NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIQUIDITY SHORTAGES AND BANKING CRISES
Douglas W. Diamond
Raghuram G. Rajan
Working Paper 10071
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10071
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2003
We thank John Cochrane, Isabel Gödde, Gary Gorton, and Nobu Kiyotaki for very helpful comments on an
earlier draft, and Steve Ross and participants at the NBER Economic Fluctuations meetings in February 2001
for helpful suggestions. We are grateful for financial support from the National Science Foundation and the
Center for Research on Security Prices. Rajan also thanks the Center for the Study of the State and the
Economy for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram G. Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Liquidity Shortages and Banking Crises
Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram G. Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 10071
October 2003
JEL No. G2, E5
ABSTRACT
We show in this paper that bank failures can be contagious. Unlike earlier work where contagion
stems from depositor panics or ex ante contractual links between banks, we argue bank failures can
shrink the common pool of liquidity, creating or exacerbating aggregate liquidity shortages. This
could lead to a contagion of failures and a possible total meltdown of the system. Given the costs
of a meltdown, there is a possible role for government intervention. Unfortunately, liquidity
problems and solvency problems interact and can cause each other, making it hard to determine the
root cause of a crisis from observable factors. We propose a robust sequence of intervention.
Douglas W. Diamond
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
douglas.diamond@gsb.uchicago.edu
Raghuram Rajan
International Monetary Fund
Research Department, Rm 10-700
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20431
and NBER
raghuram.rajan@gsb.uchicago.edu

Banks are often found at the center of systemic financial crises. The causes of these crises have
long been debated. Do they stem from depositor panics or do they arise because bank balance sheets are
exposed to common factors? If the latter, then is there any sense in which bank failures can be
contagious? Can anything be done to prevent these crises or stop them from propagating once they begin?
Our purpose in this paper is to reexamine whether bank failures can start and propagate systemic
crises even if we assume depositors do not panic, that is, even if depositors’ actions are coordinated and
they do not run simply because they fear others will run. Our focus is not because we think panics
empirically unimportant (the jury is still out on that). Instead, we show that contagion can stem from an
underlying real general equilibrium problem rather than just lack of coordination among depositors.
From a policy perspective, attempts to reassure investors through confidence building measures will not
work if panic and lack of coordination is not the reason for a crisis.
We start in this paper with a model of a bank that we developed in Diamond and Rajan (2001).
Assets in this model are illiquid -- they cannot be borrowed against or sold for the full value of resources
they will generate in their best use -- because the human capital necessary to generate that full value
cannot be committed to the asset. So, for example, projects are illiquid because the entrepreneur who sets
up the project is the best person to run the project. Even if he wants to pay out all the future revenues he
generates to a potential lender (or he wants to sell the project) he cannot get full value because he cannot
commit to using his skills on behalf of the lender. Anticipating the rents the entrepreneur will extract in
the future for his skills, the lender will only be willing to lend (or pay for) a fraction of the project value.
Someone who learns a good alternative use of the project assets can lend more to the project
because he can use the threat to put the assets to alternative use to collect more from the entrepreneur.
Call such a lender the banker, for reasons that will become clear soon. The problem, however, is that
while the project becomes less illiquid as the banker acquires collection skills, his loan to the project (i.e.,
the banker’s asset) becomes more illiquid: potential lenders to the bank do not have the banker’s skills. So
how then can the banker finance the project if the project needs more funds than he has? Has illiquidity
(stemming from specific skills) simply been transferred from the real project to the project loan?
1

The solution in Diamond and Rajan (2001) is that the banker can commit to using his collection
skills on behalf of investors (and not extracting a rent) by issuing demand deposits. No depositor will ever
accept a lower amount than initially promised. Because of the first-come first-served nature of deposits,
the depositor is always better off demanding immediate payment if he thinks others will accept. Thus any
attempt by the banker to bargain down deposits will be met by a bank run, which Diamond and Rajan
show completely dissipates any rents the banker could get. Fearing such a run, the banker will always pay
what he has promised to depositors, if he has the means to pay.
By issuing demand deposits in sufficient quantity, the banker can effectively tie his collection
skills to the loans he has made and borrow what is required from unskilled depositors. Thus the banker
does not pass on illiquidity but reduces it through a combination of his collection skills and demand
deposits. Moreover, so long as there is no aggregate shortage of resources, the bank’s ability to issue new
demand deposits allows it to meet an uncertain depositor demand for resources. Thus banks play a central
role in funding potentially long term projects while allowing depositors to withdraw when in need.
Unfortunately, the demandable claims that perform such a useful role also expose the banking
system to the risk that there might be a mismatch between the economy-wide production of resources and
the demands of depositors. Even if the mismatch is merely due to delay in production and not because of
any impairment of the long-term production possibilities of the economy, such an aggregate shortage of
resources (also termed an aggregate real “liquidity shortage”) can be spread through bank failures to the
entire banking system.
Let us understand why. To do that, let us specify the nature of projects in greater detail. Projects
require an investment of resources up front, and will pay off a larger amount of resources, either at an
interim date (early) or after considerable delay (late).1 Projects are thus risky, but only in that the timing
of when they pay off is uncertain. Projects can also be discontinued and restructured so that they
immediately return a fraction of the resources originally invested. We now ask what happens if a number
1 This could be thought of as a model of delays in harvest, or crop failure, that so plagued banking systems in the
19th century. If the consumption good is commodity money or foreign exchange, the delay could be thought of as a
delay of exports. It also has more modern parallels, which we will draw later.
2