NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AN INFLATION REPORTS REPORT
Eric M. Leeper
Working Paper 10089
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10089
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2003
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by Eric M. Leeper. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

An Inflation Reports Report
Eric M. Leeper
NBER Working Paper No. 10089
November 2003
JEL No. E4, E5
ABSTRACT
This paper evaluates the Swedish Riksbank's "Inflation Report" and draws comparisons among the
Reports issued by the Riksbank, the Bank of England, and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand. This
report poses and addresses a common set of questions about each of the three central banks'
"Inflation Reports". It assesses the credibility of inflation forecasts, evaluates the Reports'
discussions of the current state of the economy, asks if a coherent set of models underlies the
Reports, and discusses whether the Reports hold the banks sufficiently accountable for their
decisions.
Eric Leeper
Department of Economics
304 Wylie Hall
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405
and NBER
eleeper@indiana.edu

An Inflation Reports Report
Eric M. Leeper*
I was asked to evaluate the Riksbank’s Inflation Reports by Anders Vredin, head of the monetary
policy group at Sveriges Riksbank. The assignment included drawing comparisons among the
Reports issued by the Riksbank, the Bank of England, and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand. This
constitutes the entirety of my instructions. The content of this report, therefore, reflects my own
priorities and biases in monetary policy analysis. Although several staff members at the Riksbank
have provided constructive comments, they had no influence over the report’s tone or criticisms.
1. Introduction
This report addresses a common set of questions about the Inflation Reports produced by three
central banks that target inflation—the Bank of England (BoE), the Reserve Bank of New Zealand
(RBNZ), and the Sveriges Riksbank (Riksbank). Although Inflation Reports are one of many
documents used to prepare Board members for monetary policy decisions, they are primarily
intended as external documents designed to communicate policy objectives and decisions to the
public. This report evaluates both the internal and the external roles that the Reports play. When
assessing the Reports’ internal roles, I occasionally sit in the policymaker’s chair at the briefing
table.
Before launching into the evaluation, I should share some of my priorities and biases in policy
analysis. To the degree possible, monetary policy authorities would do better to be forthright in
their statements of policy objectives, their understandings of the economy, and their descriptions of
current and likely future policy actions. Inflation targeting countries have taken the crucial first step
by laying out the policy objectives unambiguously.
* I thank Jon Faust, Per Jansson, Stefan Palmqvist, Ellis Tallman, Steffan Viotti, and Anders Vredin
for helpful comments.

Limitations in our knowledge about the structure of the economy and our inability to predict
accurately future disturbances to the economy make monetary policy an inherently judgmental
business. Economic science has not delivered the definitive model economy. Instead, it delivers a
wide range of models—both theoretical and statistical—whose performance varies tremendously
over time. Judgments about the relevance of those models for the policy questions at hand are
necessary components of policy analysis. It therefore becomes important how economic judgments
are arrived at, how they are scrutinized, and how the role that judgment plays in policy decisions
gets communicated to the public. Analytical and statistical tools can help to arrive at and evaluate
judgment calls. But they cannot substitute for judgment.
Four questions form the basis for the report. They are:
1. Are the inflation forecasts credible?
2. How clear is the discussion of the current state of the economy?
3. Is there a coherent model or set of models underlying the presentation of the Report?
4. Does the Report hold the Bank sufficiently accountable for its decisions?
An appendix lists the questions along with the more detailed sub-questions that I considered.
This report is based on my reading of several issues of the Inflation Report published by each
Bank; another appendix lists this reading.
All three central banks clearly lay out their inflation targets in their Reports. The rationales for
targeting inflation and for the chosen target inflation rate are sometimes discussed, but the
rationales are not typically part of the inflation objective template that appears in Reports.
Nevertheless it is clear the Banks pursue low inflation because they believe it stabilizes and
encourages economic growth. The precise mechanism by which inflation interacts with economic
growth is typically not discussed much. There’s a good reason for this: the economics profession
has yet to understand this important issue. Indeed, there is very little intellectual basis for preferring
any particular low average inflation rate over another, although there is a strong basis for avoiding
high and volatile inflations.
I have tried to be straightforward in my assessment of the Inflation Reports. That means I am
also critical when I believe there is room for improvement. I hope the report is constructive and
helpful.
I now address the four questions in turn. For a discussion of some of the recommendations that
follow from this report, see Leeper (2003).
2