NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GEOGRAPHY AND THE INTERNET:
IS THE INTERNET A SUBSTITUTE OR A COMPLEMENT FOR CITIES?
Todd Sinai
Joel Waldfogel
Working Paper 10028
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10028
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2003
We are grateful to the Wharton e-Business Initiative (WeBI) for giving us access to, and technical assistance
with, the Media Metrix data. We received useful comments from seminar participants at Wharton, the
University of Illinois, Duke, the Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Philadelphia, and the 2002 AEA
Meetings in Atlanta. Sinai received financial support from the Ballard Scholars Program at the Zell-Lurie
Real Estate Center, and Waldfogel thanks WeBI. Sam Chandan and Dan Simundza provided excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Todd Sinai and Joel Waldfogel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Geography and the Internet: Is the Internet a Substitute or a Complement for Cities?
Todd Sinai and Joel Waldfogel
NBER Working Paper No. 10028
October 2003
JEL No. R00, R12, L81, L82
ABSTRACT
We study the tendency to connect to the Internet, and the online and offline shopping behavior of
connected persons, to draw inferences about whether the Internet is a substitute or a complement for
cities. We document that larger markets have more locally-targeted online content and that
individuals are more likely to connect in markets with more local online content, suggesting the
Internet is a complement to cities. Yet, holding local online content constant, people are less likely
to connect in larger markets, indicating that the Internet is also a substitute for cities. We also find
that individuals connect to overcome local isolation: notwithstanding a large digital divide, blacks
are more likely to connect, relative to whites, when they comprise a smaller fraction of local
population, making the Internet a substitute for agglomeration of preference minorities within cities.
Finally, using online and offline spending data, we find that connected persons spend more on books
and clothing online, relative to their offline spending, if they are farther from offline stores. This
indicates that the Internet functions as a substitute for proximity to retail outlets.
Todd Sinai
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
308 Lauder-Fischer Hall
256 South 37th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6330
and NBER
sinai@wharton.upenn.edu
Joel Waldfogel
Public Policy and Management
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3100 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6372
and NBER
waldfogj@wharton.upenn.edu

Traditionally, markets for news and information as well as some retail goods have been
predominantly local. As a result, consumers’ welfare has been limited by the size of their local
market, and agglomeration of persons sharing similar preferences has improved their welfare by
facilitating the provision of products they want.1 By agglomerating persons around the country –
indeed, around the world – into a single market, the Internet offers the potential to radically alter
consumption possibilities. In particular, the Internet may serve as a substitute for urban
agglomeration by leveling the consumption playing field between large, variety-laden and small,
variety-starved markets. But this is not necessary. Leveling the field requires that content on the
Internet be similarly attractive to persons in large and small markets. If the Internet offers local, as
well as general, information, then its role as a substitute for agglomeration will be undermined.
Indeed, if local online content is sufficiently attractive – and if it is more prevalent in larger
markets – then the Internet may be a complement for urban agglomeration.2
In this paper we use information on how Internet connection tendencies, and connected
persons’ online and offline retail spending, are related to the attractiveness of their online and
offline options to draw inferences about whether the Internet serves as a substitute or a complement
for urban agglomeration. First, we examine the relationship between market size and available
locally-targeted online content. To this end we characterize the nature of available content using
Media Metrix data on 16.5 million web page visits by about 32,000 households in 326
Metropolitan Statistical Areas [MSAs] in August 2000. We document that substantially more
1 We are aware of other arguments for agglomeration besides consumption. Henderson (1974) presents a model in
which city size balances production benefits against congestion costs. See, for example, Ciccone and Hall (1996) or
Rosenthal and Strange (forthcoming) for recent empirical evidence on the production benefits of agglomeration as well
as additional references. There is little research on consumption benefits of agglomeration. Glaeser, Kolko, and Saiz
(2001) is an exception.
2 We are not the only authors to pose this question. See Kolko (1999), as well as Gaspar and Glaeser (1998), who find
that telephones complement agglomeration because phone conversation complements face-to-face (two-way)
communication. Our focus in this paper is on one-way communication over the web rather than two-way
communication, but our question is similar. Finally, Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein (2003) examine a related
question, the effect of urban location on diffusion of Internet technologies.
1

online local content is available in larger markets, suggesting that Internet use may complement
urban agglomeration.
We then examine how the tendency to connect to the Internet varies with metro area
population – a proxy for available product variety – and locally targeted online content.
Combining the Current Population Survey’s August 2000 Computer and Internet Use module with
our Media Metrix-derived data on local online content and Census data on local market size (as a
proxy for offline product variety), we document that local online content attracts people to connect.
When we separately account for both local online content and our measure of local offline variety
(population), we find statistically significant direct evidence of both complementarity and
substitutability. Individuals are more likely to connect in markets with more local online content,
and holding local online content constant, are less likely to connect in larger markets. On balance
we find that these effects offset each other so that the Internet neither promotes nor discourages
agglomeration in larger markets.
Second, we shed light on the Internet’s substitution for offline variety by examining the
relationship between the tendency to connect and individuals’ local isolation from persons sharing
their preferences. The problem of dissatisfaction with offline options can be particularly acute for
persons either isolated from products generally or with preferences unlike their neighbors’. It is
clear from existing research that blacks and whites have sharply different preference in media
products. As a result, the local availability of products that blacks value may have been limited not
simply by the absolute size of their local markets, but also by the size of the local community
sharing their preferences.3 If isolated blacks are more likely than blacks living among large
3 For example, larger markets have more and better local newspapers (George and Waldfogel, 2003), radio broadcasts
(Waldfogel, forthcoming), and television stations (Waldfogel, 2001). These studies document that black and white
consumers’ welfare, in their capacity as media consumers, increase in the size of their own respective group
populations.
2