NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW DO LEGAL DIFFERENCES AND
LEARNING AFFECT FINANCIAL CONTRACTS?
Steven Kaplan
Frederic Martel
Per Stromberg
Working Paper 10097
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10097
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2003
This research has been supported by the Kauffman Foundation, by the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation
and the Olin Foundation through grants to the Center for the Study of the Economy and the State, and by the
Center For Research in Security Prices. Ola Bengtsson, Alejandro Hajdenberg, Jonas Lindström, and Dali
Ma provided excellent research assistance. We are grateful to the venture capital partnerships for providing
data. We have received useful comments from Jim Brander, Ron Giammarino, Lucy White and seminar
participants at the SIFR Conference on Venture Capital and University of British Columbia. Contact
information: Steven Kaplan, Per Strömberg: University of Chicago Graduate School of Business, 1101 East
58th Street, Chicago, IL 60637; e-mail: skaplan@uchicago.edu, per.stromberg@gsb.uchicago.edu. Frederic
Martel: UBS Global Asset Management, Gessnerallee 3-5, CH-8005 Zurich; IMD; and University of
Lausanne; e-mail: frederic.martel@ubs.com. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Steven Kaplan, Frederic Martel, and Per Stromberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

How Do Legal Differences and Learning Affect Financial Contracts?
Steven Kaplan, Frederic Martel, and Per Stromberg
NBER Working Paper No. 10096
November 2003
JEL No. G24, G32
ABSTRACT
We analyze venture capital (VC) investments in twenty-three non-U.S. countries and compare them
to VC investments in the U.S. We describe how the contracts allocate cash flow, board, liquidation,
and other control rights. In univariate analyses, contracts differ across legal regimes. At the same
time, however, more experienced VCs implement U.S.-style contracts regardless of legal regime.
In most specifications, legal regime becomes insignificant controlling for VC sophistication. VCs
who use U.S.-style contracts fail significantly less often. Financial contracting theories in the
presence of fixed costs of learning, therefore, appear to explain contracts along a wide range of legal
regimes.
Steven N. Kaplan
Graduate School of Business
The University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
skaplan@uchicago.edu
Frederic Martel
University of Lausanne IMD
and UBS Global Asset Management
frederic.martel@ubs.com
Per Stromberg
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
per.stromberg@ghsb.uchicago.edu

1. Introduction
Financial contracting plays an important role in aligning incentives and mitigating agency
conflicts between investors and entrepreneurs, thus allowing new ventures to obtain financing.1
Studies of U.S. venture capital (VC) investing, such as Sahlman (1990) and Kaplan and
Strömberg (2003 and 2004), show that investor contracts carefully allocate cash flow rights,
liquidation rights, and control rights between the entrepreneur and the VC investor in order to
mitigate agency conflicts. Kaplan and Stromberg (2003 and 2004) also show that the
characteristics of U.S. VC contracts correspond well to the (optimal) contracts predicted by
financial contracting theories.
At the same time, the large and growing literature in law and finance finds that legal and
institutional differences among countries appear to be important for the development and nature
of financial markets, and also for economic growth.2 The ability to design investments and
financial contracts is potentially dependent on various elements of the institutional environment
– the nature of corporate and contract law, the quality of legal enforcement, accounting systems,
tax regulations, financial markets, etc. If the institutional environment affects the types of
contracts that can be written, this could change the types of contracts that are optimal.
This raises the question of whether the financial contracts observed in the U.S. are
optimal in other institutional environments. Theories of financial contracting would suggest yes
(because they assume property rights are enforced and little else). Alternatively, sufficiently
great institutional differences might lead to a negative answer. In this paper, we address this
question by studying VC investments across different institutional environments – 145
1 See Hart (2001).
2 See King and Levine (1993), Laporta et al. (1997, 1998, and 2000), and Rajan and Zingales (2003).

investments in 107 companies in 23 countries by 70 different lead VCs. The sample companies
are concentrated in Western European countries and other relatively “developed” countries.
First, we describe how the contracts allocate cash flow, board, liquidation, and other
control rights. In univariate analyses, the contracts differ significantly across legal regimes.
While convertible preferred is the most commonly used security, it is used much less frequently
outside the U.S. than in the U.S. Partly as a result, VCs investing outside the U.S. deals have
weaker liquidation and exit rights. Non-U.S. investments also are less likely to use
contingencies – including milestones, vesting provisions and anti-dilution rights – resulting in
less high-powered cash flow incentives compared to their US counterparts.
Next, we consider how the contracts vary across legal regimes. We find that the
contracts vary systematically across those regimes. In particular, investments in common law
countries are more likely to look like U.S. contracts while investments elsewhere are likely to
differ. Liquidation preferences, anti-dilution protections, vesting provisions and redemption
rights are more typical in common law countries while milestones are less common. These
results are similar to those found in Lerner and Schoar (2003) who study VC and private equity
investments in developing countries.
Although contractual differences correlate with the institutional environment, they cannot
fully explain these differences. For example, investors can implement seniority clauses, anti-
dilution protection, redemption rights and vesting in non-common law countries like Germany,
France, and Sweden. In fact, we find that some VC funds implement U.S. contractual features in
those countries and across all the institutional environments in which they invest. In univariate
analyses, as VC size, VC age, and VC experience with U.S. VCs increase, VCs are more likely
to implement U.S. style contractual terms. This suggests that while it may not be easy or
2