NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TAX BASES, TAX RATES AND
THE ELASTICITY OF REPORTED INCOME
Wojciech Kopczuk
Working Paper 10044
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10044
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2003
I am grateful to seminar participants at UBC, Columbia, Berkeley and Stanford, Joel Slemrod, David Green
and Kevin Milligan for comments on an earlier draft, Emmanuel Saez for help with the data and to Daniel
Feenberg for his help with the TAXSIM program. Financial support from the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council of Canada and the UBC Hampton Fund is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Wojciech Kopczuk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Tax Bases, Tax Rates and the Elasticity of Reported Income
Wojciech Kopczuk
NBER Working Paper No. 10044
October 2003
JEL No. H2, H4, H31, J22, K34
ABSTRACT
Tax reforms usually change both tax rates and tax bases. Using a panel of income tax returns
spanning the two major U.S. tax reforms of the 1980s and a number of smaller tax law changes, I
find that the elasticity of income reported on personal income tax returns depends on the available
deductions. This highlights that this key behavioral elasticity is not a structural parameter but rather
that it can be to some extent controlled by policy makers. The results suggest that base broadening
reduces the marginal efficiency cost of taxation. The point estimates indicate that the Tax Reform
Act of 1986 reduced the marginal cost of collecting a dollar of tax revenue by 2 cents, with roughly
half of this reduction due to the base broadening and the other half due to the tax rate reduction. As
a by-product, the analysis in this paper offers a reconciliation of disparate estimates obtained by
previous studies of the tax responsiveness of income.
Wojciech Kopczuk
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, Rm. 1022 IAB
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
wkopczuk@nber.org

1 Motivation
Complexity is often considered to be an undesirable feature of the tax system, but this is
usuallypostulatedratherthanderivedfromaneconomicmodelanditsrelationshiptoother
criteria for evaluating tax policy is unclear. A recent paper of Slemrod and Kopczuk (2002)
offers a formalized treatment of the impact of non-tax rate instruments that are controlled
by policy makers. In particular, their analysis provides a specific framework for analyzing
the cost of complexity in the tax system by interpreting it in terms of the income tax base.
A simple income tax is characterized by few deductions and, therefore, a broad tax base.
Broadening the tax base increases revenue and affects administrative costs, but more subtly
it is also likely to affect the excess burden of taxation: in their model, a broader tax base is
associated with a lower elasticity of taxable income and therefore with lower excess burden.
Thus, in that framework, simplicity of the tax system directly affects the efficiency cost of
taxation.
In this paper, I evaluate the empirical value of such arguments by estimating the impact
of the tax base, measured as a fraction of income subject to taxation, on the elasticity of
income reported on personal tax returns. This elasticity is the key parameter necessary
to evaluate the deadweight loss of the income tax. My results highlight though that it is
not a structural parameter, but instead it depends on a non-rate aspect of the tax system
(tax base) that can be manipulated by policy makers. This effect is not just theoretically
possible, it also turns out to be empirically relevant. Consequently, the results indicate that
the marginal deadweight loss of taxation can be controlled by policy makers. In particular,
and as an illustration, I can assess potential efficiency gains resulting from a change to a
broad-base low-rate tax system.
2 Context
Thecentralimportanceoftheelasticityoftaxableincomeforpublicfinancequestionsfollows
from two simple realizations. First, by the envelope theorem, the marginal tax rate (t)
affects welfare of an individual in proportion to her taxable income (I). The analytics of
the response are irrelevant. Second, with just income taxation in place,1 the marginal effect
on revenue is t∂I +I, again depending only on the total taxable income. Therefore, having
∂t
a measure of the responsiveness of I is crucial for any attempt to measure the efficiency
cost of income taxation.2 What is the relevant I? The traditional approach was to define
I ≡ wL, where w is the wage rate and L is labor supply. Under this assumption, the
1In the presence of other taxes, the impact on other sources of revenue should be accounted for as well.
One important example of such a response is income shifting between personal and corporate income tax
bases.
2See Feldstein (1999) and Slemrod (1998) for discussions of this argument and its limitations.
1

elasticity of labor supply can be used in place of the elasticity of taxable income. Apart
from disregarding many forms of capital income subject to income taxation, this approach
also ignores other potentially important types of response to taxation such as unobserved
effort, tax avoidance, tax evasion and income shifting.
In order to address this concern, following Lindsey (1987) and Feldstein (1995), the
literature has concentrated directly on income reported on tax returns (Auten and Car-
roll, 1999; Carroll, 1998; Goolsbee, 1999; Long, 1999; Sillamaa and Veall, 2001; Aarbu and
Thoreson, 2001; Gruber and Saez, 2002).3 Several authors argued that changes in the defi-
nition of taxable income provide an additional source of identification as exogenous limiting
or expanding of deductions pushes taxpayers into different tax brackets. Understanding
consequences of such changes is important, because they occur at exactly the same time
that the tax rates change. An implicit assumption in the literature is that such changes do
not have an independent effect on income and that the elasticity of response to marginal
tax rates is not affected by them. This assumption is very strong. For example, the elimi-
nation of the non-itemizer charitable deduction by the TRA’86 changed the relative price of
charitable contributions and might have had an independent effect on income. Similarly, a
change in the standard deduction affects the decision to itemize and, through this channel,
the relative prices of itemizable activities for taxpayers who change their itemization status.
The effect stressed in this paper is that a change in the price of deductions, or more
generally the price of legal avoidance or illegal evasion, is going to affect the potential
behavioral elasticities. As argued by Slemrod (1994), taxable income is going to be more
responsive when reducing it is cheap (e.g., because deductions are abundant), and it will
be less responsive when it is expensive. This effect is conceptually separate from any effect
on the level of taxable income and has far-reaching policy implications. Because behavioral
elasticities measure the extent of excess burden, a policy that can affect the elasticities
can also determine the extent of inefficiency of taxation. Understanding the empirical
relevance of such policies is important from the optimal policy design perspective (Slemrod
and Kopczuk, 2002). It may also be important from the political economy point of view.
To appreciate possible implications, note that in the presence of these sorts of effects,
supporters of the limited role of the government may have an incentive to pursue policies
that make the tax system less efficient (and vice versa).
That income elasticity is a non-structural parameter may already be suspected based
on the existing empirical literature. Gruber and Saez (2002) find that elasticities for high-
income individuals are bigger than for the rest. Saez (2003) argues that only the responses
in the upper tail of the income distribution are significant. Higher elasticities have been
found for itemizers Gruber and Saez (2002) and those who are self-employed (Sillamaa and
Veall, 2001). Saez (2003) also finds that responses to different tax reforms appear radically
3See Slemrod (1998) for a critical discussion of this literature.
2