NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW TO DISCOUNT CASHFLOWS
WITH TIME-VARYING EXPECTED RETURNS
Andrew Ang
Jun Liu
Working Paper 10042
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10042
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2003
The authors would like to thank Michael Brandt, Michael Brennan, Bob Dittmar, John Graham, Bruce
Grundy, Ravi Jagannathan, and seminar participants at the Australian Graduate School of Management,
Columbia University, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve and Melbourne Business School for
comments. We thank Geert Bekaert and Zhenyu Wang for helpful suggestions and especially thank Yuhang
Xing for constructing some of the data. We thank Rick Green (the editor) and we are grateful to an
anonymous referee for helpful comments that greatly improved the paper. The authors acknowledge funding
from an INQUIRE UK grant. This article represents the views of the authors and not of INQUIRE. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Andrew Ang and Jun Liu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How to Discount Cashflows with Time-Varying Expected Returns
Andrew Ang and Jun Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 10042
October 2003
JEL No. E43, G12
ABSTRACT
While many studies document that the market risk premium is predictable and that betas are not
constant, the dividend discount model ignores time-varying risk premiums and betas. We develop
a model to consistently value cashflows with changing risk-free rates, predictable risk premiums and
conditional betas in the context of a conditional CAPM. Practical valuation is accomplished with
an analytic term structure of discount rates, with different discount rates applied to expected
cashflows at different horizons. Using constant discount rates can produce large mis-valuations,
which, in portfolio data, are mostly driven at short horizons by market risk premiums and at long
horizons by time-variation in risk-free rates and factor loadings.
Andrew Ang
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway
805 Uris
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
aa610@columbia.edu
Jun Liu
Anderson Graduate School of Management
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095
jliu@anderson.ucla.edu

Todetermineanappropriatediscountrateforvaluingcashflows,amanagerisconfrontedby
threemajorproblems: themarketriskpremiummustbeestimated,anappropriaterisk-freerate
must be chosen and the beta of the project or company must be determined. All three of these
inputs into a standard CAPM are not constant. Furthermore, cashflows may co-vary with the
risk premium, betas or other predictive state variables. A standard Dividend Discount Model
(DDM)cannothandledynamicbetas,riskpremiumsorrisk-freeratesbecauseinthisvaluation
method,futureexpectedcashflowsarevaluedatconstantdiscountrates.
In this paper, we present an analytical methodology for valuing stochastic cashflows that
are correlated with risk premiums, risk-free rates and time-varying betas. All these effects are
important. First, the market risk premium is not constant. Fama and French (2002) argue that
theriskpremiummovedtoaround2%attheturnofthecenturyfrom7-8%twentyyearsearlier.
Jagannathan,McGrattenandScherbina(2001)alsoarguethatthemarketex-anteriskpremium
is time-varying and fell during the late 1990’s. Furthermore, a large literature claims that a
numberofpredictorvariables,includingdividendyields(CampbellandShiller(1988aandb)),
risk-free rates (Fama and Schwert (1977)), term spreads (Campbell (1987)), default spreads
(KeimandStambaugh(1986)),andconsumption-asset-labordeviations(LettauandLudvigson
(2001)),haveforecastingpowerformarketexcessreturns.
Second, the CAPM assumes that the riskless rate is the appropriate 1-period, or instanta-
neous, riskless rate, which in practice is typically proxied by a 1-month or a 3-month T-bill
return. However, it is highly unlikely that over the long horizons of many corporate capital
budgeting problems that the riskless rate remains constant. Since the total expected return
comprises both a risk-free rate and a risk premium, adjusted by a factor loading, time-varying
risk-free rates imply that total expected returns also change through time. Note that even an
investor who believes that the expected market excess return is constant, and a project’s beta is
constant,stillfacesstochastictotalexpectedreturnsasshortratesmoveovertime.
Finally, as companies grow, merge or invest in new projects, their risk profiles change. It
is quite feasible that a company’s beta changes even in short intervals, and is very likely to
change over 10 or 20 year horizons. There is substantial variation in factor loadings even for
portfolios of stocks, for example industry portfolios (Fama and French (1997)) and portfolios
sorted by size and book-to-market (Ferson and Harvey (1999)). The popularity of multifactor
models for computing unconditional expected returns (for example, Fama and French (1993))
may reflect time-varying betas and conditional market risk premiums in a conditional CAPM
(seeJagannathanandWang(1996)).

This paper presents, to our knowledge, the first analytic, tractable method of discounting
cashflows that embeds the effects of changing market risk premiums, risk-free rates and time-
varyingbetas. PreviouspracticeadjuststheDDMbyusingdifferentregimesofcashflowgrowth
or expected returns (see Lee, Myers and Swaminathan (1999) for a recent example). These
adjustments are not made in an overall framework and so are subject to Fama (1996)’s critique
of ad-hoc adjustments to cashflows with changing expected returns. In contrast, our valuation
isdoneinaninternallyconsistentframework.
Ourvaluationframeworksignificantlyextendsthecurrentsetofanalyticpresentvaluemod-
els developed in the affine class (see, among others, Ang and Liu (2001), Bakshi and Chen
(2001) and Bekaert and Grenadier (2001)). If a security’s beta is constant and the market risk
premium is time-varying, then the price of the security would fall into this affine framework.
Similarly, the case of a time-varying beta and a constant market risk premium can also be
handled by an affine model. However, unlike our set-up, the extant class of models cannot si-
multaneously model time-variation in both beta and the market risk premium. This is because
the expected return involves a product of two stochastic, predictable variables (beta multiplied
bythemarketpremium).
We derive our valuation formula under a very rich set of conditional expected returns. Our
functional form for time-varying expected returns nests the specifications of the conditional
CAPM developed by Harvey (1989), Ferson and Harvey (1991, 1993 and 1999), Cochrane
(1996), Jagannathan and Wang (1996), among others. These studies use instrumental variables
to model the time-variation of betas or market risk premiums. In our framework, short rates
also vary through time. The set-up also incorporates correlation between stochastic cashflows,
betasandriskpremiums.
To adapt our valuation framework to current practice in capital budgeting, we compute
a term structure of discount rates applied to random cashflows. Practical cashflow valuation
separatestheproblemintotwosteps: first,estimatetheexpectedfuturecashflowsofaprojector
security,andthentaketheirpresentvalue,usuallybyapplyingaconstantdiscountrate. Instead
of applying a constant discount rate, we compute a series of discount rates, or spot expected
returns, which can be applied to a series of expected cashflows. The model incorporates the
effects of changing market risk premiums, risk-free rates and time-varying betas by specifying
adifferentdiscountrateforeachdifferentmaturity.
Brennan (1997) also considers the problem of discounting cashflows with time-varying ex-
pected returns and proposes a term structure of discount rates. Our model significantly gen-
2