NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE FORM OF PROPERTY RIGHTS:
OLIGARCHIC VS. DEMOCRATIC SOCIETIES
Daron Acemoglu
Working Paper 10037
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10037
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2003
I thank Robert Barro, Olivier Blanchard, Simon Johnson, James Robinson, and participants at the Canadian
Institute for Advanced Research conference, the NBER Summer Institute and Harvard University macro
seminar for useful comments, and Miriam Bruhn and Alexander Debs for excellent research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Daron Acemoglu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Form of Property Rights: Oligarchic vs. Democratic Societies
Daron Acemoglu
NBER Working Paper No. 10037
October 2003
JEL No. P16, O10
ABSTRACT
This paper develops a model where this is a trade-off between the enforcement of the property rights
of different groups. An "oligarchic" society, where political power is in the hands of major
producers, protects their property rights, but also tends to erect significant entry barriers, violating
the property rights of future producers. Democracy, where political power is more widely diffuesed,
imposes redistributive taxes on the producers, but tends to avoid entry barriers. When taxes in
democracy are high and the distortions caused by entry barriers are low, an oligarchic society
achieves greater efficiency. Nevertheless, because comparative advantage in entreprenuership shifts
away from the incumbents, the inefficiency created by entry barriers in oligarchy deteriorates over
time. The typical pattern is therefore one of the rise and decline of oligarchic societies: of two
otherwise identical societies, the one with an oligarchic organization will first become richer, but
later fall behind the democratic society. I also discuss how democratic societies may be better able
to take advantage of new technologies, and how the unequal distribution of income in an oligarchic
society supports the oligarchic institutions and may keep them in place even when the become
significantly costly to society.
Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
daron@mit.edu

1 Introduction
There is now a growing consensus that institutions protecting the property rights of pro-
ducersareessentialforsuccessfullong-runeconomicperformance.1 Thereisnoagreement,
however, onwhatconstitutes"protectingthepropertyrightsofproducers"oronthecosts
andbenefitsofvariousdifferent"formsofpropertyrights". Onepossibilityisanoligarchic
society where political power is in the hands of the economic elite, for example, the ma-
jor producers/investors in the economy. This type of organization not only ensures that
major producers do not fear expropriation or high rates of taxation, but also typically
enables them to create a non-level playing field and a monopoly position for themselves,
in essence violating the property rights of future potential producers (i.e., excluding them
from taking advantage of profit opportunities). The alternative is democracy (or perhaps
more appropriately, populist democracy), where political power is more equally distrib-
uted, thus effectively in the hands of poorer agents who can use their power to tax the
producers’ profits.2 But in return, incumbent producers will be unable to create signifi-
cant entry barriers against entrants, ensuring better property rights for future potential
producers.3
This paper constructs a simple model to analyze the trade-off between oligarchic and
democratic societies. The model features two policy distortions: taxation and entry bar-
riers. Taxes, which redistribute income from entrepreneurs to workers, are distortionary
because they discourage entrepreneurial investment. Entry barriers, which redistribute
income towards the entrepreneurs by reducing labor demand and depressing wages, dis-
tort the allocation of resources because they prevent the entry of more productive agents
into entrepreneurship.4
1See, among others, the general discussions in Jones (1981), North (1981), and Olson (1982), and the
empirical evidence in De Long and Shleifer (1993), Knack and Keefer (1995), Barro (1999), Hall and
Jones (1999), and Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001, 2002).
2Although there is a close connection between dictatorship and oligarchy, some electoral democracies
may be "oligarchic" according to the definition here, because the economic elite controls the parties or
the electoral agenda.
3In certain societies such as in Zaire under Mobutu, a highly predatory state, controlled either by an
individual or the political elite, may violate the property rights of both incumbent and future producers.
The focus here is not these cases, but the trade-offs between distortionary redistributive taxation and
entry barriers. A full taxonomy of regimes would distinguish predatory regimes from oligarchic and
democratic regimes.
4Entry barriers may take the form of direct regulation, or of policies that reduce the costs of inputs,
especiallyofcapital,fortheincumbents,whileraisingthemforpotentialrivals. Cheaploansandsubsidies
tothechaebolappeartohavebeenamajorentrybarrierfornewfirmsinSouthKorea(see, forexample,
Kang, 2002). See also La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (2003) on the implications of government
ownership of banks, which often enables incumbents to receive subsidized credit, thus creating entry
1

The trade-off between these two different types of distortions determines whether an
oligarchicorademocraticsocietyismoreefficientandgeneratesgreateraggregateoutput.
Oligarchyavoids thedisincentive effects of taxation, but suffers fromthedistortions intro-
duced byentrybarriers. Democracy imposes higher redistributive taxes, but also tends to
create a more level playing field.5 When the taxes that a democratic society will impose
are high and the distortions caused by entry barriers are low, oligarchy achieves greater
efficiency and generates higher output; when democratic taxes are relatively low and en-
try barriers create significant misallocation of resources, a democratic society achieves
greater aggregate output. In addition, a democratic society typically generates a more
equal distribution of income than an oligarchic society, because it redistributes income
from entrepreneurs to workers, while an oligarchic society adopts policies that reduce
labor demand, depress wages and increase the profits of incumbents.
More interesting are the dynamic trade-offs between these political regimes. Initially,
entrepreneurs will tend to be those with greater productivity, so an oligarchic society
generates only limited distortions. However, as long as comparative advantage in entre-
preneurship changes over time, it will eventually shift away from the incumbents, and the
entry barriers erected in oligarchy will become increasingly costly to efficiency. A typical
pattern is therefore one where, of two otherwise identical societies, the oligarchy will first
become richer, but later fall behind the democratic society. The model therefore sug-
gests that, at least under some parameter configurations, despite its potential economic
distortions, democracy is better for long-run economic performance than the alternatives.
I also showthat democracies maybe able totake better advantage of newtechnologies
than oligarchic societies. This is because democracy allows agents with comparative
advantage in new technology to enter entrepreneurship, while oligarchy typically blocks
new entry.
The above discussion takes the political regime and the distribution of political power,
in particular whether the society is oligarchic or democratic, as given. A major area of
research in political economy is the determination of equilibrium political institutions.
barriers for potential entrants. An interesting case in this context is Mexico at the end of the nineteenth
century,wheretherichelitecontrolledahighlyconcentratedbankingsystem,protectedbyentrybarriers,
andtheresultinglackofloansfornewentrantsenabledtheelitetomaintainamonopolypositioninother
sectors. See Haber (1991, 2002).
5This argument does not deny the presence of entry barriers in democratic societies, for example in
much of Western Europe, but suggests that the role of entry barriers in these instances may be to create
rents to a specific group of workers rather than protecting incumbent firms (on cross-country patterns of
labor regulation, see Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer, 2003).
2