NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE CHINESE ECONOMIES IN GLOBAL CONTEXT:
THE INTEGRATION PROCESS AND ITS DETERMINANTS
Yin-Wong Cheung
Menzie D. Chinn
Eiji Fujii
Working Paper 10047
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10047
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2003
We thank Yunjong Wang for comments. The financial support of faculty research funds of the University of
California, Santa Cruz is gratefully acknowledged. The views contained herein are solely those of the authors,
and do not necessarily represent those of the institutions they are associated with.The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Yin-Wong Cheung, Menzie D. Chinn, and Eiji Fujii. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Chinese Economies in Global Context: The Integration Process and Its Determinants
Yin-Wong Cheung, Menzie D. Chinn, and Eiji Fujii
NBER Working Paper No. 10047
October 2003
JEL No. F13, F31, F41
ABSTRACT
The linkages between the People's Republic of China (PRC) and the other Chinese economies of
Hong Kong and Taiwan are assessed, and compared against those with Japan and the US. We first
characterize the time series behavior of variables corresponding to three criteria of integration,
namely real interest parity, uncovered interest parity, and relative purchasing power parity. There
is evidence that these parity conditions tend to hold over longer periods between the PRC and all
other economies, although they do not hold instantaneously. In general, the magnitude of the
deviations from the parity conditions is shrinking over time. Overall, however, Hong Kong exhibits
indications of a more advanced level of integration with the PRC. We also find that evidence is
surprisingly positive for integration with the US. We then turn to examining the determinants of the
degree of integration. Regression results suggest that the degrees of financial and real integration
depend upon the extent of capital controls, foreign direct investment linkages, as well as the
magnitude of exchange rate volatility.
Yin-Wong Cheung Eiji Fujii
Department of Economics Institute of Policy and Planning
SS1 University of Tsukuba
University of California 1-1-1 Tennodai Tsukuba
Santa Cruz, CA 95064 Ibaraki, Japan
cheung@ucsc.edu efujii@sk.tsukaba.ac.jp
Menzie D. Chinn
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
and NBER
mchinn@lafolette.wisc.edu

1. Introduction
The economies of China – the People’s Republic, Hong Kong and Taiwan – constitute
one of the most dynamic regions of the world economy, with the People’s Republic of China
(PRC) registering economic growth over 8% in 2002. Perhaps of equal significance, the
combined output of these three economies is almost twice that of Japan’s, and over 60% that of
the US. In addition, their foreign exchange reserves are among the largest in the world.1 Yet it is
not clear that one can treat the region as an integrated whole; indeed, there has been little
systematic examination of whether the links between the PRC and the other two Chinese
economies are any stronger than those that connect the PRC to other major economies around the
globe, such as Japan or the US.
Over the past two and a half decades, the PRC has been engaged in a process of financial
and real integration with the rest of the world. Concurrently, for a variety of geopolitical and
economic reasons, the PRC, Hong Kong, and Taiwan – a grouping sometimes termed “Greater
China” – have maintained or developed close economic ties. While Hong Kong has a quite long
history of economic and financial interactions with the PRC, it might be more surprising to a
casual observer that, despite political and ideological differences and occasional tensions,
economic links between the PRC and Taiwan have proliferated since the 1990s. According to
official statistics, the PRC is the largest recipient of Taiwan’s overseas investment and Taiwan is
the PRC’s third-largest source of foreign direct investment.2
These links between the economies comprising “Greater China” need to be placed in
context, however. The US and Japan are the PRC’s main trading partners and foreign investors.
For instance, in 2002 the total trade (imports plus exports) between the PRC and each of the two
economies is about US$100 billion. Foreign direct investment flows to China have also been
burgeoning. HK to the PRC flows were nearly US$17 billion in 2001, while those from Taiwan
1 As of April 2003, the reserves of Hong Kong and Taiwan were, respectively, US$114.2
and US$170.6 billion. Those of the People’s Republic of China were US$312.9 billion in
February (Economist, May 31-June 6, 2003, p. 98).
2 It is widely believed that the official statistics under-represent the overall Taiwan
economic interest in China. For instance, some analysts count Taiwan's total investment in China
as just behind that of Hong Kong’s but ahead of that of the US. In 2002, electronics companies
from Taiwan account for 64% of the PRC’s total information-technology output (The Economist
Intelligence Unit, 2003).
1

were between US$3 to US$4.5 billion. Evidently, linkages of many types have been flourishing
between these economies over the last decade or so.
In this paper, we examine some macroeconomic aspects of the PRC’s economic
integration with Hong Kong, Taiwan, Japan, and the US. Despite its increasing importance in the
world economy, there are a relatively limited number of studies of the PRC’s interactions with
other economies. This is not to say that there has not been any quantitative analysis on the
subject. Particularly in the wake of the PRC’s accession to the World Trade Organization, quite a
few quantitative studies were undertaken. However, most of these focused on sectoral/trade
issues.3 A thoroughgoing investigation of financial and price linkages is notably lacking.4
In addition to assessing the integration between the PRC and the other four economies,
the current study examines whether the patterns of integration between the PRC and, on the one
hand, the other two Greater China economies and, on the other hand, Japan and the US, are
similar. We believe that such an investigation is warranted as there has been much talk of the
economic entity called Greater China, comprising the PRC, Hong Kong and Taiwan and is also
termed the “China Circle.”5
We use three fundamental parity conditions – real interest parity, uncovered interest
parity, and purchasing power parity – to gauge the degree of integration in capital, financial, and
goods markets. The real interest parity condition measures the mobility of physical capital,
specifically whether capital flows equalize real interest rates across economies. It can be shown
that the degree to which real interest rate parity holds depends on the extent to which uncovered
interest parity and relative purchasing power parity apply. Since uncovered interest parity
involves financial arbitrage between money and foreign exchange markets and relative
purchasing power parity entails arbitrage in goods and services, the real interest parity condition
embodies elements of both real and financial integration.
3 Recent analyses focused on WTO effects include Wang (2001) and Ma (2001). Other
quantitative analyses of trade linkages include Wei and Frankel (1994), Wei et al. (2000),
Noland et al. (1998), and Fernald et al. (1999).
4 Ha and Fan (2002) and Shellekens (2002) study the interactions of prices in the PRC and
Hong Kong and the deflationary effect on Hong Kong. Cheung, Chinn and Fujii (2003)
investigate intra-China linkages.
5 Harding (1995) used the term “Greater China” while Naughton (1997) popularized the
title “China Circle”.
2