NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FOREIGN OWNERS AND PLANT SURVIVAL
Andrew B. Bernard
Fredrik Sjöholm
Working Paper 10039
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10039
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2003
We thank Steve Redding and participants in the Tuck-Dartmouth International lunch for helpful comments.
Bernard’s contribution to this research is supported in part by the National Science Foundation (SES-
0241474). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Andrew B. Bernard and Fredrik Sjöholm. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Foreign Owners and Plant Survival
Andrew B. Bernard and Frerik Sjöholm
NBER Working Paper No. 10039
October 2003
JEL No.F23, L25
ABSTRACT
In recent years, international capital flows of all types have increased dramatically and most
governments have been actively encouraging inflows of direct investment. However, concerns
remain that reliance on foreign multinationals may be a risky development strategy as foreign firms
are likely to be less rooted in the local economy and may be quicker to close down production. This
paper asks whether foreign owners are more likely to close plants than domestic owners. In
Indonesia, plants with any foreign ownership are far less likely to close than wholly-owned domestic
plants. However, the lower probability of shutdown is a result of the larger size of foreign plants
rather than their nationality of ownership. Controlling for plant size and productivity, we find that
foreign plants are significantly more likely to close than comparable domestic establishments.
Andrew B. Bernard
Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
andrew.b.bernard@dartmouth.edu
Fredrik Sjöholm
Stockholm School of Economics
The European Institute of Japanese Studies
P.O. Box 6501
S-113 83
Stockholm, Sweden
fredrik.sjoholm@hhs.se

Foreign Owners and Plant Survival 2
1. Introduction
The behavior of multinational corporations in developing countries is
the subject of contentious, intense debate. Proponents of direct investment
by foreign multinationals point to higher wages, technology transfer, access
to markets, and increased product market competition. Detractors focus
on lower labor and environmental standards and weak links to the local
community. The opinions of potential host countries have changed over
time. In the immediate post-colonial period, many developing countries
were sceptical of foreign direct investment and associated foreign capital
inflows with a loss of domestic sovereignty. Recently, international capital
flows of all types have increased dramatically and most governments have
been actively encouraging inflows of direct investment by foreign multina-
tionalsthroughmarketing,taxincentives,andoutrightsubsidies. However,
concerns remain that reliance on foreign multinationals may be a risky de-
velopment strategy as foreign firms are likely to be less rooted in the local
economy and may be quicker to close down production. In this paper,
we test whether foreign ownership is associated with plant survival in the
context of a developing economy.
Research on multinationals has tended to concentrate on plant location
choices, characteristics of firms that become multinationals, and the effects
of foreign operations on domestic (home) labor markets.1 Research on
the effects of foreign direct investment on host countries is less common,
especially for developing countries, and has focused primarily on potential
productivityspillovers.2 Giventheincreasingimportanceofmultinationals
in manufacturing employment in developing countries, there is a surprising
absence of work on the host country performance of multinational plants,
especially on aspects of plant survival and labor demand.3
Rodrik (1997) and others argue that increased trade and foreign invest-
ment may have led to increases in the elasticity of labor demand. While
1Examples of recent work in these three areas include Markusen (2002) Helpman,
Melitz, and Yeaple (2003), and Blomström, Fors and Lipsey (1997).
2SeeHaddadandHarrison(1993)[Morroco],AitkenandHarrison(1999)[Venezuela],
and Blomström and Sjöholm (1999) [Indonesia]. Lipsey (2002) surveys the literature on
home and host country effects of foreign direct investment.
3Almost all the existing research on multinational behavior in developing country
labor markets concentrates on wage levels, e.g. Lipsey and Sjöholm (2004).

Foreign Owners and Plant Survival 3
numerous studies have documented increases in labor market volatility in
OECD countries, see Fabbri, Haskel, and Slaughter (2003), to our knowl-
edge no studies have asked whether multinationals survive longer in devel-
oping countries, or whether they have different labor demand elasticities.
Indeed, even in developed economies, few studies have examined if
foreign-owned firms are more likely than domestically-owned firms to exit
thedomesticmarket. LookingatU.S.manufacturingplantdeaths,Bernard
and Jensen (2002) find that plants owned by U.S. multinationals are sub-
stantially less likely to close than other U.S. plants over five year intervals.
However, they also find that controlling for establishment, firm, and indus-
try characteristics, U.S. multinationals are more likely to close a domestic
plant. Görg and Strobl (2003) find that Irish plants with majority foreign
ownership are more likely to exit their sample of manufacturing plants,
where exit can be either due to closure or a change in ownership.
Ourpaperprovidesthefirstevidenceontherelationshipbetweenforeign
ownership and plant survival in a developing country. Using data from
1975-1989 on Indonesian manufacturing establishments, we ask whether
foreign ownership and the characteristics of foreign plants are associated
with increased flexibility on the extensive margin, i.e. plant shutdowns.
Ourstudyhastheadvantageof usingdataonalargenumberofplantsover
a long time period where failure, characteristics, and foreign ownership are
recorded for each plant every year.
Using a semiparametric estimation of the hazard function, we find that
plants with some foreign ownership are far less likely to close down com-
pared to plants that are completely domestically-owned. However, the
higher survival rate among foreign-owned plants is caused by plant char-
acteristics rather than by their nationality of ownership; foreign plants
are much larger and have dramatically higher levels of productivity than
domestically-ownedplants. Controllingforsuchcharacteristicsrevealsthat
foreign ownership is associated with an increased probability of closure.
Using information on changes of ownership (domestic foreign), we con-
↔
firm that foreign ownership, rather than unobserved plant characteristics,
is associated with the lower survival rates.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 surveys the
literature on firms and plant shutdowns. Section 3 describes the data.
In Section 4, we estimate the hazard function and identify the effects of