NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MONEY IN A THEORY OF BANKING
Douglas W. Diamond
Raghuram G. Rajan
Working Paper 10070
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10070
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2003
We are grateful for financial support from the National Science Foundation and the Center for Research on
Security Prices. Rajan also thanks the Center for the Study of the State and the Economy for financial support.
We thank John Cochrane, Jeff Lacker, Jeremy Stein, and Elu Von Thadden for helpful conversations on this
topic and seminar participants at Berkeley, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Harvard, Maryland,
Stanford, Urbana Champaign, and Utah. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram G. Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Money in a Theory of Banking
Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram G. Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 10070
October 2003
JEL No. G2, E5, E4, E3
ABSTRACT
We explore the connection between money, banks, and aggregate credit. We start with a simple
"real" model without money, where banks make loans repayable in goods and depositors hold claims
on the bank payable on demand in goods. Aggregate production may be delayed in the economy.
If so, we show that the level of ongoing bank lending, and hence of aggregate future output, can
decrease with increases in the real repayment due on deposits: ceteris paribus, the higher the amount
due, the more likely there will be insufficient goods, given the delay, to pay depositors, and the more
new lending has to be curtailed to make up the shortfall. Thus a temporary delay in production can
be exacerbated by banks into a more permanent reduction of total output. A number of inefficiencies
including bank failures can result if deposits turn out to be too high. We then introduce money in
this model. We show that if demand deposits are repayable in money rather than in goods, banks can
be hedged against production delays: under certain circumstances, the price level will rise with
delays in production, reducing the real value of the deposits banks have to pay out. But demand
deposits payable in money can expose the banks to new risks: the value of money can fluctuate for
reasons other than delays in aggregate production. Because deposits are convertible into money on
demand, a temporary rise in money demand immediately boosts the interest rate banks have to pay
depositors, which in turn boosts the real amounts banks have to repay them. This increase in the real
deposit burden can again lead to the curtailment of bank lending and even bank failures. The way
to combat these contractionary effects is to infuse more money into the banking system. Our analysis
thus makes transparent how changes in the supply of money can work through banks to affect real
economic activity, without invoking sticky prices, reserve requirements, or deposit insurance. It also
suggests how bank failures could lead to a fall in prices and a contagion of bank failures, as
described by Friedman and Schwartz (1963).
Douglas W. Diamond
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
douglas.diamond@gsb.uchicago.edu
Raghuram Rajan
International Monetary Fund
Research Department, Rm 10-700
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20431
and NBER
raghuram.rajan@gsb.uchicago.edu

What is the connection between money, banks, and aggregate credit? When can
expansionary monetary policy lead to expanded bank credit? And when can monetary policy help
avert bank failures? These are the questions that motivate this paper.
We start with a “real” model where all contracts are denominated in goods. A bank is an
intermediary, which has special skills that enable it to lend to firms that are hard to collect from.
The bank finances these loans by issuing demandable claims. In Diamond and Rajan (2001), we
show why such an arrangement allows banks to fund potentially long term projects while
allowing investors to consume when needed.
Unfortunately, demandable claims expose the banking system to real shocks that create a
mismatch between the production of consumption goods and the real amount promised to the
depositors. Even if the shortage of consumption goods, also termed a real “liquidity shortage”, is
merely due to delay in production and not because of any reduction in the production possibilities
of the economy, it can be amplified by the banking system. Banks will cut short long term
projects, that is, curtail credit. Banks may fail even if depositors have the most optimistic beliefs
possible (unlike, say, in models like Diamond and Dybvig (1983)).
All this is shown in an economy where all contracts, including demand deposits, are
denominated in goods. The repayment on deposits is assumed fixed over the next instant and,
because of difficulties in contracting, cannot be an explicit function of realizations of individual
bank or detailed aggregate conditions. In practice, however, bank deposits and loans typically
promise to repay money, not goods -- though deposits are denominated in foreign currencies in
some countries, which essentially makes them real from the perspective of that country’s citizens.
What would happen if deposit contracts were instead nominal, that is, denominated and repayable
in domestic currency? Would the system smooth real shocks?
To examine this, we focus on two sources of value for money. First, money, and any
maturing government liability, is a claim on the government and may have intrinsic value from
the ability of citizens to pay taxes with it. Second, money, specifically currency, facilitates
transactions; Some goods may be sold only for cash as in cash-in-advance models (see Clower
1

[1967] and Lucas-Stokey [1987]). Examples are illegal goods like drugs, services that are sold in
transactions where the seller seeks to keep his identity hidden from tax authorities, or goods
encountered serendipitously where the relative cost of establishing a credit transaction may be too
high. Depending on circumstances, the “fiscal” value of money may exceed or be dominated by
its “transactions” value.
Suppose now that banks issue nominal deposits. To the extent that the real value of a unit
of money falls when the current aggregate supply of goods is low, deposits denominated in
money offer banks a natural hedge by adjusting effective real demand to supply. And there are
reasons why this might happen – the present value of taxes on production falls if production is
delayed so the fiscal value of money falls. Similarly, it is plausible that transactions fall when
aggregate production is delayed so the transactions value of money could also fall. If the
quantities of currency and bonds are fixed, the real value required to be paid out on nominal
deposits will then fall in consonance with an adverse shock to the supply of goods, reducing the
liquidity shortage and its effects on, and via, the banking system.
However, perfect state contingent adjustment of liquidity demand using nominal deposit
contracts is a fairly special idealization. More generally, the transactions value of money may
have large variation that is independent of aggregate production.1 If so, banks that issue nominal
demandable deposits are particularly vulnerable: if cash goods are temporarily cheap (for
example, because the supply of money is low relative to available cash goods) banks will be
forced to increase interest rates offered on demandable deposits to keep depositors from
withdrawing. In turn, this will increase the real repayment obligations of the banks, potentially
even causing bank failures. When the value of money is not “well-behaved”, far from reducing
aggregate real liquidity demand when aggregate supply falls, nominal deposits may actually
increase it, exacerbating real liquidity shortages, and reducing credit.
1 If illegal goods and informal services require cash-in-advance, there is no reason they should be positively
correlated with aggregate formal production. In fact, if more workers lose formal employment and enter the
informal sector, there could be a case for arguing for negative correlation between aggregate production
and cash transactions. Similarly, if a temporary downturn prompts asset sales, a negative correlation could
again emerge.
2