NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CRISES AND GROWTH: A RE-EVALUATION
Romain Ranciere
Aaron Tornell
Frank Westermann
Working Paper 10073
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10073
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2003
We thank Jess Benhabib, Sudipto Bhattacharya, Pierre Olivier Gourinchas, Thorvaldur Gylfason, Jürgen von
Hagen, Lutz Hendricks, Fabrizio Perri, Joris Pinske, Franck Portier, Debraj Ray, Hans-Werner Sinn, Carolyn
Sissoko, Jean Tirole, Jaume Ventura and seminar participants at Bonn, Haravrd, Munich, NYU, Toulouse,
and the Banca d’Italia/CEPR Conference on Money Banking and Finance for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Romain Ranciere, Aaron Tornell and Frank Westermann. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Crises and Growth: A Re-Evaluation
Romain Ranciere, Aaron Tornell, and Frank Westermann
NBER Working Paper No. 10073
October 2003
JEL No. F34, F36, F43, O41
ABSTRACT
We address the question of whether growth and welfare can be higher in crisis prone economies.
First, we show that there is a robust empirical link between per-capita GDP growth and negative
skewness of credit growth across countries with active financial markets. That is, countries that have
experienced occasional crises have grown on average faster than countries with smooth credit
conditions. We then present a two-sector endogenous growth model in which financial crises can
occur, and analyze the relationship between financial fragility and growth. The underlying credit
market imperfections generate borrowing constraints, bottlenecks and low growth. We show that
under certain conditions endogenous real exchange rate risk arises and firms find it optimal to take
on credit risk in the form of currency mismatch. Along such a risky path average growth is higher,
but self-fulfilling crises occur occasionally. Furthermore, we establish conditions under which the
adoption of credit risk is welfare improving and brings the allocation nearer to the Pareto optimal
level. The design of the model is motivated by several features of recent crises: credit risk in the
form of foreign currency denominated debt; costly crises that generate firesales and widespread
bankruptcies; and asymmetric sectorial responses, where the nontradables sector falls more than the
tradables sector in the wake of crises.
Romain Ranciere Aaron Tornell Frank Westermann
C.R.E.I - Universitat Department of Economics frank.westermann@ces.vw
Pompeu Fabra UCLA l.uni.muenchen.de
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27 405 Hilgard Ave
08005-Barcelona Bunche Hall #8283
romain.ranciere@upf.edu Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
tornell@ucla.edu

1 Introduction
Over the last two decades most of the fastest growing countries of the developing world have
experienced lending booms and Þnancial crises. Countries in which credit growth has been
smooth have, by contrast, exhibited the lowest growth rates. It would thus appear that
factors that contribute to Þnancial fragility have also been a source of growth, even if they
have led to occasional crises.
The link between Þnancial fragility and long run growth is associated with two views
of Þnancial liberalization. In one view, Þnancial liberalization induces excessive risk-taking,
increases macroeconomic volatility and leads to more frequent crises. In another view, lib-
eralization strengthens Þnancial development and contributes to higher long-run growth.
In this paper we bring these two views together. First, we document a robust empirical
link between higher growth and a propensity for crisis. Second, we present a model that
establishes a link between crises models and growth models, and show that the two views
of liberalization are complementary. We analyze the relationship between Þnancial fragility
and growth in an economy where credit market imperfections imply that a high growth
path requires credit risk and the possibility of crisis. Furthermore, we carry out a welfare
analysis and establish conditions under which the welfare costs of crises are outweighed by
the beneÞts of higher growth.
The paper is in two parts. The Þrst part is empirical and the second is a model. The
empirical section establishes the link between higher GDP growth and negative skewness
in credit growth across countries with active Þnancial markets. This Þnding indicates that
countries with stable credit market conditions have on average grown more slowly than
countries that have experienced occasional crises, and have a credit growth rate distribution
with a long left tail.1 But this does not imply that Þnancial crises are good for growth. It
suggests that undertaking credit risk has led to higher growth, but as a side-effect, it has
also led to occasional crises.
In our empirical analysis, we Þnd that the link between bumpiness and growth is not
evidentacrosscountrieswithahighdegreeofcontractenforceability(HECs), butonlyacross
1Negative skewness indicates that good results are clustered closer to the mean than bad results. In
other words, credit contractions are more abrupt and rare than credit expansions.
2

thosewithmoderatecontractenforceability(MECs). Infact, overthepasttwodecadesmost
HECs have experienced skewness of credit growth that is near zero.
Thailand and India are contrasting examples of a steep but crisis prone growth path and
aslowbutsafegrowthpath. Thailandhasexperiencedlendingboomsandcrises, whileIndia
has pursued a safe growth path for credit (see Figure 1). GDP per capita grew by only 99%
between 1980 and 2001 in India, whereas Thailand’s GDP per capita grew by 148%, despite
having experienced a major crisis.2
The literature has shown that economic growth is negatively correlated with the variance
of several macro aggregates. These Þndings do not conßict with our results: variance is just
not a good instrument with which to capture the uneven progress associated with Þnancial
fragility. For instance, a country which experiences high frequency shocks will exhibit a high
variance in credit growth even though it experiences neither the booms nor the busts of
countries that are Þnancially fragile.
The second part of the paper presents a model that links Þnancial fragility and long-run
growth, andderivesthewelfareimplications of suchalink. Themodel isdesignedtoaccount
also for prominent features of recent crisis episodes in MECs. Not only are crises marked by
dramaticrealdepreciations,Þresalesandwidespreadbankruptcies,buttheyarecharacterized
by a sharp sectorial asymmetry: output drops far more in the nontradables (N) sector than
in the tradables (T) sector. Closely related to this asymmetric sectorial response is the
denomination of N-sector debt in foreign currency. In the model this currency mismatch is
the source of Þnancial fragility.
To explain the link between bumpiness and growth and at the same time account for the
sectorial asymmetric response to crises, we consider a two-sector endogenous growth model
with two credit market imperfections. First, there are contract enforceability problems that
generate domestic Þnancing constraints. These constraints affect primarily N-Þrms, as T-
Þrms have access to world capital markets. Second, there are bailout guarantees that insure
lenders only against systemic crises.3
There is an equilibrium where crises never occur. Along this safe path the N-sector
2This fact is more remarkable given that in 1980 India’s GDP was only about one Þfth of Thailand’s.
3We model these two imperfections as in Schneider and Tornell (2003). Their empirical relevance in
MECs is analyzed in Tornell and Westermann (2003) .
3