NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RISK MANAGEMENT, CAPITAL BUDGETING AND
CAPITAL STRUCTURE POLICY FOR INSURERS AND REINSURERS
Kenneth A. Froot
Working Paper 10184
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10184
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003
Presented as the Geneva Risk Lecture at the 30th Seminar of the European Group of Risk and Insurance
Economists, Zurich, September 15-17, 2003. I thank Rob Bentley, John Major, David Moss, Ryan Ogaard,
Gary Venter, and especially Paul Embrechts and other participants of the EGRIE seminar for their comments
and suggestions. Naturally, all mistakes are mine. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Kenneth A. Froot. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Risk Management, Capital Budgeting and Capital Structure Policy for Insurers and Reinsurers
Kenneth A. Froot
NBER Working Paper No. 10184
December 2003
JEL No. G20, G31, G32
ABSTRACT
This paper builds on Froot and Stein (1998) in developing a framework for analyzing the risk
allocation, capital budgeting, and capital structure decisions facing insurers and reinsurers. The
model incorporates three key features: i) value-maximizing insurers and reinsurers face product-
market as well as capital market imperfections that give rise to well-founded concerns with risk
management and capital allocation; ii) some, but not all, of the risks they face can be frictionlessly
hedged in the capital market; iii) the distribution of their cashflows may be asymmetric, which alters
the demand for underwriting and hedging. We show that these features result in a three-factor model
that determines the pricing and allocation of risk and the optimal capital structure of the firm. This
approach allows us to integrate these features into: i) the pricing of risky investment, underwriting,
reinsurance, and hedging; and ii) the allocation of risk across all of these opportunities, and the
optimal amount of surplus capital held by the firm.
Kenneth A. Froot
Graduate School of Business
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
kfroot@hbs.edu

I. Introduction
The cost of holding risk is a crucial concept for any corporation to understand. Most
financial policy decisions, whether they concern capital structure, dividends, capital allocation,
capital budgeting, or investment and hedging policies, revolve around the corporate costs of holding
risk. These decisions can be made well only with a thorough understanding of how costly it is to
originate and warehouse risk.
This issue is particularly acute for financial firms, since the origination and warehousing of
risk constitutes their core value added. For these firms, capital is often their most expensive and
important input in production. They deploy capital by holding a large number of financial risk
positions that need to be evaluated. Moreover, these positions turn over and are competitively
repriced far more often than the physical assets of non-financial firms. Unanticipated shocks to the
demand for financial firms’ products can be planned for and actively protected against, unlike those
for non-financial firms. For these reasons, financial firms have the greatest need to understand the
costs and benefits of holding risk.
Insurers and reinsurers certainly belong in this group. They have large underwriting and
reinsurance portfolios, as well as investment and hedge portfolios. Often they have a large number
of clients who view their insurance contracts as financially large and important claims.
However, there are two basic features of insurers and reinsurers that make them especially
sensitive to the costs of holding risk. The first is that their customers – especially retail
policyholders – face contractual performance risks which are large relative to their wealth. Once
premiums are paid, policyholders worry whether their future policy claims will be honored swiftly
and fully. Commercial bank customers, for example, are less exposed, because they are protected by
deposit guarantees as depositors and are not exposed to bank performance risk as borrowers.
The large contractual performance risk borne by insurance and reinsurance customers makes
demand sensitive to underwriter risk. It seems sensible that firms whose capital is at greater risk are
likely, all else equal, to have a tougher time selling their products. There is considerable empirical
evidence suggestive of this. For example, Sommer (1996) seeks evidence of an empirical
relationship between insolvency risk and property-liability premiums. He finds that, all else
2

equal, firms with a greater ratio of surplus to assets have greater ratios of profit to premium.1 In
addition, he finds greater volatility of surplus-to-assets is associated with lower profitability
rates. In addition, Grace, Klein, and Kleindorfer (2001, 2003) examine homeowners coverage in
New York and Florida and find that higher-rated insurers get higher premiums. In particular,
they find that rating is more important for premiums for customers who may have claims above
state guarantee fund coverage limits than for those customers who would not have claims above
state-specified coverage limits. Finally, Epermanis & Harrington (2001) find that insurers with
high AM Best ratings grew annual premiums during 1992-1996 approximately 6% faster than those
that were not highly rated. The effect is largest statistically and economically for changes in lower-
rated and small firms, in the year of and year subsequent to the ratings change, and with respect to
negative rating changes.2
There is thus considerable evidence that customer demand is sensitive to the financial
standing of the insurer. Note that the change in customer demand may appear as either a change in
the price an insurer can charge or a change in the quantity that the insurer can sell. The investigation
of profits in Sommer (1996) and of premiums written in Epermanis and Harrington (2001) detects
both of these channels.
While these studies suggest that customer demand falls with a decline in insurer rating, it is
yet more difficult to marshal evidence that customer demand falls by more than capital provider
demand with a decline in rating. Nevertheless, there are a number of reasons to believe that
customers act as though they are more risk averse than capital providers, discounting future claims
more heavily on the basis of even relatively small probabilities of failure. There are two kinds of
explanations behind the greater product market sensitivity of customers, one is behavioral and the
other is rational.
The behavioral story begins with Richard Zeckhauser’s Russian roulette example. Suppose
a randomly-spun revolver has one bullet in the chamber. How much would you pay to have it
removed before pulling the trigger? How much, by comparison, would you pay to remove one
1
This is not unrelated to the finding in nonfinancial corporations that past profitability is a positive predictor of
equity capital as a percentage of total capital. See Myers (1984).
2
Epermanis and Harrington (2001) are actually primarily concerned with the ‘market discipline’ hypothesis, which
3