NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECT OF WORD OF MOUTH ON SALES:
ONLINE BOOK REVIEWS
Judith A. Chevalier
Dina Mayzlin
Working Paper 10148
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10148
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003
This is a preliminary draft. Please do not quote without the authors’ permission. We would like to thank
participants at the Marketing Science Conference at the U. of Maryland, Yale Applied Micro lunch, MIT
Marketing Seminar, Sharon Oster, Jackie Luan and David Godes for helpful comments. Both authors
contributed equally and their names are listed in alphabetical order. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Judith A. Chevalier and Dina Mayzlin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

The Effect of Word of Mouth on Sales: Online Book Reviews
Judith A. Chevalier and Dina Mayzlin
NBER Working Paper No. 10148
December 2003
JEL No. L1, L8, M3
ABSTRACT
We examine the effect of consumer reviews on relative sales of books on Amazon.com and
BarnesandNoble.com. We find that 1) reviews are overwhelmingly positive at both sites, but there
are more reviews and longer reviews at Amazon.com, 2) an improvement in a book's reviews leads
to an increase in relative sales at that site, and 3) the impact of 1-star reviews is greater than the
impact of 5-star reviews. The results suggest that new forms of customer communication on the
Internet have an important impact on customer behavior.
Judith A. Chevalier
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
judith.chevalier@yale.edu
Dina Mayzlin
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520
dina.mayzlin@yale.edu

1. Introduction
Online user reviews have become an important source of information to consumers,
substituting and complementing other forms of word of mouth communication about the
quality of various products. Consequently, many managers believe that a Web site needs to
provide community content in order to build brand loyalty. (See, for example, McWilliams
(2000) or Fingar, Kumar, and Sharma (2000)). Despite this widespread belief, to our
knowledge, there is no literature documenting that community content plays any role in
consumer decision-making. Such a finding, it seems, is a necessary prerequisite for content
provision to be a profitable strategy.
There are many reasonable arguments as to why making investments in providing such
content could potentially be a poor strategy. First, it is not clear why users would bother to
take the time to provide reviews for which they are not in any way compensated. Second,
even if user reviews are provided, rival retailers can free ride on them; there is nothing to
stop a consumer from utilizing the information provided by one website to inform
purchases made elsewhere. Third, by providing user reviews, a site cedes control over the
information displayed; unfavorable reviews created by either legitimate users or by biased
interested parties may depress sales. Note that this may be less of a threat to a retailer that
sells many different brands as opposed to a manufacturer. Similarly, since authors and
publishers can freely proliferate favorable reviews for their own books, positive reviews may
not be credible and may not function to stimulate sales.1 Last, online user reviews may not
be useful, and may not stimulate sales due to the sample selection bias that is inherent in an
1 See Mayzlin (2003) for a theoretical treatment of recommendation systems where firms can anonymously
post reviews.
3

amateur review process. That is, a consumer only chooses to read a book or watch a movie
if she perceives that there is a high probability that she will enjoy the experience. In the
presence of consumer heterogeneity, this implies that the pool of reviewers will have a
positive bias in their evaluation compared to the general population. Thus, positive reviews
may simply be discounted by potential buyers.2
In this study, we characterize patterns of reviewer behavior, and examine the effect of
consumer reviews on firms’ sales patterns. In particular, we use publicly available data from
the two leading online booksellers, Amazon.com (Amazon) and BN.comandNoble.com
(BN.com), to construct measures of each firm’s sales of individual books. Both BN.com
and Amazon allow for customers to post reviews on the site. However, Amazon’s
investments in “collaborative” consumer content have been more extensive and much-
imitated by other Internet retailers. By focusing on the differences between the two sites’
sales of the same books, we examine the relationship between the customer reviews at each
site and firm sales, controlling for other drivers of book sales.
There has been a long-held belief in marketing3 that word of mouth drives sales. Indeed,
this work contributes to the broader literature on the link between customer word of mouth
and sales, which has been demonstrated in several studies. For example, researchers have
used word of mouth to explain the adoption of high-yield varieties of seeds among farmers
(Foster and Rosenzweig (1995)), the adoption of tetracycline among physicians (Coleman
(1966)), as well as evolution of the ratings of new TV shows (Godes and Mayzlin (2003)).
2 In a very different context, Resnick and Zeckhauser (2002) find that 99% of the feedback ratings on
ebay.com are positive.
3 Katz and Lazarsfeld (1955) cited word of mouth as an important source of information for certain purchase
decisions.
4