NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE RISK TOLERANCE OF INTERNATIONAL INVESTORS
Kenneth A. Froot
Paul G. J. O’Connell
Working Paper 10157
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10157
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003
Preliminary draft – not to be quoted without permission. We are indebted to Andrei Shleifer for helpful
comments, to Matt Klaeffling and Riti Samanta for excellent research assistance, and to State Street
Corporation for help in obtaining data. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research
©2003 by Kenneth A. Froot and Paul G. J. O’Connell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Risk Tolerance of International Investors
Kenneth A. Froot and Paul G. J. O’Connell
NBER Working Paper No. 10157
December 2003
JEL No. G15, F21, F30
ABSTRACT
Investor confidence and risk tolerance are important concepts that investors are constantly trying
to gauge. Yet these concepts are notoriously hard to measure in practice. Most attempts rely on price
or return data, but these run into trouble when trying to disentangle whether an observed price
change is attributable to a shift in investor confidence or a change in fundamental value. In this
paper, we take an alternative approach by looking at the world-wide holdings and trading of risky
assets. We model global capital markets as the interaction between large global institutional
investors and smaller domestic investors from each country. This permits separation of global price
changes into two components, one that reflects changes in demand and fundamentals perceived by
all investors, and a second that reflects changes in the relative risk tolerance of institutional investors
over and above that of domestics. The latter component, changes in relative risk tolerance of global
institutions, is driven by the willingness of these investors to acquire additional assets in each
country in proportion to their current holdings. Using our model, we show how data on asset
holdings and flows across countries can be used to identify changes in risk tolerance. We then apply
this identification scheme to recent data on the global portfolio holdings of institutional investors.
The resulting measure of risk tolerance impressionistically accords well with periods of market
turbulence and quiescence. It also accounts for a considerable portion of the variation in portfolio
holdings and is informative about future returns.
Kenneth A. Froot Paul G. J. O’Connell
Graduate School of Business FDO Partners, LLC
Harvard University 5 Revere Street
Soldiers Field Cambridge, MA 02138
Boston, MA 02163 poconnell@fdopartners.com
and NBER
kfroot@hbs.edu

Risk tolerance of interational investors 1
1 Introduction
Eachtimethereisamajorchangeinglobalequityprices,investorsnaturallywonderhowtointerpret
it. Was it attributable to a change in investor confidence (i.e., risk tolerance or sentiment)? If
investors have less tolerance for risk, then presumably equity prices fall. However, this is not the
only conclusion one can draw from a price decline. One sensible alternative is that a fall in asset
fundamentals may have been responsible. That is, expected future cashflows may have declined, or
the systematic risk of future cashflows may have increased. Another alternative is that the price
change was attributable to a change in investor wealth. For example, a decline in future wage
income reduces wealth and may undermine investors’ willingness to hold stocks.1
With the supply of shares constant in the short run, one or more of the elements of investor
demand—risk tolerance, wealth, and expectations of future fundamentals— must change if prices
are to fall. To successfully extract a measure of risk tolerance from the data, it is necessary to
distinguish among these competing factors. This is particularly difficult because both investor
confidence and asset fundamentals cannot be directly observed. As a result, large and widespread
price changes generate considerable disagreement as to their source. Good examples would include
the ’bubble’ in technology stock prices at the end of the last decade, or the Asian crisis of the
mid-to-late-1990s.2
Our approach to identifying investor confidence focuses on the behavior of market participants,
rather than on price changes. We do this by allowing for heterogeneity between global institutions
and domestic retail investors, so that they trade with one another. Specifically, we model the
global capital-market equilibrium as having different types of investors: domestic investors from
individual countries who hold only local risky assets and a global risk-free asset (e.g., US Treasury
bills), and a single type of global investor who can trade any and all assets. In this setup, when
globalinstitutionalinvestorsarebuyingassetsfromagivencountry,smallerdomesticinvestorsfrom
that country are selling. In equilibrium, these investors trade with each other because of changes
1Our focus in this paper is on investor confidence—defined as risk tolerance—and not necessarily on notions of
investorsentimentdiscussedbymanyeconomists. Mostapproachestomodelingsentimenttakeinvestorrisktolerance
as fixed, assuming instead that investor expectations depart from those of a rational investor. These approaches are
equivalent if there is only one risky asset. For example, in DeLong, Summers, Shleifer, and Waldmann (1990),
sentiment shocks affect the expectations of one group of investors, pushing prices away from a rational level. Shocks
to this group’s expectations under constant risk preferences are isomorphic to shocks to the group’s risk tolerance
under rational expectations.
2Corsetti, Pesanti and Roubini (1998), Kaminsky and Schmukler (1999) argue that the price changes in multiple
countries represented shifts in underlying fundamentals. Kyle and Xiong (2002) argue that wealth effects were an
important propagation mechanism. Forbes and Rigobon (1999) and Rigobon (2001) hold that the covariance matrix
of shocks fundamentally changed.

Risk tolerance of interational investors 2
in their views about asset fundamentals (expected returns and risk at current prices), changes in
their relative wealth, or changes in their relative risk tolerance.
Weassume thatallinvestorsobserveafundamentalshockineachcountry, a componentofwhich
is common across investors. This common component may also be correlated across countries or
regions. Because these shocks affect all investors symmetrically, they move prices but create no
incentives for trade. Such price changes therefore cannot be interpreted as a change in relative risk
tolerance. However, these price changes can be arbitrarily correlated across countries and regions.
In addition to the common shock, each type of investor also observes his or her own perceived
country-specificfundamentalsshock. Unlikethecommonshock,therearedifferencesintheseshocks
across global and domestic investors. These shocks therefore generally lead to both trading as well
aspricechanges. Fromtheperspectiveofagiveninvestor,investor-specificshocksmaybecorrelated
across countries in a region, but, critically, not across regions. So, for example, global investors may
learn something that causes them to revise upward their expected returns for one country, or all
countries in a region, and therefore, all else equal, to purchase assets from that region’s domestics.
Anything global investors may learn that affects their expected returns simultaneously across all
countries is assumed to be common across investors, not investor-specific.
With this setup, purchases by global investors that are common across all countries can come
from only two possible sources: changes in wealth or changes in risk tolerance. These two sources
are easily separated given the structure of our model. Because each security can be held by only
one investor type other than the global investors, it is possible to measure all types of investors’
wealth by observing total market capitalization and the holdings of global investors only. Subject
thentoanassumptionabouttheformofinvestors’utilityfunctions, wecanisolateshockstowealth.
The remaining portion of the common component in purchases by global investors is the change in
investor risk tolerance.
The common component across countries of global investor trades we wish to measure is a
proportional one. That is, we look for a common component in purchases as a fraction of global
investor holdings in that country. This is because changes in risk tolerance should affect holdings
equiproportionately. Toseethis, considerwhathappensif, allelseequal, institutionalinvestors’risk
tolerancedeclines. Theseinvestorswouldthensellriskyassetsinproportiontotheirinitialholdings.
Thispatternofsellingisverydifferentfromwhatwouldtakeplaceifexpectedfundamentalschanged
randomly across regions. In such a case, we might at any given time, observe institutional investors
are on average selling across countries. However, the selling would be proportional to the declines