NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO FIRMS IN COUNTRIES WITH POOR PROTECTION
OF INVESTOR RIGHTS HOLD MORE CASH?
Lee Pinkowitz
Rene M. Stulz
Rohan Williamson
Working Paper 10188
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10188
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003
René Stulz is grateful for the hospitality of the Kellogg School at Northwestern University and of the Stigler
Center at the University of Chicago, where some of this research was conducted. We thank Kathryn-Ann
Bloomfield, Michael Chiang, Mark Ervin, Jennifer Rooke, and especially Aaron Kravitz, for their help with
the data collection. We are grateful to Ole-Kristian Hope, Jan Mahrt-Smith, and seminar participants at the
University of Toronto for useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Lee Pinkowitz, Rene M. Stulz, and Rohan Williamson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Do Firms in Countries with Poor Protection of Investor Rights Hold More Cash?
Lee Pinkowitz, Rene M. Stulz, and Rohan Williamson
NBER Working Paper No. 10188
December 2003
JEL No. G15, G31, G32
ABSTRACT
Managers make different decisions in countries with poor protection of investor rights and poor
financial development. One possible explanation is that shareholder-wealth maximizing managers
face different tradeoffs in such countries (the tradeoff theory). Alternatively, firms in such countries
are less likely to be managed for the benefit of shareholders because the poor protection of investor
rights makes it easier for management and controlling shareholders to appropriate corporate
resources for their own benefit (the agency costs theory). Holdings of liquid assets by firms across
countries are consistent with Keynes' transaction and precautionary demand for money theories.
Firms in countries with greater GDP per capita hold more cash as predicted. Controlling for
economic development, firms in countries with more risk and with poor protection of investor rights
hold more cash. The tradeoff theory and the agency costs theory can both explain holdings of liquid
assets across countries. However, the fact that a dollar of cash is worth less than $0.65 to the
minority shareholders of firms in such countries but worth approximately $1 in countries with good
protection of investor rights and high financial development is only consistent with the agency costs
theory.
Lee Pinkowitz Rene M. Stulz Rohan Williamson
Georgetown University Fisher College of Business Georgetown University
pinkowitz@msb.edu Ohio State University
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu

1. Introduction
Recent work shows that countries where institutions that protect investor rights are weak
perform poorly along a number of dimensions. In particular, these countries have lower growth,
less well-developed financial markets, and more macroeconomic volatility.1 To measure the
quality of institutions, authors have used, for instance, indices of the risk of expropriation, the
level of corruption, and the rule of law. Since poor institutions could result from poor economic
performance rather than cause it, authors have also used the origin of a country’s legal system (La
Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny, LLSV1, 1998), the nature of the activities of its
colonizers (Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2001), and its culture (Stulz and Williamson,
2003) as instruments for the quality of institutions.
For the quality of institutions to matter for economic performance, it has to affect the
actions of firms and individuals. Recent papers examine how dividend, investment, asset
composition, and capital structure policies are related to the quality of institutions.2 In this paper,
we focus more directly on why firm policies depend on the quality of institutions. The quality of
institutions can affect firm policies for two different reasons. First, a country’s protection of
investor rights may influence the relative prices or tradeoffs managers face when making
decisions, so that actions that maximize shareholder wealth in countries where investor rights are
well protected may not be optimal in other countries. We call this explanation the tradeoff theory.
Second, poor protection of investor rights makes it more difficult for non-controlling investors to
receive a return from their investment because agency conflicts are harder to govern. We call this
explanation the agency costs theory. With this theory, managers make different decisions in
countries where investor rights are poorly protected because they face fewer constraints in
1 See Levine (1997), La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (2000), and Easterly (2001) for
reviews of the evidence.
2 See, for instance, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (2000) for dividends, Claessens and
Laeven (2003) for the allocation of assets within the firm, Love (2000) for investment, Demirgüc-Kunt and
Maksimovic (1998) for external finance, and Booth, Aivazian, Demirgüc-Kunt, and Maksimovic (2001) for
capital structure.
2

pursuing policies that do not maximize shareholder wealth. In this paper, we study the relative
importance of the tradeoff and agency costs theories for why firms act differently in countries
with poor protection of investor rights.
Using a sample that spans 35 countries and twelve years, we find that firms in countries with
poorer institutions hold more liquid assets (which we also call cash) than they would if they were
located in the U.S. The effect is economically important. For instance, in a cross-country
regression that controls for GDP per capita, financial development, stock return volatility, and
inflation, a firm in a country with the worst institutions has from 5% to 25% more liquid asset
holdings in proportion to total assets than a U.S. firm depending on the index of institution
quality used.
We focus our analysis on cash holdings by firms because, since Keynes (1934), there has
been little controversy in the literature about the determinants of cash holdings when agency costs
are unimportant. Keynes (1934) explains that firms can hold cash to reduce transaction costs (the
transaction motive) and to provide a buffer to absorb adverse shocks (the precautionary motive).
The transaction motive predicts that cash holdings are positively related to economic
development. With the transaction motive, firms hold cash to economize on the costs of
transacting. The transaction motive is a “shoe leather” theory of money demand: it is cheaper to
hold cash than to send somebody to the bank. As a result, cash holdings increase with the cost of
labor. The tradeoff theory therefore predicts a positive relation between cash holdings and
economic development. We find that inferences about the relation between cash holdings and
investor protection depend crucially on controlling for economic development. Without
controlling for economic development, investor protection proxies for economic development in
regressions and there is a negative relation between cash holdings and investor protection.
Opler et al. (1999) provide evidence on the importance of the precautionary motive for cash
holdings in the U.S. The precautionary motive could explain why firms in countries with poorer
3