NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STAKEHOLDERS, TRANSPARENCY AND CAPITAL STRUCTURE
Andres Almazan
Javier Suarez
Sheridan Titman
Working Paper 10101
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10101
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2003
We are grateful to comments from Aydogan Alti, Kent Daniel, Adolfo DeMotta, Mark Flannery, Xavier
Freixas, Ron Gianmarino, David Hirshleifer, Giovanna Nicodano, Robert Prentice, Chris Parsons, Todd
Pulvino, Siew Hong Teoh, and seminar participants at University of Amsterdam, Arizona State University,
ESCP-EAP, INSEAD, McGill University, NYU, Northwestern University, Ohio State University, Oxford,
Pompeu Fabra, UCLA, University of Texas, Tulane University, the CEPR Workshop on European Corporate
Governance and the New Economy, and 2003 WFA meetings at Los Cabos, Mexico. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Andres Almazan, Javier Suarez, and Sheridan Titman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Stakeholders, Transparency and Capital Structure
Andres Almazan, Javier Suarez, and Sheridan Titman
NBER Working Paper No. 10101
November 2003
JEL No. G3
ABSTRACT
Firms that are more highly levered are forced to raise capital more often, a process that generates
information about them. Of course transparency can improve the allocation of capital. However,
when the information about the firm affects the terms under which the firm transacts with its
customers and employees, transparency can have an offsetting negative effect. Under relatively
general conditions, good news improves these terms of trade less than bad news worsens them,
implying that increased transparency can lower firm value. In addition, we show that transparency
can reduce the incentives of firms and stakeholders to undertake relationship specific investments.
The negative effects of transparency can lead firms to pass up positive NPV investments that require
external funding and to choose more conservative capital structures that they would otherwise
choose. These effects should be especially important for technology firms that require a reputation
for being on the “leading edge.”
Andres Almazan
University of Texas at Austin
aalmazan@mail.utexas.edu
Javier Suarez
CEMFI and CEPR
suarez@cemfi.es
Sheridan Titman
Department of Finance
The University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712-1179
and NBER
titman@mail.utexas.edu

1 Introduction
The transparency of a Þrm is often deÞned as the extent to which outsiders can
evaluate the Þrm’s operations. In some situations it is beneÞcial for Þrms to be
transparent and invite the scrutiny of outsiders. However, as we stress in this paper,
this is not always the case. SpeciÞcally, we show that when a Þrm’s prospects depend
on its long-term relationships with its stakeholders, external scrutiny can create costs
that reduce Þrm value.
This paper explores the interaction of two ideas. The Þrst idea is that there is a
fundamental linkage between capital structure and transparency. SpeciÞcally, since
more levered Þrms require more frequent access to external capital markets, they are
subject to greater market scrutiny. The second idea is that if the success of a Þrm
is related to the stakeholders’ perception of the Þrm, (i.e., the Þrm’s “image”), then
inßuencing the process by which information about the Þrm is generated (i.e., how
the Þrm’s image is formed) becomes important to the Þrm. As we argue, Þrms that
are more conservatively Þnanced are better able to accomplish this objective.
To understand the importance of stakeholders’ perceptions, and the link between
capital structure and market scrutiny, consider the situation at Enron in the year
leading up to its bankruptcy. In 2001, Enron was ranked by Fortune magazine as the
22nd best company to work for and was perceived to be the market leader. Given
their favorable image, Enron was able to attract top graduates who were willing to
toil long hours to gain the experience that one can only acquire by working with
the very best.1 However, Enron was also very highly levered and in the fall of 2002,
after experiencing downturns in a number of its business units, they needed to raise
1In the ‘Vision and Values’ video that Enron sent to its new recruits, Jeff Skilling, at the time
Enron’sCEO,promisedtheworkersthat:“whenyouworkforEnronyouaregoingtoseethenewest
thing, thenewestproducts,thenewestservices, thenewestwaytothinkaboutthings,”(takenfrom
Swartz and Watkins, (2003)).
1

substantial amounts of external capital. During its attempt to raise capital it became
apparent that Enron’s organization was deeply ßawed. At this point, an association
with Enron became a liability, making it difficult for Enron to keep workers and other
stakeholders as committed to the Þrm as they were before. Perhaps, the subsequent
implosion of Enron would have occurred in any event. However, personnel problems,
as well as problems with other stakeholders, that were caused by the revelation of
negative information about the Þrm, certainly hastened their demise.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that the link between the process by which Þrms
raise external capital, and the extent to which their Þrms are scrutinized, plays an
important role in determining Þrms’ Þnancing choices. For example, a recent Wall
Street Journal article states that, despite the opportunity to save on Þnancing costs,
many Þrms avoided reÞnancing their debt following the recent drop in interest rates
because of these concerns:
“This year’s spate of accounting and other governance scandals has meant
that many companies are afraid to simply test the waters: even if a com-
pany wants to shoot for a lower rate, cutting its Þnancing costs in the pro-
cess, a bond deal that goes awry could have a damaging ripple effect, rais-
ing questions about a company’s Þnancial health and potentially weighing
on its stock price at a time when investors are particularly punishing.”2
To better understand the costs associated with scrutiny, and its link to the capital
structure choice, we develop a model that allows us to analyze how transparency
affects (i) the Þrm’s cost of retaining its workers, (ii) the Þrm’s incentives to make
relationship speciÞc investments, and (iii) the employees incentive to exert effort.3
2From “The ReÞnancing Boom Hasn’t Hit Corporations” by Craig Karmin, published in WSJ
10/15/2002. In the article, the head of the U.S. capital markets at Credit Suisse First Boston
declares: “chief Þnancialofficersaresayingfor arelativelysmallamountofsavings, ‘Idon’twantto
expose myself to that risk.’”
3Although our argument applies to a broad range of stakeholders, for concreteness, our focus is
primarily on employees. In Section 8, we explicitly discuss of how the arguments can be extended
to the relationship of the Þrm with other stakeholders.
2