NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CROSS-BORDER VALUATION:
THE INTERNATIONAL COST OF EQUITY CAPITAL
Gordon M. Bodnar
Bernard Dumas
Richard C. Marston
Working Paper 10115
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10115
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2003
We thank Stéphane Marchand, MBA student at INSEAD, for extremely valuable research assistance offered
during the drafting of this article.The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Gordon M. Bodnar, Bernard Dumas, and Richard C. Marston. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Cross-Border Valuation: The International Cost of Equity Capital
Gordon M. Bodnar, Bernard Dumas, and Richard C. Marston
NBER Working Paper No. 10115
November 2003
JEL No. G3, F3
ABSTRACT
How does a firm in one country evaluate an investment in a firm in another country, or how does it evaluate
a foreign project that the firm itself is undertaking? The firm must estimate future free cash flows just as in
a domestic project, but choosing an appropriate discount rate is a particular challenge. This study examines
the determinants of the discount rate for an international acquisition or project by examining the sources of
risk in an international setting. These risks include stock-market price risk measured with various versions
of the capital asset pricing model, as well as exchange rate risk and political risk. To measure stock market
risk, both segmented and integrated models of the world equity markets are considered. The emphasis of the
study is on some of the practical aspects of estimation, particular for markets where no comparable
investments exist on which to base estimates of risk premiums. To show how each of these risks might be
measured, the study reports estimates for a representative French firm, Thalès. The estimates range widely
depending on whether or not the equity market is globally integrated.
Gordon M. Bodnar Richard C. Marston
The Paul H. Nitze School Finance Department
of Advanced International Studies Wharton School
Johns Hopkins University University of Pennsylvania
1740 Massachusetts Avenue NW Philadelphia, PA 19104
Washington, DC 20036 and NBER
bodnar@jhu.edu marstonr@wharton.upenn.edu
Bernard Dumas
Finance Department
INSEAD
77305 Fontainebleau Cedex
FRANCE
and NBER
bernard.dumas@insead.edu

How does a firm in one country evaluate an investment in a firm in another
country, or how does it evaluate a foreign project that the firm itself is undertaking? Both
questions are increasingly important as international mergers and acquisitions grow and
as firms become more multinational in their operations. As in domestic finance, answers
to these questions require that the firm estimate future free cash flows to equity of the
investment and discount these cash flows at some appropriate discount rate. The discount
rate reflects the investment’s cost of equity financing.
Domestic finance teaches us that the classic Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM)
allows a systematic comparison of the costs of equity of various traded firms. The classic
CAPM recognizes but one source of risk and one risk premium to be charged on a share
of stock; namely, the systematic risk or risk of covariation of the stock with the broader
equity market, captured by the equity's β.2 The discount rate for equity-financed projects
is based on this β times the equity market premium, or the excess return of the broad
equity market portfolio over the risk-free rate. In the international setting, it’s not
obvious which country’s equity market premium should be used in the evaluation, that of
the acquiring firm or that of the target firm. In the international setting, moreover, the
matter is more complicated because there may be more dimensions of risk for which
financial market participants require a premium. The focal point of the discussion is then
the method by which the various dimensions of risk are incorporated in the cost of equity
that we seek.
2 More recent forms of the CAPM recognize that there may exist more than one risk premium that the
market charges on a share of stock. See Fama and French (1996).
3

The following example will help to illustrate some of the issues involved in cross-
border cost of capital estimation. In July 1998, the Indonesian government decided to
privatize a cement firm, PT Semen Gresik, opening the bidding to firms throughout the
world. Cemex, a Mexico based firm, competed with Holcim, a Switzerland based firm,
in the bidding process. In advising Cemex, the French investment bank Paribas proposed
to base the bid on a discounted cash flow model using CAPM as the basis for valuation.
But which country’s stock market premium should be used for this valuation, that of the
Indonesian market or the Mexican market? The valuation might vary widely depending
on whether the CAPM was applied to one market or another. Would Holcim evaluate the
Indonesian firm differently because it was based in Switzerland? How should Cemex
take into account the political risk associated with ending of the Suharto regime? The
CAPM is not suited to measure political risk, so how should the discount rate for the
project be adjusted to account for this additional risk?
If the world’s stock markets were fully integrated, acquiring firms from different
countries would evaluate an acquisition in the same way. Cemex, and Holcim, would
base their discount rates for the acquisition on the same (world-wide) equity premium.
Since both potential acquirers would measure the beta of PT Semen Gresik vis-à-vis the
same world index, they would use the same discount rate for the cash flows (in a given
currency). If the cash flows expected by each bidding firm were identical, Cemex and
Holcim would come up with the same valuation for the Indonesian firm. But what if
markets are not fully integrated? What approach does one use then? ? This study will
consider these questions directly.
4