NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECTS OF FINANCIAL CRISES ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE
Zihui Ma
Leonard K. Cheng
Working Paper 10172
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10172
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by Zihui Ma and Leonard K. Cheng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

The Effects of Financial Crises on International Trade
Zihui Ma and Leonard K. Cheng
NBER Working Paper No. 10172
December 2003
JEL No. F17, F32, F34, G15
ABSTRACT
This paper studies empirically the effects of financial crises on international trade. The major
findings are that banking crises had a negative impact on imports but a positive impact on exports
in the short term, whereas currency crises decreased imports in the short term and stimulated exports
in the longer term.
Zihui Ma
Department of Economics
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Clear Water Bay
Hong Kong
mazihui@ust.hk
Leonard Cheng
Department of Economics
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Clear Water Bay
Hong Kong
leonard@ust.hk

The Effects of Financial Crises on International Trade∗
Zihui Ma+ and Leonard K. Cheng#
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
1 Introduction
The world suffered three major financial crises in the last ten years, namely, the
European Monetary System (EMS) crisis in 1992-1993, the Mexican crisis in
1994-1995 (which spread to a number of South American countries) and the Asian
crisis in 1997- 1998. Economists usually believe these crises were the results of weak
economic fundamentals, e.g. declining foreign reserve, increasing foreign debt, capital
account and current account deficits, government fiscal deficit and so on.
Obviously, a current account deficit can be a very important factor because, other
things being equal, it increases foreign debt, decreases foreign reserves and weakens
confidence in the exchange rate of the domestic currency. Almost all countries that
suffered financial crises had faced rising current account deficits before the crises
occurred. So such deficits are widely regarded as an important factor of financial crises.
International trade links play an important role in the so called "contagious effect",
i.e., a crisis in one country causes a new crisis in another country with relatively good
fundamentals. Glick and Rose (1999) provided some analysis of the relationship
between trade and contagion; while Forbes (2001) went further to construct some
statistics measuring the importance of trade linkages in transmitting crises.
∗ We thank Chin Hee Hahn, Kozo Kiyota, Andrew Rose and other seminar participants
at the Fourteenth NBER East Asian Seminar on Economics (Taipei, September 5-7,
2003) for helpful comments and suggestions. The work described in this paper was
substantially supported by a grant from the Research Grant Council of the Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region, China (Project No. HKUST6212/00H).
+ E-mail address: mazihui@ust.hk
# E-mail address: leonard@ust.hk
1

Since most economists agree that international trade is one of the important factors
in explaining financial crises, it seems natural and logical to ask the reverse question:
what are the effects of financial crises on international trade? Surprisingly, little
research on this subject has been done. Perhaps the reason is that the answer appears to
be obvious. Conventional wisdom would predict that a financial crisis, by bringing
about a recession in the macro economy, would lead to a drop in imports. Exports,
however, may rise because of both a decline in domestic demand and devaluation of the
domestic currency. A weakening or collapse of the financial system, in particular the
banking system, however, might weaken the country's export capability. So the
aggregate effects of a financial crisis on the macro economy are unclear. This paper
tries to ascertain whether the ambiguity can be resolved empirically.
We divide all the past financial crises into two types: banking crisis and currency
crisis. These two different types of crises had different attributes and different effects
on international trade. This paper begins by analyzing theoretically the effects of
banking and currency crises on international trade. Then it uses bilateral trade data,
macroeconomic data and geographic data to test the theoretical predictions. Overall, the
empirical results provide support for the theoretical predictions.
This paper contributes to the literature in two ways. First, it provides a theoretical
framework for understanding the impact of financial crises on international trade and
the channels of crises transmission through trade. Second, it estimates the effects of
banking crises and currency crises on imports and exports. The estimated results can be
used to predict the impact of financial crises on trade, thus providing useful information
for risk management to policy makers.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews previous
works on the relationship between international trade and financial crisis. Sections 3
and 4 analyze the effects of banking crises and of currency crises on trade respectively.
2