NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE PRICE IS (ALMOST) RIGHT
Randolph B. Cohen
Christopher Polk
Tuomo Vuolteenaho
Working Paper 10131
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10131
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003
An earlier draft of this paper was circulated under the title “Does Risk or Mispricing Explain the Cross-
section of Stock Prices?” Some of the ideas in this paper were first presented as Section V of the paper titled
“The Value Spread” at the NBER 2000 Summer Institute. We would like to thank Ken French for providing
us with some of the data used in this study. We are grateful to Gregor Andrade, John Campbell, John
Cochrane, Josh Coval, Kent Daniel (discussant), Eugene Fama, Wayne Ferson (discussant), Kenneth French,
John Heaton, Matti Keloharju, Owen Lamont, Rafael LaPorta, Andre Perold, Antti Petäjistö, Vesa Puttonen,
William Schwert, Jay Shanken, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, and Sheridan Titman (discussant) for their
comments and suggestions. We would also like to thank seminar participants at the American Finance
Association 2003 meeting, Chicago Quantitative Alliance Spring 2002 meeting, European Finance
Association 2002 meeting, Harvard University Economics Department, Helsinki School of Economics and
Business Administration, Kellogg School of Management (Northwestern), NBER Asset Pricing Program
Meeting, Simon School (Rochester), Stanford Graduate School of Business, Texas Finance Festival, and Tuck
School (Dartmouth). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Randolph B. Cohen, Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Price Is (Almost) Right
Randolph B. Cohen, Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho
NBER Working Paper No. 10131
December 2003
JEL No. G120, G140
ABSTRACT
Most previous research tests market efficiency and asset pricing models using average abnormal
trading profits on dynamic trading strategies, and typically rejects the joint hypothesis. In contrast,
we measure the ability of a simple risk model and the efficient-market hypothesis to explain the
level of stock prices. First, we find that cash-flow betas (measured by regressing firms' earnings on
the market's earnings) explain the prices of value and growth stocks well, with a plausible premium.
Second, we use a present-value model to decompose the cross-sectional variance of firms' price-to-
book ratios into two components due to risk-adjusted fundamental value and mispricing. When we
allow the discount rates to vary with cash-flow betas, the variance share of mispricing is negligible.
Randolph B. Cohen
Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163
rcohen@hbs.edu
Christopher Polk
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
c-polk@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Tuomo Vuolteenaho
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 312
1875 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138-3001
and NBER
t_vuolteenaho@harvard.edu

Most previous research uses average abnormal trading profits on dynamic trading strategies to test
market efficiency and asset pricing models. The joint hypothesis of the capital asset pricing model (CAPM)
and market efficiency is typically rejected by these tests. The economic significance of these rejections is
usually evaluated based on Sharpe ratios (average return over return standard deviation) of zero-investment
strategies that do not expose the investor to systematic risks. The discovery of economically high Sharpe
ratios has lead many to reject the CAPM and efficient-market hypothesis (EMH) as a good approximate
description of the stock market.1
We argue that asset pricing models and market efficiency should be evaluated by their ability to
explain stock-price levels, not by their ability to explain the average returns on frequently-rebalanced
dynamic trading strategies. The price-level criterion is superior to the Sharpe-ratio criterion for the
following reasons. First, although available Sharpe ratios are clearly the main object of interest to a
professional money manager, the level of price is more relevant to most other economic decision makers.
For example, a corporate manager making a large long-term investment decision cannot engage in a dynamic
trading strategy of investing or divesting a small fraction every month, depending on stock-market
conditions. Thus, if the price is approximately “right,” the impact of the stock market to his/her investment
decisions is also likely to be consistent with market efficiency, and the high available Sharpe ratios only an
interesting side show.
Second, tests of market efficiency that are based on trading profits typically use high-frequency return
covariances or betas to adjust for risk. Although such a practice is consistent with jointly testing a sharp null
1 Fama (1970, 1991) surveys the empirical literature on testing market efficiency. Daniel, Hirshleifer, and
Subrahmanyam (1998) survey the recent evidence on trading strategies that would have produced abnormal profits and
high Sharpe ratios. Hansen and Jagannathan (1991) show that in a frictionless rational-expectations model, available
Sharpe ratios are related to the variability of marginal utility. MacKinlay (1995) argues that the Sharpe ratios of some
trading strategies, if taken at face value, are too large to be explained by a rational multifactor model. Shleifer (2000, p.
8) characterizes the impact of this evidence on the views of finance academicians: “We have learned a lot, and what we
think now is quite a bit different from what we thought we knew in 1978. Among the many changes of views, the
increased skepticism about market efficiency stands out.”

hypothesis of an asset pricing model and market efficiency, it is less appropriate for measuring the impact of
mispricing on average returns or prices. If markets are even slightly inefficient, mispricing may contaminate
not only average returns but also measures of risk, as argued by Brainard, Shapiro, and Shoven (1991). The
price-level tests we advocate connect stock prices to covariances or betas of cash flows. Regressing prices
on cash-flow betas is a cleaner way to measure a model’s explanatory power than regressing average returns
on return betas, because the cash-flow betas are less affected by mispricing.
We test empirically the ability of the CAPM and EMH to explain the stock-price levels of low-price-
to-book “value” stocks and high-price-to-book “growth” stocks. Our empirical tests concentrate on price-to-
book-sorted portfolios for the following reasons. First, the average returns generated by value-minus-growth
strategies (that buy value and short growth stocks) cannot be explained by CAPM betas measured from high-
frequency returns (Rosenberg, Reid, and Lanstein, 1985; Fama and French, 1992; and others). Furthermore,
the pricing errors are highly economically significant when the Sharpe-ratio criterion is used as the metric of
economic significance (MacKinlay, 1995). Second, Fama and French (1995) and Cohen, Polk, and
Vuolteenaho (2002) show that a firm’s price-to-book ratio is a persistent variable that forecasts the returns
on the firm’s stock far in the future and that the return predictability related to price-to-book ratios has a
large price-level effect. Thus, price-to-book-sorted portfolios have the potential of being significantly
mispriced by the price-level criterion as well.
Our empirical results suggest that mispricing relative to the CAPM is not an important factor in
determining the prices of value and growth stocks. Cash-flow betas (measured by regressing a firm’s
profitability on the market’s profitability) essentially explain the prices of and long-horizon returns on price-
to-book-sorted portfolios, with a premium that is high but not implausible (8-12 percent per annum).
Furthermore, the premium on cash-flow beta remains high when we include beta-sorted or size-sorted
portfolios in the set of test assets, suggesting that the cash-flow beta is not merely proxying for the price-to-
book characteristic.
In addition to traditional regressions of prices and long-horizon average returns on betas, we specify a
stochastic-discount-factor present-value model that links firms’ current price-to-book ratios to expected
future cash flows and to covariances of future cash flows with the stochastic discount factor. If we restrict
discount rates to be constant across firms, our present-value model allocates more than 25 percent of the
cross-sectional price-to-book variance to mispricing. However, if we allow the discount rates to vary as
2