NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GOVERNANCE AND BANK VALUATION
Gerard Caprio
Luc Laeven
Ross Levine
Working Paper 10158
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10158
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003
Caprio and Laeven: World Bank; Levine: University of Minnesota and the NBER. We thank Sugato
Bhattacharyya, Thorsten Beck, Stijn Claessens, Patrick Honohan, Jack Kareken, Rafael La Porta, Phil Strahan
and seminar participants at the University of Minnesota’s Carlson School of Management for helpful
comments. This paper’s findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by Gerard Caprio, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Governance and Bank Valuation
Gerard Caprio, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 10158
December 2003
JEL No. G21, G34, K22, G28
ABSTRACT
Which public policies and ownership structures enhance the governance of banks? This paper
constructs a new database on the ownership of banks internationally and then assesses the
ramifications of ownership, shareholder protection laws, and supervisory/regulatory policies on bank
valuations. Except in a few countries with very strong shareholder protection laws, banks are not
widely held, but rather families or the State tend to control banks. We find that (i) larger cash flow
rights by the controlling owner boosts valuations, (ii) stronger shareholder protection laws increase
valuations, and (iii) greater cash flow rights mitigate the adverse effects of weak shareholder
protection laws on bank valuations. These results are consistent with the views that expropriation
of minority shareholders is important internationally, that laws can restrain this expropriation, and
concentrated cash flow rights represent an important mechanism for governing banks. Finally, the
evidence does not support the view that empowering official supervisory and regulatory agencies
will increase the market valuation of banks.
Gerard Caprio Ross Levine
World Bank Finance Department, Room 3-257
Washington, DC 20433 Carlson School of Management
gcaprio@worldbank.org University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South
Luc Laeven Minneapolis, MN 55455
World Bank and NBER
Washington, DC 20433 rlevine@csom.umn.edu
llaeven@worldbank.org

I. Introduction
Research suggests that well-functioning banks promote growth.1 When banks efficiently
mobilize and allocate funds, this lowers the cost of capital to firms and accelerates capital
accumulation and productivity growth. Furthermore, banks, as major creditors and in some countries as
major equity holders, play an important role in governing firms. Thus, if bank managers face sound
governance mechanisms, this enhances the likelihood that banks will raise capital inexpensively,
allocate society’s savings efficiently, and exert sound governance over the firms they fund.
Nevertheless, stunningly little is known about which laws, bank supervisory strategies, and
bank regulations enhance the governance and functioning of banks. Virtually all countries adopted the
Basle Committee’s original recommendations on capital regulations and official supervision, and most
have indicated their intention to adopt the much more detailed set of recommendations contained in
Basel II. Yet, there exists no cross-country evidence regarding the impact of capital standards and bank
supervision and regulation on the market value of banks. Regarding shareholder protection laws, La
Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (2002, henceforth LLSV) examine the impact of these
laws on corporate valuations. Yet, there is no evidence on whether shareholder protection laws
influence the corporate governance of opaque, heavily regulated banks differently from other
industries.2 Given the importance of banks in the economy, it is crucial to understand which laws and
regulations improve the governance of banks.
This paper assesses the impact of shareholder protection laws, bank supervision and regulation,
and the ownership structure of banks on bank valuations. By examining valuations, we directly analyze
banks’ cost of capital and indirectly assess the market’s assessment of the governance of banks. That
1 See, King and Levine (1993a,b), Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1998), Levine and Zervos (1998), Rajan and Zingales
(1998), Beck, Levine, and Loayza (2000), Levine, Loayza, and Beck (2000), Wurgler (2000), Claessens and Laeven (2003),
and reviews by Levine (1997, 2004).
2 Akerloff and Romer (1993) and La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Zamarripa (2003) examine the expropriation of bank
resources by bank insiders in the United States and Mexico respectively.
1

is, holding other things constant, governance mechanisms that both reduce the ability of insiders to
expropriate bank resources and promote bank efficiency tend to boost the market value of banks.
In terms of shareholder protection laws, research suggests that strong legal protection of small
investors increases firm valuations (Claessens, et al., 2000; LLSV, 2002). In short, investors pay more
for equity when legal institutions effectively protect their rights. From this perspective, investor
protection laws may provide the tools for small shareholders to stop large shareholder from
expropriating bank resources. We define expropriation broadly to include theft, transfer pricing, asset
stripping, the hiring of family members, the allocation of credit in a manner that enriches bank insiders
but hurts the bank as a whole, and other “perquisites” that benefit bank insiders but hurt the bank.
In the particular case of banks, however, not everyone agrees that shareholder protection laws
will effectively thwart expropriation.3 Many view banks as extraordinarily complex and opaque
(Morgan, 2003). Thus, investor protection laws alone may not provide a sufficiently powerful
corporate governance mechanism to small shareholders. Put differently, even with strong investor
protection laws, small stakeholders may lack the means to monitor and govern complex banks.
Furthermore, bank regulations may be sufficiently pervasive that they render shareholder protection
laws superfluous, or bank regulations may supersede standard investor protection laws. Thus, the
impact of investor protection laws on banks may differ from their impact on non-bank corporations.
This paper provides the first examination of the impact of shareholder protection laws on bank
valuations under different bank supervisory and regulatory regimes.
In terms of bank supervision and regulation, official oversight of banks may arise in part to stop
bank insiders from expropriating bank resources (Caprio and Levine, 2002). Thus, effective
supervision and regulation may increase investor confidence regarding expropriation and boost market
3 Also, Coasians argue that legal systems that effectively enforce private contracts will allow sophisticated financial market
participants to custom design a vast array of private contracts to ameliorate complex agency problems better than
standardized shareholder protection laws (Coase, 1960; Glaeser, et al. 2001).
2