NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AGGREGATE CONSEQUENCES OF
LIMITED CONTRACT ENFORCEABILITY
Thomas Cooley
Ramon Marimon
Vincenzo Quadrini
Working Paper 10132
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10132
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by Thomas Cooley, Ramon Marimon, and Vincenzo Quadrini. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Aggregate Consequences of Limited Contract Enforceability
Thomas Cooley, Ramon Marimon, and Vincenzo Quadrini
NBER Working Paper No. 10132
December 2003
JEL No. E3, G0
ABSTRACT
We study a general equilibrium model in which entrepreneurs finance investment with optimal
financial contracts. Because of enforceability problems, contracts are constrained efficient. We show
that limited enforceability amplifies the impact of technological innovations on aggregate output.
More generally, we show that lower enforceability of contracts will be associated with greater
aggregate volatility. A key assumption for this result is that defaulting entrepreneurs are not
excluded from the market.
Thomas Cooley
Department of Economics
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
tcooley@stern.nyu.edu
Ramon Marimon
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
08005 Barcelona, Spain
and NBER
ramon.marimon@upf.edu
Vincenzo Quadrini
Department of Finance and Business Economics
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
701 Exposition Blvd.
Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER
vquadrin@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
The ability to attract external financing is crucial for the creation of new
firms and the expansion of existing ones. For that reason the nature of the
financial arrangements between investors and entrepreneurs has important
consequences for the growth of firms. One important issue in financial con-
tracting is enforceability, that is, the ability of each side to repudiate the
contract. This is especially important because projects often involve specific
entrepreneurial expertise and might be worth less to investors without the
services of managers who initiated them. At the same time the development
of such projects may provide managers with experience that is extremely
valuable for starting new projects.
Contractual arrangements that are motivated by limited enforceability
are most likely to be important for firms that are small, young and invest in
assets that cannot be used as collateral. Albuquerque and Hopenhayn (1997)
have shown that these considerations can help to explain some of the growth
characteristics of small and young firms. We know for example that smaller
and younger firms are less likely to distribute dividends and that, conditional
on the initial size, they tend to grow faster and experience greater variability
of growth.
Eventhoughfinancialconstraintsareimportantforexplainingthegrowth
characteristics of firms, it is not obvious whether they also have important
aggregate consequences. The main goal of this paper is to show that fi-
nancial constraints that arise because of limited contract enforceability can
have important aggregate consequences. On the one hand it impairs the ef-
ficient allocation of resources with significant welfare consequences. On the
other, it increases the sensitivity of the macro economy to the arrival of new
technologies that create better investment opportunities.
We study a general equilibrium model where entrepreneurs and investors
enter into a long-term contractual relationship which is optimal, subject to
enforceability constraints.1 Our model is closely related to the partial equi-
libriummodelofMarcetandMarimon(1992)withtwoimportantdifferences.
First, we conduct the analysis in a general equilibrium framework. Second,
we do not assume that repudiation leads to market exclusion. Once the
1Thispaperrelatestotheliteratureonoptimallendingcontractswiththepossibilityof
repudiationsuchasAlvarezandJermann(2000),Atkeson(1991),KehoeandLevine(1993)
and Marcet and Marimon (1992). Contributions that explicitly focus on the financing of
the firm are Albuquerque and Hopenhayn (1997), Monge (2001) and Quintin (2000).
1

contract has been signed, the entrepreneur has the ability to start a new in-
vestment project by entering into a new contractual relationship. Therefore,
the value of repudiation is endogenous in our model and it depends on all
the general equilibrium conditions. This is an important difference respect
to other macro models with endogenous market incompleteness where agents
revert to autarky in case of default. A notable exception is Phelan (1995),
although his analysis is limited to steady states.
Within this framework we show that limited enforceability creates a large
amplification mechanism for the macroeconomic impact of new technological
innovations. More specifically, our theory predicts that economies in which
contracts are less enforceable (either because there is no market exclusion
or the cost of repudiation is higher) display greater volatility of output than
economies with stronger enforceability of contracts.
The mechanism that generates the amplification result can be explained
as follows. In each period there are two types of firms: those that are re-
source constrained (the enforcement constraint is binding) and those that are
unconstrained (the enforcement constraint is not binding). The investment
behavior of the first group of firms is what generates the amplification result.
When a more productive technology arrives, the value of a new investment
project increases. Because defaulting entrepreneurs are not excluded from
the market—that is, they can start a new project by entering into a new
contractual relationship—the higher value of a new project makes the re-
pudiation option more attractive. To prevent repudiation, the value of the
contract for the entrepreneur must increase. By increasing this value, the
tightness of the incentive-compatibility constraint is relaxed and more capi-
tal is given to the firm. Notice that this mechanism depends crucially on the
assumption that defaulting entrepreneurs are not excluded from the market.
With market exclusion—which we interpret as a higher degree of contract
enforcement—the investment boom of constrained firms would not arise and
the economy would display lower aggregate volatility.
The result that countries with lower enforceability of contracts display
greater aggregate volatility is consistent with the pattern shown in Figure 1.
This figure relates the standard deviation of per-capita GDP growth to an
index of contract enforceability for a cross-section of countries. This index
is compiled by Business Environmental Risk Intelligence and measures “the
relative degree to which contractual agreements are honored and the degree of
complications presented by language and mentality differences”. (See Knack
and Keefer (1995)). It takes a value between 0 and 4, with higher scores for
2