NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LEGAL INSTITUTIONS AND FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT
Thorsten Beck
Ross Levine
Working Paper 10126
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10126
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003
This paper was prepared for Claude Menard and Mary Shirley, eds., Handbook of New Institutional
Economics, Kluwer Dordrecht (The Netherlands), forthcoming (2004). We have received very helpful
guidance from Mary Shirley, Andrei Shleifer, and three anonymous referees. All remaining errors and
omissions, however, are our responsibility. This chapter’s findings, interpretations, and conclusions are
entirely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive
Directors, or the countries they represent. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Thorsten Beck and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Legal Institutions and Financial Development
Thorsten Beck and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 10126
December 2003
JEL No. K40, K22, G18, P14
ABSTRACT
This paper provides a concise, selective review of research on the role of legal institutions in shaping
the operation of financial systems. While a burgeoning literature finds that financial development
exerts a first-order impact on economic growth, the law and finance literature seeks to understand
the role of legal institutions in explaining international differences in financial systems.
Considerable research dissects, critiques, and debates the influence of investor protection laws, the
efficiency of contract enforcement, and private property rights protection on the effectiveness of
corporate governance, the efficient allocation of capital, and the overall level of financial
development. Furthermore, legal scholars, political scientists, historians, and economists are
questioning and assessing the importance of historically determined differences in legal traditions
in shaping national approaches to investor protection laws, contract enforcement, and property
rights. The field of law and finance promises to be a contentious and important area of inquiry in
coming years.
Thorsten Beck
World Bank
Washington, DC 20433
tbeck@worldbank.org
Ross Levine
Finance Department, Room 3-257
Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
rlevine@csom.umn.edu

1
1. INTRODUCTION
A burgeoning literature finds that financial development exerts a first-order impact on
long-run economic growth. Levine and Zervos (1998) show that banking and stock market
development are good predictors of economic growth.1 At the microeconomic level, Demirguc-
Kunt and Maksimovic (1998) and Rajan and Zingales (1998) find that financial institutions are
crucial for firm and industrial expansion. While disagreements remain, the bulk of existing
evidence points to a strong finance-growth nexus.
The finding that financial development influences economic growth raises critical
questions, such as why do some countries have well-developed growth-enhancing financial
systems, while others do not? Why have some countries developed the necessary investor
protection laws and contract-enforcement mechanisms to support financial institutions and
markets, while others have not?
The law and finance theory focuses on the role of legal institutions in explaining
international differences in financial development (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and
Vishny, 1997, 1998, 2000a, henceforth LLSV). The first part of the law and finance theory holds
that in countries where legal systems enforce private property rights, support private contractual
arrangements, and protect the legal right of investors, savers are more willing to finance firms and
financial markets flourish. In contrast, legal institutions that neither support private property rights
nor facilitate private contracting inhibit corporate finance and stunt financial development.
The second part of the law and finance theory emphasizes that the different legal traditions
that emerged in Europe over previous centuries and were spread internationally through conquest,
colonization, and imitation help explain cross-country differences in investor protection, the
contracting environment, and financial development today. More specifically, legal theories

2
emphasize two inter-related mechanisms through which legal origin influences finance (Hayek,
1960). The “political” mechanism holds that (a) legal traditions differ in terms of the priority they
attach to private property vis-à-vis the rights of the State and (b) the protection of private
contracting rights forms the basis of financial development (LLSV, 1999). The “adaptability”
mechanism stresses that (a) legal traditions differ in their formalism and ability to evolve with
changing conditions and (b) legal traditions that adapt efficiently to minimize the gap between the
contracting needs of the economy and the legal system’s capabilities will more effectively foster
financial development than more rigid systems (Merryman, 1985).
Countervailing theories and evidence challenge both parts of the law and finance theory.
Many researchers accept that effective investor protection facilitates efficient corporate financing
and growth-enhancing financial development, but reject the law and finance’s view that legal
origin is a central determinant of investor protection laws and financial development (Roe, 1994;
Pagano and Volpin, 2001; Rajan and Zingales, 2003). Alternatively, some studies do not critique
the role of legal origin. Instead, although abundant evidence emphasizes the importance of
investor protection laws, recent studies question whether changes in investor protection laws drove
the evolution of corporate ownership and financial development in the United Kingdom and Italy
(Franks, et al., 2003; Aganin and Volpin, 2003).
Given debates about the role of legal institutions in shaping financial development, the
remainder of the Chapter is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the law and finance theory
along with skeptical and competing views.2 Section 3 reviews empirical evidence on both parts of
the law and finance view. That is, we assess (i) whether legal origin differences account for cross-
country variations in property rights protection, support of private contractual arrangements,
investor protection laws and financial development and (ii) the degree to which cross-country
differences in investor protection laws explain differences in corporate finance and financial