NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INSTITUTIONS, CAPITAL CONSTRAINTS
AND ENTREPRENEURIAL FIRM DYNAMICS:
EVIDENCE FROM EUROPE
Mihir Desai
Paul Gompers
Josh Lerner
Working Paper 10165
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10165
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003
We thank Bryan Lincoln, Eric Nierenberg, and Maria Raga for research assistance. Harvard Business
School’s Division of Research provided financial assistance. All errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Mihir Desai, Paul Gompers, and Josh Lerner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Institutions, Capital Constraints and Entrepreneurial Firm Dynamics: Evidence from Europe
Mihir Desai, Paul Gompers, and Josh Lerner
NBER Working Paper No. 10165
December 2003
JEL No. L1, G3
ABSTRACT
We explore the impact of the institutional environment on the nature of entrepreneurial activity
across Europe. Political, legal, and regulatory variables that have been shown to impact capital
market development influence entrepreneurial activity in the emerging markets of Europe, but not
in the more mature economies of Europe. Greater fairness and greater protection of property rights
increase entry rates, reduce exit rates, and lower average firm size. Additionally, these same factors
also associated with increased industrial vintage n a size-weighted measure of age n and reduced
skewness in firm-size distributions. The results suggest that capital constraints induced by these
institutional factors impact both entry and the ability of firms to transition and grow, particularly in
lesser-developed markets.
Mihir Desai Paul Gompers Josh Lerner
Graduate School of Business Graduate School of Business Graduate School of Business
Harvard University Harvard University Harvard University
Soldiers Field Soldiers Field Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163 Boston, MA 02163 Boston, MA 02163
and NBER and NBER and NBER
mdesai@hbs.edu pgompers@hbs.edu josh@hbs.edu

1. Introduction
The factors that foster the creation and growth of new enterprises remain of central
interest to scholars and policy-makers. New enterprises are considered vital to economic
growth and are increasingly important laboratories for scholars interested in settings where
a variety of market frictions – informational asymmetry, moral hazard, and liquidity
constraints, for example – are most amplified. At the same time, renewed interest in how
differing institutional environments impact the functioning of capital markets and the
investment behavior of firms has drawn attention to how economic institutions vary around
the world and how they influence economic growth and firm behavior.
In this paper, we integrate these literatures by analyzing how institutional
environments impact the entrepreneurial environment. In doing so, we analyze a variety of
measures of entrepreneurial activity including traditional measures such as rates of entry,
rates of exit, and average firm size as well as more comprehensive measures such as
industrial vintage and the skewness of firm-size distributions. These measures of
entrepreneurial activity are analyzed throughout Europe by exploiting a comprehensive
database of firms that includes a variety of private, smaller firms. The European sample
allows us to analyze a setting where there exists rich institutional variation (both between
Western and Central and Eastern Europe (CEE) and amongst countries in those regions)
and where comparable data is also available. Employing industry fixed effects in this
setting further allows us to control for factors associated with distinctive industrial patterns
across Europe.

The results in the paper suggest that the institutional environment plays an
important role in shaping the nature of industrial activity and, particularly, the dynamics of
new enterprises. Specifically, greater fairness and protection of property rights is shown to
increase rates of entry, decrease rates of exit, and lower average firm size. These effects,
however, are not equally pronounced in all parts of Europe. The CEE region is
characterized by particular sensitivity to institutional factors suggesting that these effects
may be second-order in more mature, developed economies.
Industrial vintage and the skewness of firm-size distributions are also influenced by
the institutional variables. In contrast to the results on average firm size, vintage (a size-
weighted measure of age) increases with greater fairness, with particularly strong
relationships in the CEE. In conjunction with the results on size, entry and exit, these
results suggest that greater fairness alters not only firm starts but also their ability to
graduate into older, larger enterprisess. Greater fairness appears to reduce firm size but
increase vintage, suggesting that fairness both makes it easier to start firms, but also makes
it easier for firms to graduate into older, larger firms.
We also examine the skewness of firm size distributions across the CEE and
Western Europe. Both the overall level of skewness and the relative skewness of firm-size
distributions for younger firms appear to be a function of fairness and protection of
property rights with particularly amplified effects in the CEE. These results are consistent
with capital constraints leading to skewness in firm-size distributions, with the relative
importance of these factors being greater in emerging markets. Institutional factors
influence both firm entry and growth at later points.
2