NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE CHARACTER AND DETERMINANTS
OF CORPORATE CAPITAL GAINS
Mihir A. Desai
William M. Gentry
Working Paper 10153
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10153
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003
This paper was prepared for the Tax Policy and the Economy Conference in November 2003 in Washington
DC. We thank John Graham, Jim Hines and Jim Poterba for helpful comments and Sean Lubens for helpful
research assistance. Desai thanks the Division of Research of Harvard Business School for generous funding.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by Mihir A. Desai and William M. Gentry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

The Character and Determinants of Corporate Capital Gains
Mihir A. Desai and William M. Gentry
NBER Working Paper No. 10153
December 2003
JEL No. H25, G32, G38, K34, E62
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes how corporate capital gains taxes affect the capital gain realization decisions
of firms. The paper outlines the tax treatment of corporate capital gains, the consequent incentives
for firms with gains and losses, the efficiency consequences of these taxes in the context of other
taxes and capital market distortions, and the response of firms to these incentives. Despite receiving
limited attention, corporate capital gain realizations have averaged 30 percent of individual capital
gain realizations over the last fifty years and have increased dramatically in importance over the last
decade. By 1999, the ratio of net long-term capital gains to income subject to tax was 21 percent and
was distributed across a variety of industries suggesting the importance of realization behavior to
corporate financing decisions. Time-series analysis of aggregate realization behavior demonstrates
that corporate capital gains taxes impact realization behavior significantly. Similarly, an analysis
of firm-level investment and property, plant, and equipment (PPE) disposal decisions and gain
recognition behavior similarly suggests an important role for these taxes in determining when firms
raise money by disposing of assets and realizing gains.
Mihir Desai William M. Gentry
Morgan 363 Department of Economics
Harvard Business School Williams College
Boston, MA 02163 Fernald House
and NBER Williamstown, MA 01267
mdesai@hbs.edu and NBER
william.m.gentry@williams.edu

1. Introduction
Analyses of the impact of the tax system on corporate behavior typically emphasize the
role of the corporate income tax in altering firm financing and investment decisions. These
financing and investment decisions, in turn, have been shown to depend critically on the wedge
between the costs of internal and external finance. One obvious and important source of internal
finance, aside from retained earnings, is the disposal of assets and investments. The role of taxes
in influencing these types of financing decisions may be non-trivial given the system of taxing
corporate capital gains and the distortions that arise from costly external finance.
Despite the potential importance of asset sales as a source of financing corporate
investment, relatively little research has been done on how corporate capital gains taxes might
affect asset sales. Analyses of capital gains taxes have focused almost exclusively on the
realization behavior of individuals with particular attention on the revenue consequences of
changing capital gains tax rates and on the impact on risk taking and expected asset returns. The
relative oversight of the corporate capital gains tax system is surprising given the substantial
volume of corporate capital gains – U.S. corporations realized $146.5 billion of net long-term
capital gains, or 21 percent of their income subject to tax, in 1999 – and the potentially
distortionary impact of these taxes stemming from interactions with capital market
imperfections. In this paper, we address this oversight by detailing U.S. tax policy toward
corporate capital gains, characterizing the nature and distribution of corporate capital gain
activity, and examining the effect of these taxes on the financing and investment decisions of
firms.
There are several important reasons for studying the taxation of corporate capital gains.
First, while many of the economic issues regarding the tax effects of corporate and individual
capital gains are similar, the possible distortions in the corporate and individual settings differ
along some dimensions. For example, taxing corporate capital gains can impede asset sales and
reorganizations that reallocate capital between firms. If such reallocations raise the productivity
of assets, then discouraging these transactions reduces the pretax rate of return. In contrast, for
most assets held by individuals, the identity of the owner is unlikely to affect asset returns.1
1 Edwards, Lang, Maydew, and Shackelford (2003) consider the effect of such potential reallocations by examining
the stock market reaction to the German tax reform of 2000 that eliminated the capital gains tax on corporate
crossholdings. Given Germany’s history of substantial corporate crossholdings, the reform was predicted to have

More generally, the increased emphasis on the role of corporate governance in determining
economic performance suggests that tax policy that alters the incentives for cross-holding or
corporate venture capital can have important economic consequences.2 Finally, if firms are
deterred from disposing of assets as a result of the capital gains tax, corporate capital gains taxes
potentially exacerbate preexisting distortions arising from capital market imperfections that make
external finance more costly.
Second, President Bush’s recent proposal to eliminate the double taxation of corporate
income brought to the forefront the question of the appropriate structure of capital income
taxation. With regards to corporate investment in other corporations, U.S. tax policy provides
corporations some relief from multiple layers of taxation on intercorporate dividends through the
Dividends Received Deduction (DRD), which allows the exclusion of the majority of
intercorporate dividends from the corporate income tax. The logic behind the DRD is to avoid
having a full third layer of taxation on capital income to the U.S. tax system that already taxes
corporate income twice (i.e., corporate income is taxed at the corporate level and the dividends
are taxed at the shareholder level). By this logic, one might expect that capital gains earned on
intercorporate investments would similarly be provided some relief but the tax code does not
provide a preferential corporate tax rate for capital gains. Understanding how corporate capital
gains taxes influence the holding behavior of firms provides a first step in understanding the
consequences of this policy as an element in the overall system of capital taxation.
Third, the volume of corporate capital gains is substantial, and increasingly so, when
compared with either individual capital gains or other metrics of corporate activity. From 1954 –
1999, corporations reported realized net long term capital gains that averaged 30 percent of the
realizations reported by individuals. By 1999, corporate net long term gains were more than 20
percent of corporate income subject to tax and averaged 16 percent through the 1990s. From a
tax policy perspective, given that corporations face a tax rate of up to 35 percent on realized net
sweeping effects in the level of merger and acquisition activity in Germany; Edwards et al. find a substantial stock
market impact of the reform but it is concentrated among a small number of banks and insurance companies with
substantial cross-holdings. They report that the early evidence on the amount of corporate restructuring after the tax
reform does not support the idea of widespread restructuring; however, the implementation of the tax reform
corresponded to a worldwide slowdown in merger activity so it is difficult to measure the tax effect.
2 See Morck (2003) on the interaction of cross-holdings and intercompany dividend tax policy, Wolfenzon (1999) on
the consequences of pyramidal ownership and Gompers, Lerner and Scharfstein (2003) on corporate venture capital
activity.
2