NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE OPTIMAL DEGREE OF DISCRETION
IN MONETARY POLICY
Susan Athey
Andrew Atkeson
Patrick J. Kehoe
Working Paper 10109
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10109
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2003
The authors thank Kathy Rolfe for excellent editorial assistance and the NSF for generous assistance. The
views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis or the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Susan Athey, Andrew Atkeson, and Patrick J. Kehoe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Optimal Degree of Discretion in Monetary Policy
Susan Athey, Andrew Atkeson, and Patrick J. Kehoe
NBER Working Paper No. 10109
November 2003
JEL No. E5, E6, E52, E61, E58
ABSTRACT
How much discretion should the monetary authority have in setting its policy? This question is
analyzed in an economy with an agreed-upon social welfare function that depends on the randomly
fluctuating state of the economy. The monetary authority has private information about that state.
In the model, well-designed rules trade off society's desire to give the monetary authority discretion
to react to its private information against society's need to guard against the time inconsistency
problem arising from the temptation to stimulate the economy with unexpected inflation. Although
this dynamic mechanism design problem seems complex, society can implement the optimal policy
simply by legislating an inflation cap that specifies the highest allowable inflation rate. The more
severe the time inconsistency problem, the more tightly the cap constrains policy and the smaller
is the degree of discretion. As this problem becomes sufficiently severe, the optimal degree of
discretion is none.
Susan Athey Patrick J. Kehoe
Department of Economics Research Department
Stanford University Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Stanford, CA 94305-6072 90 Hennepin Avenue
and NBER Minneapolis, MN 55480-0291
athey@stanford.edu and NBER
pkehoe@res.mpls.frb.fed.us
Andrew Atkeson
Bunche Hall 9381
Department of Economics
UCLA
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
andy@atkeson.net

How much discretion should the monetary authority have in setting its policy? The
conventional wisdom from policymakers is that optimal outcomes can be achieved only if
some discretion is left in the hands of the monetary authority. Starting with Kydland and
Prescott (1977), most of the academic literature has contradicted that view. In summarizing
this literature, Taylor (1983) and Canzoneri (1985) argue that when the monetary authority
doesnothaveprivateinformationaboutthestateoftheeconomy, thedebateissettled: there
should be no discretion; that is, the best outcomes can be achieved by rules that specify the
action of the monetary authority as a function of observables. The unsettled question in
this debate is Canzoneri’s: What about when the monetary authority does have private
information? What, then, is the optimal degree of monetary policy discretion?
To answer this question, we use a model of monetary policy similar to that of Kydland
and Prescott (1977) and Barro and Gordon (1983). The model includes an agreed-upon
social welfare function that depends on the random state of the economy. We begin with
the assumption that the monetary authority observes the state and individual agents do not.
In the context of our model, we say that the monetary authority has discretion if its policy
varies with its private information.
The assumption of private information creates a tension between discretion and time
inconsistency.1 Tight constraints on discretion mitigate the time inconsistency problem in
which the monetary authority is tempted to claim repeatedly that the current state of the
economy justifies a monetary stimulus to output. However, tight constraints leave little
room for the monetary authority to fine tune its policy to its private information. Loose
constraints allow the monetary authority to do that fine tuning, but they also allow more
room for the monetary authority to stimulate the economy with a surprise inflation. These
constraints may vary with observables, but the relevant question is, how tight should they
be? How much discretion should be allowed?
Our purpose here is to answer this question by finding the constraints on monetary
policy that, in the presence of private information, optimally resolve the tension between
1For some potential empirical support for the idea that the Federal Reserve possesses some nontrivial
private information, see the work of Romer and Romer (2000).

discretion and time inconsistency. Formally, we cast this problem as a dynamic mechanism
design problem. Canzoneri (1985) conjectures that because of the dynamic nature of the
problem, the resulting optimal social contract with regard to monetary policy is likely to
be quite complex. We find that, in fact, it is quite simple. For a broad class of economies,
the optimal social contract is static and can be implemented by setting an inflation cap, an
upper limit on the permitted inflation rate.
More formally, our model can be described as follows. Each period, the monetary
authority observes one of a continuum of possible privately observed states of the economy.
These states are i.i.d. over time. In terms of current payoffs, the monetary authority prefers
to choose higher inflation when higher values of this state are realized and lower inflation
when lower values are realized. Here a mechanism specifies what monetary policy is chosen
each period as a function of the history of the monetary authority’s reports of its private
information. We say that a mechanism is static if policies depend only on the current report
by themonetaryauthorityanddynamic ifpoliciesdependalsoonthehistoryof past reports.
Our main technical result is that, as long as a monotone hazard condition is satisfied,
the optimal mechanism is static. We also give examples in which this monotone hazard
condition fails and the optimal mechanism is dynamic.
We then show that our result on the optimality of a static mechanism implies that the
optimal policy has one of two forms: either it has bounded discretion, or it has no discretion.
Under bounded discretion, there is a cutoff state: for any state less than this, the monetary
authority chooses its static best response, which is an inflation rate that increases with the
state, and for any state greater than this cutoff state, the monetary authority chooses a
constant inflation rate. Under no discretion, the monetary authority chooses some constant
inflation rate regardless of its information.
Wethenshowthatwecanimplementtheoptimalpolicyasarepeatedstaticequilibrium
of a game in which the monetary authority chooses its policy subject to an inflation cap and
in which individual agents’ expectations of future inflation do not vary with the monetary
authority’s policy choice. In general, the inflation cap would vary with observable states,
but to keep the model simple, we abstract from observable states, and the inflation cap is a
3