NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STRESSED OUT ON FOUR CONTINENTS:
TIME CRUNCH OR YUPPIE KVETCH?
Daniel S. Hamermesh
Jungmin Lee
Working Paper 10186
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10186
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003
Edward Everett Hale Centennial professor of economics, University of Texas at Austin, research associate,
National Bureau of Economic Research, and program director, Forschungsinstitut zur Zukunft der Arbeit
(IZA); Ph.D. candidate, University of Texas at Austin. We thank Lisa Dickson, Abe Dunn, Yuqian Lu and
Mark Pocock for helpful assistance, and Jennifer Hunt, Gerald Oettinger, Stephen Trejo and participants in
seminars at a number of universities for very useful comments. The Australian Department of Family and
Community Services and Mark Wooden of the Melbourne Institute for Applied Economic and Social
Research kindly made the first wave of the HILDA available expeditiously. Jürgen Schupp of the Deutsches
Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung graciously gave us the 2002 German data on an accelerated basis, and Gert
Wagner added the question to that data set. Thomas Crossley provided access to the Canadian GSS data
during Hamermesh’s tenure as the Hooker Professor at McMaster University. The Alfred P. Sloan Foundation
supported the research underlying this study. None of these organizations is responsible for any of the
findings. (“Kvetch” is defined in the Merriam-Webster Dictionary as “habitual complaint.”) The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Daniel S. Hamermesh and Jungmin Lee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Stressed Out on Four Continents: Time Crunch or Yuppie Kvetch?
Daniel S. Hamermesh and Jungmin Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 10186
December 2003
JEL No. J220, J160
ABSTRACT
Social commentators have pointed to problems of women workers who face “time stress” – an
absence of sufficient time to accomplish all their tasks. An economic theory views time stress as
reflecting how tightly the time constraint binds households. Time stress will be more prevalent in
households with higher incomes and whose members work longer in the market or on “required”
homework. Evidence from Australia, Canada, Germany, Korea and the United States corroborates
this view. Adults in higher-income households perceive more time stress for the same amount of
time spent in market work and household work. The importance of higher full incomes in generating
time stress is not small, particularly in North America – much is “yuppie kvetch.” While time stress
is most prevalent among working wives, a decomposition suggests that women would perceive more
time stress than men even if both worked the same number of hours in the market and at home.
Daniel S. Hamermesh
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
hamermes@eco.utexas.edu
Jungmin Lee
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712
junglee@eco.utexas.edu



I. Introduction
Substantial attention has been paid in the popular media and among social commentators
(e.g., Hochschild, 1997) to the issue of a “time crunch.”—a “shortage” of time faced by today’s
worker/consumers.1 This issue generates much concern about the problems of working people,
and working couples in particular, who have two market jobs and may be unable or unwilling to
substitute purchased services for time spent maintaining a household. It is tied to surprise at the
possible failure of annual market work hours to decline (Schor, 1991) and at the increasing
fraction of adults who participate in the labor market (so that market work per adult in the United
States has probably risen since 1950). The essence of the problem was captured by a young
working mother of three pre-school children, “With the kids and the house, I often feel I have
four hours of tasks and only two hours to do them in.”2
Economists have not studied this problem at all, other than to observe changing patterns
of time use. There has, however, been some research by social psychologists and sociologists on
the subject. Much simply uses time-budget surveys to identify demographic correlates of total
time spent in market and household production, equating stress (a subjective outcome) with time
use (an objective outcome). A few studies (Lochhead, 2002, and Holz, 2002) have used small
representative surveys (for Canada and Germany respectively) to relate subjective feelings of
time stress to demographic characteristics and to hours of market work.
Time stress is a problem analogous to poverty: Both reflect the scarcity of resources,
time in the former case, goods in the latter. The only difference is that in a growing economy the
goods constraint will relax over time, while the time constraint cannot. The time crunch will
become relatively more binding for more people. Once one thinks about time stress in this
1Newspaper stories discussed the issue, e.g., http://www.pressdemo.com/outlook98/stories/39353.html, and
are legion today. Government publications such as http://www.ed.gov/pubs/PFIE/constrat.html became
noticeable during the 1990s, although Linder (1970) pointed it out a generation earlier. That there may be a
link to economic variables is suggested by recent publicity for Alain Ducasse’s gourmet lunch boxes, “The
big question in our lives is how to be at the same time a hedonist and in a hurry.” (The Economist, August
2, 2003, p. 49)
2Personal communication from Hannah E. Hamermesh, July 5, 2002.