NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY FIRMS ADOPT ANTITAKEOVER ARRANGEMENTS
Lucian Arye Bebchuk
Working Paper 10190
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10190
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2003
William J. Friedman and Alicia Townsend Friedman Professor of Law, Economics, and Finance, Harvard
Law School; Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research. I am indebted to BJ Trach for his
extremely valuable assistance in preparing this paper. For helpful conversations and suggestions, I am grateful
to Bill Bratton, Marcel Kahan, Alexandra McCormack, Andrew Metrick, Lynn Stout, and participants in
workshops at Harvard and the University of Pennsylvania. I also wish to thank the John M. Olin Center for
Law, Economics and Business at Harvard Law School for its financial support. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Lucian Arye Bebchuk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Why Firms Adopt Antitakeover Arrangements
Lucian Arye Bebchuk
NBER Working Paper No. 10190
December 2003
JEL No. G30, G34, K22
ABSTRACT
Firms going public have increasingly been incorporating antitakeover provisions in their IPO
charters, while shareholders of existing companies have increasingly been voting in opposition to
such charter provisions. This paper identifies possible explanations for this empirical pattern.
Specifically, I analyze explanations based on (1) the role of antitakeover arrangements in
encouraging founders to break up their initial control blocks, (2) efficient private benefits of control,
(3) agency problems among pre-IPO shareholders, (4) agency problems between pre-IPO
shareholders and their IPO lawyers, (5) asymmetric information between founders and public
investors about the firm's future growth prospects, and (6) bounded attention and imperfect pricing
at the IPO stage.
Lucian Arye Bebchuk
Harvard Law School
1545 Massachusetts Avenue
Areeda 325
Cambridge, MA 02135
and NBER
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu

Introduction
Strong antitakeover defenses are common among publicly traded firms. Why
do firms adopt such arrangements? Does the adoption of such arrangements
indicate that board veto over takeovers is beneficial to share value? What explains
the fact that at the IPO stage firms adopt strong takeover provisions, such as
effective staggered boards, that shareholders systematically reject midstream? To
what extent should corporate law place limits on a firm’s choice of antitakeover
arrangements? This paper seeks to address each of these questions.
Firms opt for antitakeover protection in two main ways, both of which have
attracted some attention. First, firms adopt antitakeover charter provisions. Recent
work has documented that in the last decade, firms that have gone public have
increasingly been incorporating such provisions in their charters.1 Second, firms
incorporate in states that have statutes or case law that make takeovers difficult.
Recent evidence indicates that states with more antitakeover statutes are more
successful in attracting incorporations. 2
Supporters of board veto have argued that the adoption of antitakeover
arrangements at the IPO stage provides “market proof” that board veto is desirable
for shareholders.3 Their inference is unwarranted, however, because the evidence
about shareholder preferences for antitakeover protections are, to say the least,
rather mixed. While the adoption of antitakeover protections at the IPO stage has
1 see John C. Coates IV, Explaining Variation in Takeover Defenses: Blame the Lawyers, 89 Cal. L.
Rev. 1301 (2001); Robert Daines & Michael Klausner, Do IPO Charters Maximize Firm Value?
Antitakeover Protection in IPOs, 17 J. L. Econ. & Org. 83 (2001); Laura Casares Field & Jonathan
M. Karpoff, Takeover Defenses of IPO Firms, 57 J. Fin. 1857, 1858 (2002).
2 See Lucian Arye Bebchuk et al., Does the Evidence Favor State Competition in Corporate Law, 90
Cal. L. Rev. 1775, 1815-18 (2002); Lucian Arye Bebchuk & Alma Cohen, Firms’ Decisions Where to
Incorporate, 46 J.L. & Econ. (2003); Guhan Subramanian, The Influence of Antitakeover Statutes on
Incorporation Choice: Evidence on the “Race” Debate and Antitakeover Overreaching, 150 U. Pa. L.
Rev. 1795 (2002).
3 Such arguments are made in Stephen J. Choi & Andrew T. Guzman, Choice and Federal
Intervention in Corporate Law, 87 Va. L. Rev. 961, 985–86 (2001); Marcel Kahan & Edward B. Rock,
Corporate Constitutionalism: Antitakeover Charter Provisions as Precommitment, 151 U. Pa. L. Rev.
(forthcoming 2003); Martin Lipton, Pills, Polls, and Professors Redux, 69 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1037
(2002); Jonathan R. Macey, Displacing Delaware: Can the Feds Do Better than the States in Regulating
Takeovers?, 57 Bus. Law. 1025 (2002); Lynn A. Stout, Do Antitakeover Defenses Decrease Shareholder
Wealth? The Ex Post/Ex Ante Valuation Problem, 55 Stan. L. Rev. 845, 847-56 (2002); John Elofson,
What If They Gave a Shareholder Revolution and Nobody Came? Poison Pills, Binding Shareholder
Resolutions and the Coase Theorem (working paper 2002).
1

increased over the last decade, shareholder opposition to antitakeover protections
through voting decisions has increased as well.4 In the wake of this seemingly
contradictory evidence, a theory is needed that is sufficiently rich to account for the
behavior of firms and investors, both at the IPO stage and in midstream.5
I identify and work out below several possible explanations that can account
for both IPO and midstream behavior.6 First, under the explanation of encouraging
de-concentration of ownership, antitakeover provisions serve the interests of
shareholders when firms go public. In the absence of such arrangements, founders
would be discouraged from subsequently reducing their holdings and relinquishing
the lock on control that comes with concentrated ownership. Under this explanation,
while public investors would fare best under dispersed ownership with weak
antitakeover provisions, having strong antitakeover provisions in the IPO charter is
still preferable because it results in less entrenchment. Thus, antitakeover
provisions are desirable at the IPO stage only because they encourage founders to
break up their control blocks. Then, once ownership is sufficiently dispersed so that
the votes of public investors matter, the benefits of antitakeover protections
disappear. This can explain the midstream opposition of such investors to
antitakeover arrangements.
Under the efficient rent protection theory, antitakeover arrangements are
always undesirable for public investors and reduce the value of their shares.
However, the benefits of rent protection obtained by the founders through the
antitakeover provisions are, at least at the IPO stage, greater than the resultant
reduction in share price that the provisions cause. In this case, antitakeover
arrangements are efficient overall; thus, assuming no informational problems,
founders find it in their interest to adopt them at the IPO stage even though this
4 See Lucian Arye Bebchuk & Allen Ferrell, Federalism and Corporate Law: The Race to Protect
Managers from Takeovers, 99 Col. L. Rev. 1168, 1187 (1999); Lucian Arye Bebchuk & Allen Ferrell,
Federal Intervention to Enhance Shareholder Choice, 87 Va. L. Rev. 993, 999-1001 (2001).
5 Michael Klausner, in Institutional Shareholders, Private Equity, and Anti-takeover Protection at the
IPO Stage, 151 U. Pa. L. Rev. (forthcoming 2003), also stresses the conflicting patterns of IPO and
midstream behavior and the need to reconcile them. His analysis focuses on the firms with
private equity funding, where some of the institutional investors regularly voting against
antitakeover provisions are also investors in the private equity funds taking public firms with
such provisions.
6 As I will note, some of the suggested explanations are new, while others build on earlier works
written by myself and by others. For all explanations, my analysis seeks to contribute by
working out fully the explanation, examining the extent to which it can explain empirical
patterns, and drawing its implications for legal policy.
2