NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE NEW NEW FINANCIAL THING:
THE SOURCES OF INNOVATION
BEFORE AND AFTER STATE STREET
Josh Lerner
Working Paper 10223
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10223
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2004
The methodology in this paper borrows heavily from Kortum and Lerner (2003). Research assistance was
provided by Chris Allen, Daniel Bergman, Jonathan Man, Felix Momsen, Karl Neumar, Kaego Ogbechie,
and Sarah Woolverton. Jim Bessen, Andrew Marquez, Peter Tufano, and participants in seminars and
informal workshops at MIT, the NBER, Stanford, and the University of Pennsylvania provided helpful
comments. Harvard Business School’s Division of Research provided financial support. All errors and
omissions are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Josh Lerner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The New New Financial Thing: The Sources of Innovation Before and After State Street
Josh Lerner
NBER Working Paper No. 10223
January 2004
JEL No. G2, O3
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the sources of financial innovations between 1990 and 2002, using Wall Street
Journal articles as indicators of innovations. No evidence suggests that larger firms are particularly
innovative; in many specifications, there is a disproportionate representation of smaller firms among
the innovators. Less profitable firms and those with stronger academic ties also innovate more. The
elasticity of innovation with respect to size appears to have increased sharply since the State Street
decision that greatly accelerated the rate of financial patenting. I conclude by exploring how the
origins of financial patents resemble or differ from those of innovations.
Josh Lerner
Harvard Business School
Rock Center, Room 214
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
josh@hbs.edu

The significance of financial innovation is widely recognized. Many leading
scholars, including Miller (1986) and Merton (1992), have highlighted the importance of
new products and services in the financial arena. Empirically, Tufano (1989) showed
that of all public offerings in 1987, 18% (on a dollar-weighted basis) consisted of
securities that had not been in existence in 1974. These innovations are not just critical
for firms in the financial services industry, but also impact other companies: for instance,
enabling them to raise capital in larger amounts and at a lower cost than they could
otherwise.
Yet despite this importance, the sources of financial innovation remain
surprisingly poorly understood. In a recent review article, Frame and White (2003)
highlight the paucity of empirical research in this area. While innovation in
manufacturing industries has inspired literally thousands of academic studies, the authors
are only able to identify 39 empirical studies of financial innovation. Moreover, this
literature is highly concentrated on the “back end” of the innovation process, focusing
largely on the diffusion of these innovations, the characteristics of the innovation
adopters, and the consequences of innovation for firm profitability and social welfare.
The authors can only identify two papers on the origins of innovation, Ben-Horim and
Silber (1977) and Lerner (2002). This paucity of research can be contrasted with the
abundant literature on the sources of manufacturing innovation.
This paucity of research is particularly puzzling given the likelihood that the
dynamics of financial innovation are quite different from that in manufacturing. The

financial services industry has historically differed substantially from the bulk of
manufacturing industries in regard to the ability of innovators to appropriate their
discoveries. Until recently, firms have been very limited in their ability to protect new
ideas through patents. As a result, new product ideas have diffused rapidly across
competitors (Tufano (1989)). Second, product innovations have been typically subject to
a great deal of exposure, due to the need to market these products to potential customers
and (frequently) to file documentation with public regulatory agencies. Third, firms in
many segments of the financial services industry frequently engage in collaborative
activities, whether syndications of particular innovations or collaborations to market new
products. Such collaborations—while certainly also seen in manufacturing industries—
may shape the incentives to innovate and nature of innovations. Together, these
considerations suggest the need to examine financial innovation as a phenomenon in its
own right.
As Frame and White point out, one of the major barriers to the study of financial
innovation has been a paucity of data. Studies of manufacturing innovation have
traditionally focused on R&D spending and patenting. Given the rareness with which
financial service firms report R&D sending and the infrequency of financial patents until
recently, these measures are unlikely to be satisfactory. This paper seeks to take a first
step towards addressing this gap, by developing a measure of financial innovation based
on news stories in the Wall Street Journal.
2