NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
POPULATION AND REGULATION
Casey B. Mulligan
Andrei Shleifer
Working Paper 10234
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10234
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2004
We appreciate the comments of Lucian Bebchuk, Gary Becker, Dora Costa, Simeon Djankov, Ed Glaeser,
Claudia Goldin, Louis Kaplow, Jim Hines, Larry Katz, Matt Kahn, Sam Peltzman, seminar participants at
Clemson, Harvard, and the University of Chicago, data from Steve Tenn, and the research assistance of
Herbert Lian, Pakshun Ng, Walter Theseira, and Vasu Vadlamudi. Mulligan gratefully acknowledges the
financial support of the University of Chicago’s Stigler Center for the study of the Economy and the State,
and computing support from the NBER. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Casey B. Mulligan and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Population and Regulation
Casey B. Mulligan and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 10234
January 2004
JEL No. H11, K10
ABSTRACT
We present a model of efficient regulation along the lines of Demsetz (1967). In this model, setting
up and running regulatory institutions takes a fixed cost, and therefore jurisdictions with larger
populations affected by a given regulation are more likely to have them. Consistent with the model,
we find that higher population U.S. states have more pages of legislation and adopt particular laws
earlier in their history. We also find that specific types of regulation, including the regulation of
entry, the regulation of labor, and the military draft are more extensive in countries with larger
populations. Overall, the data show that population is an empirically important determinant of
regulation.
Casey B. Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street, #506
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu
Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M-9
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu

I. Introduction
In a classic paper, Demsetz (1967) argues that the creation of institutions is shaped by
demand. Introducing an institution only becomes efficient when the scale of an activity it supports
becomes significant enough to cover the costs of creating and running it. Using the example of
Indians in the Quebec region circa 1700, Demsetz maintains that the aggregate value of fur trading
explains the emergence of enforced land ownership rights. In this paper, we show that Demsetz’s
logic is quite general theoretically but also valid empirically. We show that population of a
community – our measure of the scale of various activities – is an important determinant of whether
and how much these activities are regulated by that community.
The focus on population as a determinant of regulation is uncommon in theoretical and
empirical work. Much of research on regulation has focused on contrasting public interest theories,
in which regulation cures market failure (e.g., Pigou 1934), with public choice theories, in which
regulation helps special interests to make money (e.g., Tullock 1967, Stigler 1971, Peltzman 1976,
or McChesney 1987). This work generally focuses on particular industries to understand the
structure of regulation. Our work is closer to the recent writings on regulation that see it as one
strategy of enforcing good conduct, which needs to be compared to private orderings, dispute
resolution in courts, and other enforcement strategies (e.g., Glaeser, Johnson and Shleifer 2001,
Djankov et al. 2003). However, that work ignores scale as a potentially important factor shaping
public involvement. Our purpose is to explore the implications of fixed organization, adoption, and
enforcement costs of regulation on its use by focusing on total population of a community – a U.S.
state or a country – as a determinant of its regulatory structure.
Section II presents a simple model of the creation of regulation of different types. The model
establishes the relationship between population and regulation, but also permits a calculation of the
population elasticity of regulation. Section III presents our cross-state data on the amount of law,
showing how bigger states regulate more activities and tend to regulate each activity in more detail.
Section IV revisits the previous literature on regulatory adoption, adding population to the list of
explanatory variables, and shows how larger states tend to adopt regulations earlier. Section V looks
at five types of regulation across countries, showing how high population countries tend to regulate
a given activity more. Section VI extends the basic model to consider redistributive and not just
efficient regulation, shows that many of the same insights apply, and presents some evidence on the
empirical significance of that model. Section VII concludes.

Population and Regulation - 2
II. Regulation Creation in a Simple Model with Fixed Costs and Zipf’s Law
Our starting point is the efficiency approach to regulation which holds, in broadest terms,
that a society chooses to regulate an activity when doing so is cheaper than alternative strategies of
addressing social problems. Perhaps the simplest example of this approach, and one that we model,
is resolution of disputes. Consider a jurisdiction, such as a U.S. state, where people interact with
each other, and sometimes have a dispute. These disputes can be resolved in a number of ways.
They can be resolved completely privately, perhaps because neighbors want to get along (Elickson
1991) or because participants in a given industry have established a private ordering to facilitate
business in the long run (Greif 1993, Bernstein 1992). Alternatively, they can be resolved in court
based on general principles of fairness, without any reference to legislation or regulation. Both of
these strategies of enforcing good conduct have much to recommend them, but sometimes they fail.
Private orderings are vulnerable to abuse of the weak by the strong; mafia enforcement is an
example. Dispute resolution based on custom or common law is also expensive when application
of general principles requires the assembly of a great deal of data and expertise. When private
orderings and common law do not work well, mutually beneficial transactions might not take place.
As an efficient response to such problems, many societies introduce legislation and
regulation, which delineate the rights and obligations of various parties in a community. Sometimes
legislation just describes the rules of the game, and leaves the enforcement of these rules to private
parties. Its main function is to reduce the cost of settling disputes in court. In other instances,
enforcement is also taken over by the state, as in the case of regulatory agencies. At least in some
instances, legislation and regulation reduce the transaction costs of enforcing good conduct relative
to private orderings and common law. Glaeser, Johnson and Shleifer (2001) argue, for example,
that regulation reduces enforcement costs because regulators have stronger incentives to enforce
rules than do the judges. Glaeser and Shleifer (2001) and LaPorta et al (2003) give examples of why
“bright line rules” provided by regulation are easier to enforce – both publicly and privately – than
torts. For our purposes, we do not assume that regulation is always more efficient, or identify the
exact transaction costs – it is sufficient that, in some instances, regulation does reduce these costs.
As an example of this approach, consider the regulation of securities markets. In these
markets, a crucial problem is the issuance of worthless securities to a poorly informed public by
dishonest promoters and entrepreneurs. One can argue that underwriter and issuer reputation would
eliminate this risk, but in many countries they do not; the temptation to take the money and run is