NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTEREST RATES AND INITIAL PUBLIC OFFERINGS
Boyan Jovanovic
Peter L. Rousseau
Working Paper 10298
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10298
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2004
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Boyan Jovanovic and Peter L. Rousseau. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Interest Rates and Initial Public Offerings
Boyan Jovanovic and Peter L. Rousseau
NBER Working Paper No. 10298
February 2004
JEL No. E4, G3, N1
ABSTRACT
We study the relation between IPO investment and the rate of interest. We model the IPO timing
decision and show that the implied relation between interest rates and investment is non-monotonic,
and the data support the implication. At low rates of interest firms delay their IPOs. This happens
because during the pre-IPO period the firm forgoes earnings that do not matter as much at low
interest rates. The 1950's and early 1960's, especially, were periods of very low real interest rates,
and IPO investment was low, with firms delaying their IPOs significantly. A qualitative difference
seems to exist between investment of IPO-ing firms and the investment of incumbent firms which
is decreasing in the interest rate, as neoclassical theory predicts.
Boyan Jovanovic
Department of Economics
New York University and
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
bjovanov@uchicago.edu
Peter L. Rousseau
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University and
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
roussepl@umich.edu

Interest Rates and Initial Public Offerings
Boyan Jovanovic and Peter L. Rousseau
∗
February 2, 2004
Abstract
We study the relation between IPO investment andthe rate of interest. We
model the IPO timing decision and show that the implied relation between
interest rates and investment is non-monotonic, and the data support the im-
plication. AtlowratesofinterestfirmsdelaytheirIPOs. Thishappensbecause
duringthepre-IPOperiodthefirmforgoesearningsthatdonotmatterasmuch
at low interest rates. The 1950’s and early 1960’s, especially, were periods of
very low real interest rates, and IPO investment was low, with firms delay-
ing their IPOs significantly. A qualitative difference seems to exist between
investment of IPO-ing firms and the investment of incumbent firms which is
decreasing in the interest rate, as neoclassical theory predicts.
1 Introduction
A firm’s initial public offering on the stock market — its “IPO” — represents a transfer
ofownershipofthefirmanditsassetsintothehandsofthepublic, atleastinpart. At
the same time an IPOalsoaugments the funds available to the firm, thereby enabling
it to invest more. Clementi (2003), Pastor and Veronesi (2003) and Jovanovic and
Rousseau (2001) focus on the investment motive behind IPOs. The present paper
also treats a firm’s IPO as inseparable from a simultaneous physical investment.
The paper finds that IPOs are qualitatively different from other investments,
especially investments made by stock-market incumbents. It investigates, further,
the role that the rate of interest plays in influencing IPOs. It finds that the relation
between the two is non-monotonic. Very high rates of interest discourage investment
for the usual reason, namely that when future income is discounted more heavily, it
is not worthwhile to sacrifice current resources. Very low rates of interest, however,
BoyanJovanovicisprofessorofeconomicsattheUniversityofChicagoandNewYorkUniversity,
∗
aresearchassociateoftheNationalBureau ofEconomicResearch(NBER),andaconsultanttothe
FederalReserveBankofChicago. PeterL.RousseauisassociateprofessorofeconomicsatVanderbilt
University and a research associate of the NBER. The authors thank the NSF for financial help.
1

Ex-post real r
IPOs
7%
incumbents
0
Investment
-3%
Figure 1: Two qualitatively different investment schedules.
also discourage investment if that investment is irreversible. This is because when
interest rates are low, it is not as costly to wait for conditions under which the
investment is more favorable. Similar results are in Chetty (2003) and Jovanovic and
Rousseau (2001) who also provide an information-theoretic rationale for the gains to
waiting, but these authors do not test for non-monotonicity. Aroughsummary of the
estimated contrast between the two forms of investment — IPOs vs. established firms
— is in Figure 1. Aggregate investment is negatively though not strongly related to
interest rates. IPO investment, on the other hand, has a backward bending portion,
with the positively-sloped portion much more pronounced. The two curves are not
properly scaled on the horizontal axis, though, because IPO investment is a small
fraction of all investment — roughly 11 percent over the past 40 years.
The non-monotonicity of IPO-ing firms’ physical investment in the interest rate
stems, ultimately, from the fact that the firm is giving up profits while it waits to
IPO. Waiting itself delivers information, i.e., human capital, hence what really goes
on is a substitution of one form of capital for another. An IPO-ing firm faces more
uncertainty than incumbent firms, and it has a greater incentive to wait and gather
information before it invests. We comment on this again in the conclusion, and on
the implications that it may have for countries like Japan that are experiencing low
investment in spite of enjoying very low interest rates.
The plan of the paper is as follows: Section 2 explains the model, and Section
3 describes its main implications for the data that we have. Section 4 tests those
implications, and Section 5 discusses some related literature. Section 6 concludes.
2