NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW FINANCIAL AID AFFECTS PERSISTENCE
Eric Bettinger
Working Paper 10242
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10242
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2004
Special thanks goes to Rob Sheehan and Andy Lechler for helpful comments and for providing the data. I
am also grateful for comments from David Cooper, Jim Rebitzer, Bridget Long, Jon Guryan, and especially
Caroline Hoxby. All errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Eric Bettinger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Financial Aid Affects Persistence
Eric Bettinger
NBER Working Paper No. 10242
January 2004
JEL No. I2
ABSTRACT
The Pell Grant program is the largest means-tested financial assistance available to postsecondary
students across the United States, yet researchers have only limited evidence on the causal effects
of these grants. This paper examines the effect of Pell grants on student persistence after the first
year. The paper uses unique, student-level data from all public colleges in Ohio. The data include
detailed financial data which allow me to identify small discontinuities in the Pell grant formula.
I exploit these discontinuities to identify the causal effects of the voucher. The results based on
discontinuity approaches suggest that Pell grants reduce college drop-out behavior. The results in
this paper support other evidence that find a relationship between need-based aid and college
completion (e.g. Dynarski 2002, Turner and Bound 2002).
Eric Bettinger
Department of Economics
266 Peter B. Lewis Building
Case Western Reserve University
11119 Bellflower Road
Cleveland, OH 44106-7235
and NBER
epb4@weatherhead.cwru.edu

The Pell Grant program is the largest means-tested financial assistance available
to postsecondary students across the United States. Students from all types of degree
granting post-secondary institutions can apply for Pell grants. In 2000-01, the federal
government awarded almost $8 billion in Pell grants among more than 3.8 million
students, roughly one-third of all college students (College Board 2001). President
Bush’s 2003 budget allocates over $10.9 billion dollars for an estimated 4.5 million Pell
grant recipients (DOE 2002) potentially representing a 32.4 percent increase in the
number of students receiving Pell grants since the 1990-91 school year. Yet despite this
continued expansion of Pell, researchers have only limited evidence on the causal effects
of these grants.
Most Pell-related research focuses on the effects of Pell Grants on enrollment
decisions, specifically focusing on initial enrollment and choice amongst colleges (see
Kane 1999, Ehrenberg and Sherman 1984, Leslie and Brinkman 1987, Seftor and Turner
2002). However, there is surprisingly little research measuring the causal effect of Pell
grants on student outcomes in college (e.g. persistence, graduation). Regardless of
whether Pell grants affect initial enrollment patterns, Pell grants may independently affect
student outcomes.
Moreover, studying the effects of need-based aid on student outcomes may also
be important since Pell-eligible students are more likely to be on the margin of “stopping-
out.”1 At Ohio 4-year colleges in 1999-2000, 18 percent of full-time freshmen who were
not eligible for Pell Grants withdrew from college by the next year while 28 percent of
students who were eligible for a Pell grant did not enroll the following year. It is an open
1 “Stopping-out” refers to students who withdraw from school after their first year. These students are not
“drop-outs” since many of these students do not leave school permanently and their undergraduate credit
hours do not “expire.” I use these terms interchangeably throughout the paper.
1

question whether Pell grants and other need-based aid programs affect these margins.
This paper attempts to resolve these questions. Using unique student data from Ohio, this
paper measures the causal relationship between need-based aid and student retention.
A study of the effects of need-based aid on student retention may be of interest to
both policymakers and educational researchers. As Sarah Turner argues elsewhere in this
volume, policymakers have often paid more attention to improving student access to
college rather than improving student retention once in college. However, as college
enrollment rates continue to increase while completion rates do not, both policymakers
and researchers have begun focusing more heavily on indicators of student retention (e.g.
DesJardins, Ahlburg, McCall 1999, St. John, Hu, Tuttle 2000, St. John, Hu, Weber 2000),
and the relationship between financial need and persistence is central to many of these
studies (e.g. DesJardins, Ahlburg, MccCall 2002, St. John, Musoba, Simmons 2003).
There are a number of reasons why more research has not investigated the effects
of Pell grants on student collegiate outcomes. One reason is that researchers have
difficulty distinguishing between the effects of family characteristics and the effects of
Pell grants. Pell grants are a means-tested program. Comparisons between Pell
recipients and non-Pell recipients (e.g. Wei and Carroll 2002) may be difficult to interpret
since Pell recipients are poorer and may be more likely to drop-out even in the absence of
need-based aid. To correct for such bias, researchers must sufficiently control for family
characteristics.
Additionally, identifying the effects of Pell grants is difficult since much of the
variation in the size of students’ Pell grants is correlated with students’ college
enrollment decisions. For example, college choice and the size of a students’ Pell grant
2