NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EMPLOYEES’ INVESTMENT DECISIONS ABOUT COMPANY STOCK
James J. Choi
David Laibson
Brigitte C. Madrian
Andrew Metrick
Working Paper 10228
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10228
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2004
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Employees’ Investment Decisions about Company Stock
James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick
NBER Working Paper No. 10228
January 2004
JEL No. E2, G1, G2, H3
ABSTRACT
We study the relationship between past returns on a company's stock and the level of investment in
that stock by the participants in that company's 401(k) plan. Using data on 94,191 plan participants,
we analyze several different decision points: the initial fraction of savings allocated to company
stock, the changes in this fraction, and the reallocations of portfolio holdings across different asset
classes. Like Benartzi (2001), we find that high past returns on company stock induce participants
to allocate more of their contributions to company stock. We also find, however, that high returns
on company stock have the opposite effect on reallocations of portfolio holdings, with high returns
leading to shifts away from company stock and into other forms of equity. Overall, for company
stock decisions, participants in our sample appear to be momentum investors when making
contribution decisions and contrarian investors when making trading decisions.
James J. Choi Brigitte C. Madrian
Department of Economics Department of Business and Public Policy
Harvard University University of Pennsylvania
Cambridge, MA 02138 The Wharton School
james.choi@post.harvard.edu Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
David Laibson bmadrian@courier-mail.wharton.upenn.edu
Department of Economics
Harvard University Andrew Metrick
Cambridge, MA 02138 Department of Finance
and NBER University of Pennsylvania
dlaibson@harvard.edu Wharton School
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
metrick@wharton.upenn.edu

Introduction
Recent high-profile cases have illustrated the dangers of employee investment in
company stock. These debacles are unlikely to be the last ones, or even the most severe.
Companies with more than 50 percent of retirement assets in company stock are
common, and fractions over 80 percent exist at such large companies as Procter &
Gamble, Anheuser-Busch, and Pfizer.1
The concentration of retirement wealth in company stock is a clear violation of
diversification principles. Recently, several studies have quantified the economic costs of
this concentration. Meulbroek (2002) uses a Sharpe-ratio approach and finds that the
average diversification cost of company stock is about 42% of its value. Ramaswamy
(2002) uses option-pricing techniques to compute the cost of insuring the extra risk of
company stock. For a range of plausible parameter values, he finds that this insurance
would be prohibitively expensive.2
Despite these high costs, companies continue to offer employee stock in their
plans. There are many potential explanations for this behavior, but none are entirely
satisfying. For example, employers may believe that stock compensation is inexpensive
relative to cash, that there are strong incentive or morale effects, or that friendly
employees will aid management in a takeover or other proxy battle. Mitchell and Utkus
(2002) review these arguments and find little evidence to support them. The only
explanation with any significant empirical support is tax-driven: dividends paid to certain
employee ownership plans are tax-deductible at the corporate level. Liang and
Weisbenner (2002) find a significant relationship between company stock fractions of
total contributions and dividend payout. Nevertheless, this finding can explain only part
Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick July 28, 2003 2

of the puzzle, as many firms without any dividends still have significant employee
ownership of company stock in their plans.
Even if employers offer their stock, it does not necessarily mean that employees
must buy it. While many plans make matched contributions in company stock, and some
of these plans restrict employees’ rights to sell this stock for some period of time, there is
still a significant amount of discretionary contributions to company stock. Benartzi
(2001) was the first to investigate this behavior and provided an interesting explanation
for it. Using a sample of about half of the S&P 500 companies, he finds that discretionary
contributions to company stock are positively correlated with the past returns on that
stock. He posits that this correlation is due to employees’ extrapolation of past returns
when forming expectations about future returns. Liang and Weisbenner (2002) confirm
this result for a larger number of companies over a longer time period.
The Benartzi (2001) and Liang and Weisbenner (2002) results use firm-level data
drawn from SEC filings. These data provide the average contribution fraction to company
stock for each firm. Thus, these studies use data for a large number of firms to analyze
cross-sectional relationships between firm characteristics and employee discretionary
contributions to company stock. Our analysis looks at some similar questions, but our
approach is distinct and complementary: we use time-series variation in returns at three
large firms’ 401(k) plans from 1992 to 2000 to identify the effect of returns on the
company stock choices of 94,191 plan participants. Our main goal is to use this time-
series variation to better understand the mechanisms by which past returns affect
employee investment. Specifically, we attempt to measure the extent of “feedback”
investing in company stock: to analyze whether participants are momentum or contrarian
Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick July 28, 2003 3