NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IS DEBT RELIEF EFFICIENT?
Serkan Arslanalp
Peter Blair Henry
Working Paper 10217
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10217
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2004
We thank Jeremy Bulow, Steve Buser, Sandy Darity, Darrell Duffie, Nick Hope, Willene Johnson, Paul
Romer, Jim Van Horne, Jeff Zwiebel and seminar participants at the AEA Pipeline Project, Columbia, The
IMF, Stanford, and The US Department of State for helpful comments. Rania A. Eltom provided excellent
research assistance. Henry gratefully acknowledges financial support from an NSF CAREER Award, the
Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research (SIEPR), and the Stanford Center for International
Development (SCID). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Serkan Arslanalp and Peter Blair Henry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Is Debt Relief Efficient?
Serkan Arslanalp and Peter Blair Henry
NBER Working Paper No. 10217
January 2004
JEL No. F3, F4, E6
ABSTRACT
When Less Developed Countries (LDCs) announce debt relief agreements under the Brady Plan,
their stock markets appreciate by an average of 60 percent in real dollar terms – a $42 billion
increase in shareholder value. In contrast, there is no significant stock market increase for a control
group of LDCs that do not sign Brady agreements. The results persist after controlling for IMF
programs, trade liberalizations, capital account liberalizations, and privatization programs. The stock
market appreciations successfully forecast higher future net resource transfers, investment and
growth. Creditors also benefit from the Brady Plan. Controlling for other factors, stock prices of US
commercial banks with significant LDC loan exposure rise by 35 percent – a $13 billion increase
in shareholder value. The results suggest that debt relief can generate large efficiency gains when
the borrower suffers from debt overhang.
Serkan Arslanalp
Stanford University
Department of Economics
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
serkan@stanford.edu
Peter Blair Henry
Stanford University
Graduate School of Business
Littlefield 277
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
pbhenry@stanford.edu

Introduction
Bono and Jesse Helms want debt relief for the world’s less-developed countries (LDCs).
The Pope and 17 million people are behind them. At a June 1999 meeting of G8 leaders in
Cologne, Germany the lead singer of the rock band U2 presented Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder
with 17 million signatures in support of the Jubilee 2000 Debt Relief Initiative. In November
1998, Pope John Paul II issued a Papal Bull calling on the wealthy nations to relieve the debts of
developing nations in order to “remove the shadow of death.”
Opponents of debt relief occupy less hallowed ground but are no less zealous about their
cause, citing at least two reasons why the debt relief campaign is misguided. First, debt relief
alone cannot solve the problem of third-world debt. Even if all debt were forgiven, it will
accumulate again if income does not grow faster than expenditure (O’Neill, 2002). Second, debt
relief can create perverse incentives for debtor countries. By relaxing budget constraints, debt
relief may permit governments to prolong wasteful economic policies (Easterly, 2001a).
Do the benefits of debt relief outweigh the costs? Or is it a welfare-reducing market
intervention? The stock market provides a natural place to search for answers. Changes in stock
prices reflect both revised expectations about future corporate profits and the discount rate at
which those profits are capitalized. Consequently, the stock market response to the
announcement of a debt relief program collapses the entire expected future stream of debt relief
costs and benefits into a single summary statistic: the expected net benefit (current and future) of
the program.
The effect of debt relief on the stock market depends on the model of sovereign lending
to which one subscribes. Models emphasizing costs suggest three channels through which debt
relief may adversely affect the recipient country’s stock market. First, if debt relief allows a
1

government to persist with wasteful policies, economic growth and corporate profits may be
reduced impacting stock prices adversely. Second, countries that do not honor their debts may
incur costs in the form of trade sanctions, which may also hurt growth and profits (Bulow and
Rogoff, 1989a). Third, debt relief may damage the debtor’s reputation for repayment and raise
its future cost of borrowing in international capital markets (Eaton and Gersovitz, 1981).
But, the reputation argument is valid only under assumptions that may not be plausible
for LDCs (Bulow and Rogoff, 1989b). Furthermore, both borrower and lenders can benefit from
debt relief when the borrower suffers from debt overhang. If each creditor would agree to
forgive some of its claims, then the debtor would be better able to service the debt owed to each
creditor. Consequently, the expected value of all creditors’ claims would rise (Krugman, 1988;
Sachs, 1989). Forgiveness will not happen without coordination, however, because any
individual creditor would prefer to have a free ride, maintaining the full value of its claims while
others write off some debt.
By forcing all creditors to accept some losses, debt relief can solve the collective action
problem and pave the way for profitable new lending (Cline, 1995). By relaxing the
intertemporal budget constraint, the new capital inflow may reduce the discount rate in the
debtor country. To the extent that the country suffers from a “debt overhang” caused by the
collective action problem, debt relief increases the incentive to undertake efficient investments.
In turn, these investments may raise expected future growth rates and cash flows (Froot,
Scharfstein, and Stein, 1989; Krugman, 1989; Myers, 1977; Sachs, 1989).
On March 10, 1989, the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States, Nicholas F.
Brady, called for LDC debt relief. Between 1989 and 1995, sixteen LDCs reached debt relief
agreements under the Brady Plan. Figure 1 shows what happened. In the 12-month period
2