NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY ARE MOST FUNDS OPEN-END?
COMPETITION AND THE LIMITS OF ARBITRAGE
Jeremy C. Stein
Working Paper 10259
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10259
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2004
I am grateful to the National Science Foundation for financial support, and to Adam Szeidl and Ann Richards
for research assistance. Thanks also to Lucian Bebchuk, Markus Brunnermeier, Hong Liu, Stefan Nagel,
Michael Schwarz, Andrei Shleifer, Wei Xiong, and seminar participants at Harvard Business School, Emory,
Washington University, Brandeis, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the University of Michigan, and
Harvard Law School for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Jeremy C. Stein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Why Are Most Funds Open-End? Competition and the Limits of Arbitrage
Jeremy C. Stein
NBER Working Paper No. 10259
January 2004
JEL No. G12, G20
ABSTRACT
The majority of asset-management intermediaries (e.g., mutual funds, hedge funds) are structured
on an open-end basis, even though it appears that the open-end form can be a serious impediment
to arbitrage. I argue that the equilibrium degree of open-ending in an economy can be excessive
from the point of view of investors. When funds compete for investors' dollars, they may engage in
a counterproductive race towards the open-end form, even though this form leaves them ill-suited
to undertaking certain types of arbitrage trades. One implication of the analysis is that, even absent
short-sales constraints or other frictions, economically large mispricings can coexist with rational,
competitive arbitrageurs who earn small excess returns.
Jeremy C. Stein
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer, Room 209
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeremy_stein@harvard.edu

1. Introduction
This paper is motivated by two stylized facts. First, the vast majority of
professionally-managed investment vehicles (i.e., mutual funds, hedge funds) are
structured on an open-end, as opposed to closed-end basis, making it possible for their
clients to liquidate shares on demand.1 Second, both theory and evidence suggest that the
open-end form imposes serious constraints on would-be arbitrageurs. In particular, being
open-end exposes arbitrageurs to the risk of large withdrawals if they perform poorly in
the short run.2 This risk in turn makes it dangerous for them to put on trades that are
attractive in a long-run sense, but where convergence to fundamentals is unlikely to be
either smooth or rapid—a point that has been made by Shleifer and Vishny (1997). To
take one leading example, open-end funds are unlikely to want to bet heavily against
something like the internet bubble of the late 1990s.3
Given the obvious drawbacks, why is the open-end form so dominant? One
answer might be that open-ending is the optimal response to problems of agency and
asymmetric information. When contributing to a fund, investors worry that the manager
may be either incompetent or a crook. If the fund is set up on a closed-end basis, they
have no recourse, and may end up seeing their entire investment slowly eaten away. In
1 I discuss the evidence relating to this point in Section 2 below. One qualification is that unlike mutual
funds, hedge funds are rarely open-end in the purest continuous-time sense. That is, while they almost
always allow their clients to liquidate their positions, there are typically some restrictions on how
frequently such liquidation can occur.
2 See, e.g., Ippolito (1992), Chevalier and Ellison (1997), and Sirri and Tufano (1998) for evidence on the
flow-performance relationship in the mutual-fund sector.
3 Brunnermeier and Nagel (2003) document the reluctance of hedge funds to buck the internet bubble, and
Lamont and Stein (2004) find that investors as a whole actually scaled back their short positions as the
NASDAQ index was exploding upwards from mid-1998 through March of 2000.
1

contrast, if the fund is open-end, they can liquidate their positions at the first sign of
trouble, thereby avoiding large losses due to mismanagement or theft. In this view, the
prevalence of open-end funds—while not without its costs—represents a socially
efficient (i.e., second-best) outcome, given the existence of managerial moral hazard
and/or asymmetric information.
In this paper, I take a somewhat different view. While maintaining the premise
that agency and information problems are at the heart of the decision to open-end, I argue
that the end result may be a degree of open-ending that is socially excessive. The basic
argument is as follows. First, suppose that from an efficiency perspective, it would be
better if all funds were closed-end. This amounts to assuming that the gains from being
able to undertake longer-horizon trades in the closed-end form outweigh the potential
losses that come from being unable to control wayward managers (i.e., the fraction of
such wayward managers in the overall population is relatively small).
Unfortunately, in such a case it may be impossible to sustain the efficient outcome
where all funds remain closed-end. Any one high-ability manager will have an incentive
to deviate, and set his fund up with an open-end charter, because this will signal his
quality and thereby allow him to get more assets under management. This “business-
stealing” effect sets off a counterproductive race to be open-ended, with both high-quality
and low-quality managers ultimately being forced to open-end in order not to lose their
investors. In the resulting equilibrium, all funds are open-end, yet there is no net benefit
in terms of the quality of the managerial pool, since no low-ability managers get screened
out. For some parameter values, the all-closed-end scenario can be Pareto-dominant,
2