NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAPITAL CONTROLS:
MUD IN THE WHEELS OF MARKET DISCIPLINE
Kristin J. Forbes
Working Paper 10284
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10284
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2004
Paper prepared for the conference: “Market Discipline: The Evidence Across Countries and Industries.”
Sponsored by the Bank of International Settlements and Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2004 by Kristin J. Forbes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Capital Controls: Mud in the Wheels of Market Discipline
Kristin J. Forbes
NBER Working Paper No. 10284
January 2004
JEL No. F3, F15, F21, G15
ABSTRACT
Widespread support for capital account liberalization in emerging markets has recently shifted to
skepticism and even support for capital controls in certain circumstances. This sea-change in
attitudes has been bolstered by the inconclusive macroeconomic evidence on the benefits of capital
account liberalization. There are several compelling reasons why it is difficult to measure the
aggregate impact of capital controls in very different countries. Instead, a new and more promising
approach is more detailed microeconomic studies of how capital controls have generated specific
distortions in individual countries. Several recent papers have used this approach and examined very
different aspects of capital controls – from their impact on crony capitalism in Malaysia and on
financing constraints in Chile, to their impact on US multinational behavior and the efficiency of
stock market pricing. Each of these diverse studies finds a consistent result: capital controls have
significant economic costs and lead to a misallocation of resources. This new microeconomic
evidence suggests that capital controls are not just “sand”, but rather “mud in the wheels” of market
discipline.
Kristin J. Forbes
MIT Sloan School
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
kjforbes@mit.edu

1. Introduction
In the early and mid-1990's, most international economists and Washington-based policymakers
supported rapid capital account liberalization for emerging markets. Liberalization was expected
to have widespread benefits. For example, it was predicted to increase capital inflows, thereby
financing investment and raising growth. It could facilitate the diversification of risk, thereby
reducing volatility in consumption and income. Liberalization could also increase market
discipline, thereby leading to a more efficient allocation of capital and higher productivity
growth. Many countries followed this advice and removed their capital account restrictions.
The initial results were generally positive – increased capital inflows, investment booms,
and impressive growth performance. In the last decade, however, this positive view of capital
account liberalization has been widely questioned. Several countries that had recently removed
capital account restrictions, such as Mexico, Thailand, Korea, Russia, and Argentina,
experienced severe financial crises. These experiences, especially when combined with the
recent backlash against globalization, caused many people to question the benefits of unrestricted
capital flows in emerging markets. Does capital account liberalization lead to inefficient
investment and asset market bubbles? Could controls on capital flows have prevented these
crises, or at least reduced their virulence? Even the IMF, formerly the bastion of capital market
liberalization, has cautiously begun to support certain capital controls, especially taxes on capital
inflows.1
These concerns have been bolstered by the inconclusive macroeconomic evidence on the
benefits of capital account liberalization and the costs of capital controls. Although there is an
1 For example, Fischer (2002), the former First Deputy Managing Director of the IMF, writes: “The IMF has
cautiously supported the use of market-based capital inflow controls, Chilean style.” Eduardo Aninat, a Deputy
Managing Director of the IMF, recently stated: “…in some circumstances, these controls on capital inflows can play
a role in reducing vulnerability created by short-term flows…” (Druckerman, 2002)
1

extensive literature on this subject (discussed in more detail in Section 2), the lack of agreement
across studies, methodologies, and data sources is remarkable. In a recent survey of capital
account liberalization, Eichengreen (2002) summarizes his conclusions: “Capital account
liberalization, it is fair to say, remains one of the most controversial and least understood policies
of our day...empirical analysis has failed to yield conclusive results.” In a recent review of the
empirical evidence on globalization, Prasad et al. (2003) conclude: “…if financial integration has
a positive effect on growth, there is as yet no clear and robust empirical proof that the effect is
quantitatively significant.”
Many skeptics interpret these inconclusive macroeconomic results as evidence that the
theoretical benefits of capital account liberalization may be elusive, possibly due to a range of
market imperfections. A closer look at individual countries that have removed their capital
controls, however, suggests that capital account liberalization may actually have substantial
benefits, but these benefits are extremely difficult to measure at the macroeconomic level
(especially in a cross-country framework). Most countries that remove their capital controls
simultaneously undertake a range of additional reforms and undergo widespread structural
changes, so that it is extremely difficult to isolate the specific impact of removing the controls.
Accurately measuring one of the most important benefits of capital account liberalization—
increased competition and market discipline that leads to a more efficient allocation of capital
and higher productivity growth—is extremely complicated. Moreover, the benefits of removing
capital controls may vary substantially across countries based on factors such as: their
institutional development, the strength and depth of their financial system, and the quality of
their corporate governance.
2