NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PRIVATE BENEFITS AND CROSS-LISTINGS
IN THE UNITED STATES
Evangelos Benos
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 10224
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10224
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2004
This paper is based on a talk at the Darden School of Business’ Emerging Markets Conference, May 29-30,
2003. We thank Dan Bernhardt, Craig Doidge, Jordan Siegel, Andrew Karolyi, Bill Reese, and participants
in presentations at the Darden School, and the University of Illinois for helpful suggestions. The authors can
be reached via email at ebenos@uiuc.edu, and weisbach@uiuc.edu. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Evangelos Benos and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Private Benefits and Cross-Listings in the United States
Evangelos Benos and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 10224
January 2004
JEL No. G3, F3
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we review the literature on private benefits and cross-listings in the United States. We
first discuss the alternative approaches used to measure private benefits. We survey recent evidence
documenting cross-country differences in the levels of private benefits obtained by corporate
managers, as well as the country-specific factors associated with high and low private benefits. We
then explain how, by cross-listing its stock in a market with high disclosure and regulatory standards
such as the United States, a firm can commit to a relatively low level of private benefits in the future.
We discuss the circumstances under which managers would choose to cross-list their stocks in the
United States, when such a cross-listing has important implications for managers' private benefits.
Finally, we survey recent empirical work that tests empirical implications of this bonding view of
cross-listings. Overall, this evidence provides a compelling case that the desire to protect
shareholders' rights so as to facilitate access to equity markets is one of a number of reasons why
firms choose to cross-list their stocks in the United States.
Evangelos Benos
University Of Illinois
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 S. Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
ebenos@uiuc.edu
Michael S. Weisbach
University Of Illinois
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 S. Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
weisbach@uiuc.edu

Private Benefits and Cross-Listings in the United States
1. Introduction
Managers’ and controlling shareholders’ ability to take private benefits from their
firms is an important aspect of corporate governance. Firms can raise external finance only
to the extent that they can commit to return this capital to investors and not extract it for the
managers’ personal use. Various laws and institutions provide limits on how much wealth
managers can take from investors, and thus make it possible for firms to raise external
finance. Thus, there is a logical connection between private benefits and firms’ opportunities
in the capital market. Not surprisingly, there is a significant relation in the data between the
strength of minority shareholders’ legal rights and the ability of firms to raise capital [see La
Porta et al. (1997)].
Measuring the extent of private benefits accruing to managers and controlling
shareholders is therefore a central question in corporate finance, both because the nature of
these benefits are interesting and important in their own right, and also because they have a
direct impact on firms’ access to external capital. A number of recent studies have estimated
the level of private benefits, and the extent to which they vary across countries.
These studies have relied on two alternative approaches. First, the analysis of
Zingales (1995) suggests that in equilibrium, the value of a vote will be associated with the
value of controlling a corporation, and thus with the large shareholders’ private benefits. By
comparing the prices of otherwise similar high-vote and low-vote shares, Nenova (2002) and
Doidge (2003) estimate average private benefits in a number of countries. Second, the
analysis of Barclay and Holderness (1989) suggests that private benefits can be measured by
the difference between the prices at which controlling blocks change hands, and the prices of
minority shares. Dyck and Zingales (2003a) measure the premia of controlling blocks across
countries and estimate private benefits in these countries.
1

The relation between private benefits and external finance implies that from a
manager’s perspective, there are costs as well as benefits when resources are taken from
shareholders. In particular, when a firm has access to valuable investment opportunities that
require external finance, the value of having access to external capital can be large relative to
the size of the private benefits. In this circumstance, Stulz (1999) and Coffee (1999, 2002)
have argued that managers/controlling shareholders will wish to bond themselves not to take
private benefits so as to ensure access to external capital markets.
Coffee (1999, 2002) has emphasized that one way to perform such bonding is to
cross-list the firm’s stock on an exchange that imposes higher regulatory and legal costs than
the firm’s primary exchange. In particular, listing a non-U.S. firm on the NYSE or
NASDAQ, either directly or through an ADR, requires registration with the U.S. SEC.
Doing so, provides minority shareholders (even those that purchase their shares outside the
U.S.) with substantially more legal rights than they have absent such a cross-listing. Doidge
(2003), Doidge, Karolyi and Stulz (2003), and Reese and Weisbach (2002) all examine
implications of this argument, and find evidence broadly consistent with it.
This paper synthesizes the arguments about private benefits, access to external capital,
and cross-listings in the U.S. It discusses in detail the methods used by recent studies,
focusing on five particularly important ones: Nenova (2002), Dyck and Zingales (2003a),
Doidge (2003), Doidge, Karolyi and Stulz (2003), and Reese and Weisbach (2002). It also
summarizes the evidence on a number of questions: Can we measure the value of private
benefits? How does this value vary across countries? What country-specific factors lead to
larger levels of private benefits? Are there circumstances under which managers would
voluntarily choose to commit not to pursue private benefits? How can cross-listing limit
private benefits? Is there evidence that commitment to limit private benefits is one reason
why firms cross-list in the U.S.?
2