NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY DO SOME FIRMS GIVE
STOCK OPTIONS TO ALL EMPLOYEES?:
AN EMPIRICAL EXAMINATION OF ALTERNATIVE THEORIES
Paul Oyer
Scott Schaefer
Working Paper 10222
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10222
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2004
We thank Corey Rosen and Ryan Weeden for providing the NCEO data, John Bishow, Anthony Barkume,
and John Ruser for their assistance with the BLS data, Paul Pfleiderer and Robert McDonald for their
assistance with option valuation, and Anthony Barkume, Brian Hall, Edward Lazear, Jonathan Levin, Kevin
J. Murphy, Jan Zabojnik, Jeffrey Zweibel, an anonymous referee, and participants in numerous seminars for
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Paul Oyer and Scott Schaefer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Why Do Some Firms Give Stock Options to All Employees?:
An Empirical Examination of Alternative Theories
Paul Oyer and Scott Schaefer
NBER Working Paper No. 10222
January 2004
JEL No. J31, J33, L23, M40, M50, G32
ABSTRACT
Many firms issue stock options to all employees. We consider three potential economic justifications
for this practice: providing incentives to employees, inducing employees to sort, and helping firms
retain employees. We gather data on firms' stock option grants to middle managers from three
distinct sources, and use two methods to assess which theories appear to explain observed granting
behavior. First, we directly calibrate models of incentives, sorting and retention, and ask whether
observed magnitudes of option grants are consistent with each potential explanation. Second, we
conduct a cross-sectional regression analysis of firms' option-granting choices. We reject an
incentives-based explanation for broad-based stock option plans, and conclude that sorting and
retention explanations appear consistent with the data.
Paul Oyer
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
pauloyer@stanford.edu
Scott Schaefer
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2013
s-schaefer@northwestern.edu

1 Introduction
The use of stock option grants in compensation plans for middle- and lower-level employees has
attracted ample attention in recent years. The increase in the prevalence of this practice presents
a challenge to economists interested in firms’ relations with their employees.1 Because the eventual
value of a stock option is tied to the value of a single firm, this form of compensation subjects
employees to a considerable amount of risk. In order for broad option grants to be optimal, there
must therefore be offsetting benefits. In this paper, we propose and empirically examine a number
of potential sources of benefits stemming from stock-option-based compensation.
We focus our analysis on three possible benefits to firms from stock-option usage. First, option
grants may provide incentives to employees. Linking an employee’s wealth to the value of the firm
may overcome agency problems and motivate the employee to take actions that are in the firm’s
interest. Second, option grants may induce sorting. As with any form of non-cash compensation,
potential employees may have heterogeneous assessments of the value of a firm’s option grant. We
considerthecase whereemployees differintheirbeliefs regardingthefirm’sprospects, providingan
opportunityforfirmstoreducecompensationcostsbyusingoptionstoattractoptimisticemployees.
Third, options may help firms retain employees. Any form of deferred compensation will make it
costlyforemployeestoleave. However,optionsmaybeespeciallyusefulforthispurposewhenstock
prices and labor market conditions are positively correlated because they can index employees’
deferred compensation to their outside opportunities.
We gather data from three distinct sources and seek to determine which explanation is most
consistent with the option grants we observe. Our data sources offer offsetting strengths and
weaknesses. Our first source, a survey conducted in 2000 by the National Center for Employee
Ownership (NCEO) provides detailed information regarding salary and option packages offered
to middle-level executives. However, because the NCEO surveyed only those firms it believed to
have broad-based stock option plans, this sample is not useful for exploring across-firm variation
in option-granting behavior.
Second, we randomly choose 1,000 publicly traded firms that filed both annual reports and
proxy statements with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) in calendar 1999. From
these disclosures, we gather information on the number of options granted to employees in the
1Mehran and Tracy (2001) document the increase in employee stock option grants at large, publicly traded
companies during the 1990’s.
1

preceding fiscal year. While this data source is representative and allows us to use detailed firm-
level information, the financial disclosures do not offer detailed information regarding grants made
to middle-level employees.
Our third data source is the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ (BLS) Pilot Survey of option grants
made in 1999. This survey offers fairly detailed information regarding option grants, and is also
selectedtoberepresentativeoftheU.S.economyasawhole. Themainlimitationofthisdatasource
is confidentiality — to insure high response rates, the BLS restricts researchers from learning the
identities of the individual firms that responded. Thus, we are unable to link option-granting
behavior to firm characteristics. Because of these limitations, we use the BLS data only to describe
the broad patterns of stock option usage in the U.S.
We apply two distinct empirical methods to distinguish between the theories proposed above.
First, we devise economic models of each theory, and calibrate these models using our NCEO data.
To do this, we assume the option packages observed in our NCEO data are the product of firms’
optimization over possible grant sizes. Given this, we can ask what the underlying parameters of
each model must be in order to give rise to the observed option grants. We ask, for example, what
an employee’s production function must look like if observed option packages are optimal incentive
instruments. How optimistic must employees be regarding the firm’s prospects if option grants are
driven by sorting? How large must short-run wage variation be if option grants are designed for
retention? Second, we use our SEC sample to estimate a series of regressions that relate firms’
decisions to adopt a broad-based stock option plan to firm and industry characteristics.
Our calibration of the agency model indicates that the risk premiums associated with many
firms’optiongrantsareseveralordersofmagnitudelargerthanthecosttoemployeesoftheresulting
increases in effort. This finding confirms the intuition that observed option grants are too small
to provide strong incentives for middle-level managers. We conclude that middle-manager options
are sensible for incentive purposes only under a very limited set of circumstances — namely, if
employees can take actions that have very large value implications for the firm, the costs to the
employee of taking these actions is very small, and it is extremely difficult for firms to observe
whether employees are taking these actions.
Our results are far more consistent with the assertions that sorting and retention concerns
drive broad-based stock option granting decisions. Our calibrations, for example, indicate that a
somewhat risk-averse employee who expects his firm’s stock to increase by about 25% annually
would prefer observed option-plus-salary packages to a cash-only compensation plan that costs
2