NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COMPENSATING EMPLOYEES BELOW THE EXECUTIVE RANKS:
A COMPARISON OF OPTIONS, RESTRICTED STOCK, AND CASH
Paul Oyer
Scott Schaefer
Working Paper 10221
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10221
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2004
We thank Jeremy Bulow, Rachel Hayes, Kevin J. Murphy, Madhav Rajan, Stefan Reichelstein, and Jeff
Zwiebel for valuable discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Paul Oyer and Scott Schaefer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Compensating Employees Below the Executive Ranks:
A Comparison of Options, Restricted Stock, and Cash
Paul Oyer and Scott Schaefer
NBER Working Paper No. 10221
January 2004
JEL No. J31, J33, L23, M40, M50, G32
ABSTRACT
Using a detailed data set of employee stock option grants, we compare observed stock-option-based
pay plans to hypothetical cash-only or restricted-stock-based plans. We make a variety of
assumptions regarding the possible benefits of options relative to cash or stock, and then use
observed option grants to make inferences regarding firms' decisions to issue options to lower-level
employees. If the favorable accounting treatment is the sole reason underlying firms' choices of
options over cash-only compensation, then we estimate that the median firm in our data set incurs
$0.64 in real costs in order to increase reported pre-tax income by $1. This figure is several times
larger than the willingness-to-pay for earnings reported by Erickson, Hanlon, and Maydew (2002),
who study firms that (allegedly) commit fraud in order to boost earnings. If, on the other hand, firms'
option-granting decisions are driven by economic-profit maximization, then observed stock option
grants are most consistent with explanations involving attraction and retention of employees.
Paul Oyer
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
pauloyer@stanford.edu
Scott Schaefer
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2013
s-schaefer@northwestern.edu

1 Introduction
Employee stock options have generated substantial media and political attention recently, thanks
largely to the ongoing policy debate about accounting methods for option grants. Though options
were once rarely granted below top executive levels, broad-based option plans have become more
commoninrecentyears.1 InsomesectorsoftheU.S.economy,stockoptionsappeartobethedefault
method by which firms share ownership with employees. This need not be the case, however, as
evidenced by Microsoft Corporation’s recent decision to grant restricted stock to employees instead
of stock options. This decision highlights the fact that firms face a number of alternatives to stock
options, including restricted stock and cash, as means for compensating employees.
The presence of these alternatives raises the question of why so many firms would choose
options over cash or restricted stock. Given that options impose greater risk costs on risk-averse
employees than would either cash or restricted stock, there must be benefits (or, at least, perceived
benefits to the decision maker) that offset these costs. One possibility, detailed in Hall and Murphy
(2003), is that the use of option-based pay arises from the favorable accounting treatment of option
grants. Unlike cash and stock, most options granted to lower-level employees never affect the firm’s
income statement. Hence, managers may not internalize the costs of options when making grants
to employees. Other authors, including Core and Guay (2001), Kedia and Mozumdar (2002), and
Oyer and Schaefer (2003), have argued that there may be substantial economic benefits to firms
from granting stock options broadly to employees. Options may help firms attract and retain
employees, provide incentives, or finance investment by reducing cash wage payments. If options
are selected for these reasons, however, it must be the case that options perform better on these
dimensions than would comparable cash or restricted stock compensation packages.2
Inthispaper,wecomparestockoptions,restrictedstock,andcashascompensationinstruments
forlower-levelemployees. Wefocusonthecost/benefitcomparisonmadebyadecisionmakerwithin
the firm (who may or may not have the same objective function as shareholders), and pose three
main questions. First, suppose the only benefit from any form of equity-based compensation is the
favorableaccountingtreatmentofstockoptions. Ifthisistrue,thenhowlargearetherealeconomic
costs the firm’s decision maker is willing to incur in order to achieve this accounting-only benefit?
1See Crimmel and Schildkraut (2001) and Oyer and Schaefer (2003) for detail on the incidence of broad-based
option grants.
2Whilewefocusonnon-executives,theissueofwhetheroptiongrantstotopexecutivescreatevaluehasalsobeen
widely examined. For example, Bebchuk and Fried (2003) claim that patterns in executive pay are most consistent
withtopmanagersextractingrentsfromshareholders,whileHanlon,RajgopalandShevlin(2002)arguethatexecutive
stock option grants are justified by the subsequent economic value created.
1

Second, suppose there are real economic benefits associated with equity-based compensation, but
that the benefits arising from observed option grants could also be achieved by equivalently valued
(by the employee) restricted-stock grants. Suppose further that decision makers select options over
stock grants in order to gain the favorable accounting treatment. Under this assumption, how
large are the real economic costs incurred in order to achieve this accounting-only benefit? Third,
suppose the real economic benefits associated with option-based compensation are greater than
could be achieved by equivalently valued restricted-stock grants. If this is true, then what might
this imply about the reasons underlying firms’ decisions to grant options rather than stock?
To answer these questions, we rely on data from the 2000 Survey on Current Practices in
Broad-BasedStockOptionPlanDesignconductedbytheNationalCenterforEmployeeOwnership
(NCEO). The NCEO Survey is unique in that it provides very detailed information regarding
specific compensation plans offered to individual employees. We observe, for example, the number
of options typically granted to new employees at various levels of the organization. Much prior
research on firms’ decisions to grant options broadly relies on data that is more highly aggregated,
such as that found in firms’ annual reports. These disclosures do not permit detailed analysis of
compensation contracts offered to individual employees other than top executives.
Our main findings are as follows: First, if the only benefit from equity-based compensation is
the favorable accounting treatment of stock options, then a firm’s best alternative to an observed
cash-plus-options pay plan is a cash-only plan that the employee values equivalently. Given various
assumptions regarding employee risk aversion, we can compute the cost to the firm of offering such
a cash-only plan, and compare this to the cost of offering the observed cash-plus-option-based plan.
For each firm in our data set, we compare the risk premium associated with observed option grants
to the resulting per-manager increase in the firm’s reported pre-tax income. For example, at the
median firm, observed option grants impose $3,000 in additional compensation cost per manager
annually(relativetocashcompensation), butallowthefirmtoincreasereportedearningsby$9,000
per manager. The implied marginal value of a dollar of earnings for the median firm is $0.64 —
that is, the decision maker at the median firm is willing to incur sixty-four cents in real costs (at
the margin) in order to increase reported income by $1.
Second, if in the absence of options’ favorable accounting treatment, firms would offer employ-
ees equivalently valued restricted stock packages, then the real costs of option-based pay remain
surprisingly high. For the median firm, option grants impose $1,400 in additional compensation
cost per manager annually (relative to restricted stock), but allow the firm to increase reported
income by $10,600. In this case, the implied marginal value of a dollar of earnings for the median
firm is 18 cents.
2