NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AGGREGATE SHORT INTEREST AND MARKET VALUATIONS
Owen A. Lamont
Jeremy C. Stein
Working Paper 10218
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10218
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2004
Thanks to the National Science Foundation for financial support, to Stefan Nagel and John Griffin for
providing some of the data, to Andrea Frazzini and James David for research assistance, and to Harrison
Hong, Charles Jones and Andrei Shleifer for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Owen A. Lamont and Jeremy C. Stein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Aggregate Short Interest and Market Valuations
Owen A. Lamont and Jeremy C. Stein
NBER Working Paper No. 10218
January 2004
JEL No. G12, G14
ABSTRACT
We examine some basic data on the evolution of aggregate short interest, both during the dot-com
era, and at other times in history. Total short interest moves in a countercyclical fashion. For
example, short interest in NASDAQ stocks actually declines as the NASDAQ index approaches its
peak. Moreover, this decline does not seem to reflect a substitution away from outright short-selling
and towards put options, as the ratio of put-to-call volume displays the same countercyclical
tendency. The evidence suggests that: i) arbitrageurs are reluctant to bet against aggregate
mispricings; and ii) short-selling does not play a particularly helpful role in stabilizing the overall
stock market.
Owen A. Lamont
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
owen.lamont@yale.edu
Jeremy C. Stein
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeremy_stein@harvard.edu

The spectacular rise and fall of stock prices during the recent dot-com bubble
period has been accompanied by a surge of interest in the topic of short-selling. For the
most part, this work is cross-sectional in nature, examining the causes and consequences
of short-sales constraints at the individual-stock level, and it suggests the following two
broad conclusions. First, consistent with the notion that short-selling is undertaken by
rational arbitrageurs, the demand for short positions is greatest among stocks that appear
to be overvalued—e.g., stocks that have high ratios of prices to book value. Second,
because of frictions in the market for borrowing stock, as well as various institutional
rigidities, arbitrage by would-be short-sellers is incomplete. Thus those stocks where the
demand for shorting is greatest (as measured, say, by a high premium paid to borrow the
stock for the purposes of short-selling) tend to have abnormally low future returns.1
Less attention has been paid to variation over time in aggregate short interest, and
to the role that this might have in countering market-wide sentiment. Casual intuition
might suggest that short-selling-based arbitrage would be more effective along the
aggregate dimension than it is in the cross-section. After all, while it can be difficult at
any point in time to short a minority of very overpriced stocks, most stocks are easily and
cheaply shorted. Moreover, there are other ways to get a short bet down on the aggregate
market—for example, by purchasing put options on various indices.
It turns out that this intuition is off the mark. We examine some basic data on the
evolution of aggregate short interest, both during the dot-com era, and at other times in
history. In a striking contrast to the patterns seen in the cross-section, total short interest
1 See, e.g., Joseph Chen, Harrison Hong and Jeremy Stein (2002); Gene D’Avolio (2002); Patricia Dechow
et al (2001); Charles Jones and Owen Lamont (2002); Lamont and Richard Thaler (2003); and Eli Ofek and
Matthew Richardson (2003).
1

moves in a countercyclical fashion. For example, short interest in NASDAQ stocks
actually declines as the NASDAQ index approaches its peak. Moreover, this decline
does not seem to reflect a substitution away from outright short-selling and towards put
options: the ratio of put-to-call volume displays the same countercyclical tendency. As
we discuss below, the evidence is perhaps most consistent with Andrei Shleifer and
Robert Vishny (1997), who argue that the open-end nature of most professional arbitrage
firms (i.e., the fact that investors can withdraw their funds on demand) makes it difficult
for these firms to buck aggregate mispricings. The evidence also suggests that short-
selling does not play a particularly helpful role in stabilizing the overall stock market.
I. The Data
A. The Dot-Com Bubble
Figure 1 tells our basic story for the dot-com period. We plot three series on a
monthly basis over the interval 1995-2002: i) the NASDAQ index (CRSP’s total return
index); ii) the value-weighted short-interest ratio (100 times the market value of shares
sold short, divided by the value of shares outstanding) for all NASDAQ companies; and
iii) the 60-day moving average of the Chicago Board Options Exchange’s (CBOE) daily
put-call ratio. The put-call ratio is the total CBOE trading volume in puts—including
both index options as well as options on individual NASDAQ, NYSE and AMEX
stocks—divided by the volume in calls, and we use it as an admittedly noisy proxy for
the magnitude of shorting done via options. This ratio averaged about 0.7 during the
period; we have multiplied it by four in the figure so as to fit it on the same scale as the
short-interest ratio.
2