NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXPORTING AND PERFORMANCE OF PLANTS:
EVIDENCE FROM KOREAN MANUFACTURING
Chin Hee Hahn
Working Paper 10208
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10208
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2004
The author would like to thank James Harrigan, Kyoji Fukao, and other seminar participants at the Fourteenth
NBER East Asian Seminar on Economics (Taipei, September 5-7, 2003) for helpful comments and
suggestions, and Yonghun Jung of KDI for excellent research assistance. This paper is forthcoming in the
book “International Trade,” NBER EASE Volume 14. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Chin Hee Hahn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Exporting and Performance of Plants: Evidence from Korean Manufacturing
Chin Hee Hahn
NBER Working Paper No. 10208
January 2004
JEL No. F1, O1, O4
ABSTRACT
This study examines the relationship between exporting and various performance measures
including total factor productivity, using the annual plant-level panel data on Korean manufacturing
sector during the period of 1990 to 1998. The two key questions examined are whether exporting
improves productivity (learning) and/or whether more productive plants export (self-selection). This
study provides evidence supporting both self-selection and learning-by-exporting effects, with both
effects being more pronounced at around the time of entry into and exit from the export market.
Thus, positive and robust cross-sectional correlation between exporting and total factor productivity
is accounted for by both selection and learning effects. These results are in contrast with Aw, Chung,
and Roberts (2000) who do not find any strong evidence of self-selection or learning in Korea.
Similar effects are observed when shipments or employment is considered as a performance
measure. Overall, this study suggests that the benefits from exporting have been realized not only
through resource reallocation channel but also TFP channel in Korea.
Chin Hee Hahn
Research Fellow
Korea Development Institute
P.O. Box 113 Cheongryangri Dong
Seoul 130-012 Korea
chhahn@kdi.re.kr

1. Introduction
It has been a widely accepted view that international trade and international
openness play a key role in enhancing the growth rates of output and income. As a prime
example, the past economic successes of Korea and several other East Asian countries
have often been attributed, to a large extent, to the export-oriented development strategy.
The World Bank (1993) points to the export-promotion development strategy as the
hallmark of the East Asian miracle countries. Also, Krueger (1995) argues that the most
salient distinguishing characteristic between the success of East Asian countries and the
stalled growth of Latin American countries is the openness of international trading regime;
i.e., outer-oriented trade strategy of the former versus import substitution development
strategy of the latter. Even in recent years, many developing countries, including Korea,
promote export based on the belief that exporting activity per se is valuable, bringing
additional economic benefits. There is little disagreement on the static gains from trade in
the form of improved resource allocation and economic well-being. However, the dynamic
relationship between increased trade and long-run output and productivity growth is less
well understood.
This study examines the relationship between exporting and productivity using the
plant level panel data on the Korean manufacturing sector during the period of 1990 to
1998. The two key questions to be addressed are whether exporting improves productivity
and whether more productive plants export. To consider the possibility that the benefits of
exporting accrue through channels other than productivity, other measures of plant
performance, such as shipment and employment, are also considered in the analysis.
There are numerous studies supporting that exporters are better than non-exporters
2

in terms of various performance measures. That is, exporting plants are more productive,
larger, more capital intensive, more technologically sophisticated, and pay higher wages
compared with those plants producing for domestic market only.1 While these studies
provided an important stepping stone toward understanding the export-performance nexus,
they do not by themselves suggest that exporting activity brings medium- to long-run
technological and other benefits over and above the static gains from trade. That is,
exporters might be better than non-exporters before they started exporting due to factors
other than exporting activity itself. Thus, in order to understand the role of international
openness or, more narrowly, the role of exporting in growth of productivity and output, it
is necessary to understand the causal relationship between exporting and performance
measures including productivity.
There are broadly two strands of theoretical explanations for the positive cross-
sectional correlation between exporting and productivity. One explanation is that more
productive plants self-select into the export market. In this case, causality runs from
productivity to exporting. The usual argument is based on the existence of sunk entry cost
associated with export market participation (Bernard and Jensen 1999a). In order to sell
goods abroad, producers might have to incur additional costs, such as transport costs,
modification costs to meet foreign tastes and regulations, and setup costs to establish
distribution network. With these costs present, only productive producers will be able to
expect to recoup the entry cost after entering the foreign market.2 Alternative explanation
1 These studies include Aw and Hwang (1995), Aw and Batra (1998), Chen and Tang(1987),
Haddad (1993), Handoussa, Nishimizu and Page (1986), Tybout and Westbrook (1995), Aw, Chen
and Roberts (2001), Aw, Chung, and Roberts (2000), Bernard and Jensen (1995), and Bernard and
Wagner (1997).
2 The existence of sunk cost is not essential feature to explain self-selection. See Clerides, Lach,
and Tybout (1998).
3