NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INVESTOR BEHAVIOR AND THE OPTION MARKET
Josef Lakonishok
Inmoo Lee
Allen M. Poteshman
Working Paper 10264
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10264
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2004
We thank Joe Levin, Eileen Smith, and Dick Thaler for assistance with the data used in this paper. We are
extremely grateful to Phil Teuscher for a number of extensive discussions about the workings of the equity
option market. We also appreciate helpful comments from Nicholas Barberis, Eric Gettleman, Jun Pan, and
seminar participants at the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, the 2003 Allied Korean
Finance Association Meetings, and the Fall 2003 NBER behavioral finance meeting. Lee acknowledges
financial support by the SK Research Fund at Korea University Business School. We bear full responsibility
for any remaining errors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Josef Lakonishok, Inmoo Lee, and Allen M. Poteshman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Investor Behavior in the Option Market
Josef Lakonishok, Inmoo Lee, and Allen M. Poteshman
NBER Working Paper No. 10264
January 2004
JEL No. G1
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the behavior of investors in the equity option market using a unique and
detailed dataset of open interest and volume for all contracts listed on the Chicago Board Options
Exchange over the 1990 through 2001 period. We document major stylized facts about the option
market activity of three types of non-market maker investors over this time period and also
investigate how their trading changed during the stock market bubble of the late 1990s and early
2000. Our key findings are: (1) non-market maker investors have about four times more long call
than long put open interest, (2) these investors have more short than long open interest in both calls
and puts, (3) each type of investor purchases more calls to open brand new positions when the return
on underlying stocks are higher over horizons ranging from one week to two years into the past, (4)
the least sophisticated group of investors substantially increased their purchases of calls on growth
but not value stocks during the stock market bubble of the late 1990s and early 2000, and (5) none
of the investor groups significantly increased their purchases of puts during the bubble period in
order to overcome short sales constraints in the stock market.
Josef Lakonishok Allen M. Poteshman
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
340 Wohlers Hall 340 Wohlers Hall
1206 South Sixth Street 1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820 Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER poteshma@uiuc.edu
josefla@uiuc.edu
Inmoo Lee
Korea University
1, 5-ga Anam-dong, Sungbuk-gu
Seoul, 136-701
Korea
inmoo@korea.ac.kr

1. Introduction
The seminal work of Black and Scholes (1972) and Merton (1973) generated an
explosion of research into methods for computing theoretical option prices and hedge ratios. By
contrast, relatively little is known about the trading of this important class of securities. This
paper uses a unique option dataset to investigate investor behavior in the equity option market.
There are two main goals. The first is to document major empirical facts about the option market
activity of different types of investors. The second is to investigate changes in option market
activity during the stock market bubble of the late 1990s and early 2000.
The dataset contains detailed daily open interest and volume information for each equity
option listed at the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) from 1990 through 2001. All of
the data are broken down by different types of investors: firm proprietary traders, customers of
full-service brokers, and customers of discount brokers. The open interest data provide both long
and short positions for each investor type. The volume data are classified according to whether
an investor type is buying or selling and also according to whether the investor type establishes
brand new option positions or closes existing ones. Most other datasets, by contrast, provide
only aggregate daily open interest and volume for each option.1
Our analysis begins by determining the average daily long and short, put and call open
interest for different types of investors and various categories of stocks such as large
capitalization stocks and value and growth stocks. We also compute for the different investor
types and categories of stocks average daily volume of purchases and sales of both calls and puts
1 The Berkeley Options Database and the CBOE MDR data provide time-stamped trade-by-trade information on
option transactions. They do not, however, break down option volume by different investor types or according to
whether it is being used to open a new option position or close an existing one. They also do not indicate whether
option transactions are buyer or seller initiated – although an approximate classification into buyer and seller
initiated can be achieved through the use of the Lee and Ready (1991) algorithm.
1

that open new positions. Next, each of these four volume categories is regressed on the
underlying stock returns over various past horizons, underlying stock book-to-market (BM)
ratios, and underlying stock volatilities in order to understand the factors that drive option market
activity. We also use the regression results to investigate the impact on daily option volume of
shocks to the independent variables. The analyses are first performed over our entire sample
period from 1990-2001 and then over subperiods to see how option trading changed over time.
We are especially interested in changes in the behavior of the different investor types during the
stock market bubble of the late 1990s and early 2000.
Our first set of finding about option market activity pertains to the entire sample period
from 1990 through 2001. We summarize several of them here. First, non-market maker
investors have about four times more long call than long put open interest. Second, for both calls
and puts the three investor types in aggregate have more short than long open interest. Third, the
differences in open interest and trading volume across options with underlying growth and value
stocks are small. Fourth, all investor types buy more calls to open new positions after positive
returns on underlying stocks at horizons from one week to two years in the past. For the most
part, a similar relation also holds between past returns and the selling of new calls and the buying
and selling of new puts. A noteworthy exception, however, is that sales of puts to open new
short positions are negatively related to returns on the underlying stock for short horizons up to
one quarter in the past.
Given the diversity of the participants and the complexity of the instruments in the
option market, there are surely a number of factors which yield the empirical regularities that we
document. Although formal testing for the contributions of various factors lies beyond the scope
of this paper, when presenting our findings we do make some suggestions about what might be
2