NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LEGISLATIVE REPRESENTATION, BARGAINING POWER,
AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF FEDERAL FUNDS:
EVIDENCE FROM THE U.S. SENATE
Brian Knight
Working Paper 10385
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10385
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2004
Thanks to Dhammika Dharmapala for helpful comments on an early draft of this paper and to semimar
participants at the Public Choice Society, the Constitutional Design Conference, University of Pennsylvania,
and Columbia University. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Brian Knight. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Legislative Representation, Bargaining Power, and the Distribution of Federal Funds:
Evidence from the U.S. Senate
Brian Knight
NBER Working Paper No. 10385
March 2004
JEL No. D7, H7
ABSTRACT
While representation in the U.S. House is based upon state population, each state has an equal
number (two) of U.S. Senators. Thus, relative to the state delegations in the U.S. House, small
population states are provided disproportionate bargaining power in the U.S. Senate. This paper
provides new evidence on the role of this small state bargaining power in the distribution of federal
funds using data on projects earmarked in appropriations bills between 1995 and 2003. Relative to
earmarks secured in House appropriations bills, Senate earmarks exhibit a small state advantage that
is both economically and statistically significant. The paper also examines two theoretically-
motivated channels through which this small state advantage operates: increased proposal power
through appropriations committee representation and the lower cost of securing votes due to smaller
federal tax shares. Taken together, these two channels explain over 80 percent of the measured small
state bias. Finally, a welfare analysis demonstrates the inefficiency of hte measured small state bias.
Brian Knight
Brown University
Department of Economics, Box B
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
brian_knight@brown.edu

1 Introduction
In the U.S. Senate, each state has two delegates regardless of state population, providing small
population states with disproportionate representation on a per-capita basis.1 Wyoming, the
state with the smallest population, currently has over 70 times the per-capita representation of
California, the state with the largest population. This divergence is expected to become only
more severe in the coming years; according to projections by the Census Bureau, three of the
largeststatesbycurrentpopulationmeasures(California, Texas, andFlorida)arealsoexpected
to be among the fastest growing states. While Senate delegations are fixed, delegation sizes
in the U.S. House, by contrast, are much more closely aligned with state population and are
adjusted every ten years to reflect changes in population across states.
Many have hypothesized that this disproportionate political power for small states in the
U.S. Senate should translate into higher levels of federal spending being located in these states.
Morespecifically,researchershaveinvestigatedapossiblelinkbetweenper-capitafederalspend-
ing and per-capita representation in the U.S. Senate. While both Atlas et. al. (1995) and
Lee(1998)reportstatistically significantrelationships, the magnitude of theserelationshipsare
relatively weak from an economic perspective.
This paper provides several contributions to this existing literature. First, unlike the ex-
isting literature, the hypothesized relationship between representation and the distribution of
federal funds is formally derived from a theoretical legislative bargaining model modified to
allow for variable delegation sizes. Due to the common pool tax base, which provides incen-
tives for agenda-setters to minimize coalition sizes, and the disproportionate political power
afforded small states in the U.S. Senate, the theoretical model predicts a bargaining advantage
for small states, defined as a positive relationship between delegates per-capita and federal
spending per-capita. In addition, this model provides a theoretical foundation for the per-
capita normalizations that have been employed in the existing literature. The model also
identifies two channels underlying this small-state bargaining advantage: after adjusting for
1Of course, other central legislatures, such as those of Brazil and the European Union, also provide small
jurisdictions with representation disproportionate to their populations.
2

population differences, small states are both more likely to be represented on relevant Congres-
sional committees (the proposal-power channel) and are more attractive coalition partners due
to their lower federal tax liabilities (the vote-yield channel). Given that measures of these two
underlying channels are readily available, one canempirically gauge the relative contribution of
these two factors to a small-state bargaining advantage in the U.S. Senate. Finally, a welfare
analysis examines the efficiency properties of the observed small state bias.
In addition to these theoretically-based contributions, the project-based data on the cross-
state allocation of federal funds are richer than those used in previous studies and thus afford
several empirical contributions. First, previous studies have tended to use highly aggregated
data that include federal spending programs, such as Social Security, that are difficult for Con-
gressionaldelegationstogeographicallymanipulate. Theprojectsstudiedherewereearmarked
in Congressional appropriations bills and were thus more easily manipulated by delegations,
providing more accurate estimates of small state bias in the U.S. Senate. While these types
of projects seem a reasonable focus in a test for the effects of Senate representation, it is im-
portant to note that the results in this paper can be generalized to only the subset of federal
spending programs for which Congress has significant influence over the geographic allocation.
Regarding the second empirical contribution, the data identify a sponsoring chamber (House
or Senate), allowing for more accurate estimates of the small-state bias in the U.S. Senate
as well as a means for controlling for unobserved state characteristics. Using this previously
untapped data source, the preliminary results demonstrate relationships between per-capita
federal spending and per-capita Senate representation that are much stronger than those found
using the data and methods in the existing literature.
This paper also provides a justification, at least in part, for recent worldwide movements
towards decentralization of the public sector. If political factors, rather than economic fun-
damentals, determine the geographic allocation of public goods under centralized provision,
public goods may be over-provided in politically powerful states (small states in this instance)
and under-provided in politically weak states. Thus, the centralized provision of local public
goods may entail inefficiencies. Under decentralized provision, by contrast, states are forced to
3