NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LABOR PRODUCTIVITY IN THE UNITED STATES AND THE UNITED KINGDOM
DURING THE NINETEENTH CENTURY
Stephen N. Broadberry
Douglas A. Irwin
Working Paper 10364
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10364
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2004
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2004 by Stephen N. Broadberry and Douglas A. Irwin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Labor Productivity in the United States and the United Kingdom During the Nineteenth Century
Stephen N. Broadberry and Douglas A. Irwin
NBER Working Paper No. 10364
March 2004
JEL No. N10, N30, O47, O57
ABSTRACT
A number of writers have recently questioned whether labor productivity or per capita
incomes were ever higher in the United Kingdom than in the United States. We show that although
the United States already had a substantial labor productivity lead in industry as early as 1840,
especially in manufacturing, labor productivity was broadly equal in the two countries in agriculture,
while the United Kingdom was ahead in services. Hence aggregate labor productivity was higher
in the United Kingdom, particularly since the United States had a larger share of the labor force in
low value-added agriculture. U.S. overtaking occurred decisively only during the 1890s, as labor
productivity pulled ahead in services and the share of agricultural employment declined
substantially. Labor force participation was lower in the United States, so that the United Kingdom’s
labor productivity advantage in the mid-nineteenth century translated into a larger per capita income
lead.
Stephen N.Broadberry Douglas A. Irwin
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of Warwick Dartmouth College
Coventry CV4 7AL, UK Hanover, NH 03755
s.n.broadberry@warwick.ac.uk and NBER
douglas.irwin@dartmouth.edu

2
I. INTRODUCTION
A number of writers have recently questioned whether labor productivity and per
capita incomes were ever higher in the United Kingdom than in the United States
(Prados de la Escosura, 2000; Ward and Devereux, 2003). Although previous work by
Broadberry (1998) calculated sectoral differences in output per worker in the United
Kingdom and the United States from 1870 to 1990, and confirmed that US overtaking
occurred during the 1890s, this work was based on time series projections from a
1937 benchmark. That study was able to check the time series projections against a
sectoral benchmark for 1910, but no attempt was made to provide any additional
checks for the nineteenth century.
This paper addresses more directly the issue of comparative productivity
levels in the United Kingdom and the United States during the nineteenth century, by
using time series projection from a 1910 benchmark, and using an 1850 benchmark as
an additional cross-check. We provide results for the period from 1910 back to 1840
for the overall economy together with a full three-sector breakdown for the period
1840-1910, based on agriculture, industry, and services, as well as a more detailed
breakdown of industry into manufacturing, mining and construction. However, due to
limitations in the pre-1870 data, we have provided a more detailed breakdown of
comparative productivity in the service sector into transport and public utilities,
distribution, other private services and government, only for the period 1870-1910.
We show that although the United States already had a substantial labor
productivity lead in industry as early as 1840, especially in manufacturing, labor
productivity was broadly equal in the two countries in agriculture, while the United

3
Kingdom was ahead in services. Hence aggregate labor productivity was higher in the
United Kingdom, particularly since the United States had a larger share of the labor
force in low value-added agriculture. U.S. overtaking occurred decisively only during
the 1890s, as labor productivity pulled ahead in services and the share of agricultural
employment declined substantially.
In addition, the proportion of the population in the labor force was higher in
the United Kingdom than in the United States, reinforcing the U.K.’s per capita
income lead that resulted from its labor productivity advantage in the mid-nineteenth
century. The rise in the share of the population in the U.S. labor force after 1880, as
well as the improvement in overall labor productivity, enabled the United States to
attain per capita income leadership early in the twentieth century.
II. COMPARATIVE LABOR PRODUCTIVITY, 1840-1910: DATA SOURCES
AND OVERVIEW
In this section we utilize time-series data on output and employment in the United
Kingdom and the United States to establish comparative productivity levels back to
circa 1840 by extrapolation from a circa 1910 benchmark. The sectors are agriculture
(farming, fishing, forestry), industry (mining, manufacturing and construction) and
services (including transportation and public utilities, distribution, finance and other
private services and government). The data are provided in Appendix 1, together with
detailed sources.
1. U.S. Time Series of Output and Employment