NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PUBLIC DEBT MANAGEMENT IN BRAZIL
Francesco Giavazzi
Alessandro Missale
Working Paper 10394
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10394
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2004
‘
We thank Fernando Blanco and Santiago Herrera who provided valuable information and data on the
Brazilian Economy. We are grateful to Alfonso Bevilaqua and Paulo Levy for insightful discussions on the
effect of GDP growth and inflation on the primary surplus. We thank Carlo Favero for many comments and
suggestions. We also benefited from comments of participants in the seminars at the Brazilian Ministry of
Finance, the Cental Bank of Brazil and IPEA. Marco Aiol6 and Andrea Civelli provided excellent research
assistance. Financial support from the World Bank is gratefully acknowledged. The authors are associated
with Universita di Milano; IGIER-Universita Bocconi, NBER and CEPR, respectively. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Francesco Giavazzi and Alessandro Missale. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Public Debt Management in Brazil
Francesco Giavazzi and Alessandro Missale
NBER Working Paper No. 10394
March 2004
JEL No. E63, H63
ABSTRACT
This paper derives the optimal composition of the Brazilian public debt by looking at the relative
impact of the risk and cost of alternative debt instruments on the probability of missing the
stabilization target. This allows to price risk against the expected cost of debt service and thus to find
the optimal combination along the trade off between cost and risk minimization. The optimal debt
structure is a function of the expected return differentials between debt instruments, of the
conditional variance of debt returns and of their covariances with output growth, inflation,
exchange-rate depreciation and the Selic rate. We estimate the relevant covariances by: i) exploiting
the daily survey of expectations; ii) simulating a small structural model of the Brazilian economy
under different shocks; iii) estimating the unanticipated components of the relevant variables with
forecasting regressions. The empirical evidence suggests that a large share of the Brazilian debt
should be indexed to the price level. Fixed-rate bonds should be preferred to Selic indexed bonds,
while the share of dollar denominated (and indexed) bonds should be further reduced from the
current high level.his paper derives the optimal composition of the Brazilian public debt by looking
at the relative impact of the risk and cost of alternative debt instruments on the probability of
missing the stabilization target. This allows to price risk against the expected cost of debt service
and thus to find the optimal combination along the trade off between cost and risk minimization. The
optimal debt structure is a function of the expected return differentials between debt instruments,
of the conditional variance of debt returns and of their covariances with output growth, inflation,
exchange-rate depreciation and the Selic rate. We estimate the relevant covariances by: i) exploiting
the daily survey of expectations; ii) simulating a small structural model of the Brazilian economy
under different shocks; iii) estimating the unanticipated components of the relevant variables with
forecasting regressions. The empirical evidence suggests that a large share of the Brazilian debt
should be indexed to the price level. Fixed-rate bonds should be preferred to Selic indexed bonds,
while the share of dollar denominated (and indexed) bonds should be further reduced from the
current high level.
Francesco Giavazzi Alessandro Missale
IGIER Dip. di Economica Politica e Aziendale
Universita' L.Bocconi Via Conservatorio 7
5, via Salasco 20122 Milano
20136 - Milano ITALY Italy
and NBER alessandro.missale@unimi.it
francesco.giavazzi@unibocconi.it

1. Introduction
There are many different views as to the objectives of debt management but in the
case of Brazil the paramount objective of debt management should be that of reducing the
country’s fiscal vulnerability.1 This calls for funding at low cost but also for minimizing
the risk of large interest payments due to unexpected changes in interest rates and/or in
the exchange rate.2 Risk minimization is accomplished, as shown by Goldfajn (1998), by
choosingdebtinstrumentswhichbothensurealowvolatilityofreturnsandprovideahedge
against fluctuations in the primary budget, in the interest payments and in the value of the
other liabilities.
In this paper we present a simple model where debt management helps to stabilize the
debt ratio and thus reduces the probability of a debt crisis. Reducing the uncertainty ofthe
debt ratio, for any expected cost of debt service, is valuable in that it lowers the probability
that the fiscal adjustment may fail because of a bad shock to the budget.
Theoptimaldebtcompositionisderivedbylookingattherelativeimpactoftheriskand
cost of alternative debt instruments on the probability of missing the stabilization target.
This allows to price risk against the expected cost of debt service and thus to find the
optimal combination along the trade off between cost and risk minimization.
Theoptimaldebtstructureisthusafunctionoftheexpectedreturndifferentialsbetween
debt instruments, of the conditional variance of debt returns and of their covariances with
output growth, inflation, exchange-rate depreciation and the Selic rate. We estimate the
relevant covariances with three alternative methods. The first approach exploits the daily
survey of expectations on GDP growth, inflation, the exchange rate and the Selic rate. The
second method relies on a small structural model of the Brazilian economy estimated on
monthlydatafortheperiod1999:03-2003:07. Theone-yearaheadunanticipatedcomponents
of the Selic rate, exchange-rate depreciation, inflation and output growth are estimated
as the 12-month cumulated impulse responses of these variables to shocks to inflation,
the output gap and the EMBI spread. The third approach approximates the one-year
ahead unanticipated components of the relevant variables using the residuals of forecasting
regressions run on quarterly data for the period 1995:3-2003:1.
The empirical evidence suggests that a large share of the Brazilian debt should be
indexed to the price level. Price indexation should be preferred to Selic-rate indexation
while the share of dollar denominated (and indexed) bonds should be further reduced from
the current high level.3 These policy prescriptions appear robust to alternative methods
of estimating the optimal debt structure. The share of fixed-rate bonds should also be
increased. Fixed-rate debt avoids large interest payments when the Selic rate rises during
a crisis or reacts to negative supply shocks and thus when debt stabilization is endangered
by slow output growth. Because of their short maturity, below two years, fixed-rate bonds
1See Missale(1999) for a review of theliterature onthe objectivesof debt management.
2See, Garcia (2002).
3For a similar conclusion in favor of price indexation see Bevilaqua and Garcia (2002). Goldfajn (1998)
also hardly finds an explanation for thehighshare of foreign-denominated debt.
2

ensure a sufficiently fast reduction of debt servicing costs in the event of a rapid fall in
interestrates. Ifthetermpremiumrequiredonfixed-ratebondsisnottoohigh,issuingsuch
bonds in exchange for Selic indexed bonds increases the probability of debt stabilization.
We provide evidence on the term premium which suggests that such a strategy is indeed
optimal.
The empirical evidence strongly supports the funding strategy of Brazilian Treasury
in 2003 of relying heavily on fixed-rate LTN bonds. It also supports its recent decision
to revitalize the market for price-indexed bonds with the new NTN-B program of IPCA
indexation. Althoughthe exposure to exchange rateriskhas been reducedin2003, itisstill
large suggesting that more efforts should be made to reduce issuance of bonds denominated
in foreign currencies.
2. The government problem
In this section we present a simple model where debt management helps to stabilize
the debt ratio and thus reduces the probability of a debt crisis. Debt stabilization calls for
funding at low cost but also for minimizing the risk of large payments due to unexpected
changes in interest rates and the exchange rate. Hence, the choice of debt instruments
trades off the risk and the expected cost of debt service.
Risk minimization is accomplished by choosing debt instruments which both ensure a
low return variability and provide a hedge against variations in the primary budget, and
in the returns of the other liabilities (see e.g. Goldfajn 1998). Reducing the uncertainty
of the debt ratio, for any expected cost of debt service, is valuable in that it lowers the
probability that debt stabilization may fail because of bad shocks to the budget. This
strategy is consistent with the asset-and-liability management approach adopted by the
Brazilian Treasury (see Tesouro Nacional 2003a).
Toprovideinsuranceagainstvariationsintheprimarysurplusandthedebtratio, public
bonds should be indexed to nominal GDP. However, this would be a costly innovation.
Indeed, a high premium would have to be paid: for insurance; for the illiquidity of the
market and; for the delay in the release of GDP data and their revisions. Therefore, we
focusonthemainfundinginstrumentsthatarecurrentlyavailabletotheBrazilianTreasury:
bonds indexed to the Selic rate (LFT), fixed-rate bonds (LTN), bonds indexed to the IPG-
M price index (NTN-C) or to the IPCA index (NTN-B), domestic bonds indexed to the
US dollar and external debt denominated in foreign currency. (We refer to the latter two
instruments as dollar denominated bonds in what follows.)
The aim of the government is to stabilize the debt ratio, B . To this end, the govern-
t
ment decides a fiscal correction taking into account the realization of debt returns, output,
inflation and the exchange rate.4 However, since the outcome of the government’s efforts is
uncertain (and the fiscal adjustment is costly) a crisis cannot be prevented with certainty.
Denoting the outcome of the fiscal adjustment (in terms of GDP) with A X, a debt
t+1
−
crisis arises if the debt ratio increases:
BT A +X >B (1)
t+1 t+1 t
−
4The choice of the government can be modeled by assuming that it wheighs the cost of the adjustment
against the probability of debt default. The formal analysis of the government problem is not carried out
sinceit doesnotaffect the resultsfor debt management.
3