NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FLIGHT TO QUALITY, FLIGHT TO LIQUIDITY,
AND THE PRICING OF RISK
Dimitri Vayanos
Working Paper 10327
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10327
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2004
I thank Viral Acharya, John Cox, Xavier Gabaix, Denis Gromb, Tim Johnson, Leonid Kogan, Pete Kyle,
Jonathan Lewellen, Hong Liu, Stew Myers, Jun Pan, Anna Pavlova, Steve Ross, Jiang Wang, Wei Xiong,
Jeff Zwiebel, seminar participants at Amsterdam, Athens, Caltech, LSE, LBS, Michigan, MIT, NYU,
Princeton, Stockholm, Toulouse, UBC, UCLA, UT Austin, Washington University, and participants at the
Econometric Society 2003 Summer Meetings, for helpful comments. I am especially grateful to Jeremy Stein
for discussions that helped define this project, and for insightful comments in later stages. Jiro Kondo
provided excellent research assistance. Financial support for this research came from the MIT/Merrill Lynch
partnership. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Dimitri Vayanos. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Flight to Quality, Flight to Liquidity, and the Pricing of Risk
Dimitri Vayanos
NBER Working Paper No. 10327
February 2004
JEL No. G1, G2
ABSTRACT
We propose a dynamic equilibrium model of a multi-asset market with stochastic volatility and
transaction costs. Our key assumption is that investors are fund managers, subject to withdrawals
when fund performance falls below a threshold. This generates a preference for liquidity that is time-
varying and increasing with volatility. We show that during volatile times, assets' liquidity premia
increase, investors become more risk averse, assets become more negatively correlated with
volatility, assets' pairwise correlations can increase, and illiquid assets' market betas increase.
Moreover, an unconditional CAPM can understate the risk of illiquid assets because these assets
become riskier when investors are the most risk averse.
Dimitri Vayanos
Sloan School of Management
MIT
50 Memorial Drive, E52-437
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
dimitriv@mit.edu

1 Introduction
Financial assets differ in their liquidity (i.e., the ease at which they can be transacted), and an
important question is how liquidity affects asset prices. One way to get at this question is to
measure the price differential (liquidity premium) between two assets of different liquidity but very
similar other characteristics. Many examples of such asset pairs come from the government bond
market. Consider, for instance, a just-issued (on-the-run) thirty-year US Treasury bond, and a
thirty-year bond issued three months ago (off-the-run). The two bonds are very similar in terms of
1
cash flows, but the on-the-run bond is significantly more liquid than its off-the-run counterpart.
The analysis of liquid/illiquid asset pairs reveals that liquidity premia vary considerably over
time, widening dramatically during extreme market episodes. A term often used to characterize
these episodes is flight to liquidity, suggestive of the notion that investors experience a sudden and
strong preference for holding liquid assets. An example of such an episode is the 1998 financial
crisis. During the crisis, the yield spread between off- and on-the-run thirty-year US Treasury
bonds increased to 24 basis points (bp), from a pre-crisis value of 4bp. Similar increases occurred
2
in other on-the-run spreads, as well as in other spreads for which liquidity plays some role.
An important factor driving the variation in liquidity premia seems to be the extent of un-
certainty in the market. For example, during the 1998 crisis there was a dramatic increase in
3
uncertainty, as measured by the implied volatilities of key financial indices. A link between liq-
4
uidity premia and volatility has also been empirically documented for less extreme times.
In this paper, we propose an equilibrium model in which (i) assets differ in their liquidity, and
(ii) the extent of uncertainty, represented by the volatility of asset payoffs, is stochastic. Our model
generates liquidity premia that are time-varying and increasing with volatility. Thus, times of high
volatility are associated with a flight to liquidity.
1For example, Sundaresan (1997, pp.16-18) reports that trading volume for on-the-run bonds is about ten times
aslargeasfortheiroff-the-runcounterparts. SeealsoBoudoukhandWhitelaw(1991),whodocumenttheon-the-run
phenomenoninJapan,andWarga(1992),Krishnamurthy(2002),andGoldreich,Hanke,andNath(2003),whostudy
the yield spread between off- and on-the-run bonds.
2Forexample, theon-the-runfive-yearspreadincreasedfrom7bpto28bp, theten-year spreadfrom6bpto16bp,
and the ten-year spread in the UK from 6bp to 18bp. The spread between AA-rated corporate bonds (for which
default plays only a minor role) and government bonds increased from 80bp to 150bp in the US, and from 60bp
to 120bp in the UK. For more information, and a comprehensive description of the crisis, see the report by the
Committee on the Global Financial System (CGFS (1999)).
3According to CGFS (1999), the implied volatility of the S&P500 index increased from 23% to 43%, that of the
FTSE100 index from 27% to 48%, that of the three-month US eurodollar rate from 8% to 33%, and that of the
thirty-year US T-bond rate from 7% to 14%.
4For example, Kamara (1994) considers the yield spread between T-notes and T-bills with matched maturities.
Heshowsthatthespread(whichismainlyduetothenotes’lowerliquidity)iscorrelatedwithinterest-ratevolatility.
(SeealsoAmihudandMendelson(1991)andStrebulaev(2003).) Longstaff(2002)considerstheyieldspreadbetween
the securities of Refcorp, a US government agency, and Treasury securities. He shows that the spread (which is
mainly due to the lower liquidity of the Refcorp securities) is correlated with a consumer confidence index.
1

In our model, times of high volatility are associated with several other interesting phenomena,
often mentioned in the context of financial crises. We show that during volatile times, investors’
effectiveriskaversionincreases. Thus, thereisaflighttoquality, inthesensethattheriskpremium
investors require per unit of volatility increases. We also show that assets become more negatively
correlated with volatility, and can also become more correlated with each other. Moreover, illiquid
assets become riskier, in the sense that their market betas increase. Some of these phenomena
have been documented anecdotally or empirically, and some are new and testable predictions of
5
our model. To our knowledge, our model is the first to show that all these phenomena are related,
and are also related to flight to liquidity.
Finally, ourmodelhastheimplicationthatonecostofilliquidityistomakeanassetriskier, and
more sensitive to the volatility. We also show that an unconditional CAPM can understate the risk
of illiquid assets because of this risk’s time-varying nature: illiquid assets become riskier in volatile
times,wheninvestorsarethemostriskaverse. Thishasimplicationsforevaluatingtheperformance
of strategies investing in illiquid assets: if performance is evaluated under an unconditional CAPM,
6
the strategies could appear better than they actually are.
We consider a continuous-time, infinite-horizon economy with one riskless and multiple risky
assets. The riskless rate is exogenous and constant over time. The risky assets’ dividend processes
are exogenous, and are characterized by a common volatility parameter which evolves according to
a square-root process. The volatility parameter is the key state variable in our model.
The risky assets differ in their liquidity. To model liquidity, we assume that each asset carries
an exogenous transaction cost. These costs differ across assets, and could arise for reasons outside
the model such as asymmetric information, market-maker inventory costs, search, etc. We assume
that transaction costs are constant over time. Thus, the time-varying liquidity premia arise not
because of the transaction costs, but because of the investors’ willingness to bear these costs.
Our key assumption is in the modelling of investors. We assume that investors are fund man-
agers, managing wealth on behalf of the individuals who own it. Managers receive an exogenous
fee which depends on the amount of wealth under management. They are facing, however, the
probability that the individuals investing in the fund might withdraw their wealth at any time.
Withdrawals occur both for random reasons, and when a fund’s performance falls below an ex-
5Section 5 presents the empirical evidence. Anecdotal evidence for increased risk aversion during volatile times
can be found in the CGFS (1999) report. In page 6, the report describes investment decisions at the onset of the
1998 crisis as follows: “More fundamentally, investment decisions reflected some combination of an upward revision
touncertaintysurroundingtheexpectedfuturepricesoffinancialinstruments... andareducedtoleranceforbearing
risk.”Thedramaticincreasesintheyieldsofspeculative-gradecorporatebondsandemergingmarketbondsduringthe
crisiscanalsobe viewed asevidence forincreased riskaversion. Flight-to-quality phenomenaarehardtorationalize
withinafrictionlessrepresentative-investormodel,becauseriskaversionisdrivenbypreferencesandshouldbestable
over short time intervals.
6Strategies long on illiquid assets were followed by many hedge funds prior to the 1998 crisis.
2