NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATIONS AND ENDOGENOUS CHANGES
IN U.S. LEGAL INSTITUTIONS, 1790-1920
B. Zorina Khan
Working Paper 10346
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10346
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2004
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by B. Zorina Khan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Technological Innovations and Endogenous Changes in U.S. Legal Institutions, 1790-1920
B. Zorina Khan
NBER Working Paper No. 10346
March 2004
JEL No. N4, O3
ABSTRACT
Recent scholarship highlights the importance of institutions to the processes of economic growth,
but the precise nature of their relationship bears further examination. This paper considers how the
evolution of legal institutions has contributed to, and in turn been affected by, major technological
innovations. The first section of the paper examines the U.S. intellectual property system. Patent and
copyright laws, and their interpretation and enforcement by the federal judiciary, certainly
influenced the course of technical and cultural change, but it is clear that they did not develop
independently of the state of technology and of the economy. Both the statutes and their
interpretations altered in response to the introduction and diffusion of new technologies. The second
section explores in more detail the impact of some of these technological innovations -- including
steamboats, railroads, telegraphy, medical technologies, and automobiles -- on the common law,
regulation and insurance. Such technological advances often led to institutional bottlenecks, which
then required accommodations in legal rules and their enforcement. Although the common law had
some capability for economizing on legal adjustment costs through "adjudication by analogy," the
socio-economic changes wrought by major innovations ultimately produced more fundamental
change in legal institutions, such as shifts in the relative importance of state and federal policies, and
in the degree of reliance on regulation by bureaucracy. In sum, the historical record of the evolution
of legal rules and standards in the United States indicates a remarkable degree of flexibility as such
institutions responded to changing economic circumstances.
B. Zorina Khan
9700 College Station
Department of Economics
Bowdoin College
Brunswick, ME 04011
and NBER
bkhan@bowdoin.edu

“I am not an advocate for frequent changes in laws and constitutions. But
laws and institutions must go hand and hand with the progress of the
human mind. As that becomes more developed, more enlightened, as
new discoveries are made, new truths discovered and manners and
opinions change, with the change of circumstances, institutions must
advance also to keep pace with the times.….”
-- Thomas Jefferson (1810)1
1.INTRODUCTION
Recent scholarship highlights the importance of institutions in long-run economic growth, but the
specific relationship is still not clearly understood, despite a plethora of research on both the
theoretical and empirical aspects of institutions and economic activity.2 Indeed, even in the face
of evidence that such institutions might be endogenous, some empirical studies still treat legal
regimes, patent systems and other forms of property rights as exogenous determinants of economic
performance. Moreover, legal structures and statutory changes are often discussed without
attempts to distinguish between rules and their enforcement. In short, there is a need for research
that contributes to a better understanding of the sources of institutional change, the specific means
through which revisions are implemented, the impact of different rules and standards, the
feedback mechanism between economic factors and institutions, and the degree of substitutability
across institutions. This paper addresses such issues by assessing several thousand lawsuits from
U.S. state and federal courts over the “long nineteenth century.” The analysis indicates how legal
institutions adapted to changing circumstances, and suggests that American economic success was
partly due to the flexibility and transparency of its legal system.
Law and technology are both critical for understanding the evolution of American society.
As such prominent commentators as Thomas Paine and Alexis de Tocqueville have pointed out,
U.S. policy has always been distinguished by the central role of law and the judiciary.3 Moreover,
1 See http://www.monticello.org/reports/quotes/memorial.html, for inscription at the Jefferson Memorial in
Washington, D.C. (taken from a letter to Samuel Kercheval, July 12, 1810).
2 . For an excellent overview of the debate on institutions and economic growth, see Stanley L. Engerman and
Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Institutional and Non-Institutional Explanations of Economic Differences,” NBER Working
Paper No. 9989, Sept. 2003; and Douglass North, Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
3 Thomas Paine felt that “in America THE LAW IS KING”((Caps. in the original text), Common Sense, Chapt. III, p.
49, Philadelphia: W. and T. Bradford,1776. Alexis de Tocqueville argued that American courts wielded enormous
2

its citizens stand out for their innovativeness and willingness to adopt new technologies, to such an
extent that some have even characterized the United States as a “republic of technology.” This
favourable view of invention and innovation was matched by the readiness of the judiciary to
accommodate the radical transformations caused by innovations. The notion that our own era is
unique reveals a somewhat limited appreciation of the cumulative impact of such innovations as
the telegraph, steam engine, railroad, radio, electric power and the automobile on American society
in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Unprecedented technical progress during that
period brought about discrete and measurable changes in the lives, lifestyles and livelihood of
Americans that arguably exceed those of our own time. Technological innovations also affected
the scope and nature of the law. Competition policy, medical malpractice, nuisance, trespass and
torts, the allocation of riparian rights and admiralty law all reflected the turmoil wrought by
technical changes. Advances in forensic science and technology transformed the enforcement and
adjudication of criminal law. Similarly, organizational innovations and the growth of national
markets affected the nature of property rights, employment contracts and liability rules.4
This study focuses on the period between 1790 and 1920. Clearly, technological change
was not unknown before this time, but the innovations of the nineteenth century were significantly
different from those of previous centuries because their sphere of influence was on a much larger
scale. For the first time in American history, innovations in transportation extended the practical
boundaries of markets and social interactions to encompass repeated national and international
transactions as a common occurrence. Moreover, the expansion of virtually instantaneous
communications networks introduced time as a central feature of such interactions and facilitated
political power, since “Scarcely any question arises in the United States which does not become, sooner or later, a
subject of judicial debate.” (Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, ed. J.P. Mayer, trans. George
Lawrence,1835; New York: Harper & Row, 1969, Vol. I, Chap. 8, p. 311.)
4 Technological change was not limited to domestic issues, for it also facilitated more numerous and more rapid
transactions with other nations during peace and war. Indeed, the very boundaries of maritime sovereignty were
constrained by existing technology, since the three-mile limit was determined by the maximum distance a cannon shot
could reach. Innovations like submarines, underwater international cables and manned airplane flights created
jurisdictional and third party effects among nations which the legal system had to address. The legal implications of
naval blockades and sanctions changed as newer ships and submarines developed, and the maritime laws of agency
3