NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AGREEING NOW TO AGREE LATER:
CONTRACTS THAT RULE OUT BUT DO NOT RULE IN
Oliver Hart
John Moore
Working Paper 10397
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10397
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2004
We would like to thank Bengt Holmstrom, Jozsef Sakovics, and Jonathan Thomas for helpful conversations.
We acknowledge financial support from the U.S. National Science Foundation through the National Bureau
of Economic Research; the Leverhulme Trust; and the U.K. Economic and Social Research Council. This
paper was written while the first author was on sabbatical at the London School of Economics; he would like
to thank that institution for its hospitality. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Oliver Hart and John Moore. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Agreeing Now to Agree Later: Contracts that Rule Out but do not Rule In
Oliver Hart and John Moore
NBER Working Paper No. 10397
March 2004
JEL No. D8, D23, K12, L22
ABSTRACT
We view a contract as a list of outcomes. Ex ante, the parties commit not to consider outcomes not
on the list, i.e., these are "ruled out". Ex post, they freely bargain over outcomes on the list, i.e., the
contract specifies no mechanism to structure their choice; in this sense outcomes on the list are not
"ruled in". A "loose" contract (long list) maximizes flexibility but may interfere with ex ante
investment incentives. When these incentives are important enough, the parties may write a "tight"
contract (short list), even though this leads to ex post inefficiency.
Oliver Hart
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 220
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
oliver_hart@harvard.edu
John Moore
Department of Economics
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh EH8 9JY
United Kingdom

1. Introduction
An interesting class of contracts has the following form. The parties agree
some things now and agree to agree other things later. For example, suppose that an
impresario and a pianist sign a contract for a concert, or series of concerts, a year
hence. They may decide now on the fee and the broad outlines of the musical
program, but may agree that the exact pieces played will be determined later. Or
suppose that a printer and a paper manufacturer sign a contract for the delivery of
paper. They may decide on the price for the first year, but agree that the price in
future years will be subject to negotiation, within limits.
This paper is concerned with contracts of this type.1 In order to analyze them,
we adopt the following view. We imagine that when parties draw up a contract they
specify a list of all the possible outcomes from their transaction (here an outcome is a
complete description of what might happen, e.g., a price-quantity-quality vector).
Trade is voluntary and so “no trade” is always on the list. The parties commit not to
consider outcomes not on the list; that is, any outcome not on the list is ruled out. In
contrast, any outcome on the list may be chosen. However, no mechanism is provided
for selecting an outcome from the list; rather the choice will be made through
unstructured negotiation or bargaining. In this sense outcomes on the list are not ruled
in.
At one extreme the list might consist of a small number of outcomes, e.g., just
one (in addition to “no trade”). This corresponds to a very tight contract since there is
little or nothing to bargain over later. At the other extreme the list might be very long.
1 Lawyers refer to such contracts as indefinite agreements, or agreements with open terms, or
agreements to agree. See Farnsworth (1999, p.110, pp.207-216, and particularly pp. 217-222). Two
recent contributions to the legal literature are Ben-Shahar (2004) and Scott (2003). A key issue for
these authors, and for the courts, is whether an agreement is too indefinite to be enforceable. Legal
enforceability is not central to our analysis, and so the attitudes of the courts to indefinite agreements,
and their role in filling in the gaps in these agreements, are not major issues in our paper.
2

This corresponds to a loose contract since there is much to bargain over later. Note
that “no contract” fits easily into this framework. “No contract” corresponds to the
list of all possible outcomes; the reason is that if the parties write no contract now,
then nothing is ruled out since they can always contract later.
We are interested in how long the parties’ list should be. The trade-off is the
following. The advantage of a long list is flexibility: the parties are more likely to be
able to choose an outcome that fits their circumstances. That is, ex post, the parties
have more scope to locate where they want to be in outcome space. However, this
very flexibility has its disadvantages. A long list opens the door to bargaining. As a
result, from an ex ante perspective, the parties may end up where they don’t want to
be.
We study the optimal contract in light of this trade-off. We show that, if
relationship-specific investments are large, the parties may need to choose a tight
contract, e.g., in the music example, the contract might specify that the pianist will
play Bach’s 24 Preludes and Fugues for a fixed fee in all circumstances, even though
this is not always ex post efficient -- it is sometimes more efficient to play
Shostakovich’s 24 Preludes and Fugues. The parties may also make a “middle-of-the-
road” choice: they might agree that Mozart will always be performed, even though
this is never efficient, because it is a reasonable compromise between the efficient
choices of Bach and Shostakovich. On the other hand, if relationship-specific
investments are not large, the parties will choose a loose contract: the contract will fix
the pianist’s fee but leave the choice of music to be decided later. Finally, the parties
may choose a convex combination of the above contracts, which can be given a
temporal interpretation: the parties agree that the pianist will play Bach in some
3