NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A RISK MANAGEMENT APPROACH TO
EMERGING MARKET’S SOVEREIGN DEBT SUSTAINABILITY
WITH AN APPLICATION TO BRAZILIAN DATA
Márcio Garcia
Roberto Rigobon
Working Paper 10336
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10336
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2004
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Márcio Garcia and Roberto Rigobon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

A Risk Management Approach to Emerging Market’s Sovereign Debt Sustainability with an
Application to Brazilian Data
Márcio Garcia and Roberto Rigobon
NBER Working Paper No. 10336
March 2004
JEL No. F3
ABSTRACT
In this paper we study the question of debt sustainability from a risk management perspective. The
debt accumulation equation for any country involves variables that are stochastic and closely
intertwined. When these aspects are taken into consideration the notion of debt sustainability is
expanded to studying the stochastic properties of the debt dynamics. We illustrate the methodology
by studying the Brazilian case. We find that even though the debt could be sustainable in the absence
of risk, there are paths in which it is clearly unsustainable. Furthermore, we show that properties of
the debt dynamics are closely related to the spreads on sovereign dollar denominated debt.
Marcio Garcia
Department of Economics
Pontifical Catholic University
Rua Marques de Sao Vicente, 225
Gavea - Rio de Janeiro - RJ
22451-041 Brasil
mgarcia@econ.puc.rio.br
Roberto Rigobon
Sloan School of Management
MIT, E52-431
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
rigobon@mit.edu

I. Introduction
There are several ways to assess debt sustainability. A widely used criterion is the gap
between the actual primary budget deficit and the one required to keep the debt GDP
ratio stable (the “debt stabilizing primary balance”).1 This measure has several
drawbacks: since the purpose of having debt in the first place is to smooth consumption,
why would a country want to keep the debt to GDP ratio constant? Or, if a country is
excessively heavily indebted, to keep the debt to GDP ratio would not be sustainable.
Other measures have been proposed. IMF (2003) estimates the fiscal reaction function.
The idea is similar to estimate the coefficient of the expected inflation in a Taylor rule,
and check whether it exceeds one, as required for the rule to provide a stationary
inflation. In the fiscal reaction function, the aim is to estimate how the primary balance
reacts to increases in the debt to GDP ratio. Another measure is to compute a ratio
between the actual debt level and a benchmark level equal to the present value of future
primary surpluses computed under conservative assumptions. If the ratio exceeds one, the
country would be over borrowing (IMF 2003).
Risk based measures of fiscal sustainability have been borrowed from the financial
literature. One of them is the very famous Value-at-Risk (V@R). Other sustainability
measures include stress testing through Monte Carlo simulations.2
Here we propose a related measure that takes very seriously the realization that the debt
accumulation equation for any country involves variables that are stochastic and closely
intertwined. By taking these aspects into consideration, the notion of debt sustainability is
expanded to studying the stochastic properties of the debt dynamics. We propose a VAR
(Vector Auto Regression) to estimate the correlation pattern of the macro variables and
use it to implement Monte Carlo simulations. These simulations allow us to compute
“risk probabilities”, i.e., probabilities that the simulated Debt to GDP ratio exceeds a
given threshold deemed risky (say, 75% of GDP).3 The time-series of such probabilities
is then used to investigate whether or not it is correlated with the market risk assessment,
measured by the spread on sovereign dollar denominated debt. The application of our
methodology for Brazil shows that even though the debt could be sustainable in the
absence of risk, there are paths in which it is clearly unsustainable. Furthermore, we show
that properties of the debt dynamics are closely related to the EMBI+ Brazil spread.
Next Section describes the data used and performs a few debt decomposition exercises.
Section III presents the core methodology and the application to Brazilian data. Section
IV concludes.
1 See IMF (2003), p. 124, for references.
2 Garcia (2002) computes a V@R for the Brazilian debt and performs Monte Carlo simulations to
implement a CF@R (cash-flow at risk).
3 For a financial institution, this probability would be analogous to the probability of wiping out the
net worth.

II. Brazilian Sovereign Debt
A. Data Description
The simulation of the debt dynamics requires the compatibility of many statistics that are
produced in different places. Bevilaqua and Garcia (2002) performed a decomposition
exercise of the growth sources of the domestic bonded debt in Brazil. The domestic
bonded debt is the component of the net public debt that grew the most: from 11.81% of
GDP in December, 1994 to 48.95% of GDP in September, 2003. Here, we use a similar
framework to decompose the sources of growth of the Brazilian net debt.
To put together the data was not a straightforward task, and it took us a few months and
many interactions with the Brazilian Central staff to clean the data and adapt them to the
format required in the simulations.4 Currently, these data are all available at the Brazilian
Central Bank web page (www.bcb.gov.br).
We now briefly describe the data. We use debt stocks (domestic, foreign; gross and net)
monthly series. These stocks are converted to ratios of GDP using the “valorized” GDP,5
which are used to compute all ratios of GDP that we use in this paper. The PSBR (public
sector borrowing requirements) are computed in three different concepts: primary,
operational and nominal. We favor the use of the operational and primary concepts,
which mitigate the effects of high inflation, because our sample contains the immediate
aftermath of the Real plan, when the inflation came down from almost 50% per month.
Massive distortions (see Figure 2 A) show up in the nominal deficit figures immediately
succeeding the Real plan starting point (July 1, 1994) because we use twelve-month-
moving averages to provide comparability and avoid excessive fluctuation.6 With the
moving averages, until a full year had elapsed, the distortionary effects of the
hyperinflation still contaminated the nominal deficit figures.7
Two main adjustments have to be taken into consideration in order to make the debt
statistics compatible with the PSBR’s. First, privatization revenues have the (accounting)
effect of reducing the debt, but are not computed as fiscal revenues for purposes of
calculating the PSBR. Second, many expenditures incurred in the present are results of
4 Box 3.1 (Data on Public Debt in Emerging Market Economies) of the last World Economic
Outlook (IMF 2003) describes the many difficulties involved in gathering such data.
5 The “valorized” GDP is a better measure than the nominal GDP because, even under moderate
inflation, the simple addition of the GDP flow within a twelve-month period distorts the statistic. For
example, for a 10% yearly inflation, each unit of domestic currency of the last month will be worth 1.1
units of domestic currency of the first month included in the sample. The “valorization” procedure
mitigates this distortion. Under zero inflation, the “valorization” procedure reverts to usual addition of
monthly GDP flows. Box 3.1 of the World Economic Outlook (IMF 2003) comments on the effects of such
procedure, grossly exaggerating them.
6 Since the deficits are so important to determine debt sustainability, we opted to use twelve-month-
moving averages instead of monthly figures. This is because the latter series is very volatile, often changing
signs. For example, if some expenses were concentrated in a given month, the monthly series would show a
large deficit among many surpluses, while the moving average would better reflect the fiscal stance.
7 See Figure 2.