NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE DYNAMICS OF SELLER REPUTATION:
THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM eBAY
Luís Cabral
Ali Hortaçsu
Working Paper 10363
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10363
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2004
We thank Kenny Ballendir, Tim Miller and Jeremy Shapiro for truly outstanding research assistance.
We also thank Damien DeWalque, Svetlozar Nestorov, Mike Riordan, Anne Rogers, Steve Tadelis,
and seminar participants at Chicago, Essex, Copenhagen, SED meetings, NBER Summer Institute,
Georgetown, Tufts, Rochester, NYU and Columbia for helpful comments and suggestions. Hortaçsu
acknowledges financial support from the National Science Foundation (Grant SES-0242031). The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Luís Cabral and Ali Hortaçsu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Dynamics of Seller Reputation: Theory and Evidence from eBay
Luís Cabral and Ali Hortaçsu
NBER Working Paper No. 10363
March 2004
JEL No. D44, L15, L86
ABSTRACT
We propose a basic theoretical model of eBay's reputation mechanism, derive a series of
implications and empirically test their validity. Our theoretical model features both adverse selection
and moral hazard. We show that when a seller receives a negative rating for the first time his
reputation decreases and so does his effort level. This implies a decline in sales and price; and an
increase in the rate of arrival of subsequent negative feedback. Our model also suggests that sellers
with worse records are more likely to exit (and possibly re-enter under a new identity), whereas
better sellers have more to gain from "buying a reputation" by building up a record of favorable
feedback through purchases rather than sales. Our empirical evidence, based on a panel data set of
seller feedback histories and cross-sectional data on transaction prices collected from eBay is
broadly consistent with all of these predictions. An important conclusion of our results is that eBay's
reputation system gives way to strategic responses from both buyers and sellers.
Luís Cabral Ali Hortaçsu
New York University Department of Economics
Henry Kaufman Mgmt Ctr. University of Chicago
44 W 4th Street, 7-70 1126 East 59th Street
New York, NY 10012 Chicago, IL 60637
and CEPR and NBER
lcabral@stern.nyu.edu Hortacsu@uchicago.edu

1 Introduction
Electroniccommercepresentsthetheoreticalandtheempiricaleconomistwith
a number of interesting research questions. Traditional markets rely signifi-
cantly on the trust created by repeated interaction and personal relationships.
Electronic markets, by contrast, tend to be rather more anonymous. Can the
same level of trust and efficiency be obtained in these markets?
One possible solution, exemplified by eBay auctions, is to create reputation
mechanisms that allow traders to identify and monitor each other. In this
paper,westudyeBay-typereputationmechanisms,bothfromatheoreticaland
from an empirical point of view. Specifically, we propose a basic theoretical
model of eBay’s reputation mechanism, derive a series of implications and
empirically test their validity.
Our focus on eBay’s reputation mechanism is justified for two reasons.
First, electronic commerce in general and eBay in particular are a significant
economic phenomenon: in 2003, more than $21bn were transacted on eBay by
69 million users. Second, with its well defined rules and available information,
eBay presents the researcher with a fairly controlled environment for theory
testing. Specifically, a reasonable assumption on eBay is that the information
one trader has about other traders is the same as the researcher’s. Essentially,
this information consists of a series of positive and negative feedback com-
ments given by past trading partners. In this context, we can make sharper
predictions about agent behavior than in other markets, in particular in mar-
kets where buyers and sellers share information that is not observed by the
researcher.
Our theoretical model features both adverse selection and moral hazard
on the seller’s side. In the spirit of Diamond (1989), we show that in equilib-
rium there is a positive correlation between seller reputation and seller effort.
Specifically, when a seller receives a negative rating for the first time, his rep-
utation decreases and so does his effort level. This implies a decline in sales
and sale price; and, moreover, an increase in the rate of arrival of subsequent
negative feedback. Our empirical evidence is broadly consistent with these
predictions. Specifically, we find that the growth rate of a seller’s transactions
drops from about 7% per week to about -7% following the first negative feed-
back. We also find that the rate of negative feedback arrival increases twofold
following this event. Both findings are strongly statistically significant across a
variety of empirical specifications. We also find that the sale price for identical
goods varies across sellers with differing feedback records: a 1% level increase
in the fraction of negative feedback is correlated with a 9% decrease in price
1

A natural experiment based on a change in eBay’s reporting format suggests
there is indeed a causal relation between seller reputation and sale price.
We consider two extensions of our basic model. First we allow for the
possibility of seller “exit”, which we assume corresponds to a secret change in
identity. We show theoretically that exit is more likely the worse the seller’s
record is. Our empirical findings are once again consistent with this result. We
find that a tenfold increase in a seller’s transaction record length is correlated
with a 18 to 27% lower probability of exit within the observation period.
Moreover, a 1% level increase in the fraction of negative feedback is correlated
with a 1 to 2% increase in probability of exit (however, this coefficient is not
statistically significant).
Second, we consider the possibility of sellers building up a record (“buying
areputation”)bystartingoffasbuyersandthenswitchingtoselling(anecdotal
evidence suggests that it is easier and cheaper to accumulate positive feedback
as a buyer than as a seller). Our theoretical model suggests that better sellers
have more to gain from building such a record, a prediction that is borne out
by the data. Specifically, we define a seller as a “switcher” if more than 50%
of the first 20 transactions were purchases whereas more than 70% of the last
20 transactions were sales. About 30% of all sellers fall in this category; sellers
with 1% lower percentage of negative feedback are 6% more likely to have
started out “switchers”.
A number of authors have conducted empirical studies of eBay’s repu-
tation mechanism. Almost all of these prior studies focus on the buyer re-
sponse to published feedback aggregates. In particular, a large number of
studies estimate cross-sectional regressions of sale prices on seller feedback
characteristics: Dewan and Hsu (2001), Eaton (2002), Ederington and De-
wally (2003), Houser and Wooders (2003), Kalyanam and McIntyre (2003),
Livingston (2002), Lucking-Reiley, Bryan, Prasad and Reeves (2000), McDon-
ald and Slawson (2002), Melnik and Alm (2002), Resnick and Zeckhauser
(2001).1 Resnick, Zeckhauser, Swanson and Lockwood (2003) point out the
potential for a significant omitted variable bias in these cross-sectional regres-
sions, and conduct a controlled field experiment in which a seasoned seller
sells identical postcards using his real name and an assumed name. They
find an 8% premium to having 2000 positive feedbacks and 1 negative over a
feedback profile with 10 positive comments and no negatives. Ba and Pavlou
(2002) conduct a laboratory experiment in which subjects are asked to de-
clare their valuations for experimenter generated profiles, and find a positive
1SeeDellarocas(2002), Resnick, Zeckhauser, SwansonandLockwood(2003), andBajari
and Horta¸csu (2004) for surveys of these results.
2