NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MINIMUM ASSET REQUIREMENTS AND
COMPULSORY LIABILITY INSURANCE
AS SOLUTIONS TO THE JUDGMENT-PROOF PROBLEM
Steven Shavell
Working Paper 10341
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10341
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2004
Samuel R. Rosenthal Professor of Law and Economics, Harvard Law School, and Research Associate,
National Bureau of Economic Research. I thank Louis Kaplow for comments, Sergey Lagodinsky, Frederick
Pollock III, and Ziv Preis for research assistance, and the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and
Business at Harvard Law School for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Steven Shavell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Minimum Asset Requirements and Compulsory Liability Insurance As Solutions to the
Judgment-Proof Problem
Steven Shavell
NBER Working Paper No. 10341
March 2004
JEL No. D00, K13, K20, L5
ABSTRACT
Minimum asset and liability insurance requirements must often be met in order for parties to
participate in potentially harmful activities. Such financial responsibility requirements may improve
parties’ decisions whether to engage in harmful activities and, if so, their efforts to reduce risk.
However, the requirements may undesirably prevent some parties with low assets from engaging
in activities. Liability insurance requirements tend to improve parties’ incentives to reduce risk when
insurers can observe levels of care, but dilute incentives to reduce risk when insurers cannot observe
levels of care. In the latter case, compulsory liability insurance may be inferior to minimum asset
requirements.
Steven Shavell
Harvard Law School
1575 Massachusetts Avenue
Hauser Hall 508
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
shavell@law.harvard.edu

Minimum Asset Requirements and Compulsory Liability Insurance
As Solutions to the Judgment-Proof Problem
Steven Shavell
© 2004. Steven Shavell. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Requirements that parties have assets or liability insurance coverage of at least a
prescribed magnitude in order to participate in an activity are frequently imposed. Individuals
must sometimes satisfy such financial responsibility requirements, a notable example concerning
driving, and business entities often face these requirements, for instance concerning
transportation of hazardous wastes, construction, and banking operations.1
In this article, a principal rationale for minimum asset and liability insurance
requirements is considered: Potential injurers may make superior decisions whether to engage in
an activity and, if they do so, may have stronger incentives to reduce risk, when they have at
stake at least the required level of assets and/or liability insurance coverage if they are sued for
causing harm.2
In section 2 of the article, asset requirements are investigated in the absence of liability
insurance. A standard model is studied in which individuals make two choices: whether to
engage in a potentially harmful activity; and if so, how much care to exercise to reduce the risk
of harm. 3 Individuals are assumed to be held liable for harm caused. If they have assets at least
1
On driving, see Jerry 1996, pp. 859-63; on hazardous wastes, see for example FLA. STAT. Ch. 403.724 (2002); on
construction, see for example WIS. ADMIN. CODE §5.31 (2002); and on banking, see Jackson and Symons 1999, pp.
184-207.
2Another rationale for asset and liability insurance requirements is to increase victims’ ability to obtain compensation
through suit for their losses; this rationale is mentioned in the concluding section.
3
The parties in the model are individuals, as opposed to firms, but many (not all) of the conclusions should carry
1

equal to the harm that they might create, both of their incentives will be optimal. They will
engage in the activity if and only if their benefits would exceed the expected harm caused; and if
they engage in the activity, they will choose the optimal level of care. If individuals’ assets are
less than the potential harm, however, they will engage too often in the harmful activity, as they
will not then face (effective) expected liability equal to the expected harm, and they will
similarly lack incentives to take optimal care.
A minimum asset requirement alleviates the problem that individuals might engage in the
activity too often. However, an asset requirement has a disadvantageous effect: Some of the
individuals with assets below the required level ought to engage in the activity, because the
benefits they would obtain exceed the expected harm they would cause, even though this
expected harm is higher than is optimal due to their dulled incentives to take care. The optimal
asset requirement reflects the tradeoff between this disadvantageous effect and its advantages.
In section 3 of the article, compulsory liability insurance is added to the analysis. The
usual rule of compulsory liability insurance is studied: in order to engage in an activity, parties
must purchase liability insurance coverage in a stipulated amount or else have assets sufficient to
make up any shortfall between their coverage and that amount.4 The optimal liability insurance
requirement is considered, and liability insurance requirements are compared to pure asset
requirements.
Liability insurance requirements affect individuals’ decisions about engaging in the
potentially harmful activity. A party with assets less than the possible harm can pay at most his
over to a model with firms, as discussed in the concluding section.
4
Most of the statutes that I have examined follow essentially this rule; see, for example, FLA. STAT. Ch. 403.724
2