NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TRANSPARENCY OF INFORMATION AND
COORDINATION IN ECONOMIES
WITH INVESTMENT COMPLEMENTARITIES
George-Marios Angeletos
Alessandro Pavan
Working Paper 10391
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10391
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2004
This paper was prepared for the annual meeting of the American Economic Association and will appear in
American Economic Review 94:1 (Papers and Proceedings). We are grateful to Narayana Kocherlakota for
the invitation. For useful comments, we thank Daron Acemoglu, Ricardo Caballero, Christian Hellwig, Bengt
Holmstrom and Ivan Werning. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by George-Marios Angeletos and Alessandro Pavan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Transparency of Information and Coordination in Economies with Investment
George-Marios Angeletos and Alessandro Pavan
NBER Working Paper No. 10391
March 2004
JEL No. D6, D8, E6
ABSTRACT
How do public and private information affect equilibrium allocations and social welfare in
economies with investment complementarities? And what is the optimal transparency in the
information conveyed, for example, by economic statistics, policy announcements, or news in the
media? We first consider an environment where the complementarities are weak so that the
equilibrium is unique no matter the structure of information. An increase in the precision of public
information may have the perverse effect of increasing aggregate volatility. Nevertheless, as long
as there is no value to lotteries, welfare unambiguously increases with an increase in either the
relative or the absolute precision of public information. Hence, full transparency is optimal. This is
because more transparency facilitates more effective coordination, which is valuable from a social
perspective. On the other hand, when complementarities are strong enough that multiple equilibria
are possible, more transparency permits the market to coordinate more effectively on either the bad
or the good equilibrium. In this case, constructive ambiguity becomes optimal if there is a high risk
that more transparency will lead to coordination failures.
George-Marios Angeletos
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive, E51-251
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
angelet@mit.edu
Alessandro Pavan
alepavan@northwestern.edu

G.M. Angeletos and A. Pavan 2
1 Introduction
Economieswithproductionexternalities,demandspillovers,incompletefinancialmarkets,andKey-
nesian frictions are only a few examples where macroeconomic complementarities play a prominent
role. Within this class of economies, how does the precision of publicly provided and privately
collected information affect equilibrium allocations and social welfare? And what is the optimal
transparency in the information conveyed, for example, by economic statistics, policy announce-
ments, or news in the media? To answer these questions, we consider a simple real economy where
the individual return to investment is increasing in the aggregate level of investment and where
market participants have heterogenous expectations about the underlying economic fundamentals
(the exogenous productivity). We interpret an increase in the transparency of public information
either as a reduction in the level of common uncertainty for given level of idiosyncratic uncertainty
(that is, an increase in the absolute precision of public information), or as a reduction in the het-
erogeneity of expectations across market participants for given level of overall uncertainty (that is,
an increase in the relative precision of public information).
We first consider an environment where complementarities are weak so that the equilibrium is
unique no matter the structure of information. Like in Morris and Shin (2002), complementarities
increasethesensitivityofequilibriumallocationswithrespecttopublicinformation,whichincreases
the volatility generated by common noise in market expectations. Moreover, when information is
heterogeneous, an increase in the precision of public information may have the perverse effect of
increasing aggregate volatility, by increasing the sensitivity of economic activity to common noise.
On the contrary, an increase in the precision of private information necessarily reduces aggregate
volatility. Nevertheless,weshowthat,aslongasthereisnovaluetolotteries,welfareunambiguously
increases with an increase in either the relative or the absolute precision of public information.
Hence, policies that either disseminate more precise information about economic fundamentals,
or reduce the heterogeneous interpretation of economic statistics and policy measures, necessarily
boost welfare. On the contrary, an increase in the precision of private information may reduce
welfare by increasing the heterogeneity ofexpectations and thereby obstructing coordination in the
market, in which case policies that discourage the private collection of private information may
increase welfare.
Morris and Shin (2002) have recently argued that, in environments with strategic complemen-
tarities and heterogeneous information, more precise public information can reduce social welfare,
whereas more precise private information is always beneficial. We find rather the opposite. The

G.M. Angeletos and A. Pavan 3
difference in the results is due to an important distinction between the environments in the two
models. Morris and Shin (2002) consider a kind of “beauty contest,” where the payoff of a player
decreases with the distance between his own action and the action of others, but where this dis-
tance is irrelevant from a social perspective. It follows that the complementarity is present only
at the private level and hence the attempt of the agents to align their actions is socially wasteful.
In this case, more transparent public information facilitates more effective coordination, which is
valued by the market but not by the society. In contrast, we consider environments where the
complementarity is present at the social level so that effective market coordination is socially valu-
able, as it is likely to be the case in economies with production and demand spillovers, network
externalities, or incomplete financial markets. As shown in Angeletos and Pavan (2003), market
participants use public information to align their investment choices, but not enough as compared
to what is socially optimal, for they do not internalize the positive externality of their investment
on the return to others. As a consequence, more transparent public information, by permitting
moreeffectivecoordinationinthe market, necessarily increases welfare, despite thefact thatitmay
lead to higher volatility.1
Inthelightoftheseresults,wefinallyconsiderthepossibilitythatcomplementaritiesarestrong
enough that multiple equilibria emerge for certain structures of information, in which case more
effective coordination in the market need not always be socially beneficial. Indeed, there is a criti-
cal threshold for the transparency of public information above which multiple equilibrium levels of
investment are possible. Above this threshold, the desirability of more effective market coordina-
tion and thus the welfare effect of more transparent public information depend critically on which
equilibrium is selected. If the market coordinates on the socially desirable equilibrium, facilitating
coordination is beneficial, and welfare tends to be maximized at high levels of transparency. If in-
steadthemarketcoordinatesontheundesirableequilibrium, impedingcoordinationbyintroducing
noise in public information can be welfare enhancing.
This final result is related to Angeletos, Hellwig and Pavan (2003). They show that, in coor-
dination environments where a privately-informed policy maker is interested in fashioning market
outcomes, active policy intervention may lead to policy traps, where the optimal policy and market
outcomes are dictated largely by arbitrary self-fulfilling market expectations. In the present paper,
1In independent parallel work, Hellwig (2003) and Lorenzoni (2003), building on Woodford (2002), examine
monetaryeconomiesinwhichcomplementaritiesariseinpricingdecisions. TheyalsofindthattheMorris-Shinresult
about the social value of public information can be reversed. However, they do not show how the welfare effects of
public information depend on whether market coordination is socially desirable.