NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEATH SPIRAL OR EUTHANASIA?
THE DEMISE OF GENEROUS GROUP
HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE
Mark V. Pauly
Olivia Mitchell
Yuhui Zeng
Working Paper 10464
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10464
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2004
The researchers acknowledge support from the Pension Research Council at the Wharton School and the
Department of Health Care Management Systems. Comments from Leny Bader are appreciated. Opinions
are solely those of the authors and not of the institutions with which the authors are affiliated. This research
is part of the NBER programs on Aging and Labor Economics. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Mark V. Pauly, Olivia Mitchell, and Yuhui Zeng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Death Spiral or Euthanasia? The Demise of Generous Group Health Insurance Coverage
Mark V. Pauly, Olivia Mitchell, and Yuhui Zeng
NBER Working Paper No. 10464
May 2004
JEL No. I11, G22
ABSTRACT
Employers must determine which sorts of healthcare insurance plans to offer employees and also
set employee premiums for each plan provided. Depending on how they structure the premiums that
employees pay across different healthcare insurance plans, plan sponsors alter the incentives to
choose one plan over another. If employees know they differ by risk level but premiums do not fully
reflect these risk differences, this can give rise to a so-called “death spiral” due to adverse selection.
In this paper, we use longitudinal information from a natural experiment in the management of
health benefits for a large employer to explore the impact of moving from a fixed dollar contribution
policy to a risk-adjusted employer contribution policy. Our results suggest that implementing a
significant risk adjustment had no discernable effect on adverse selection against the most generous
indemnity insurance policy. This stands in stark contrast to previous studies, which have tended to
find large impacts. Further analysis suggests that previous studies which appeared to detect plans
in the throes of a death spiral, may instead have been experiencing an inexorable movement away
from a non-preferred product, one that would have been inefficient for almost all workers even in
the absence of adverse selection.
Mark V. Pauly Olivia Mitchell Yuhui Zeng
Department of Health Care SystemsDepartment of Risk and Insurance Department of Health Care Systems
The Wharton School The Wharton School The Wharton School
The University of Pennsylvania The University of PennsylvaniaThe University of Pennsylvania
Room 208 Colonial Penn Center3641 Locust Walk 3641 Locust Walk
3641 Locust Walk Philadelphia, PA 19104 Philadelphia, PA 19104
Philadelphia, PA 19104 and NBER
and NBER mitchell@wharton.upenn.edu
pauly@wharton.upenn.edu

Introduction
Companies often offer employees an opportunity to select a health insurance plan from a
number of choices offered to workers in the group benefit setting. Inasmuch as healthcare plans
differ in coverage and premiums, plan sponsors must decide how to structure the premiums that
employees pay, since those premiums alter the incentives to choose one plan over another. One
recommended strategy follows a “fixed dollar contribution” model, in which the employer
nominally ‘credits’ each employee with the same fixed level of (tax-shielded) compensation
dollars which can be used toward any plan purchase. Under this model, plan-specific premiums
actually paid by employees are set to reflect differences in average total costs across plans
(Enthoven, 1980).
If all workers were of approximately the same level of risk, employee choice would
(ideally) reflect differences in the value they place on the benefits associated with each plan.
Relative to their incremental costs, workers would then efficiently select the plans that give them
the highest net benefits. This attractive property may be eroded, however, if workers know that
they differ by risk level but premiums charged to employees do not fully reflect these risk
differences. This can give rise to adverse selection if (other things equal) a higher risk employee
concludes that the relative benefit enhancements expected from a more generous plan exceeds
his incremental premium. In such a world, higher-risk employees (and employees with higher-
risk families) would be predicted to differentially enroll in more generous healthcare plans.
If employers then set incremental employee premiums for each plan proportionally to the
expected incremental claims costs of participants who actually elect that plan, premiums for the
more generous plan will be higher than it would have been, had the plan been selected by a
representative cross-section of all employees. This higher premium, in turn, may drive low-risk

2
enrollees away, resulting in what has come to be known as a “death spiral”. Even if an (interior)
equilibrium is reached, it will be one in which enrollment in generous plans will be lower than it
would have been, had premiums been based on the average risk across all workers. A number of
recent studies report that more generous plans have been or could be adversely selected against,
and the estimated response magnitudes are quantitatively important (Cutler and Reber, 1998;
Cutler and Zeckhauser, 2000; Buchmueller and Feldstein, 1997).
One way to deter such a death spiral might be to set the predetermined employer
contribution in a risk-adjusted fashion, which will in turn influence employee premium
differentials. The argument is that such risk adjustment might be more equitable and more
efficient than permitting the premium differential to reflect equilibrium plan choices and actual
average claims expenses. While an industry has emerged to help employers compute such risk
adjusted premiums, no economic study has thus far explored how effective such risk-adjustment
is, in tempering adverse selection behavior in the group health insurance context. Rather, prior
research has typically examined the effects of introduction of “fixed dollar” models in situations
in which previously either differentials did not exist, or premium contributions were proportional
(Cutler and Reber, 1998; Royalty and Solomon, 1999) .
In this paper we report on a natural experiment in the management of health benefits for a
large university employer where two interesting changes were made: (1) a risk-adjusted
employer contribution approach was substituted for what had been roughly a fixed-dollar
contribution; and then (2) over time, the risk-adjusted contribution approach was held nearly
constant. Thus we have the opportunity to observe the initial impact of introducing risk
adjustment, and also to evaluate its continuing effects over time. Our results, which may be
surprising to some, suggest that implementing a significant risk adjustment had no obvious