NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
401(k) MATCHING CONTRIBUTIONS IN COMPANY STOCK:
COSTS AND BENEFITS FOR FIRMS AND WORKERS
Jeffrey R. Brown
Nellie Liang
Scott Weisbenner
Working Paper 10419
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10419
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2004
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve
Board. We thank Eric Richards, Thomas McAndrews, and Aldo Rosas for exceptional research assistance,
and Annika Sunden and Alicia Munnell for providing the age-earnings profiles used in this paper. We also
thank Bill Even, David Laibson, Olivia Mitchell, Steve Utkus and seminar participants at the University of
Illinois and the Federal Reserve Board for their comments and constructive suggestions. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Jeffrey R. Brown, Nellie Liang, and Scott Weisbenner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

401(k) Matching Contributions in Company Stock: Costs and Benefits for Firms and Workers
Jeffrey R. Brown, Nellie Liang, and Scott Weisbenner
NBER Working Paper No. 10419
April 2004
JEL No. G11, J30, J32
ABSTRACT
This paper examines why some employers provide matching contributions to 401(k) plans in
company stock and explores the implications of match policy for employee retirement wealth.
Unlike stock option grants to non-executives, a firm's decision to match in company stock does not
appear to be strongly correlated with cash flow or with measures of the benefits of aligning
incentives of employees and employers. Rather, we find evidence that firms are more likely to
provide the match in company stock if firm risk is low (i.e. lower stock price volatility and lower
bankruptcy risk) and employees are also covered by a defined benefit plan. These findings suggest
that firms consider the retirement security of their workers in making the match decision, either
because firms want to minimize the risk of violating their fiduciary responsibility or because
employees more fully value company stock at companies with lower firm-specific risk. Evidence
also indicates that firms may want to match in company stock to boost employee ownership, perhaps
to help deter takeovers, or because of the tax advantages for dividends on the company stock match.
Simulation results suggest that sufficiently risk-tolerant individuals actually prefer a 401(k) plan at
a company with a company stock match to a plan at a company with an unrestricted match, unless
the equity premium is reduced substantially.
Jeffrey R. Brown Nellie Liang Scott Weisbenner
340 Wohlers Hall Federal Reserve Board 340 Wohlers Hall
University of Illinois at Urbana 20th and Constitution Ave NW University of Illinois at Urbana
Champaign Washington, DC 20551 Champaign
Champaign, IL 61820 nliang@frb.gov Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER and NBER
brown@nber.org weisbenn@uiuc.edu

I. Introduction
Company stock in 401(k) plans has been the subject of intense scrutiny by policy makers
over the past several years. In the wake of high profile corporate bankruptcies for companies
that had a large fraction of 401(k) plan assets invested in company stock, numerous lawmakers
began calling for new regulations and restrictions on company stock ownership in 401(k) plans.1
In part motivated by these events, a growing number of academic papers have begun to examine
assets in 401(k) plans in general, and the effects of employer match policy in particular. Recent
research papers have examined the relative adequacy of retirement wealth for defined benefit
versus defined contribution plans (Samwick and Skinner, 2003; Even and McPherson, 2003a),
the importance of plan design and employee inertia (Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick, 2001;
Agnew, Balduzzi, and Sunden, 2003), the effect of 401(k) match policy on employee purchases
of company stock (Bernartzi 2001; Liang and Weisbenner, 2002), and the role of company stock
in 401(k) portfolios (Mitchell and Utkus, 2004; VanderHei, 2002).
Notably absent from this literature is an understanding of why companies choose to
provide their match in company stock in the first place.2 After all, standard portfolio theory
suggests that there are potentially large welfare costs to forcing employees to hold part of their
portfolio in company stock (Meulbroek, 2002). Presumably, there must be some benefits of
providing a match in company stock to offset these potential welfare costs, or else profit-
maximizing companies would not compensate their employees in a form that may not be valued
fully. Indeed, there are a number of potential benefits to a firm from providing a match in
company stock. Specifically, a match in company stock has lower expenses than other
investment options, can free up cash for other uses, boosts employee ownership, and potentially
reduces corporate taxes if the firm pays dividends. Firms that match in company stock may also
be those where the cost to employees of being concentrated in company stock is the lowest. That
is, the costs of matching in company stock could be lower at firms that also provide other
retirement benefits or have lower stock price volatility. We test these alternative hypotheses,
1 For example, Senators Boxer and Corzine introduced legislation that would place a 20 percent cap on the share of
401(k) plan balances that could be invested in company stock.
(http://www.kcstar.com/item/pages/business.pat,business/3acd380f.c18,.html)
2 In a paper written concurrently with this one, Even and Macpherson (2003b) examine why company stock is held
in defined contribution plans, but do not specifically focus on match policy. Our study focuses on why, conditional
on offering company stock as an investment option, firms decide to offer a match in company stock. Most large
publicly-traded corporations offer company stock as an investment option while approximately one-third require that
the match be held in company stock (Profit Sharing / 401(k) Council of America, 2002).
1

providing the first evidence of how a company’s decision to provide its match in company stock
or to offer an unrestricted match is affected by company characteristics.
Using a sample of all publicly traded companies that filed an 11-k statement from 1994 to
2001,3 we find little evidence that firms provide the employer match in company stock because
of cash flow constraints or to increase employee ownership to better align incentives. This is in
contrast to the literature on stock options to non-executive employees, which finds that these
factors are important determinants of options grants (Core and Guay, 2001).
Instead, we find that less risky firms, in terms of lower stock price volatility and a lower
expected bankruptcy rate, are more likely to provide the employer match in company stock. In
addition, we find that firms that have a defined benefit plan are significantly more likely to
provide the match in company stock, particularly if the match is small relative to employee
contributions and hence employer contributions to the 401(k) plan are a less important source of
wealth for employees. These findings suggest that firms do take into account the effect of match
policy on the retirement security of plan participants, either because firms want to minimize the
chance of being considered in violation of their fiduciary responsibility under the Employee
Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) or because employees at these firms more fully value
company stock because of the lower firm-specific risk. Our results also suggest that some firms
may match in company stock to put stock in “friendly hands” to help thwart takeovers. Firms
with multiple classes of stock, which confer superior voting rights on management, are less
likely to match with company stock, consistent with Rauh (2003) who found that state takeover
laws and the company stock holdings in defined contribution (DC) plans of companies
incorporated in those states are substitutes. In addition, we find that the likelihood of an
employer match in company stock increases with the dividend yield, likely because of the tax
benefit associated with dividends paid on stock in leveraged ESOP plans.4 However, the relation
with dividends is not robust.
We then confirm the findings of prior work concerning the effect of the 401(k) match on
participant behavior. Consistent with past research (Benartzi, 2001; Liang and Weisbenner,
3 An 11-k statement is an annual report of a firm’s defined contribution plan that details changes in plan assets over
the past year such as employee and employer contributions to the various investment options. See Section II for a
further description.
4 The firm is allowed to deduct dividends paid on stock contributed to leveraged ESOP plans from taxable income.
The match component of a defined contribution plan can be converted to a leveraged ESOP to reap this tax
deduction for dividends.
2