NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MERGERS AND THE COMPOSITION
OF INTERNATIONAL COMMERCE
Volker Nocke
Stephen Yeaple
Working Paper 10405
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10405
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2004
We would like to thank Bruce Blonigen, Bill Ethier, Matt Slaughter, and Scott Taylor for helpful comments.
We would also like thank seminar participants at the University of Pennsylvania, Penn State University, Iowa
State University, Syracuse University, and the NBER Trade Meetings in Stanford. Finally, both of us
gratefully acknowledge financial support through the University of Pennsylvania Research Foundation. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Volker Nocke and Stephen Yeaple. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Mergers and the Composition of International Commerce
Volker Nocke and Stephen Yeaple
NBER Working Paper No. 10405
March 2004
JEL No. F12, F13
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we develop a novel theory of cross-border mergers and acquisitions. Firms can
choose between different modes of foreign market access: exporting, greenfield FDI, and cross-
border M&A. Our theory is based on three key ideas. First, there is heterogeneity in firms'
capabilities. Second, these capabilities differ in their degree of international mobility. Third,
capabilities are traded in a merger market. We address two questions: (1) what are the characteristics
of firms that choose the various modes of foreign market access, and (2) how does the composition
of international commerce vary across industries and countries?
We show that the degree to which firms differ in their mobile and non-mobile capabilities
plays a crucial role for the composition of international commerce: depending on whether firms
differ in their mobile or immobile capabilities, cross-border mergers may involve the most or the
least efficient active firms. A similar dichotomy obtains when analyzing the effects of country and
industry characteristics on the distribution of firms' efficiencies.
Volker Nocke
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Economics
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
nocke@econ.upenn.edu
Stephen Yeaple
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Economics
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
snyeapl2@ssc.upenn.edu

Nocke & Yeaple: Mergers and the Composition of International Commerce 1
1 Introduction
Inanincreasinglyglobalizedworld,thedecisionofhowbesttoserveforeignmarketsisbecoming
one of the key challenges facing firms. A firm that has decided to sell its product abroad has
two distinct options of serving foreign markets: exporting or producing locally (foreign direct
investment(FDI)).Ifthefirmdecidestoproducelocally,itcanchoosebetweenbuildingitsown
establishment (greenfield investment) or to acquire an existing firm (cross-border merger and
acquisition(M&A)).Thefundamentaldifferencebetweencross-borderM&AandgreenfieldFDI
isthat cross-border M&A involves a transaction between a buyer and a seller at an endogenous
price, while greenfield FDI is simply an investment decision that does not involve a market
transaction and is therefore not directly constrained by market clearing conditions for firm
assets.
While the difference between cross-border M&Aand greenfield investment might seem sub-
tle at first glance, there is a belief among the agents who conduct or influence international
commerce that these modes are in fact very different. First, a vast business literature suggests
that firms view cross-border M&A and greenfield investment as very different modes of FDI so
that the choice between these modes requires careful cost/benefit analysis. Second, as inter-
national commerce has increasingly taken the form of foreign direct investment, governments
have sought to design policies vis-à-vis foreign firms entering their market. In formulating
their approach to the treatment of foreign firms producing in their market, many governments
perceive the costs and benefits of the two modes of FDI as very different.
In a number of host countries, concern is expressed in political discussions and the
media that FDI entry through the takeover of domestic firms is less beneficial, if
not positively harmful, for economic development than entry by setting up new
facilities. At the heart of these concerns is that foreign acquisitions do not add
to productive capacity but simply transfer ownership and control from domestic
to foreign hands. (United Nations Center for Transnational Corporations, 2000, p.
xxiii)

Nocke & Yeaple: Mergers and the Composition of International Commerce 2
Share of Total FDI
1.2
Share of Investment Expenditures
1
0.8
Share of Number of Investments
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1981 1982 1983 19841985 1986 19871988 1989 1990 19911992 1993 19941995 1996 1997 19981999 2000 2001
Figure 1: Acquisitions in total manufacturing FDI.
Interestingly, while the CEOs of multinational firms and government policymakers believe
that greenfield investment and cross-border M&A are distinct modes of FDI, the academic
literature in International Trade has not distinguished between the two modes. In fact, almost
alloftheliteraturehasimplicitlyassumedthatFDItakestheformofgreenfield. Yet, empirical
evidence shows that firms engaging in FDI have entered foreign markets mainly by purchasing
existing foreign firms rather than by building new plants. As figure 1 illustrates, in every year
from 1981 to 2001, between 75% and 90% of all new foreign affiliates in U.S. manufacturing
havebeenacquiredbyforeignfirms(cross-borderM&A),whileonly10%-25%havebeennewly
established (greenfield investment).
Given the empirical importance of cross-border M&A, it is worth asking first why mergers
occur more generally. According to the business literature, firms differ in their underlying
capabilities, and many mergers occur to allow firms to exploit complementarities in these
capabilities. In the international context, cross-border mergers often occur because local firms
havesomecapabilities, suchastheknowledgeoflocalmarketconditionsthatforeignfirmslack,
while foreign firms bring some other capabilities, such as organizational capital or technology