NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OPTIMAL RECURSIVE REFINANCING AND
THE VALUATION OF MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES
Francis A. Longstaff
Working Paper 10422
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10422
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2004
I am grateful for helpful discussions with David Armstrong, Douglas Breeden, Stephen Cauley, Robert
Edelstein, Jim Gammill, Kent Hatch, Lakhbir Hayre, Dwight Jaffe, Hedi Kallal, Stanley Kon, Eduardo
Schwartz, Tony Sanders, Roberto Sella, Chester Spatt, Richard Stanton, and Nancy Wallace and for the
comments of seminar participants at the University of California at Berkeley, Brigham Young University,
Citigroup, Cornell University, Morgan Stanley, New York University, Stanford University, The Wharton
School at the University of Pennsylvania, and Yale University. I am also grateful to Brett Myers for research
assistance. All errors are my responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Francis A. Longstaff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Optimal Recursive Refinancing and the Valuation of Mortgage-Backed Securities
Francis A. Longstaff
NBER Working Paper No. 10422
April 2004
JEL No. G1
ABSTRACT
We study the optimal recursive refinancing problem where a borrower minimizes his lifetime
mortgage costs by repeatedly refinancing when rates drop sufficiently. Key factors affecting the
optimal decision are the cost of refinancing and the possibility that the mortgagor may have to
refinance at a premium rate because of his credit. The optimal recursive strategy often results in
prepayment being delayed significantly relative to traditional models. Furthermore, mortgage values
can exceed par by much more than the cost of refinancing. Applying the recursive model to an
extensive sample of mortgage-backed security prices, we find that the implied credit spreads that
match these prices closely parallel borrowers’ actual spreads at the origination of the mortgage.
These results suggest that optimal recursive models may provide a promising alternative to the
reduced-form prepayment models widely used in practice.
Francis A. Longstaff
UCLA
Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu

1. INTRODUCTION
Since its inception in the 1970s, the mortgage-backed security market has experi-
enced dramatic growth in the United States. As of June 30, 2002, the total notional
amount of Agency mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations
outstanding was more than $3.9 trillion. This means that the size of these markets
now exceeds the $3.5 trillion notional amount of publicly-traded U.S. Treasury debt.
Despite the importance of these markets, however, the goal of developing a fun-
damental theory of mortgage valuation represents an ongoing challenge to researchers.
The key element that has proven difficult to explain within a rational model is how
mortgageborrowerschoosetorefinancetheirloans. InfluentialearlyworkbyDunnand
McConnell (1981a, b), Brennan and Schwartz (1985), and others applies contingent
claims techniques to the problem by modeling prepayment as an endogenous decision
made by the borrower in minimizing the present value of his current mortgage. More
recently, Dunn and Spatt (1986) and Stanton and Wallace (1998) extend this classical
approach in an important way by modeling the prepayment decision as the result of
the borrower minimizing his lifetime mortgage costs. As discussed by Schwartz and
Torous (1989, 1992, 1993), however, actual prepayment behavior appears very subop-
timal relative to the optimal behavior implied by these models. Furthermore, these
models all have the property that mortgage-backed security prices cannot exceed par
plus the number of points paid to refinance the loan. As demonstrated by Stanton
(1995), Boudoukh, Whitelaw, Richardson, and Stanton (1997), and others, this upper
bound is nearly always violated in practice.
The apparent failure of the optimal prepayment literature led to the current gen-
eration of reduced-form or behavioral mortgage valuation models. In this approach,
econometric models of prepayment behavior are estimated from historical data and
are then used to forecast future prepayments. Important examples of this widely-
used modeling approach include Schwartz and Torous (1989, 1992, 1993), Boudoukh,
Whitelaw, Richardson, and Stanton (1997), Hayre (2001), and many others. An im-
portant drawback of these descriptive models, however, is that they may do very
poorly out of sample when the current or expected shape of the term structure differs
from those experienced during the historical calibration period. Thus, this approach
can impose significant model risk on market participants during periods when the
characteristics of the market differ from their historical patterns.
The drawbacks of reduced-form models provide a strong motivation for revis-
iting the optimal prepayment modeling approach. Interestingly, a common feature
throughout the earlier literature is the assumption that the rate at which a borrower
can refinance his loan is independent of his financial status. In actuality, however, a
1

borrower who does not satisfy the strictest underwriting guidelines may have to refi-
nance at a higher rate than other more-qualified borrowers. This clearly would reduce
his incentives for prepaying his current mortgage and affect his optimal refinancing
strategy. Thus, even though principal and interest on an Agency mortgage-backed
security are guaranteed, the actual timing of these cash flows could be affected by the
credit of the borrower, which in turn would be reflected in the value of the security.
In this paper, we solve for the optimal recursive refinancing strategy of a borrower
whoseobjectiveistominimizehislifetimemortgagecosts, andthenexaminetheimpli-
cations of this strategy for the valuation of mortgage-backed securities. Our approach
incorporatestheeffectsofthefollowingkeyfactorsontheoptimalrefinancingstrategy:
The transaction costs associated with refinancing a mortgage.
•
The probability of prepaying for exogenous reasons.
•
The credit spread faced by a borrower who is considering refinancing.
•
Since the nature of the recursive problem requires considering the effects of decisions
going far beyond the current mortgage, it is important to use a modeling framework
that reflects the actual intertemporal behavior of the term structure. In light of
this, we develop the model within a realistic multi-factor term-structure setting that
matches both the current term structure and the values of fixed income options. The
use of a multi-factor model is also consistent with Boudoukh, Whitelaw, Richardson,
and Stanton (1997) and Downing, Stanton, and Wallace (2002) who find evidence that
mortgage-backed security prices are driven by multiple term-structure factors. Since
the recursive refinancing problem is essentially an American option valuation problem,
we use the least-squares simulation method of Longstaff and Schwartz (2001) to solve
for the optimal recursive strategy and value mortgage-backed securities in this multi-
factor framework.
We show that the optimal recursive strategy implies prepayment behavior very
different from that given by classical rational prepayment models. For example, the
mean time to prepayment of the current mortgage can be several years later under
the optimal recursive strategy when the borrower is not able to refinance at the par
mortgage rate. Furthermore, a borrower attempting to minimize lifetime mortgage
costs has a strong incentive to minimize the number of times he refinances his mort-
gage because of the associated transaction costs. Thus, a borrower who believes that
mortgage rates may be going down further in the near future may choose to delay re-
financing his loan. This is particularly true when there is a significant possibility that
the borrower may need to pay off the loan for exogenous reasons in the near future
anyway. Because the first prepayment may occur much later when the optimal recur-
sive strategy is followed, the value of a mortgage-backed security can be significantly
higher than par plus the costs of refinancing.
2