NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HETEROGENEOUS INVESTORS AND THEIR
CHANGING DEMAND AND SUPPLY SCHEDULES
FOR INDIVIDUAL COMMON STOCKS
Jung-Wook Kim
Jason Lee
Randall Morck
Working Paper 10410
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10410
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2004
We thank Hyeon Kee Bae, Mark Huson, Aditya Kaul, Ki Bong Lee, Vikas Mehrotra, Barry Scholnick, Andrei
Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, students in Andrei Shleifer’s behavioral finance seminar course at Harvard University,
and seminar participants at the University of Alberta for helpful comments. We gratefully acknowledge
financial supports provided by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2004 by Jung-Wook Kim, Jason Lee, and Randall Morck. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Heterogeneous Investors and their Changing Demand and
Supply Schedules for Individual Common Stocks
Jung-Wook Kim, Jason Lee, and Randall Morck
NBER Working Paper No. 10410
April 2004
JEL No. G0
ABSTRACT
Using 550 million limit orders submitted in the Korea Stock Exchange, we estimate demand and
supply elasticities of heterogeneous investor types and their changes around the Asian financial
crisis. We find that domestic individuals have substantially more inelastic demand and supply curves
than domestic institutions and foreign investors. The crisis permanently reduced price elasticities
of domestic individuals by 50% but had no effect on those of foreign investors. Institutional changes
restricting margin purchases, implemented after the crisis, seem particularly important in explaining
the dramatic drop. Information heterogeneity, availability of close substitutes and arbitrage risk also
explain time-series variations in elasticities.
Jung-wook Kim
Department of Finance
University of Alberta
Edmonton Alberta
Canada T6G 2R6
jungwook.kim@ualberta.ca
Jason Lee
Department of Finance
University of Alberta
Edmonton Alberta
Canada T6G 2R6
jasonlee@ualberta.ca
Randall K. Morck
Department of Finance
University of Alberta
Edmonton Alberta
Canada T6G 2R6
and NBER
randall.morck@ualberta.ca

In this paper, we use a unique dataset from the Korea Stock Exchange to examine the demand
and supply schedules for common stocks. Our dataset allows us to identify limit orders
submitted by three types of investors: domestic individuals, domestic institutions, and foreign
investors. Using this feature, we investigate demand and supply elasticities across these three
types of investors in general, and then study their changes around the 1997 Asian financial
crisis. To the best of our knowledge, our paper is the first evidence that heterogeneous
investors have differing demand and supply schedules and that the elasticities of different
investor types are affected differently by a financial crisis.
The textbook description of arbitrage requires no capital and involves no risk.
Arbitrageurs short an overvalued security and use the proceeds to buy its perfect substitute.
In this environment, competition among arbitrageurs leads to perfectly elastic demand and
supply curves for individual securities. However, in real stock markets, arbitrage does not
work as effectively as the textbook description and the slopes of demand and supply curves
are finitely elastic.1, 2
Since Scholes (1972), the elasticities of demand and supply curves for common stocks
have been a subject of extensive research. In the past, researchers have used two approaches
to measuring these elasticities. One approach is to examine price changes associated with
stock issues or repurchases. Another is to examine price changes of stocks added to market
indexes. In this paper, we propose a third approach – the direct construction of demand and
supply curves for individual stocks from detailed data on individual bids and offers in the
course of normal daily trading in both call auction and continuous markets.3
We do this using a dataset which consists of over 550 million buy and sell orders
submitted in the Korea Stock Exchange (KSE) for the period from December 1996 to
December 2000. The methodology we develop using this data allows us to probe into the
1

nature of demand and supply elasticity for stocks more deeply than previous studies in
several ways.
First, by constructing daily demand and supply schedules for all common stocks listed
in the KSE, we are able to directly estimate the daily elasticity measures of demand and
supply curves in a general trading environment. Because the KSE opens with call auction
and then switches to continuous trading, we estimate two measures of elasticity for both
demand and supply curves. We find that for the opening auction, the average (median)
elasticity of demand is 9.26 (8.62) while it is 10.28 (8.85) for the continuous trading hours.
We also obtain comparable estimates for the elasticity of supply. Our estimates roughly fall
in the middle of the spectrum of existing estimates based on the other two approaches.
Second, going beyond previous studies, our data let us investigate demand and supply
schedules for different classes of investors. When we partition the sample by investor class,
we find that both domestic institutions and foreign investors (mainly institutional investors)
have substantially more elastic demand and supply schedules than domestic individual
investors. This result indicates that institutional investors have more homogeneous
expectations and are more responsive to changes in stock prices than are individual investors.
Third, and also beyond the scope of previous studies, we can examine how elasticities
change. Since our sample period includes the 1997 Asian financial crisis, which led to sharp
declines in stock prices in Korea and other countries in the region, we can examine the effect
of this crisis on elasticities. We find that the crisis permanently reduced the demand and
supply elasticities of both domestic individuals and domestic institutions, but had virtually no
effect on the elasticities of foreign investors. Notably, demand and supply elasticities of
domestic individual investors fall by almost 50% from their pre-crisis levels. One possible
explanation for this structural break can be found in an equally dramatic decrease in margin
2