NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CORPORATE YIELD SPREADS: DEFAULT RISK OR LIQUIDITY?
NEW EVIDENCE FROM THE CREDIT-DEFAULT SWAP MARKET
Francis Longstaff
Sanjay Mithal
Eric Neis
Working Paper 10418
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10418
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2004
We are grateful for valuable comments and assistance from Dennis Adler, Warren Bailey, Sanjiv Das, Darrell
Duffie, Joseph Langsam, Jun Liu, Jun Pan, Eduardo Schwartz, Jure Skarabot, Soetojo Tanudjaja, and Ryoichi
Yamabe, and from seminar participants at the University of California at Riverside, the London School of
Business, the University of Southern California, and the University of Texas at Austin. We are particularly
grateful for the comments of the Editor Robert Stambaugh and an anonymous referee. All errors are our
responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Francis Longstaff, Sanjay Mithal, and Eric Neis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Corporate Yield Spreads: Default Risk or Liquidity? New Evidence from the Credit-Default
Swap Market
Francis Longstaff, Sanjay Mithal, and Eric Neis
NBER Working Paper No. 10418
April 2004
JEL No. G1
ABSTRACT
We use the information in credit-default swaps to obtain direct measures of the size of the default
and nondefault components in corporate spreads. We find that the majority of the corporate spread
is due to default risk. This result holds for all rating categories and is robust to the definition of the
riskless curve. We also find that the nondefault component is time varying and strongly related to
measures of bond-specific illiquidity as well as to macroeconomic measures of bond-market
liquidity.
Francis A. Longstaff
UCLA
Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu
Sanjay Mithal
Deutsche Bank
Eric Neis
Anderson Graduate School of Management
UCLA

1. INTRODUCTION
How do financial markets value corporate debt? What portion of corporate yield
spreads is directly attributable to default risk? How much of the spread stems from
other factors such as liquidity and taxes? These issues are of fundamental impor-
tance from an investment perspective since corporate debt outstanding in the U.S.
now approaches $5 trillion, making it one of the largest asset classes in the financial
markets. These issues are also of key importance from a corporate finance perspective
because the presence of nondefault components in corporate spreads could directly
affect capital structure decisions as well as the timing of debt and equity issues.
Anumberofpapershavestudiedthe determinantsofcorporateyieldspreads. Im-
portant examplesincludeJones, Mason, andRosenfeld(1984), LongstaffandSchwartz
(1995a), Duffie and Singleton (1997), Duffee (1999), Elton, Gruber, Agrawal, and
Mann (2001), Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Martin (2001), Delianedis and Geske
(2001), Liu, Longstaff, and Mandell (2002), Eom, Helwege, and Huang (2003), Huang
and Huang (2003), Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Helwege (2003), and many others.
Previously, however, researchers have been limited by having only bond data available
to them in their efforts to identify the components of corporate spreads.
In the past several years, however, credit derivatives have begun trading actively
in financial markets. By their nature, these innovative contracts provide researchers
with a near-ideal way of directly measuring the size of the default component in
corporate spreads. Credit derivatives are rapidly becoming one of the most successful
financial innovations of the past decade. The British Bankers’ Association estimates
that from a total notional amount of $180 billion in 1997, the credit-derivatives market
grew more than tenfold to $2.0 trillion by the end of 2002. Furthermore, the British
Bankers’ Association forecasts that the total notional amount of credit derivatives will
reach $4.8 trillion by the end of 2004.
This paper uses the information in credit-default swap premia to provide direct
measures of the size of the default and nondefault components in corporate yield
spreads. Credit-default swaps are the most common type of credit derivative. In
a credit-default swap, the party buying protection pays the seller a fixed premium
each period until either default occurs or the swap contract matures. In return, if the
underlying firm defaults on its debt, the protection seller is obligated to buy back from
the buyer the defaulted bond at its par value. Thus, a credit-default swap is similar to
an insurance contract compensating the buyer for losses arising from a default. A key
aspect of our study is the use of an extensive data set on credit-default swap premia
and corporate bond prices provided to us by the Global Credit Derivatives desk at
Citigroup. This proprietary data set includes weekly market quotations for a broad
1

cross section of firms actively traded in the credit-derivatives market.
In measuring the size of the default component, we use two approaches. First,
we use the credit-default swap premium directly as a measure of the default com-
ponent in corporate spreads. As shown by Duffie and Liu (2001), however, this
widely-used model-independent approach can be biased. Accordingly, we also use
a reduced-form-model approach to measure the size of the default component. Specif-
ically, we develop closed-form expressions for corporate bond prices and credit-default
swap premia within the familiar Duffie and Singleton (1997, 1999) framework. In
this reduced-form model, corporate cash flows are discounted at an adjusted rate that
includes a liquidity or convenience-yield process. This feature allows the model to cap-
ture any liquidity or other nondefault-related components in corporate bond prices.
For each firm in the sample, we fit the model jointly to credit-default swap premia
and a cross section of corporate bond prices with maturities straddling the five-year
horizon of the credit-default swaps in the sample. Once estimated, the default com-
ponent is given directly from the closed-form expression for corporate bond prices.
We illustrate these approaches with a detailed case study of Enron. The analysis is
then extended to include all firms in the sample. To insure that the results are robust
to alternative specifications of the riskless rate, we report results using the Treasury,
Refcorp, and swap curves to calculate corporate spreads.
We find that the default component accounts for the majority of the corporate
spread across all credit ratings. In particular, calculating spreads relative to the Trea-
sury curve, the default component represents 51 percent of the spread for AAA/AA-
rated bonds, 56 percent for A-rated bonds, 71 percent for BBB-rated bonds, and 83
percent for BB-rated bonds. The percentages are even higher when the other curves
are used to calculate spreads.
These results contrast with those in Jones, Mason, and Rosenfeld (1984), Elton,
Gruber, Agrawal, and Mann (2001), Delianedis and Geske (2001), Huang and Huang
(2003), and others who report that default risk accounts for only a small percentage of
the spread for investment-grade bonds. However, Elton, Gruber, Agrawal, and Mann
find that spreads include an important risk premium in addition to compensation for
the expected default loss. Since the credit-default swap premium measures the risk-
neutraldefaultcomponent(expecteddefaultlosspluscredit-riskpremium), ourresults
may in fact be consistent with theirs. Furthermore, Delianedis and Geske and Huang
and Huang show that under some parameterizations, results paralleling ours can be
obtained from a structural model. Doing so, however, requires either larger jump
sizes or credit-risk premia than in typical calibrations.1 Finally, Eom, Helwege, and
Huang (2003) show that some structural models can actually overestimate corporate
1However, recent work by Liu, Longstaff, and Mandell (2002), Pan (2002), and Collin-
Dufresne, Goldstein, and Helwege (2003) suggests that the market price of jump-
related risks such as default is surprisingly large in some markets.
2