NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INSTITUTIONS AS THE FUNDAMENTAL
CAUSE OF LONG-RUN GROWTH
Daron Acemoglu
Simon Johnson
James Robinson
Working Paper 10481
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10481
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2004
Prepared for the Handbook of Economic Growth edited by Philippe Aghion and Steve Durlauf. We thank the
editors for their patience and Leopoldo Fergusson, Pablo Querubín and Barry Weingast for their helpful
suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Institutions as the Fundamental Cause of Long-Run Growth
Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 10481
May 2004
JEL No. N11, N13, N15, N16, N17, O10, P10, P17
ABSTRACT
This paper develops the empirical and theoretical case that differences in economic institutions are
the fundamental cause of differences in economic development. We first document the empirical
importance of institutions by focusing on two "quasi-natural experiments" in history, the division
of Korea into two parts with very different economic institutions and the colonization of much of
the world by European powers starting in the fifteenth century. We then develop the basic outline
of a framework for thinking about why economic institutions differ across countries. Economic
institutions determine the incentives of and the constraints on economic actors, and shape economic
outcomes. As such, they are social decisions, chosen for their consequences. Because different
groups and individuals typically benefit from different economic institutions, there is generally a
conflict over these social choices, ultimately resolved in favor of groups with greater political power.
The distribution of political power in society is in turn determined by political institutions and the
distribution of resources. Political institutions allocate de jure political power, while groups with
greater economic might typically possess greater de facto political power. We therefore view the
appropriate theoretical framework as a dynamic one with political institutions and the distribution
of resources as the state variables. These variables themselves change over time because prevailing
economic institutions affect the distribution of resources, and because groups with de facto political
power today strive to change political institutions in order to increase their de jure political power
in the future. Economic institutions encouraging economic growth emerge when political institutions
allocate power to groups with interests in broad-based property rights enforcement, when they create
effective constraints on power-holders, and when there are relatively few rents to be captured by
power-holders. We illustrate the assumptions, the workings and the implications of this framework
using a number of historical examples.
Daron Acemoglu James Robinson
Department of Economics Departments of Economics and Political Science
MIT University of California, Berkeley
50 Memorial Drive Berkeley, CA 94720
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
daron@mit.edu
Simon Johnson
Sloan School of Management
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
sjohnson@mit.edu

1 Introduction
1.1 The question
The most trite yet crucial question in the field of economic growth and development
is: Why are some countries much poorer than others? Traditional neoclassical growth
models, following Solow (1956), Cass (1965) and Koopmans (1965), explain differences
in income per capita in terms of different paths of factor accumulation. In these models,
cross-country differences in factor accumulation are due either to differences in saving
rates (Solow), preferences (Cass-Koopmans), or other exogenous parameters, such as
total factor productivity growth. More recent incarnations of growth theory, following
Romer (1986) and Lucas (1988), endogenize steady-state growth and technical progress,
but their explanation for income differences is similar to that of the older theories. For
instance, in the model of Romer (1990), a country may be more prosperous than an-
other if it allocates more resources to innovation, but what determines this is essentially
preferences and properties of the technology for creating ‘ideas’.1
Though this theoretical tradition is still vibrant in economics and has provided many
insightsaboutthemechanicsofeconomic growth, ithasfor alongtimeseemedunableto
provideafundamentalexplanationforeconomicgrowth. AsNorthandThomas(1973, p.
2) put it: “the factors we have listed (innovation, economies of scale, education, capital
accumulation etc.) are not causes of growth; they are growth” (italics in original).
Factor accumulation and innovation are only proximate causes of growth. In North and
Thomas’s view, the fundamental explanation of comparative growth is differences in
institutions.
What are institutions exactly? North (1990, p. 3) offers the following definition:
“Institutions are the rules of the game in a society or, more formally, are the humanly
devised constraints that shape human interaction.” He goes on to emphasize the key
implications of institutions since, “In consequence they structure incentives in human
exchange, whether political, social, or economic.”
Of primary importance to economic outcomes are the economic institutions in soci-
ety such as the structure of property rights and the presence and perfection of markets.
Economic institutions are important because they influence the structure of economic
1Although some recent contributions to growth theory emphasize the importance of economic poli-
cies,suchastaxes,subsidiestoresearch,barrierstotechnologyadoptionandhumancapitalpolicy,they
typically do not present an explanation for why there are differences in these policies across countries.
1

incentives in society. Without property rights, individuals will not have the incentive to
invest in physical or human capital or adopt more efficient technologies. Economic insti-
tutions are also important because they help to allocate resources to their most efficient
uses, they determine who gets profits, revenues and residual rights of control. When
markets are missing or ignored (as they were in the Soviet Union, for example), gains
from trade go unexploited and resources are misallocated. Societies with economic in-
stitutions that facilitate and encourage factor accumulation, innovation and the efficient
allocation of resources will prosper.
Central to this chapter and to much of political economy research on institutions is
that economic institutions, and institutions more broadly, are endogenous; they are, at
least in part, determined by society, or a segment of it. Consequently, the question of
why some societies are much poorer than others is closely related to the question of why
some societies have much “worse economic institutions” than others.
Even though many scholars including John Locke, Adam Smith, John Stuart Mill,
Douglass North and Robert Thomas have emphasized the importance of economic insti-
tutions, we are far from auseful framework for thinking about howeconomic institutions
are determined and why they vary across countries. In other words, while we have good
reasontobelievethateconomicinstitutionsmatterforeconomicgrowth, welackthecru-
cial comparative static results which will allow us to explain why equilibrium economic
institutions differ (and perhaps this is part of the reason why much of the economics
literature has focused on the proximate causes of economic growth, largely neglecting
fundamental institutional causes).
This chapterhas three aims. First, weselectively reviewtheevidencethat differences
in economic institutions are a fundamental cause of cross-country differences in prosper-
ity. Second, we outline a framework for thinking about why economic institutions vary
across countries. We emphasize the potential comparative static results of this frame-
work and also illustrate the key mechanisms through a series of historical examples and
case studies. Finally, we highlight a large number of areas where future theoretical and
empirical work would be very fruitful.
1.2 The Argument
The basic argument of this chapter can be summarized as follows:
1. Economic institutions matter for economic growth because they shape the in-
centives of key economic actors in society, in particular, they influence investments in
physical and human capital and technology, and the organization of production. Al-
2