NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SHORT INTEREST AND STOCK RETURNS
Paul Asquith
Parag A. Pathak
Jay R. Ritter
Working Paper 10434
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10434
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2004
We would like to thank the NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq for supplying us with short interest data, and to Lisa
Meulbroek for helpful contributions. This paper substantially revises and extends the 1995 working paper
“An Empirical Investigation of Short Interest” by Paul Asquith and Lisa Meulbroek. Comments from Burt
Porter and workshop participants at Barclays Global Investors and the University of North Carolina are
appreciated. In addition, we thank Vivek Bohra, Jeff Braun, Stefan Budac, Jason Hotra, Carl Huttenlocher,
Kevin Kadakia, and Matthew Zames for their research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Paul Asquith, Parag A. Pathak, and Jay R. Ritter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Short Interest and Stock Returns
Paul Asquith, Parag A. Pathak, and Jay R. Ritter
NBER Working Paper No. 10434
April 2004
JEL No. G12, G14
ABSTRACT
Using a longer time period and both NYSE-Amex and Nasdaq stocks, this paper examines short
interest and stock returns in more detail than any previous study and finds that many documented
patterns are not robust. While equally weighted high short interest portfolios generally
underperform, value weighted portfolios do not. In addition, there is a negative correlation between
market returns and short interest over our whole period. Finally, inferences from short time periods,
such as 1988-1994 when the underperformance of high short interest stocks was exceptional or
1995-2002, when high short interest Nasdaq stocks did not underperform, are misleading.
Paul Asquith
Sloan School of Management
MIT, Room E52-325
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
pasquith@mit.edu
Parag A. Pathak
Department of Economics
Harvard University
ppathak@fas.harvard.edu
Jay R. Ritter
Warrington College of Business Administration
University of Florida
jay.ritter@cba.ufl.edu

Short Interest and Stock Returns
I. Introduction
It is now widely accepted that stocks with high short interest ratios underperform the
market. This is a very recent bit of conventional wisdom, based largely on the evidence in
Asquith and Meulbroek’s (1995) unpublished working paper for New York Stock Exchange
(NYSE) and American Stock Exchange (Amex) stocks, and Desai, Ramesh, Thiagarajan, and
Balachandran’s (2002) article for Nasdaq stocks. Both Asquith and Meulbroek and Desai et al
report negative and significant abnormal returns for firms with short interest ratios of 2.5% or
more, where the short interest ratio is defined as the ratio of short interest to shares outstanding.
Both papers also report large secular increases in short interest ratios, and skewed cross-sectional
distributions, with most stocks having short interest ratios of less than 0.5%, and very few firms
having a ratio exceeding 10%. Prior to these papers, the conventional wisdom was that large
short positions presaged positive future returns, caused by the flow demand from short sellers
covering their positions.1
The rationale for why high short interest should presage negative abnormal returns relies
upon the fact that short selling stocks is costly or constrained relative to taking long positions.
There are many reasons for this, primarily regulatory constraints. If short selling is costly, the
“votes” of optimistic investors carry a greater weight than those of pessimistic investors in stock
valuation. Two predictions flow from these observations. First, firms with a high dispersion of
opinion will be overvalued, and thus have low subsequent returns, as first discussed by Miller
(1977). Second, since short sellers will concentrate their positions in the firms that are most
overvalued, firms with high short interest ratios will have low subsequent returns, as modeled by
Diamond and Verrecchia (1987).
This paper shows that the new conventional wisdom regarding short interest ratios and
return predictability, as well as continual increases in short interest ratios over time, is premature
and incomplete. Using a longer time period for both NYSE-Amex and Nasdaq stocks and
examining short interest and stock returns in more detail than any previous study, we find that
the patterns are more ambiguous than the recent literature suggests. While the result that high
1 This idea is named the “Cushion Theory” in Barron’s Dictionary of Finance and Investment Terms, 5th edition,
1998.
2

short interest stocks underperform is generally true for equally weighted portfolios, it does not
hold for value weighted portfolios. Specifically, for the period from 1976 to 2002, equally
weighted (EW) portfolios of NYSE-Amex and (beginning in July 1988) Nasdaq firms with high
short interest reliably underperform. These same portfolios over the same calendar time period,
however, do not reliably underperform on a value weighted (VW) basis. For example, firms in
the 99th percentile of short interest ratios have monthly abnormal returns of –53 basis points (t= -
2.44) on an EW basis, but only –5 basis points (t= -0.17) on a VW basis. This difference is not
because highly shorted stocks are all micro-caps, however. While highly shorted stocks have a
larger median equity value than the median of non-highly shorted stocks, they are
disproportionately small stocks, with both micro-cap stocks and large-cap stocks
underrepresented. This is true for the entire sample and for the subsamples of NYSE-Amex and
Nasdaq firms.
In addition to the differences between EW and VW portfolios, over the period 1988-
2002, when data for all markets are available, there are differences between NYSE-Amex and
Nasdaq firms. The abnormal returns on NYSE-Amex stocks with high short interest are more
negative and more consistent across portfolios than for Nasdaq stocks.
Consistent with other studies, we find that the higher the short interest ratio, the lower is
the subsequent performance. That is, firms with short interest ratios of 10% or more
underperform those of 5% or 2.5%. Likewise, firms that are in the 99th percentile of short interest
underperform firms in the 95th percentile. These are not fair comparisons, however, since these
portfolios are not distinct. The 2.5% portfolio includes stocks in the 5% and 10% portfolio.
Likewise the 95th percentile portfolio includes stocks in the 99th percentile portfolio. This
suggests that the magnitude and significance of abnormal returns for the less restrictive
portfolios are driven by stocks with the highest short interest.
We examine this issue using truncated portfolios, i.e. 2.5-4.9%, 5-9.9%, and 95-98.9th
percentiles, and find that this is in fact the case. For the sample of NYSE-Amex-Nasdaq firms
over the period 1988-2002, the truncated portfolio returns are not as negative or significant as are
the corresponding untruncated portfolio returns. In general, the portfolios with reliably negative
abnormal returns are EW portfolios with high short interest ratios. These stocks comprise a small
percentage of all firms and market capitalization. In a typical year, there are 5,500 domestic
operating companies trading on the NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq National Market System. Only 55
3