NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCIAL-SECTOR FDI AND HOST COUNTRIES:
NEW AND OLD LESSONS
Linda Goldberg
Working Paper 10441
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10441
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2004
The views expressed in this paper are the author’s and do not necessarily reflect the position of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. Valuable comments were provided by participants
in the Bank for International Settlements Committee on Global Financial Stability in Basle, at the 2004 ASSA
meetings in San Diego, and at the Trinity College of Dublin Conference on Micro and Macro Perspectives
on FDI. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Linda Goldberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial-Sector FDI and Host Countries: New and Old Lessons
Linda Goldberg
NBER Working Paper No. 10441
April 2004
JEL No. F3, F4
ABSTRACT
Many of the lessons from foreign direct investment (FDI) research on manufacturing and extractive
resource industries are applicable to financial-sector FDI. This paper reviews the main findings and
policy themes of FDI research, with a primary focus on the host country implications of FDI for
emerging market economies. Evidence on technology transfers, productivity spillovers, wage
effects, macroeconomic growth, and fiscal and tax concerns are emphasized. Throughout this
review, I stress that parallel findings often arise independently in the separate research programs that
focus on general and financial-sector FDI. I also emphasize that some important differences between
the results of FDI into these sectors are apparent, especially with respect to their implications for
local institution building and business cycles. These differences, more so than the similarities,
should be the focus of concentrated research efforts.
Linda Goldberg
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER
linda.goldberg@ny.frb.org

I. Introduction
In the 1990s, foreign direct investment (FDI) became the largest single source of
external finance for many developing countries. For the most part, discussions of the
causes and effects of FDI have mainly focussed on manufacturing and real production
activity (“general” FDI). Financial-sector FDI also has soared. Yet, research efforts on
the general FDI and the financial-sector FDI have been orthogonal, and cross citation has
been rare. This orthogonality is surprising: financial FDI shares many of the features of
more general FDI in productive services. This paper attempts to bridge this gap and
emphasize the parallels and differences between the real and financial-sector FDI.
Conceptually, in each case a foreign producer of goods or services makes a two-
fold decision. First, he decides whether to service a particular market; second, he
determines whether this market should be served through exports or through setting up
local production. While manufacturers use the language of exports or production by
multinationals, there is a direct financial services (and in particular banking) analogue to
this two-step decision: first, the bank decides whether to provide lending, deposit-taking
and other services to a market; second, if so, the bank determines whether to service this
market via cross-border activities (arms-length transactions) or foreign direct investment
in the form of setting up branches or subsidiaries followed by local lending.
FDI is an activity that occurs as part of a multinational’s broader strategic plan.
Flows can respond to both microeconomic stimuli, such as tax incentives,1 and
macroeconomic stimuli, such as fluctuations in exchange rates and business cycles. The
sometimes lumpy reallocation of capital across borders may occur when governments
reduce their protection of inefficient or corrupt local industries.2 Opportunities to gain
local market share and exploit sales or production networks also trigger entry. These
features are common to manufacturing industries, extractive resource industries, and
financial services.
A well-established literature explores the causes and consequences of FDI in
productive services, generally interpreted as manufacturing but sometimes extending to
mining and natural resource extractive services. This research often uses data from
1 See the edited volume by Feldstein, Hines, and Hubbard (1995) for a range of analyses of tax and FDI
questions.
1

individual countries or industries within countries, as opposed to taking the form of
sweeping multi-country studies. Consequently, the resulting stylized are usually based on
theoretical arguments supplemented by selective case studies.3 Mainly due to data
limitations, distinctions are seldom made between FDI conducted in the form of mergers
and acquisitions, versus those done as greenfield (de novo) investments.
A distinct and more recent literature has been addressing themes related to cross-
border flows of products or ownership in the financial services industry. This literature
generally focuses on the implications of foreign entry into local banking systems, either
from the perspective of risk management by the investing firms and parents, or from the
perspective of host markets that sometimes are skeptical about foreign entry.4 Events of
the early 1990s accelerated interest in this financial-sector FDI. Following the breakup of
the Soviet Union, foreign bank entry into Central and Eastern European countries led to
foreign ownership in local banking system often in excess of 80 percent of local banking
system assets. Liberalizations in Latin America also may have been partially prompted
by these events, especially where there were concerns about potential competitiveness
losses relative to the East. Financial crises of the mid-to late1990s prompted further
openings as countries sought to recapitalize and spur efficiency improvements in their
financial systems.
Observers of these changes in financial sector ownership have appropriately
begun to analyze the implications of this financial sector FDI on the host countries. In
this paper, I argue that many of the lessons from the general FDI research (which has a
manufacturing sector and extractive resource industry focus) directly pertain to financial-
sector FDI (FSFDI). I review – without attempting to be exhaustive -- some of the main
findings and policy themes, taking as a primary focus the host country implications of
FDI, especially for emerging markets. I emphasize evidence on technology transfers,
productivity spillovers, wage effects, macroeconomic growth, institutional development,
and fiscal and tax concerns. Throughout the paper, I cite the applicable parallel results
2 Dixit and Kyle (1985) provide an elegant conceptual exposition.
3 The case studies employ distinct “definitions” of FDI – sometimes using a flow definition (for example,
covering the foreign investment that took place within a particular period of time) or a stock definition,
which is meant to represent the total cumulative value of all foreign investment up until some point in time.
Data availability often drives the type of analysis conducted.
2