NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE TYING OF LENDING AND EQUITY UNDERWRITING
Steven Drucker
Manju Puri
Working Paper 10491
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10491
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2004
Puri is grateful to the Sloan Foundation for partial funding of this research. We thank James Booth, Mark
Flannery, Jean Helwege, Jianping Qi, Andy Winton, and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank
of San Francisco, Stanford Graduate School of Business, the 2003 FMA International Meetings in Dublin,
the 2003 FMA Meetings in Denver, the 2003 FDIC/JFSR Conference on Banking and Finance in
Washington, D.C., and the 2004 AFA Meetings in San Diego. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Steven Drucker and Manju Puri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Tying of Lending and Equity Underwriting
Steven Drucker and Manju Puri
NBER Working Paper No. 10491
May 2004
JEL No. G2
ABSTRACT
This article examines the practice of “tying,” which occurs when an underwriter lends to an issuer
around the time of a public securities offering. We examine whether there are efficiencies from tying
lending and underwriting which lead to benefits for issuers and underwriters. We find evidence
consistent with tying occurring for issues when there are informational economies of scope from
combining lending and underwriting. Firms benefit from tying through lower financing costs, as tied
issuers receive lower underwriter fees on seasoned equity offerings and discounted loan yield
spreads. These financing costs are significantly reduced for non-investment grade issuers, where
informational economies of scope from combining lending with underwriting are likely to be large.
These results are robust to matching methodology developed by Heckman, Ichimura, and Todd
(1997, 1998). For underwriters, tying helps build relationships that augment an underwriter’s
expected revenues by increasing the probability of receiving both current and future business. Both
commercial banks and investment banks tie lending and underwriting and offer price discounts,
albeit in different ways, with commercial banks discounting loan yield spreads and investment banks
offering reduced underwriter spreads.
Steven Drucker
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
Manju Puri
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
1 Towerview Drive, Box 90120
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
mpuri@duke.edu

1. Introduction
For many years, the 1933 Glass-Steagall Act prevented commercial banks from underwriting
corporate bonds and equities. Due to the recent relaxation and eventual repeal of the Act,
commercial banks acquired investment banks, or developed investment-banking capabilities
internally, to create universal banks that can offer an array of financial services.
The entry of commercial banks into underwriting markets has increased the potential for
financial institutions to tie products, such as packaging loans with underwriting services. In fact,
tying has increased substantially over time -- in 1994, only 1% of seasoned equity issuers
received a loan from their underwriter at around the time of issuance, but by 2001, over 20% of
all deals were tied. The tying of lending and underwriting raises a host of interesting questions.
First, why are deals tied? Are there efficiencies resulting from the tying of lending and
underwriting? Tying might allow for potential efficiency gains due to informational economies
of scope that can result from the bank jointly delivering services and using the same client-
specific information for multiple purposes (see e.g. Benston, 1990; Saunders and Walter, 1994).
Therefore, tying might be useful when there are large potential economies of scope from
combining lending and underwriting. This would suggest that certain kinds of deals are tied, but
not others. Second, who benefits from tying? Lower costs could arise due to informational
economies of scope, and issuers can benefit if the bank passes along these savings. For the
underwriter, tying might help build relationships that improve the probability of securing current
and future business from the firm. Third, do the benefits from tying vary by the type of
underwriter involved in the transaction? It is possible that commercial banks are able to generate
larger economies of scope than investment banks due to their well-established lending
businesses. Therefore, there may exist differences in tied deals that are underwritten by
investment banks as opposed to commercial banks.
In this paper, we address these issues empirically by studying the tying of loans to
seasoned equity offerings. To tackle these questions, we use a unique data set that is carefully
assembled from multiple databases and augmented by hand collected data. We gather data on
seasoned equity issuers, including each firm’s credit rating, stock returns, issuance history, and
lending history. We identify prior underwriting and lending relationships between each issuer
1

and potential underwriter, as well as each underwriter’s ranking and level and quality of analyst
coverage. Further, we collect data on underwriter fees, loan pricing, and lending terms.
We find that there is a distinct profile of issues that are tied. The majority of tied deals
involve clients that are highly leveraged and are non-investment grade rated. One explanation
for this is that for lower rated and highly leveraged firms, there are larger potential efficiency
gains that arise due to informational economies of scope from combining lending and
underwriting. Therefore, tying lending and underwriting for these issuers could produce
substantial benefits. To study if issuers actually benefit from tying, we examine the impact of
tying on issuers’ financing costs. Our results suggest that tying lowers issuers’ financing costs
through two main dimensions – (i) a reduced underwriter fee for the equity offering, and (ii)
discounted yield spreads of tied loans as compared with “matched” non-tied loans. Interestingly,
we find that the cost reductions are more pronounced amongst issuers that are non-investment
grade rated, where the expected informational economies of scope are relatively large.
To ensure that matching biases are not driving the yield spread discount, we use the
econometric techniques developed by Heckman, Ichimura and Todd (1997, 1998). These
econometric methods effectively take into account the fact that the characteristics of tied loans
may differ significantly from non-tied loans and ensure that such observed characteristics are not
driving the results. Using a variety of matching models, we confirm that tied loans are
significantly cheaper than comparable loans.
To examine if underwriters benefit from tying, we look at the impact of tying on the
underwriter’s relationship with the firm. In particular, we investigate if the same bank is selected
for current and future equity underwriting mandates. We find that tying significantly increases
the probability of securing current equity underwriting business. We also find that tied issuers
go back to the equity market more frequently than non-tied issuers, and issuers who are tied to
investment bank underwriters are more likely to keep the same underwriter. The results are
consistent with tied loans helping to build relationships that increase an underwriter’s expected
revenues.
We also examine if the benefits from tying vary by the type of underwriter involved in
the transaction. Interestingly, while commercial banks are well positioned to tie lending and
underwriting due to their existing lending businesses, we discover that investment banks
underwrote a significant portion of tied deals. This suggests that investment banks have now
2