NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO STOCK PRICE BUBBLES INFLUENCE
CORPORATE INVESTMENT?
Simon Gilchrist
Charles P. Himmelberg
Gur Huberman
Working Paper 10537
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10537
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004
We are grateful to Anna Scherbina for providing us with data, and we thank Andy Abel, Tobias Adrian,
Ignazio Angeloni, Brian Cherno¤, Wei Jiang, Bob King, Jim Mahoney, David Marshall, Asani Sarkar, Jeremy
Stein, and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Federal Reserve System Meetings,
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Colorado University, Columbia University, Harvard University,
University of Brescia, the ASSA meetings, and the JME/Gerzensee Conference on Behavioral
Macroeconomics for helpful comments and suggestions. We are also grateful to Brian Cherno¤ for excellent
research assistance. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the positition
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Simon Gilchrist, Charles P. Himmelberg, and Gur Huberman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Stock Price Bubbles Influence Corporate Investment?
Simon Gilchrist, Charles P. Himmelberg, and Gur Huberman
NBER Working Paper No. 10537
May 2004
JEL No. E22, G31, G32, D92
ABSTRACT
Building on recent developments in behavioral asset pricing, we develop a model in which
dispersion of investor beliefs under short-selling constraints drives a firm's stock price above its
fundamental value. Managers optimally respond to the stock market bubble by issuing new equity.
The bubble reduces the user-cost of capital and increase real investment. Using the variance of
analysts' earnings forecasts as a proxy for the dispersion of investor beliefs, we find strong empirical
support for the model's key prediction that increases in dispersion cause increases in new equity
issuance, Tobin's Q, and real investment.
Simon Gilchrist
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
sgilchri@bu.edu
Charles P. Himmelberg
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
and Columbia University
gcph15@columbia.edu
Gur Huberman
Columbia University
gh16@columbia.edu

1 Introduction
Research on asset prices increasingly challenges the view that asset prices equal fun-
damental value. In particular, …nance theory is increasingly sympathetic to the idea
that stock price bubbles are possible. In this paper, we consider their consequences
for corporate investment and …nancing behavior. Some theories of bubbles rely on a
common bias in investors’beliefs. But there also exists an important class of theories
in which bubbles can arise even when beliefs are, on average, unbiased. If pessimists
are constrained in their ability to short, then prices disproportionately re‡ect beliefs
of optimists, and thus rise above their fundamental value.2 That stock price bub-
bles could arise under these conditions has been pointed by Miller (1977) and Chen,
Hong and Stein (2002), among others. Re…nements and extensions have also been
examined, including the e¤ect of dynamic speculative trading (Harrison and Kreps,
1978)andtheendogenousformationofheterogeneousbeliefs(ScheinkmanandXiong,
2003).3 This is the type of stock price bubble on which we focus in this paper.
What should corporate managers do when they believe that their …rms’stock
prices are in‡ated for the above reasons? In particular, what should they do when,
as in the above setting, investor beliefs are disperse, and the pessimists cannot short
the stock?4 We make two key observations. First, unlike other agents, …rms are
unconstrainedintheirabilitytosellshort–theycansimplyissuenewshares. Second,
in contrast to textbook models of corporate …nance, the above environment implies
that …rms face a downward-sloping demand curve for newshare issues. Consequently,
since the …rm is a monopolist in the supply of its own shares, and since resale in the
2Of course, this class of models does not preclude the possibility that average beliefs are also
biased. Such a bias provides a second source of bubbles that we do not examine.
3See also Allen, Morris, and Shin (2003). For surveys of behavioral asset pricing models more
generally, see Barberis and Thaler (2002), Hirshleifer (2001) and Shleifer (2000).
4Stein (1996) explores rational capital budgeting in the presence of irrational market prices.
Focusing on the …rm’s invetment decision, he assumes that the market has a biased view of the
…rm’s future. In this class of problems, our paper considers the special case when market pricing
irrationalities are generated by heterogeneous beliefs and short-sale constraints (as in Miller, 1977).
1

secondary market prevents price discrimination, the optimal quantity of shares issued
is that which equates marginal revenue with marginal cost. This occurs where price
is above fundamental value. Thus, somewhat counter-intuitively, the bubble survives
the …rm’s attempt to exploit it.
Our model also considers the consequences for real investment. In general, the
management’s decision as well as the market’s valuation should re‡ect the expected
use of funds. If 100 percent of the proceeds were invested in cash, for example,
investors would presumably agree on the value of that portion of the …rm’s balance
sheet. In our model, the heterogeneous beliefs among investors apply only to the
…rm’s operating assets. This assumption eliminates the manager’s incentive to use
the proceeds from the issuance of over-valued stock to invest in cash, marketable
securities, dividend payment, or retirement of the …rm’s own debt. There is, however,
a real distortion; managers over-invest in operating assets because the market over-
values them.
The model’s quantitative predictions are perhaps surprising. Most notably, it
is possible to generate large stock price bubbles with relatively small distortions to
…nancing activity and real investment. Roughly speaking, this happens when the
demand curve for new shares is steep. Analogous to the monopolist’s problem, a
steep demand curve implies a high price over marginal cost and therefore a large
bubble. The large bubble is accompanied by a small quantity of new shares issued
and therefore a small reduction in the cost of capital. This arguably provides a
good description of many stocks that were often described as bubbles during the tech
boom of the late 1990s. Despite sky-high valuations, …rms like Amazon and Yahoo,
for example, issued a surprisingly small fraction of total equity to the public. As
we will argue, such behavior is consistent with our model. For policy makers, our
…ndings suggest that while deviations of stock prices from fundamentals can have
real consequences, large stock price bubbles may be less distortionary than one might
otherwise think.
2