NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE REAL EFFECTS OF INVESTOR SENTIMENT
Christopher Polk
Paola Sapienza
Working Paper 10563
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10563
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004
We thank Andy Abel, Malcolm Baker, David Brown, David Chapman, Randy Cohen, Kent Daniel, Arvind
Krishnamurthy, Owen Lamont, Vojislav Maksimovic, Bob McDonald, Mitchell Petersen, Fabio Schiantarelli,
Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, Tuomo Vuolteenaho, IvoWelch, Luigi Zingales, and seminar participants at
Harvard Business School, London Business School, McGill University, University of Virginia, the AFA 2003
meeting, the NBER Behavioral Finance Program meeting, the Texas Finance Festival, the University of
Illinois Bear Markets conference, the Yale School of Management, the WFA 2002 meeting, and the Zell
Center Conference on “Risk Perceptions and Capital Markets.” We acknowledge support from the Investment
Analysts Society of Chicago Michael J. Borrelli CFA Research Grant Award. The usual caveat applies. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Christopher Polk and Paola Sapienza. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Real Effects of Investor Sentiment
Christopher Polk and Paola Sapienza
NBER Working Paper No. 10563
June 2004
JEL No.E22, G31, G32
ABSTRACT
We study how stock market mispricing might influence individual firms' investment decisions. We
find a positive relation between investment and a number of proxies for mispricing, controlling for
investment opportunities and financial slack, suggesting that overpriced (underpriced) firms tend
to overinvest (underinvest). Consistent with the predictions of our model, we find that investment
is more sensitive to our mispricing proxies for firms with higher R&D intensity suggesting longer
periods of information asymmetry and thus mispricing) or share turnover (suggesting that the firms'
shareholders are short-term investors). We also find that firms with relatively high (low) investment
subsequently have relatively low (high) stock returns, after controlling for investment opportunities
and other characteristics linked to return predictability. These patterns are stronger for firms with
higher R&D intensity or higher share turnover.
Christopher Polk
Kellogg School of Management
Finance Department
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
c-polk@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Paola Sapienza
Kellogg School of Management
Finance Department
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
paola-sapienza@northwestern.edu

The market efficiency hypothesis states that security prices always fully reflect available
information. Over the last decade that paradigm has come under attack. Shleifer (2000),
BarberisandThaler(2001),andHirshleifer(2001)summarizethreerelatedstrandsofliterature.
First, theoretical work argues that arbitrage has limited effectiveness. Second, experimental
evidence shows that agents hold beliefs that are not completely correct and/or make choices
that are normatively questionable. Finally, empirical work documents phenomena where prices
almost certainly deviate from fundamental value.
This body of evidence in support of behavioral finance naturally raises the question as to
whether mispricing in the stock market has consequences for the real economy. Without such
an impact, these behavioral anomalies may just represent an interesting sideshow.
An obvious starting point for such a line of inquiry is to ask whether market inefficiencies
impact managerial decisions. Baker and Wurgler (2002) show that when a firm’s stock price
is high, the firm is more likely to issue equity rather than debt. This behavior has a large,
persistent effect on firm capital structure.
An interesting related question is whether deviation from fundamentals can influence firms’
investment policy. Stein (1996) examines firm investment in the presence of market ineffi-
ciencies. In his analysis, Stein shows that the mechanism through which market inefficiencies
affect investment decisions are different depending on whether the managers have long or short
horizons.
If managers have long horizons and discount project cash flow at the true cost of capital (i.e.
based on fundamental risks), a manager can issue overvalued stock or buy back undervalued
equity consistent with Baker and Wurgler (2002). Investment decisions may change as a result
of this capital structure decision. Stein shows that equity-dependent firms will have investment
that is more sensitive to non-fundamental variations in stock prices than firms that are not
liquidity constrained. When stock prices are above fundamentals, rational managers of equity-
dependent firms find it more attractive to issue equity. By contrast, when stock prices are
below fundamental values, managers of equity-dependent firms do not invest, because for them
investmentrequirestheissuanceofstockattoolowofaprice. Insummary,stockpricevaluations
can affect investment through an equity-issuance channel. According to this theory irrational
1

fluctuations in a firm’s stock market price are an important determinant of investment for the
subset of firms that are equity-dependent, but are a sideshow for firms that are not. The real
effect of investors’ sentiment is to enable good (i.e. positive net present value) projects that
otherwise would not occur.
Baker and Wurgler (2002)’s evidence on the timing of equity issues is consistent with the
importance of such a mechanism but does not provide direct evidence that deviation from
fundamentals can affect a firm’s real investment decision. Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003) do
directly test Stein (1996) and find evidence that stock prices have a stronger influence on the
investment of firms that need external equity to finance their investments.
This literature concludes that stock market mispricing has an impact on firm’s investment
through equity-decision. In this paper we ask a complementary question, whether there is an
alternative direct channel that affects investment decisions that is not linked to equity issuance
decisions. Stein (1996) provides a positive theoretical answer to this question. In his paper
Stein also studies the case where managers have short horizons. In that circumstance, managers
discount project cash flows at the actual conditional expected return on the firm’s assets. Since
markets are inefficient, this will not necessarily be the cost of capital as predicted by a model
of fundamental risks. As Stein points out, one way of thinking about this situation is that a
short-horizons manager is interested in maximizing the current stock price and thus must cater
to any misperceptions investors may have.
In this paper we test this alternative (and complementary) catering channel through which
deviation from fundamentals may affect investment decisions directly. If new investment
projects are evaluated at the current stock market price, for example as in the practice of
using “multiples” to evaluate new projects, and if there is enough asymmetry of information
regarding project quality, a rational manager may find it optimal to invest in projects with
negative NPV even when the project is not financed with equity issues. Firms with ample cash
or debt capacity may have an incentive to waste resources when their stock price is overpriced
and to forgo positive investment opportunities when their stock price is undervalued. Thus
mispricing may affect investment without working through anequity channel as in Baker, Stein,
and Wurgler (2003).
2