NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO DIVIDEND PAYMENTS RESPOND TO TAXES?
PRELIMINARY EVIDENCE FROM THE 2003 DIVIDEND TAX CUT
Raj Chetty
Emmanuel Saez
Working Paper 10572
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10572
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004
This paper offers preliminary evidence and will be extended and completed as soon as more data is available.
We thank Alan Auerbach, Martin Feldstein, Day Manoli, Francisco Perez-Gonzalez, James Poterba, and Jesse
Shapiro for very helpful comments and discussions, and Joe Rosenberg for outstanding research assistance.
Financial support from NSF Grant SES-0134946 and the Sloan Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Raj Chetty and Emmanuel Saez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Do Dividend Payments Respond to Taxes? Preliminary Evidence from the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut
Raj Chetty and Emmanuel Saez
NBER Working Paper No. 10572
June 2004
JEL No. G35, H2, H3
ABSTRACT
The individual income tax burden on dividends was lowered sharply in 2003 from a maximum rate
of 35% to 15%, creating a unique opportunity to analyze the effects of dividend taxes on dividend
payments by U.S. corporations. This paper uses data from the Center for Research in Security Prices
(CRSP) spanning 1980 to 2004-Q1 to analyze this issue. We find a sharp and widespread surge in
dividend distributions following the tax cut, along several dimensions. First, the fraction of publicly
traded firms paying dividends began to increase precisely in 2003 after having declined continuously
for more than two decades. Nearly 150 firms have initiated dividend payments after the tax cut,
adding more than $1.5 billion to aggregate quarterly dividends. Most of these firms initiated regular,
recurrent payments rather than one-time "special" distributions. Second, many firms that were
already paying dividends prior to the reform raised regular dividend payments significantly after the
tax cut. Third, special dividends also rose, but the magnitude of this effect is likely to be small
relative to the increases in regular distributions in the long run. All three of these effects are
significant among all company sizes, and are robust to controls for profits and other firm
characteristics. The surge in regular dividend payments after the 2003 reform is unprecedented in
recent years. The Tax Reform Act of 1986, which also reduced the top individual tax rate on
dividends significantly, led to a temporary, concentrated rise in special dividend payments.
However, the number of regular dividend payers did not rise much after the 1986 reform.
Raj Chetty Emmanuel Saez
University of California University of California
Department of Economics Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880 549 Evans Hall, #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720 Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER and NBER
chetty@econ.berkeley.edu saez@econ.berkeley.edu

1 Introduction
One of the key provisions of the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003
(hereafter, the “2003 tax reform”) was to reduce the individual tax on dividend income sub-
stantially.1 Historically, dividendincomehasbeen consideredordinaryincomeforfederal indi-
vidual income tax purposes and hence taxed according to the regular, progressive income tax
schedule. The 2003 tax reform introduced favored treatment for dividends, starting retroac-
tively at the beginning of 2003, whereby dividends are taxed at a rate of 15% instead of facing
the regular income tax schedule with a top rate of 35%.2 This tax change effectively gave to
dividend income the same favorable tax treatment accorded to capital gains income. Conser-
vatives argued that such a change would greatly reduce the tax disadvantage of dividends and
hence induce firms to pay more dividends, ultimately fostering more investment and business
activity. Liberals countered that such a tax cut would benefit mostly wealthy taxpayers who
own a disproportionate share of total dividends paid out to individuals in non-tax favored
accounts, with little or no economic benefits for the wide majority of American families.3
Consistent with these predictions, Microsoft, the company with the largest accumulated
cash holdings in the U.S. corporate sector, initiated a large annual dividend payment for the
first time in 2003. These payments benefited wealthy taxpayers disproportionately. For
example, Bill Gates, the founder and CEO of Microsoft, owns 10.44% of the company stock
and is the richest person in the United States. Gates received a dividend payment of $270
million from Microsoft in 2003. Without the tax favored treatment of dividends, Gates would
have paid $54 million more in income taxes.4
The goal of this paper is to use longitudinal data on dividend distributions by U.S. corpo-
rations to examine whether Microsoft’s behavior was an anomaly unrelated to the tax change
or whether the 2003 tax change was indeed successful in inducing many companies to pay
more dividends. Since the tax change is very recent, the amount of post-reform data that is
available is limited. Hence, the conclusions of this paper should be considered preliminary,
and will be revised and extended in the near future as more data become available.
1The tax reform was signed by President Bush at the end of May 2003, but was first proposed by the Bush
administration on January 7, 2003.
2Moreprecisely,taxpayersinthebottomtwoincometaxbrackets(facingaregularmarginaltaxrateof10%
or15%) facea new dividend tax rate ofonly 5%, whiletaxpayersin thetop fourbrackets (facing marginal tax
rates of 25, 28, 33, or 35%) face a new dividend tax rate is 15%. Taxpayers on the Alternative Minimum Tax
schedule (flat rate of 28%) benefit as well from the reduced 15% tax rate on their dividend income.
3The Internal Revenue Service Statistics of Income show that about two thirds of taxable dividends are
earnedbythetop10%incometaxpayers. MorethanhalfofAmericanfamiliesnowholdstockthroughpension
or college funds (401(k)s, IRAs, etc.). However, dividends paid to these tax-favored accounts (all of which
exempt accrued returns from income taxation) are not affected by the 2003 tax reform. The fraction of U.S.
families owning stocks either directly or through non tax-favored mutual funds is much smaller according to
the 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances.
4Gates paid a 15% tax rate instead of a 35% tax rate on his dividend income in 2003. This computation
assumes of course that the income is not donated to charitable organizations.
1

The effects of dividend taxes on dividend payments and the investment behavior of corpo-
rations has generated much interest in the public economics literature. However, the academic
debateonthistopicremainscontroversial(seeAuerbach(2003)andAllenandMichaely(2003)
for recent surveys). The “old view” on this issue, implicit among supporters of the 2003 divi-
dend tax cut, says that dividend taxes reduce the net return on investment and hence reduce
the supply of investment. Therefore, when taxes on dividends are cut, individuals are more
willingtosaveandinvesttheirmoneyinstocks, spurringbusinessinvestment, profits, anddiv-
idend distributions. Poterba and Summers (1985), using time series evidence from the United
Kingdom found that consistent with this view, dividend payments and investment were higher
when the tax on dividends was lower. More recently, Poterba (2004) uses U.S. time series data
since 1929 and finds a negative association between dividend payments and the dividend tax
rates relative to taxes on capital gains.
In contrast, the “new view” on dividend taxation, implicit among critics of the 2003 tax
reforms, assumes that marginal investments are entirely financed by retained earnings rather
than new share issues (Auerbach (1979), King (1977), and Bradford (1981)). Under this
assumption, the tax on dividends paid out does not affect investment decisions of firms, and
profits and dividends paid out should not change either.5 In this case, the dividend tax
cut is irrelevant for corporate decisions and simply benefits individual investors by reducing
their tax burden. As dividend income is very concentrated at the top of the income and
wealth distributions, a tax cut on dividends should providea tax break to the wealthy without
expansion of investment and business activity. Using U.S. data from 1981 to 1998, Auerbach
and Hassett (2003), show that consistent with the new view, dividend payments are sensitive
to changes in investment at the firm level, suggesting that retained earnings are indeed the
marginal source of investment funds.
The large change in the tax treatment of dividends in 2003 offers a unique opportunity to
cast light on this debate. In this paper, we use CRSP data on dividend payments available
throughthe firstquarterof2004totestwhetherdividendpayoutpolicieschangedsignificantly
after the 2003 tax reform. Total regular dividends have surged by nearly 20% since the
beginning of 2003, the point at which the lower tax rate was first proposed and ultimately
retroactively applied. However, since the aggregate dividends series is very volatile and
driven by outliers, it is difficult to make statistically robust inferences about the effects of
the tax change without disaggregating the data further. We therefore divide our analysis of
the response to the tax reform into three margins: (1) the extensive margin (initiations and
terminationsof regular dividendpayments); (2) the intensivemargin (increasesor decreasesin
payment amounts byfirms already paying); and (3) special dividends (one time distributions).
5However, as pointed out by Auerbach and Hassett (2003), if the tax reform not only changes dividend
income taxation but also interest income taxation (as in the Tax Reform Act of 1986) or if the tax reform is
not permanent but temporary (as might be the case with the 2003 tax reform — see below), then even under
the “New View” dividend payments may change following a dividend tax change.
2