NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO DOMESTIC INVESTORS HAVE AN EDGE?
THE TRADING EXPERIENCE OF FOREIGN INVESTORS IN KOREA
Hyuk Choe
Bong-Chan Kho
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 10502
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10502
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2004
René Stulz is grateful for the hospitality of the Kellogg Graduate School of Management at Northwestern
University and the George G. Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and State at the University of
Chicago where part of this research was conducted. We are grateful for comments from seminar participants
at Duke, the Hong-Kong University of Science and Technology, the Ohio State University, the University
of California at Los Angeles, the University of North Carolina, the University of Texas, the Hallym
University, the American Economic Association meetings in Washington, and from Dong Lee, Mark
Grinblatt, Campbell Harvey, Maureen O’Hara, Andrew Karolyi, Pete Kyle, Toby Moskowitz, Richard Roll,
Mark Seasholes, Linda Tesar, and two anonymous referees. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Hyuk Choe, Bong-Chan Kho, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Do Domestic Investors Have an Edge? The Trading Experience of Foreign Investors in Korea
Hyuk Choe, Bong-Chan Kho, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 10502
May 2004
JEL No. F36, G12, G14, G15
ABSTRACT
We investigate whether domestic investors have an edge over foreign investors in trading domestic
stocks.Using Korean data, we show that foreign money managers pay more than domestic money
managers when they buy and receive less when they sell for medium and large trades. The sample
average daily trade-weighted disadvantage of foreign money managers is of 21 basis points for
purchases and 16 basis points for sales. There is also some evidence that domestic individual
investors have an edge over foreign investors. The explanation for these results is that prices move
more against foreign investors than against domestic investors before trades.
Hyuk Choe
Seoul National University
hchoe@snu.ac.kr
Bong-Chan Kho
Seoul National University
bkho@snu.ac.kr
René M. Stulz
Fisher College of Business, Ohio State University
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144

For a long time, the consensus among financial economists as well as among finance academics and
practitioners has been that a country’s domestic investors have an advantage in trading stocks in their
country over foreign investors. A leading explanation for this advantage has been that domestic investors
have superior information, but other explanations have been advanced also. For instance, it has been
argued that regulators might be more tolerant of domestic investors or even biased against foreign
investors. This view that domestic investors have an edge over foreign investors has been used to explain
empirical regularities such as the home bias, the volatility of capital flows, and herding among foreign
investors. However, recently, a number of papers have provided results that are inconsistent with this
view.1
In this paper, we use a unique dataset to shed new light on the issue of whether domestic investors
have an edge over foreign investors in trading domestic stocks by investigating whether foreigners pay
more for stocks when they buy and receive less when they sell. One advantage of such an investigation is
that it relies less on models of expected returns than existing papers that compare the performance of
foreign investors to the performance of domestic investors. Using a dataset of all trades on the Korean
stock exchange from December 2, 1996 to November 30, 1998, we find evidence that foreign investors
are at a disadvantage for medium and large trades but not for small trades. Weighting trades by their size,
the average disadvantage of foreign money managers relative to domestic money managers is of the order
of 21 basis points for purchases and 16 basis points for sales. This means that on a roundtrip trade foreign
money managers face greater transaction costs of the order of 37 basis points compared to domestic
money managers, which is substantial for any foreign investor who is not a long-term buy-and-hold
investor. For instance, an investor who trades three times per year would contemplate a drag on his
performance in excess of 100 basis points. To put this in perspective, Carhart (1997) reports that the
difference in the monthly estimates of Jensen’s alpha between the top decile and the bottom decile of
1 See, for instance, Grinblatt and Keloharju (2000), Seasholes (2000), and Froot and Ramadorai (2001).
1

diversified mutual funds in the U.S. is 0.67% from 1963 through 1993. The roundtrip edge could
therefore have a substantial impact on the performance of a money manager. We also find that foreign
money managers are at a disadvantage compared to domestic individuals, but this evidence is stronger for
sales than for purchases.
We find that the disadvantage of foreign investors cannot be explained by firm and stock
characteristics. It is strongly related to the size of the trades of foreign investors and to how intensely they
trade. There are at least three non-mutually exclusive explanations for this result. First, foreign investors
could be more impatient or trade when liquidity is lower, so that they pay more to liquidity providers.
Second, foreign investors are better informed, so that their trades have a larger permanent impact. Third,
they make their trades after prices have already moved against them. To investigate these three possible
explanations, we investigate stock returns before, during, and after periods of intensive trading. We find
that the intensive trading by foreign investors is not associated with a greater temporary impact than the
intensive trading by domestic institutions, suggesting that foreign investors are not more impatient in their
trading than domestic institutions. Using a conventional measure of the permanent impact of intensive
trading, there is no evidence either that foreign investors are better informed than domestic institutions.
The key difference between foreign investors and domestic investors is that prices move unfavorably for
foreign investors than for domestic investors immediately before they trade intensively. This difference is
partly explained by the return-chasing behavior of foreign investors.
As far as we know, this is the first paper that compares in any country the prices domestic and foreign
investors pay or receive when they trade. More effort has been expended on understanding whether
foreigners earn more or less than domestic investors on their investments in stocks. Studies that evaluate
investment performance face the problem that their results are sensitive to how they control for priced risk.
In contrast, when comparing prices within a calendar day, control for risk priced in asset pricing models is
2