NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE ECONOMIC IMPLICATIONS OF
CORPORATE FINANCIAL REPORTING
John R. Graham
Campbell R. Harvey
Shiva Rajgopal
Working Paper 10550
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10550
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004
We thank the following people for suggestions about survey and interview design: Sid Balachandran, Phil
Berger, Robert Bowen, Shuping Chen, Hemang Desai, Julie Edell, Gavan Fitzsimons, Michelle Hanlon, Frank
Hodge, Jim Jiambalvo, Bruce Johnson, Jane Kennedy, Lisa Koonce, SP Kothari, Mark Leary, Baruch Lev,
Bob Libby, John Lynch, John Martin, Dawn Matsumoto, Ed Maydew, Jeff Mitchell, Mort Pincus, Jim
Porteba, Brian Turner, Terry Shevlin, Doug Skinner, K.R. Subramanyam, and especially Mark Nelson. We
have also benefited from useful discussions with Michael Jensen. A special thanks to Chris Allen, Cheryl de
Mesa Graziano, Dave Ikenberry, Jim Jiambalvo and Jennifer Koski, who helped us administer the survey and
arrange some interviews. Mark Leary provided excellent research support, Andrew Frankel provided editorial
assistance, and Tara Bowens and Anne Higgs provided data entry support. We thank Gary Previts, Josh
Ronen, Shiva Shivakumar and seminar participants at Case Western University, Duke University, National
Forum on Corporate Finance and the University of Washington for comments. Finally, we thank the financial
executives who generously allowed us to interview them or who took time to fill out the survey. We
acknowledge financial support from the John W. Hartman Center at Duke University and the University of
Washington. Please address correspondence to John Graham (john.graham@duke.edu), Campbell Harvey
(cam.harvey@duke.edu), or Shiva Rajgopal (rajgopal@u.washington.edu). The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by John R. Graham, Campbell R. Harvey, and Shiva Rajgopal. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Economic Implications of Corporate Financial Reporting
John R. Graham, Campbell R. Harvey, and Shiva Rajgopal
NBER Working Paper No. 10550
June 2004
JEL No. G35, G32, G34
ABSTRACT
We survey 401 financial executives, and conduct in-depth interviews with an additional 20, to
determine the key factors that drive decisions related to reported earnings and voluntary disclosure.
The majority of firms view earnings, especially EPS, as the key metric for outsiders, even more so
than cash flows. Because of the severe market reaction to missing an earnings target, we find that
firms are willing to sacrifice economic value in order to meet a short-run earnings target. The
preference for smooth earnings is so strong that 78% of the surveyed executives would give up
economic value in exchange for smooth earnings. We find that 55% of managers would avoid
initiating a very positive NPV project if it meant falling short of the current quarter's consensus
earnings. Missing an earnings target or reporting volatile earnings is thought to reduce the
predictability of earnings, which in turn reduces stock price because investors and analysts hate
uncertainty. We also find that managers make voluntary disclosures to reduce information risk
associated with their stock but try to avoid setting a disclosure precedent that will be difficult to
maintain. In general, management's views provide support for stock price motivations for earnings
management and voluntary disclosure, but provide only modest evidence in support of other theories
of these phenomena (such as debt, political cost and bonus plan based hypotheses).
John R. Graham Campbell R. Harvey Shiva Rajgopal
Department of Economics Department of Economics Department of Economics
Duke University Duke University University of Washington
Durham, NC 27708 Durham, NC 27708 Seattle, WA 98195
jgraham@mail.duke.edu and NBER rajgopal@u.washington.edu
cam.harvey@duke.edu

The Economic Implications of Corporate Financial Reporting
1. Introduction
We conduct a comprehensive survey that asks CFOs to describe their choices related to reported
accounting numbers and voluntary disclosures. Our objective is to address the following questions: Do
managers care about earnings benchmarks or earnings trends and, if yes, which benchmarks are perceived
to be relatively more important? What factors motivate firms to exercise discretion, and even sacrifice
economic value, to manage reported earnings numbers? What is the relative importance of various
theories proposed by academic research to explain earnings management and voluntary disclosure?
Triangulating our results with those from archival empirical research enhances our understanding of these
issues.
We investigate these questions using a combination of field interviews and a survey instrument.
By using these methods, we are able to address issues that traditional empirical work based on large
archival data sources cannot. A combination of surveys and field interviews enables us to (i) get financial
officers to rank-order the relative importance of extant academic theories to explain financial reporting
policies; (ii) discover new patterns of behavior and new explanations for known patterns; and (iii)
highlight stylized facts on issues such as earnings benchmarks, earnings guidance, and the marginal
investor that are relatively hard to document from archival data. Overall, our evidence provides a
reference point describing where academic research and real-world financial reporting policies are
consistent and where they appear to differ.
Our results indicate that CFOs consider earnings, not cash flows, to be the key metric considered
by outsiders. The two key earnings benchmarks are quarterly earnings for the same quarter last year and
the analyst consensus estimate. Meeting or exceeding benchmarks is very important. Managers describe a
trade-off between the short-term need to “deliver earnings” and the long-term objective of making value-
maximizing investment decisions. Executives believe that hitting earnings benchmarks builds credibility
with the market and helps to maintain or increase their firm’s stock price.
The severe stock market reactions to small EPS misses can be explained as evidence that the
market believes that most firms can “find the money” to hit earnings targets. Not being able to find one or
two cents to hit the target might be interpreted as evidence of hidden problems at the firm. Additionally, if
the firm had guided analysts to the EPS target, then missing the target can indicate that a firm is managed
poorly in the sense that it can not accurately predict its own future. Both of these scenarios breed
uncertainty about a firm’s future prospects, which in turn affects its stock price. While managers are
willing to make small or moderate sacrifices in economic value to meet the earnings expectations of
1

analysts and investors (to avoid the severe market reaction for under-delivering), they are hesitant to
employ accounting adjustments to hit earnings targets, perhaps as a consequence of the stigma attached to
accounting fraud in the post-Enron environment.
An overwhelming majority of CFOs prefer smooth earnings (versus volatile earnings). Volatile
earnings are thought to be riskier than smooth earnings. Moreover, smooth earnings ease the analyst’s
task of predicting future earnings. Predictability of earnings seems to be the over-arching concern among
CFOs. Less predictable earnings -- either a missed earnings target or volatile earnings – command a risk
premium in the market. A surprising 78% of the surveyed executives would give up economic value in
exchange for smooth earnings.
Most executives feel they are making an appropriate choice when sacrificing value to smooth
earnings or to hit a target. The turmoil that can result in equity and debt markets from a negative earnings
surprise can lead to costs (at least in the short-run). Therefore, many executives feel that they are
choosing the lesser evil by sacrificing long-run value to avoid short-term turmoil (which can itself lead to
value loss). In other words, if a decision is made to sacrifice value, many executives feel that it is in some
sense forced on them by the market’s severe (over) reaction to earnings misses. Many argue that the
system (that is, financial market pressures and overreactions) encourages decisions that at times sacrifice
value to meet earnings targets.
Companies voluntarily disclose information to facilitate “clarity and understanding” to investors.
Lack of clarity, or a reputation for not consistently providing precise and accurate information, can lead to
under-pricing of the firm’s stock. In short, disclosing reliable and precise information can reduce
“information risk” about a company’s stock, which in turn reduces the required return. Concerns about
revealing sensitive information to competitors and worries about starting disclosure precedents that are
difficult to maintain (such as manager-provided earnings forecasts) appear to constrain voluntary
disclosure. Managers prefer in some cases to release bad news earlier than good news in order to build
credibility with the capital market and avoid potential lawsuits.
When benchmarked against the extant academic literature, our evidence offers four key insights.
First, accounting earnings matter more to managers than cash flows for financial reporting purposes,
which contrasts with the emphasis on cash flows pervasive in the finance literature. Second, managers are
interested in meeting or beating earnings benchmarks primarily to influence stock prices, and less so in
response to incentives related to debt covenants, credit ratings, political visibility and employee bonuses
that have traditionally been the focus of academic work (e.g., Watts and Zimmerman 1978, 1990). Third,
holding cash flows constant, managers care a lot about smooth earnings paths, although this concern has
been somewhat under-emphasized in the academic literature (see Ronen and Sadan 1981 for an earlier
2