NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS IN
THE PHARMACEUTICAL AND BIOTECH INDUSTRIES
Patricia M. Danzon
Andrew Epstein
Sean Nicholson
Working Paper 10536
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10536
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004
This research was supported by a grant from the Merck Company Foundation and a grant from the Huntsman
Center at the Wharton School. The opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the research sponsors. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Patricia M. Danzon, Andrew Epstein, and Sean Nicholson. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Mergers and Acquisitions in the Pharmaceutical and Biotech Industries
Patricia M. Danzon, Andrew Epstein, and Sean Nicholson
NBER Working Paper No. 10536
May 2004
JEL No. I11, G34, L65
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the determinants of M&A activity in the pharmaceutical-biotechnology industry and the
effects of mergers using propensity scores to control for merger endogeneity. Among large firms, we find
that mergers are a response to excess capacity due to anticipated patent expirations and gaps in a company’s
product pipeline. For small firms, mergers are primarily an exit strategy for firms in financial trouble, as
indicated by low Tobin’s q, few marketed products, and low cash-sales ratios. We find that it is important
to control for a firm’s prior propensity to merge. Firms with relatively high propensity scores experienced
slower growth of sales, employees and R&D regardless of whether they actually merged, which is consistent
with mergers being a response to distress. Controlling for a firm’s merger propensity, large firms that merged
experienced similar changes in enterprise value, sales, employees, and R&D relative to similar firms that did
not merge. Merged firms had slower growth in operating profit in the third year following a merger. Thus
mergers may be a response to trouble, but they are not an effective solution for large firms. Neither mergers
nor propensity scores have any effect on subsequent growth in enterprise value. This confirms that market
valuations on average yield unbiased predictions of the effects of mergers. Small firms that merged
experienced slower R&D growth relative to similar firms that did not merge, suggesting that post-merger
integration may divert cash from R&D.
Patricia M. Danzon Andrew Epstein Sean Nicholson
The Wharton School The Wharton School The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania University of Pennsylvania University of Pennsylvania
3641 Locust Walk 3641 Locust Walk 3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104 Philadelphia, PA 19104 Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER eandrew@wharton.upenn.edu and NBER
danzon@wharton.upenn.edu nicholss@wharton.upenn.edu

2
I. Introduction
The pharmaceutical-biotechnology industry has become increasingly concentrated over the past
15 years; in 1985 the 10 largest firms accounted for about 20 percent of worldwide sales, whereas in 2002
the 10 largest firms accounted for 48 of sales. Much of this consolidation is the result of mergers. The
value of M&A activity in this industry exceeded $500 billion during the 1988 to 2000 period. A
commonly cited rationale for this consolidation by proponents of these mergers is the existence of
economies of scale in research and development (R&D) and in sales and marketing. However, despite
rising R&D spending the productivity of the pharmaceutical industry, as measured by the number of
compounds approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has deteriorated since 1996.
Furthermore, the number of new drugs entering clinical trials has declined since 1998, which calls into
question the effectiveness of mergers and the economies of scale hypothesis more generally. Moreover,
several of the largest pharmaceutical firms have been trading at significantly lower price-to-earning ratios
than many of their smaller rivals, indicating investors believe the larger firms will experience lower
growth rates.
In this paper, we first examine the determinants of merger and acquisition (M&A) activity in the
pharmaceutical- biotechnology industry during 1988-2001. We then examine the impact of merger on
growth in two major cost categories -- employment and R&D investment – and on several measures of
firm performance: growth in sales, operating profit and market value. In the first stage of our model, we
test several reasons why firms would merge based on existing literature (Jensen, 1986; Holmstrom and
Kaplan, 2001): economies of scale or scope; specific assets or capacities (for example, new technologies
or foreign subsidiaries) that can be acquired more efficiently than through internal growth; self-serving
expansion by managers with excess cash and imperfect agency controls; and the market for corporate
control, in which acquisition is a mechanism to transfer assets to more efficient uses and/or management.
Our analysis of determinants and effects of mergers distinguishes between small biotech firms
and large pharmaceutical firms, since they face very different production and cost functions. In particular,
we test a variant of the excess capacity theory of mergers that is most relevant to mergers involving large

3
firms, specifically, that patent expirations and gaps in a firm’s pipeline of new drugs makes current levels
of human and physical capital potentially excessive. Previous literature has suggested that excess
capacity may be a rationale for merger to restructure asset bases in industries that experience shocks due
to technological change or deregulation. In the pharmaceutical industry, this capacity-adjustment motive
for merging occurs because of the patent-driven nature of a research-based pharmaceutical firm’s sales.
Essentially, a fully-integrated pharmaceutical firm has two production activities. The first is R&D, which
uses inputs of labor, capital, and various technologies to develop new drugs and perform the clinical trials
that are required for regulatory approval.1 R&D investment is substantial but by itself generates no
revenue, and is characterized by a high degree of ex ante uncertainty regarding the ultimate safety,
efficacy, and market potential of individual compounds. The second activity is production, marketing and
sales, for which approved compounds, obtained from internal R&D, in-licensing or acquisition, are an
essential input. Patent protection on new drugs on average lasts for roughly 12 years after market
approval. Once the patent expires, generic competitors usually enter and rapidly erode the originator
firm’s sales.2 Since a few blockbuster drugs often account for 50 percent or more of a firm’s revenues,
patent expiration on one or more of these compounds can decimate the firm’s revenues within a few
months, unless the firm can replace the patent-expired compounds with new compounds. Thus if a firm is
faced with patent expirations and has failed to generate or in-license new compounds to replace them, its
investment in specialized labor and capital in the sales and marketing functions becomes unproductive.
Since large firms finance their R&D almost exclusive from current earnings (Vernon, 2002), patent
expirations can also disrupt the funding of R&D.
For an integrated company that faces patent expirations and gaps in its pipeline of follow-on
products, merging with a firm that has a pipeline but lacks adequate marketing and sales capacity to
1 Compounds must demonstrate safety and efficacy in human clinical trials, in order to obtain marketing approval
from the FDA in the US or similar regulatory agencies in other countries. In the US, roughly 4 out of 5 drugs fail in
clinical trials, and some are withdrawn post launch if adverse events occur once on the market. Taking a compound
through discovery, development and regulatory approval takes on average 12 years.
2 Recent experience is that generics take over 80% of prescription volume within the first year of patent expiration,
due to their much lower prices and strong incentives of patients and pharmacists to substitute generics.