NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNTIL IT’S OVER, OVER THERE:
THE U.S. ECONOMY IN WORLD WAR I
Hugh Rockoff
Working Paper 10580
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10580
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Hugh Rockoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Until it’s Over, Over There: The U.S. Economy in World War I
Hugh Rockoff
NBER Working Paper No. 10580
June 2004
JEL No. N1, N4
ABSTRACT
The process by which the US economy was mobilized during World War I was the subject of
considerable criticism both at the time and since. Nevertheless, when viewed in the aggregate the
degree of mobilization achieved during the short period of active US involvement was remarkable.
The United States entered the war in 1917 having made only limited preparations. In 1918 the armed
forces were expanded to include 2.9 million sailors, soldiers, and marines; 6 percent of the labor
force in the 15 to 44 age bracket. Overall in 1918, one fifth or more of the nation's resources was
devoted to the war effort. By the time the Armistice was signed in 1919 a profusion of new weapons
was flowing from American factories. This essay describes how mobilization was achieved so
quickly, including how it was financed, and some of the long-term consequences.
Hugh Rockoff
Department of Economics
75 Hamilton Street
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
rockoff@econ.rutgers.edu

Until it's Over, Over There: The U.S. Economy in World War I1
This paper reexamines the economic and financial history of the United States during World War I. The key
fact is that a rapid and substantial transformation of the US economy was accomplished in the 20 months of active US
involvement. By the time the Armistice was signed a flood of munitions, a foretaste of World War II’s Arsenal of
Democracy, was issuing from America’s factories. This result, I argue, was mainly a response to financial incentives.
More exotic forms of controls, such as the Priorities System developed by the War Industries Board, probably were put
in place too late to have much effect. Nevertheless, the halo created by successful conversion of the economy and victory
on the battlefield gave these brief experiments with non-market controls an enduring authority that shaped economic
policy for years to come.
Here, for those who find it helpful, is the roadmap. Section 1 presents the chronology of American
involvement, and contrasts the World War I expansion with previous expansions. (A list of key dates is contained in the
chronology at the end of the paper.) Section 2 describes how resources were mobilized and allocated to the war sector.
Section 3 on the financing of the war, is divided into three parts: monetary policy, fiscal policy (taxes), and debt policy.
Section 4 discusses the War Industries Board and other government agencies that were charged with regulating prices
and production. Section 5 discusses the production of munitions. Section 6, the concluding section, on the legacies of the
war for the United States, is divided into three parts: the costs of the war in terms of resources, the impact of the war on
the role of the United States in international capital markets, and the institutional and ideological legacies of the war.
3

1. The War Boom in Historical Perspective
The outbreak of the war in Europe in 1914 touched off a severe financial disturbance in the United States. The New
York Stock Exchange was closed – because the market might be demoralized when European holders of U.S.
securities dumped them – and a run on the banks began, manifested at this stage mainly by precautionary
withdrawals of cash by Midwestern banks from their eastern correspondents. These events might have produced a
full-fledged financial panic. But the issue of emergency currency under the Aldrich-Vreeland Act calmed things
down, and there was no suspension of convertibility of deposits into gold as had occurred in earlier panics, such as
the panic of 1907.2 (Friedman and Schwartz 1963, 172)
When the war began the United States was in a recession. European purchases of goods for the war, mainly
food and munitions, soon turned things around and created a long economic boom. This story was to be repeated after
the outbreak of the Second World War, although the U.S. economy was considerably further from full employment in
1939 than it was in 1914. The National Bureau of Economic Research records an economic expansion beginning in
December 1914 and ending in August 1918, a period of 44 months. The Civil War expansion, perhaps the most obvious
,
comparison for contemporaries once the U.S. entered the war, was almost the same length 46 months, from June 1861
to April 1865. Any comparison of the magnitude of the expansion, however, would be speculative. The South obviously
was decimated, and considerable controversy exists over the impact of the war on the Northern economy. All of the
Civil War expansion, moreover, took place during the period of active warfare.3 Nearly two thirds of the World War I
expansion took place during the period of U.S. neutrality. It might make sense, therefore to look to a peacetime
expansion for a basis of comparison. As we look backward in time, the first peacetime expansion to match or exceed the
length of the World War I expansion was the gold-rush expansion from 1848 to 1853.4
Table 1 provides a comparison among the three expansions. Although estimates vary, it is possible, moreover,
as shown in the second line of table 1, that the magnitudes of the expansions were also similar. The similarity between
the booms was more than accidental. Both the gold-rush expansion and the expansion during the period of U.S.
neutrality in World War I were propelled by a rapid gold-backed expansion of the stock of money. In one case the gold
was being panned from the streams and dug from the mountains of California; in the other the gold was coming from
Europeans to pay for food and arms. But in both cases the result was inflation, real income growth, and a long boom.5
4