NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SHAKEOUTS AND MARKET CRASHES
Alessandro Barbarino
Boyan Jovanovic
Working Paper 10556
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10556
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Alessandro Barbarino and Boyan Jovanovic. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Shakeouts and Market Crashes
Alessandro Barbarino and Boyan Jovanovic
NBER Working Paper No. 10556
June 2004
JEL No. G0, L0
ABSTRACT
Stock-market crashes tend to follow run-ups in prices. These episodes look like bubbles that
gradually inflate and then suddenly burst. We show that such bubbles can form in a Zeira-Rob type
of model in which demand size is uncertain. Two conditions are sufficient for this to happen: A
declining hazard rate in the prior distribution over market size and a positively sloped supply of
capital to the industry. For the period 1971-2001 we fit the model to the Telecom sector.
Alessandro Barbarino
University of Chicago
barbar@uchicago.edu
Boyan Jovanovic
New York University
Department of Economics
269 Mercer Street
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
bj2@nyu.edu

Shakeouts and Market Crashes
∗
Alessandro Barbarino and Boyan Jovanovic
† ‡
May 30, 2004
Abstract
Stock-market crashes tend to follow run-ups in prices. These episodes look
like bubbles that gradually inflate and then suddenly burst. We show that
such bubbles can form in a Zeira-Rob type of model in which demand size is
uncertain. Two conditions are sufficient for this to happen: A declining hazard
rate in the prior distribution over market size and a positively sloped supply
of capital to the industry. For the period 1971-2001 we fit the model to the
Telecom sector.
1 Introduction
Stock-market crashes tend to follow run-ups in prices. The NYSE index rose in the
late 1920s, and then crashed in October 1929, and the Nasdaq rose steadily through
the 80’s and 90’s and crashed after March 2000. These episodes therefore look like
bubbles that gradually inflate and then suddenly burst.
In a learning model of the Zeira-Rob type we study the possibility of bubble-like
behavior of stock prices, but driven by fundamentals. We add to Rob (1991) a rising
adjustment cost for the growth of industry capacity and a declining hazard rate in
the prior distribution over market size. In that form, the model generates a crash
when an irreversible creation of capacity overshoots demand.
We fit the model to the Telecom sector which, in the year 2000, crashed more
spectacularly than most others. Figure 1 portrays the 30-year history of the Nasdaq
Telecom index. The NYSE index in the first panel shows that the Telecom crash was
not an isolated event. The second panel shows two indexes of real activity along with
the Nasdaq Telecom index. Evidently the real and financial indicators all fell sharply
in 2000. We seek to explain this link — the slow rise in these indexes followed by their
sharp decline.
We thank M. Ebell, M. Kato, and D. Ray for comments and the NSF for support.
∗
University of Chicago
†
NYU and University of Chicago
‡
1

Figure 1: Financial indexes and two real series
Thelinkbetweenrealandfinancialindexesexistsinothersectorstoo, particularly
around the time of the 2000 crash. Figure 2 reports the March 2000-to-March 2001
changes in prices and in fundamentals. Sectors that experienced greater drops in
valuealsoexperiencedlargerdeclinesinsales. Telecomunderwentoneofthesharpest
declines.
Our explanation of the pre-crash run-up is of the “Peso Problem” type. Krasker
(1980)usedthistermtodescriberationallychangingbeliefsaboutaneventthatisnot
realizedwithinthesampleperiod. Untiltheyear2000,optimismwasontherise. Two
conditions that could produce such a rise are: (i) A declining hazard rate in the prior
distribution over market size and (ii) A rising cost of investment. The decreasing-
hazard assumption delivers a rising optimism: As the market grows, further growth
looks ever more feasible, and the likelihood of a crash ever more remote.
Two other properties of the model are noteworthy. First, optimism and the price-
earningsratiorationallyriseeventhoughearningsremainflatsothattosomeonewho
predicts earnings by extrapolating from the past, the behavior of the stock market
would seem irrational. And second, along the equilibrium path the crash hazard
declines, so that older markets are more likely to survive.
Contrary to popular opinion about the 90’s, we find that capacity expansion was
not too fast but too slow. Our model states that in light of what was known at
the time, Telecom capacity should have expanded more rapidly and its the crash
should have happened earlier. This is because expanding capacity entails a positive
informational externality that a competitive firm ignores when choosing how much
to invest.
Many of the ideas in our paper are also in Zeira (1987, 1999), Caplin and Leahy
(1994) and in Horvath, Schivardi and Woywode (2001). Models in which a new tech-
2