NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STOCK PRICES, NEWS AND ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS
Paul Beaudry
Franck Portier
Working Paper 10548
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10548
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004
The authors thank Susanto Basu , Larry Christiano, Roger Farmer, Robert Hall, Richard Rogerson, Julio
Rotemberg and participants at seminars at CEPR ESSIM 2002, SED Paris 2003, Bank of Canada, Bank of
England, the Federal Reserve of Philadelphia, the National Bureau of Economic Research, University of
Berlin, Université du Québec à Montréal, Université de Toulouse and CREST for helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Paul Beaudry and Franck Portier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Stock Prices, News and Economic Fluctuations
Paul Beaudry and Franck Portier
NBER Working Paper No. 10547
June 2004
JEL No. E3
ABSTRACT
In this paper we show that the joint behavior of stock prices and TFP favors a view of business
cycles driven largely by a shock that does not affect productivity in the short run -- and therefore
does not look like a standard technology shock -- but affects productivity with substantial delay --
and therefore does not look like a monetary shock. One structural interpretation we suggest for this
shock is that it represents news about future technological opportunities which is first captured in
stock prices. We show that this shock causes a boom in consumption, investment and hours worked
that precede productivity growth by a few years. Moreover, we show that this shock explains about
50\% of business cycle fluctuations.
Paul Beaudry
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC
Canada V6T 1Z1
and NBER
paulbe@interchange.ubc.ca
Franck Portier
Manufacture des Tabacs
Universite des Sciences Sociales de Toulouse
21 allee de Brienne
31000 Toulouse, France
fportier@cict.fr

1 Introduction
There is a huge literature suggesting that stock prices movements reflect the market’s expectation
of future developments in the economy. As a test of standard valuation models, Fama [1990] shows
that monthly, quarterly and annual stock returns are highly correlated with future production
growth rates for 1953-1987. This result is confirmed on a extended sample (1889-1988) by Schwert
[1990]. Both authors argue that the relation between current stock returns and future production
growthreflectsinformationaboutfuturecashflowsthatisimpoundedinstockprices. Ontheother
hand, not all stock prices movements are informative, as Shiller [1981] noted that stock prices move
too much to be justified by subsequent changes in dividends, such an evidence being confirmed
by Flavin [1983] and Mankiw, Romer, and Shapiro [1985]. There is also a huge literature, and a
long tradition in macroeconomics (from Pigou [1926] and Keynes [1936] to the survey of Benhabib
and Farmer [1999]), suggesting that changes in expectation may be an important element driving
economic fluctuations.
Given this, it is surprising that the empirical macro literature – especially the VAR based
literature – rarely exploits stock prices movements to expand our understanding of the role of
expectations in business cycle fluctuations. In this paper, we take a step in this direction by
showing how stock prices movements, in conjunction with movements in total factor productivity
(TFP),canbefruitfullyusedtohelpshednewlightontheforcesdrivingbusinesscyclefluctuation.
The empirical strategy we adopt in this paper is to perform two different orthogonalization
schemes as a means of identifying properties of the data that can then be used to evaluate theories
of business cycles. Let us be clear that our empirical strategy is a purely descriptive device which
becomes of interest only when its implications are compared with those of structural models. The
twoorthogonalizationschemesweusearebasedonimposingsequentially,notsimultaneously,either
impact or long run restrictions on the orthogonalized moving average representation of the data.
The primary system of variables that interests us is one composed of an index of stock market
value (SP) and measured total factor productivity (TFP). Our interest in focusing on stock market
3

information is motivated by the view that stock prices are likely a good variable for capturing any
changes in agents expectations about future economic conditions.
The two disturbances we isolate with our procedure are first, a disturbance which represents
innovations in stock prices which are orthogonal to innovations in TFP and second, a disturbance
that drives long run movements in TFP. The main intriguing observation we uncover is that these
two disturbances– when isolate separately without imposing orthogonality – are found to be almost
perfectly co-linear and to induce the same dynamics. We also show that these co-linear shock
series causes standard business cycle co-movements (i.e., induces positive co-movement between
consumptionandinvestment)andexplainsalargefractionofbusinesscyclefluctuations. Moreover,
when we use measures of TFP which control for variable rates of factor utilization, as for example
when we use the series constructed by Basu, Fernald, and Kimball [2002], we find that our shock
series anticipate TFP growth by several years.
In order to interpret the result from our empirical exercise, we begin by presenting a simple
model where fluctuations are driven by surprise changes in productivity as well as a temporary
disturbance– which in our example is a monetary shock. This example allows us to clarify the
extenttowhichthedataonTFPandstockpriceshavepropertiesthatruncountertothoseimplied
by models where surprise changes in productive capacity are a central part of fluctuations. We also
present a model where technological innovations only affect productive capacity with delay, and
show how such a model can explain quite easily the patterns observed in the data. In particular,
our evidence suggests that business cycles may be driven to a large extent by TFP growth that is
heavilyanticipatedbyeconomicagents; therebyleadingtowhatmightbecalledexpectationdriven
booms. Ineffect,theoriginalburstineconomicactivityassociatedwiththeshockweidentify,using
eithertheimpactorthelongrunrestriction, lookslikeabusinesscyclefluctuationswhichpreempts
future growth in productivity. Hence, our empirical results suggests that an important faction of
business cycles fluctuations may be driven by changes in expectations – as is often suggested in
the macro literature – but where these changes in expectations may well be based on fundamentals
since they anticipate future changes in productivity.
4