NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECT OF POPULATION HEALTH
ON FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT
Marcella Alsan
David E. Bloom
David Canning
Working Paper 10596
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10596
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Marcella Alsan, David E. Bloom and David Canning. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Population Health on Foreign Direct Investment
Marcella Alsan, David E. Bloom and David Canning
NBER Working Paper No. 10596
June 2004
JEL No. I10, F21
ABSTRACT
We conduct a panel data analysis of 74 countries over 1980 n2000 to investigate whether population
health affects foreign direct investment inflows. Our main finding is that health has a positive and
significant effect on such inflows for low- and middle-income countries. This finding is consistent
with the view that health is an integral component of human capital in developing countries.
Marcella Alsan
Department of Population and International Health
Harvard School of Public Health
665 Huntington Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
mmousavi@hsph.harvard.edu
David E. Bloom
Department of Population and International Health
Harvard School of Public Health
665 Huntington Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
dbloom@hsph.harvard.edu
David Canning
Department of Population and International Health
Harvard School of Public Health
665 Huntington Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
dcanning@hsph.harvard.edu

1. INTRODUCTION
As Ralph Waldo Emerson famously wrote in the 19th century, "Health is the first
wealth". Sickness and disability constrain human capability and have a negative impact on
welfare (Bloom, Canning, and Jamison, 2004). In addition to the importance of health as a
consumption good, health can also be viewed as a form of human capital that enhances economic
performance both for the individual and at the level of the macroeconomy.
Health affects economic performance through direct and indirect mechanisms (Bloom
and Canning, 2000). It has a direct effect on workers’ productivity because healthy workers are
generally more physically and mentally robust than those afflicted with disease or disability and
are less likely to be absent from work because of personal or household illness. Microeconomic
analyses using anthropometric measures (such as onset of menarche, stature, and nutritional
status) as well as indexes of morbidity, have consistently demonstrated that health affects
earnings and productivity (Knaul, 1999; Ribero, 1999; Savedoff and Schultz, 2000; Schultz and
Tansel, 1997).
Health can also affect economic performance through indirect mechanisms; for example,
improved health can increase the return to other forms of human capital, such as education and
worker experience. Healthier children have enhanced cognitive function and higher school
attendance, allowing them to become better educated, higher earning adults (Bhargava, 2001). In
addition, healthier workers, who have lower rates of absenteeism and longer life expectancies,
acquire more job experience.
At the macroeconomic level, a substantial body of evidence has demonstrated that
population health is a robust predictor of growth in per capita income (Barro, 1991; Bhargava et

al., 2001; Bloom, Canning, & Sevilla, 2004). However, countries may benefit to different
degrees from health; Bhargava et al. (2001) argue that economic growth resulting from health
improvements is more pronounced in developing countries than in industrial countries.
Health, viewed as a form of human capital, could affect foreign direct investment (FDI)
through several mechanisms.1 The World Health Organization’s Commission on
Macroeconomics and Health (2001) suggests that a healthy workforce is important when
attracting foreign direct investment due to the effect of health on worker productivity. In
addition, for fear of endangering their own health and that of their expatriate staff, foreign
investors may shun areas where disease is rampant and where access to health care is limited.2
A classic instance of disease interfering with investment was during the building of the
Panama Canal. Yellow fever and other pathogens claimed the lives of 10,000 to 20,000 workers
between 1882 and 1888, forcing Ferdinand de Lesseps and the French to abandon the
construction project (Jones, 1990). More recently, the outbreak of Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome (SARS) has exemplified how disease, or even the fear of disease, can dampen
investment: FDI inflows into mainland China declined by US$2.7 billion during 2003 (Business
Daily Update, 2003). Similarly, FDI inflows to Hong Kong fell 62% in one quarter (Tam, 2003).
These trends quickly reversed once the outbreak was controlled, but they suggest that lengthier
epidemics, such as HIV/AIDS or malaria, could have severe, long-term effects on FDI.3
Even though circumstantial evidence suggests a link between health and FDI, empirical
findings are noticeably absent. The gap in the literature is not without consequence. While other
sources of capital market flows and official development assistance to developing countries have
steadily declined, FDI has continued to rise and now represents the largest component of net
resource flows to developing countries (Miyamoto, 2003). In addition to providing employment
2