NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST, INFORMATION PROVISION,
AND COMPETITION IN BANKING
Patrick Bolton
Xavier Freixas
Joel Shapiro
Working Paper 10571
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10571
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004
Financial support from the Fondation Banque de France and Barcelona Economics (CREA) is gratefully
acknowledged. Shapiro also acknowledges the .nancial support from DGES under BEC 2000-1026 and
BEC2003-00412.We thank Ricardo Fuentes and Judit Montoriol for their research assistance. We also thank
Fabrizio Germano, Joseph Harrington, Edi Karni, Sjaak Hurkens, Giancarlo Spagnolo and audiences at the
Banque de France, Columbia, Johns Hopkins, UAB, the Econometric Society NASM 2003 and NAWM
2004, and European Finance Association 2003 Meetings for helpful discussions. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Patrick Bolton, Xavier Freixas, and Joel Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Conflicts of Interest, Information Provision, and Competition in Banking
Patrick Bolton, Xavier Freixas, and Joel Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 10571
June 2004
JEL No. G2, L1
ABSTRACT
In some markets, such as the market for drugs or for financial services, sellers have better
information than buyers regarding the matching between the buyer's needs and the good's actual
characteristics. Depending on the market structure, this may lead to conflicts of interest and/or the
under-provision of information by the seller. This paper studies this issue in the market for financial
services. The analysis presents a new model of competition between banks, as banks' price
competition influences the ensuing incentives for truthful information revelation. We compare two
different firm structures, specialized banking, where financial institutions provide a unique financial
product, and one-stop banking, where a financial institution is able to provide several financial
products which are horizontally differentiated. We show first that, although conflicts of interest may
prevent information disclosure under monopoly, competition forces full information provision for
sufficiently high reputation costs. Second, in the presence of market power, one-stop banks will use
information strategically to increase product differentiation and therefore will always provide
reliable information and charge higher prices than specialized banks, thus providing a new reason
for the creation of one-stop banks. Finally, we show that, if independent financial advisers are able
to provide reliable information, this increases product differentiation and therefore market power,
so that it is in the interest of financial intermediaries to promote external independent financial
advice.
Patrick Bolton Xavier Freixas Joel Shapiro
Princeton University Universitat Pompeu Fabra Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Bendheim Center for Finance Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27 Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
26 Prospect Avenue 08005 Barcelona Spain 08005 Barcelona Spain
Princeton, NJ 08540-5296 xavier.freixas@upf.edu joel.shapiro@upf.edu
and NBER
pbolton@princeton.edu

1 Introduction
This paper is concerned with the provision of information by sellers of fi-
nancial services to customers when the financial products are horizontally
differentiated. The issue of information provision is timely, as the banking
industry is evolving from the traditional business of financial intermediation
towards a fee-based industry where information is crucial in providing more
added value to customers. In a departure from the standard finance litera-
ture, we make the assumption that some investors are partially uninformed
in the sense that they don’t know the financial product that best suits their
needs. Thisinnovativeassumptionallowsforarichenvironmentwherediffer-
ent types of phenomena such as misselling of financial products might occur.
Althoughinformationisvaluabletocustomers, thesellersfaceafundamental
conflict of interest problem: should a financial intermediary tell a client that
another firm offers a product that better suits the client’s needs? Our results
directly challenge the conventional wisdom that information is only credible
if it is produced from an independent institution that has no conflict of in-
terests. We find that in different environments, competition or consolidation
(into one-stop banks) can solve the apparent conflicts of interest.
In addition to horizontal differentiation and customers’ imperfect infor-
mation, our setting is characterized by two additional assumptions that we
deem natural in the financial industry: non-verifiable information and repu-
tation costs for misselling. In a heavily regulated environment, the disclosure
of verifiable information can be made compulsory and any attempt to falsify
it can be heavily penalized. This then leaves open the issue of inducing rev-
elation of non-verifiable information. Since financial institutions often care
about establishing a relationship with their clients, however, some discipline
can be imposed in the revelation of non-verifiable information through the
reputation costs institutions bear for giving misleading advice.
Although our research is originally motivated by the issues relevant to
the financial industry, our findings apply to any market where buyers are
uncertain about which product is best for them and where sellers face a
reputation cost if they provide misleading information. Examples of such
markets outside the financial industry could be the market for medicine,
where information is provided by physicians, the market for real estate, and
the market for sophisticated technical equipment. Moreover, the issue of
how informative information provision is and how it affects competition is
1

important to discussions of markets where advertising is used1.
Our main findings can be summarized as follows. Competition among
specialized financial intermediaries leads to full credible information disclo-
sure, even for small but strictly positive reputation costs that are bounded
away from zero. The basic intuition for this result is that competition may
eliminate the potential conflict of interest by reducing the gains from lying
and by inducing banks to differentiate their product by providing credible
information. Banks can thus restore their margins on a smaller base of cus-
tomers that have a special need for their product. However, the size of
reputation costs limit profit margins because of the need to remain credible
in giving advice to clients. As a consequence, sellers could gain from the
presence of a third party (for instance some independent financial advisor)
that could provide information, allowing them to raise prices further.
One-stop banks (defined here as banks that sell multiple products) can
also overcome this conflict of interest in certain circumstances. While the
usualexplanationforthecreationofone-stopbanksisbasedonaneconomies
of scope argument that it is more efficient to sell multiple financial products
fromthe same outlet, we find that the ability to credibly provide information
may be another major motive for consolidation. One-stop banks are able to
provide reliable information and charge higher prices than specialized banks
when they have market power. Otherwise, competition with one-stop banks
results in a similar outcome as competition with specialized banks.
Themaintheoreticalnoveltyofthepaperisthatfirms’actions(theprices
they set) define an ensuing signaling game (the advice banks give to cus-
tomers). These actions commit the firms to credible or non-credible informa-
tion revelation by providing incentives to tell the truth or not. Most other
signaling models have payoffs determined by current or future actions, not
pastactionsasinourmodel. Moreover,thesemodelshaveeachfirmsignaling
its private information, such as in Mailath (1989). Here, the private infor-
mation is the information acquired by a bank about its customer’s financial
profile, which it can reveal as it wishes.
Our model incorporates several elements from the industrial organization
literature. As all customers are uncertain of which product they prefer, there
are flavors of both horizontal differentiation (Hotelling, 1929) and vertical
differentiation(ShakedandSutton, 1983). Inordertoprovide informationto
customers, we assume that banks make unverifiable statements about which
1See for example, Meurer and Stahl (1994).
2