NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE COSTS OF ENTRENCHED BOARDS
Lucian Bebchuk
Alma Cohen
Working Paper 10587
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10587
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004
We are grateful to Rajesh Aggarwal, John Coates, Rob Daines, Allen Ferrell, Julian Franks, Jack Jacobs,
Guhan Subramanian, Manuel Trajtenberg, Belen Villalonga, David Yermack, and participants in seminars
and conferences at Harvard, London Business School, Yale School of Management, Fordham, Virginia, and
the American Law and economics Annual meeting, for their valuable suggestions. We also wish to thank
Andrew Metrick for providing us with data. We benefited from the financial support of the NBER, the
Harvard John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business, the BSI-Gamma Foundation, and the
Nathan Cummins Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Lucian Bebchuk and Alma Cohen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Costs of Entrenched Boards
Lucian Bebchuk and Alma Cohen
NBER Working Paper No. 10587
June 2004
JEL No. G30, G34, K22
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates empirically how the value of publicly traded firms is overall affected by
arrangements protecting management from removal. A majority of U.S. public companies have
staggered boards that substantially insulate the board from removal via a hostile takeover or a proxy
contest. We find that staggered boards are associated with an economically significant reduction in
firm value (as measured by Tobin’s Q). We also find evidence consistent with staggered boards’
bringing about, and not merely reflecting, a lower firm value. Finally, the correlation with reduced
firm value is stronger for staggered boards established in the corporate charter (which shareholders
cannot amend) than for staggered boards established in the company’s bylaws (which can be
amended by shareholders).
Lucian Bebchuk Alma Cohen
Harvard Law School Analysis Group and
1557 Massachusetts Avenue Harvard Law School
Cambridge, MA 02138 John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business
and NBER acohen@analysisgroup.com
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu
3

1. Introduction
The desirability of protecting the boards of publicly traded companies from
removal by shareholders has long been the subject of much debate. Does the threat of
removal benefit shareholders by discouraging incumbents from shirking, engaging in
empire-building, extracting private benefits, and rejecting attractive acquisition offers?
Or does the threat of removal reduce shareholder value by distracting management,
distorting its decisions by introducing a short-term bias, and weakening incumbents’
bargaining position in negotiated sales? These questions are undoubtedly among the
most important in corporate governance. The debate in the 1950s about proxy contests,
the debates during the 1980s and 1990s about takeover defenses, and the current debate
on shareholder access to the corporate ballot have all focused to a large extent on this
issue.
The extent to which the boards of US public firms are insulated from removal
critically depends on whether they have, as a majority of them do, a staggered board. A
staggered board can prevent shareholders from replacing a majority of the board of
directors without the passage of at least two annual elections. It thus makes it much
more difficult to gain control of a company either in a stand-alone proxy contest or in a
hostile takeover.
Staggered boards have been encountering growing resistance from institutional
investors during the past decade (Bebchuk (2003), Klausner (2003)). Since the early
1990s, shareholders of existing public companies have been reluctant to approve
charter amendments (that would establish a staggered board (IRRC (2002)).
Furthermore, shareholders have increasingly been voting in favor of advisory
resolutions that recommend dismantling existing staggered boards. Such resolutions
regularly obtain support from a majority of the shareholders (Georgeson Shareholder
(2002)).
But staggered boards also continue to have many defenders (e.g., Koppes,
Ganske, and Haag (1999)). Boards commonly elect not to follow precatory shareholder
resolutions against charter provisions establishing a staggered board. Defenders of
1

staggered boards stress that staggered boards provide boards with stability and
insulation from short-term pressures that are necessary for them to operate well.
Participants in the long-standing debate over protecting boards from removal
have identified many ways in which such protection can affect firm value. Such
protection can affect the probability of an acquisition, the expected premium in the
event of an acquisition, and, most importantly perhaps, the ex ante behavior of
management. The overall desirability of such protection depends on the aggregate
impact of all of these effects on expected shareholder value. Thus, to shed light on the
desirability of defenses, one strategy that empirical work can pursue is to investigate
separately each of these effects. An alternative strategy, which we pursue in this paper,
is to study how firms’ market value is overall affected by protection from removal.
We study the association between staggered boards and market value during the
period 1995-2002. By 1995, the legal rules that give staggered boards their protective
powers were firmly in place. Our data set is based on the companies followed by the
Investor Responsibility Research Center (IRRC), which publishes data about the
governance provisions of all the companies in the S&P 500, as well as many other
companies of significance.
We find that, controlling for firm characteristics including other governance
provisions, staggered boards are associated with a reduced firm value. The association
between staggered boards and firm value is not only statistically significant but also
economically meaningful.
As is often the case with respect to identified correlations between governance
arrangements and firm value, simultaneity issues complicate the interpretation of our
findings. One possible interpretation is that staggered boards lead to a reduction in firm
value. But there are two other interpretations that do not involve such a causal link:
First, the association might have been produced by the selection of staggered boards by
firms that have a low value and seek to protect themselves from a takeover. Second, the
association might have been produced by the selection of such arrangements by
managements with characteristics that also lead to lower value; for example, self-
2