NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GROWTH VOLATILITY AND
FINANCIAL LIBERALIZATION
Geert Bekaert
Campbell R. Harvey
Christian Lundblad
Working Paper 10560
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10560
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004
We thank Susan Collins for inspiring this paper. We appreciate the comments of Andrew Frankel, Blake
LeBaron, Marco Del Negro, Vihang Errunza, Yasushi Hamao, Roberto Rigobon, Lubos Pastor and seminar
participants at Cass Business School, Fordham University, University of Porto, ISCTE Lisbon, HEC
Lausanne, the National Bank of Belgium Conference on E ciency and Stability in an Evolving Financial
System, the European Finance Association meetings in Berlin, and the American Economic Association
meetings in Washington, D.C. Send correspondence to: Campbell R. Harvey, Fuqua School of Business,
Duke University, Durham, NC 27708. Phone: +1 919.660.7768, E-mail: cam.harvey@duke.edu . The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2004 by Geert Bekaert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Growth Volatility and Financial Liberalization
Geert Bekaert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad
NBER Working Paper No. 10560
June 2004
JEL No. E32, F30, F36, F43, G15, G18, G28
ABSTRACT
We examine the effects of both equity market liberalization and capital account openness on real
consumption growth variability. We show that financial liberalization is mostly associated with
lower consumption growth volatility. Our results are robust, surviving controls for business-cycle
effects, economic and financial development, the quality of institutions, and other variables.
Countries that have more open capital accounts experience a greater reduction in consumption
growth volatility after equity market openings. The results hold for both total and idiosyncratic
consumption growth volatility. We also find that financial liberalizations are associated with
declines in the ratio of consumption growth volatility to GDP growth volatility, suggesting improved
risk sharing. Our results are weaker for liberalizing emerging markets but we never observe an
increase in real volatility. Moreover, we demonstrate significant differences in the volatility response
depending on the size of the banking and government sectors and certain institutional factors.
Geert Bekaert
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway/802 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
gb241@columbia.edu
Campbell R. Harvey
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
cam.harvey@duke.edu
Christian Lundblad
Indiana University
clundbla@indiana.edu

1 Introduction
Is the cost to a country for opening its financial markets to foreign portfolio investment
increased economic volatility? Our research suggests the answer is no. Our research question
bridges at least two distinct literatures.
First, there is a heated debate in the growth and development economics literature on the
costs and benefits of financial liberalization. Research focusing on capital account openness
finds mixed results (see Eichengreen (2001)fora survey), but articles focusing on equity mar-
ket liberalization typically find significant positive average growth effects from liberalization
(see, for example, Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2001, 2004)).
Policy makers in developing countries, however, are interested in more than the average
effect. The crises in Mexico and South East Asia have focused attention on the potentially
disruptive effects of foreign speculative capital that may leave at a whim and abruptly
throw whole countries or regions into recession. There is a perception that foreign capital
not only increases volatility in the financial markets, but also in the real economy, and
that such volatility is not desired (see Stiglitz (2000) and Agenor (2003)). The perceived
disadvantages of unbridled capital flows have recently brought back proposals for a Tobin
tax on cross-border capital flows even between developed markets (see Eichengreen, Tobin,
and Wyplosz (1995)).
Second, there is an extensive literature on the benefits of international risk sharing. This
literature explicitly recognizes that open capital markets lead to international risk sharing,
which should improve welfare. Due to a multitude of reasons such as home asset preference,
imperfect marketintegration, andincomplete insurance markets, thebenefits ofinternational
risk sharing are not realized and, consequently, the main question the literature attempts to
answer is how large these benefits potentially would be. Most studies use consumption-based
endowment models to measure the utility benefit of moving from the current situation to a
situation of optimal risk sharing. A major component of the benefits of international risk
sharing is the reduction of the variability of consumption growth, and often level effects are
simply ignored (Obstfeld (1994) is an important exception). So far, there appears to be no
consensus about the extent of the benefits of international risk sharing (see van Wincoop
(1999) and Lewis (1999)).
1

Our study contributes to this debate by testing directly whether consumption growth
volatility changes after financial liberalization. If there are genuine benefits to international
risksharing, weexpect toobservereduced consumption growthvolatility. Ifinstead, financial
liberalization leads to increased financial fragility and crises (Furman and Stiglitz (1998)),
we expect to observe increased volatility. Of course, the presence of a positive level effect
implies that finding no significant volatility effect generally suffices to conclude that liberal-
izations improved welfare. Importantly, we can conduct this test with minimal parametric
assumptions.
Our research plan faces several challenges.
First, we must measure financial liberalization. Our first measure narrowly focuses on
the equity market which should be particularly relevant for risk sharing, and relies on the
measures developed by Bekaert and Harvey (2000). We also want to more broadly examine
capital account openness and we use the standard IMF measure as well as measure compiled
by Quinn (1997), which corrects for the degree of openness. We describe these measures,
some initial analysis and the empirical framework in Section 2.
Second, we face an identification and simultaneity problem. Is it liberalization that
has an effect on volatility or another characteristic of the country? Is the liberalization
strategically timed when volatility is expected to change? Or does the liberalization effect
reflect the effects of simultaneous reforms, for example regarding macro-economic policy or
the domestic financial sector? Section 3 contains the main results, showing the liberalization
effect in the presence of controls for economic development, the size of the government
sector, the presence and extent of social security benefits, time trends etc., including a large
numberofrobustness checks. Section4explicitlydealswiththeendogeneity andsimultaneity
problems. In this section, we control for the presence of macroeconomic imbalances, financial
development, and more generally, the quality of institutions. Our findings remain robust:
in a large cross-section, equity market liberalization and capital account openness (when
measured properly) are associated with substantial lower consumption growth variability.
It is even the case that the effect of equity market liberalization is larger for countries
with a relatively more open capital account. In a sample totally focusing on the temporal
effect in mostly emerging, liberalizing countries, we never observe a significant increase in
volatility. Mostly, thevolatility effectisinsignificantly different fromzero, butitissometimes
2