NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE PATH TO THE TOP:
CHANGES IN THE ATTRIBUTES AND CAREERS
OF CORPORATE EXECUTIVES, 1980-2001
Peter Cappelli
Monika Hamori
Working Paper 10507
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10507
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2004
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Peter Cappelli and Monika Hamori. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Simple Estimators for the Parameters of Discrete Dynamic Games (with Entry/Exit Examples)
Peter Cappelli and Monika Hamori
NBER Working Paper No. 10507
May 2004
JEL No. J0, L2, M1
ABSTRACT
The analyses below compare the career histories and personal characteristics of the executives in
the top ranks of the world’s largest and most stable business operations, the Fortune 100, between
1980 and 2001. To our knowledge, there have been no prior studies of contemporary changes in the
experience or attributes of executives beyond CEOs. In 2001, these executives were younger, more
likely to be women, and less likely to have been Ivy League educated. Most important, they got to
the executive suite about four years faster than in 1980 and did so by holding fewer jobs on the way
to the top. (In particular, women in 2001 got to their executive jobs faster than their male
counterparts --there were no women executives in the Fortune 100 in 1980). Executives in 2001 also
spent about five years less in their current organization and were more likely to be hired from the
outside than in 1980. Interestingly, the most stable firms – the 26 that were in the Fortune 100 in
both periods – had just as much lifetime employment among executives in 2001 as in 1980, although
changes in other aspects of careers were similar. Overall, the path to the executive suite and the
attributes of the individuals who get there appear to have changed even in the largest and most stable
business operations.
Peter Cappelli
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6370
and NBER
cappelli@wharton.upenn.edu
Monika Hamori
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6370
hamori@wharton.upenn.edu

The Path to the Top:
Changes in the Attributes and Careers of Corporate Executives
1980 to 2001
Peter Cappelli and Monika Hamori 1
Introduction:
Multinational corporations are among the most important economic actors in the world.
The largest of them have more economic assets than all but the biggest countries. They
are engines of cultural and economic change that can alter the economic fates of entire
nations. The people who control them, in turn, have arguably as much power and
influence as all but the highest-ranking government officials. Understanding who they
are is therefore relevant to understanding the corporations and how they operate.
In addition to knowing the attributes of the people who run large corporations, it is also
important to understand the path that took them to these powerful positions. These paths
say a great deal about access to positions of influence, about social mobility generally,
and specifically about career development practices.
Research on these questions has a long history, especially in the U.S. where notions of
social mobility are central to national culture and values. Popular biographies of the
“robber baron” generation and its leading figures like John D. Rockefeller and Andrew
Carnegie reinforced the notion that individuals became business leaders through hard
work or, in the case of manufacturing leaders like Henry Ford and Thomas Edison,
inventive genius, typically overcoming hardships in the process. Arguably the first study
to examine this meritocratic thesis was Pitirim Sorokin’s 1924 study of millionaires in the
U.S.2 He compared an older generation of millionaires to the then current generation and
found that while about half of the former had come from middle or upper class
backgrounds, three quarters of the latter had done so. This suggested to him that society
1 Thanks to Jimmy George, Joyce Huang, Patricia Hwang, Alvaro Pinto, Stacy Shi and Clifford Song for
careful assistance collecting the data for this study, to Emilio Castilla for helpful comments, and to Jim
Baron for the conversation that motivated it.
2 Pitirum Sorokin. American Millionaires and Multi-Millionaires: A Comparative Statistical Study.
Journal of Social Forces 3(4) 1925, pp.627-640.
2

was becoming less meritocratic and that it had become more difficult to work one’s way
up economic and class levels.
Carl S. Joslyn and Frank W. Taussig aimed their study of social mobility precisely at
business executives.3 They studied the backgrounds of 7,371 executives drawn from the
ranks of corporate directors in the 1920s. While they found that the vast majority of
these executives had fathers who were also businessmen, and that this percentage actually
had grown over time, they also found that 11 percent had fathers who were laborers.
They focused on this finding and concluded that individuals with merit could work their
way to the top of the business community. Differences in the probability of advancement
by social class, they argued, were the result of differences in merit and ability – the upper
class had more able people.
A number of studies followed the Joslyn and Taussig investigations in examining more
closely the origins of the business leadership in the U.S. William Miller looked into the
backgrounds of 190 of the most elite executives -- Presidents and Chairmen of Boards of
Directors of the largest companies in the most important industries – at the beginning of
the industrial age, from 1900-1910.4 What was interesting about this group, and in
contrast to business leaders from earlier generations, is that most were professional
managers, not the founders or entrepreneurs who had started the businesses. Miller
concluded that half had come from upper class backgrounds and only 5 percent from
working or lower-class families. Frances Gregory and Irene Neu looked back even
further in time at the backgrounds of business leaders just before the beginnings of the
modern corporation in the 1880s. They found that most of the business leaders before the
turn of the last century had inherited money, which allowed them to invest in and then
become leaders of companies.5 The meritocracy argument was no longer looking
credible.
A generation later, the notion of a corporate career with entry-level jobs and promotion
from within was more fully in place. Lloyd Warner and James Abbeglan attempted to
3 Carl S. Joslyn and Frank W. Taussig. 1932. American Business Leaders, New York: MacMillian.
4 William Miller. American Historians and the Business Elite. Journal of Economic History 9(2) 1949.
5 Frances W. Gregory and Irene D. Neu. The American Industrial Elite in the 1870s. in William Miller
(Ed). Men in Business. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1952.
3