NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEALING WITH DESTABILIZING ‘MARKET DISCIPLINE’
Daniel Cohen
Richard Portes
Working Paper 10533
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10533
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2004
This paper has been prepared for the conference on ‘Market Discipline: the Evidence across Countries and
Industries’, organized by the Bank for International Settlements and the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago,
on 30 October – 1 November 2003. It draws on material in our report prepared for the Conseil d’Analyse
Economique (Cohen and Portes, 2003). We are very grateful to Laurence Bloch and Jean Pisani-Ferry for
their help and their comments on our work. We have also benefited from comments at a CAE meeting, as well
as comments from Ted Truman. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Daniel Cohen and Richard Portes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Dealing with Destabilizing ‘Market Discipline’
Daniel Cohen and Richard Portes
NBER Working Paper No. 10533
May 2004
JEL No. F33, F34
ABSTRACT
If interest rates (country spreads) rise, debt can rapidly be subject to a snowball effect, which then
becomes self-fulfilling with regard to the fundamentals themselves. This is a market imperfection,
because we cannot be confident that the unaided market will choose the "good equilibrium" over the
"bad equilibrium". We see here a fundamental flaw in the process of market discipline. We propose
a policy intervention to deal with this structural weakness in the mechanisms of international capital
flows. This is based on a simple taxonomy that enables us to break down the origin of crises into
three components: a crisis of confidence (spreads and currency crisis), a crisis of fundamentals (real
growth rate), and a crisis of economic policy (primary deficit). The policy would seek to short-
circuit confidence crises, partly by using IMF support to improve ex ante incentives.
Daniel Cohen
Ecole normal superieure
48 Blvd Jourdan
75014 Paris
France
dcohen@elias.ens.fr
Richard Portes
London Business School
Regent’s Park
London NW1 4SA
United Kingdom
and NBER
rportes@london.edu

DEALING WITH DESTABILIZING ‘MARKET DISCIPLINE’
Daniel Cohen
(Ecole normale supérieure, Cepremap and CEPR)
Richard Portes
(London Business School, Columbia Business School, EHESS and CEPR)
December 2003
1. Towards efficient market discipline ex ante, orderly workouts ex post
1.1. Orderly workouts: SDRM and CACs
The widespread debt crisis of the 1980s became ‘the lost decade’ for Latin America, and the
banks ultimately had to accept substantial writeoffs. The Asian crisis of 1997-98 was
devastating at the time and is still not over for Indonesia. The Russian default of August 1998
was settled relatively quickly, but even quicker were the shock waves it sent out to the
financial markets – with some role in the failure of LTCM, a sharp rise of all emerging market
bond spreads, and the subsequent Brazilian exchange-rate crisis. Dealing with country debt
crises is always very messy, often protracted and very costly to both debtor and creditors.
There are alternatives. After the Mexican crisis of 1994-95, Jeffrey Sachs (1995) proposed an
international bankruptcy regime modelled on Chapter 11 of the US bankruptcy code.
Eichengreen and Portes (1995) argued instead for a combination of contractual and
institutional changes that would not require an international bankruptcy court. The G10
deputies issued a report in May 1996 that endorsed the latter route. Nothing was done,
because the G10 left any action to the initiative of market participants. But the lenders had
already expressed their opposition to any measures that would, as they put it, “make default
easier”. It should instead be as “painful and messy” as possible, they said, in order to deter
any violation of the sanctity of contracts.
3

This is one aspect of “market discipline” that we shall not explore in this paper. It is clear,
however, that this argument is wrong. If the debtor perceives default as infeasible or
unacceptably costly, even when an objective assessment would say it is unavoidable, then we
see “gambles for resurrection”: policies with some small chance of getting out of the hole but
a high probability of a failure that exacerbates the difficulties. The Argentine debt exchange in
summer 2001 is an excellent example, perhaps the costliest such gamble in history. On the
other hand, if default is too easy, then we do get moral hazard.
The discussions on the international financial architecture that followed the Asian crisis of
1997-98 revived the debate, but the results were the same as before: no change. The crises in
Turkey and Argentina were handled in much the same way as the Asian crises – a pre-crisis
period of exchange-rate rigidity, endorsed by the IMF, followed by big bailout packages when
trouble came. Only the debacle and default of Argentina broke the pattern, and the
consequences have been disastrous for that country, if not for the international financial
system. And all these episodes have weakened the IMF and its authority.
There are now signs of serious change in the framework for crisis resolution and debt
restructuring. Stanley Fischer (1999) proposed that the IMF act as international lender of last
resort (ILLR). In November 2001, Anne Krueger, his successor as First Deputy Managing
Director of the IMF, advocated a Sovereign Debt Restructuring Mechanism (SDRM) to
facilitate a declaration of insolvency for an over-indebted country along the lines of Chapter
11 of the US Bankruptcy Code (Krueger, 2001). One institutional manifestation of the
Fischer proposal is the Contingent Credit Line (CCL) facility, which would enable a country
affected by a contagion crisis to draw on additional lines of credit. No country, however, has
as yet made use of this facility. The proposal described in this paper has some kinship with it,
but it is designed to meet a specific market failure and should be more attractive to borrowers.
The Krueger proposal has also not been implemented. Despite subsequent revisions that
reduced the role of the IMF (Krueger, 2002), the SDRM would still require an international
treaty or amendment of the IMF Articles of Agreement. John Taylor, US Undersecretary of
the Treasury for International Affairs, had meanwhile responded with a version of the
4