NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EARNINGS MANIPULATION AND MANAGERIAL
INVESTMENT DECISIONS:
EVIDENCE FROM SPONSORED PENSION PLANS
Daniel Bergstresser
Mihir A. Desai
Joshua Rauh
Working Paper 10543
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10543
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004
The authors thank Shlomo Benartzi, David Cutler, David Hawkins, Caroline Hoxby, Dirk Jenter, André
Perold, James Poterba, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein and various seminar participants for helpful comments.
Conversations and email exchanges with Ron Gebhardtsbauer of the American Academy of Actuaries, James
Marple of Watson Wyatt, and Jerrold Levy of Mercer Consulting were particularly helpful. The Division of
Research at Harvard Business School provided generous financial support. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Daniel Bergstresser, Mihir A. Desai, and Joshua Rauh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Earnings Manipulation and Managerial Investment Decisions:
Evidence from Sponsored Pension Plans
Daniel Bergstresser, Mihir A. Desai, and Joshua Rauh
NBER Working Paper No. 10543
June 2004
JEL No. M41, M52, G23, G30, G11
ABSTRACT
Managers appear to manipulate firm earnings when they characterize pension assets to capital
markets and alter investment decisions to justify, and capitalize on, these manipulations. We
construct a measure of the sensitivity of reported earnings to the assumed long-term rate of return
on pension assets. Managers are more aggressive with assumed long-term rates of return when their
assumptions have a greater impact on reported earnings. Managers also increase assumed rates of
return as they prepare to acquire other firms and as they exercise stock options, further confirming
the opportunistic nature of these increases. Decisions about assumed rates of return, in turn,
influence asset allocation within pension plans. Instrumental variables results suggest that a 25 basis
point increase in the assumed rate of return is associated with a 5% increase in equity allocation.
Taken together, these results suggest that earnings manipulation arising from managerial motivations
influences significant managerial investment decisions.
Daniel Bergstresser Mihir A. Desai Joshua Rauh
Harvard Business School Harvard Business School MIT
Morgan 391 Morgan 363 Department of Economics
Soldiers Field Soldiers Field E52-300
Boston, MA 02163 Boston, MA 02163 50 Memorial Drive
dbergstresser@hbs.edu and NBER Cambridge, MA 02142
mdesai@hbs.edu rauh@mit.edu

1. Introduction
Manipulation of reported earnings can be a powerful tool for managers to inflate their
stock prices. Studies of earnings manipulation typically emphasize aggregate measures such as
accruals and, consequently, struggle to link earnings manipulation to investment decisions. In
this paper, we identify a simple mechanism for earnings manipulation, describe how
manipulation through this channel is linked to CEOs’ incentives, and show that firms change
investment decisions in order to justify, and capitalize on, this type of earnings manipulation.
Specifically, we find that managers opportunistically choose assumed rates of return on pension
assets, and we examine how these distorted reporting decisions interact with option exercises,
merger activity and asset allocation decisions within pension plans.
The size of defined-benefit pension plans and managers’ wide latitude in characterizing
them to capital markets make pension accounting a fertile area for earnings manipulation. Many
firms have pension plans that are large enough to allow them to substantially increase reported
earnings in the short run by changing the assumed long-term rate of return for the pension assets
they manage for their workers. Managers who perceive that manipulating this assumption can
influence their firms’ stock price, as was apparently the case during the 1990s, face strong
incentives to set this long-term rate of return assumption opportunistically.
Some capital market observers have viewed the actions of IBM, under CEO Louis
Gerstner, Jr., as an example of how firms can use pension accounting to manipulate earnings.1
IBM sponsors a large defined benefit pension plan, with over $57 billion in assets at the end of
2002. Table 1 outlines the operating performance of IBM, the performance of its DB pension
plan, and the CEO’s option grants and exercises. Changes in the long-term rate of return
(LTROR) that IBM assumes on its DB pension plan assets are of particular interest. IBM
changed its assumed long-term rate of return four times during this period: a twenty-five basis
point reduction in 1995, a twenty-five basis point increase in 1997, a fifty basis point increase in
2000, and a fifty basis point reduction in 2002. As we describe more fully in the sections that
follow, IBM’s assumed rates of return throughout this period exceeded those used by most firms.
The frequent changes are also notable given the long run nature of these assets and assumptions.
1 See Maclean (2002).
1

While IBM reacted to poor actual performance in its pension plan in the mid-1990s by reducing
the assumed long-term rate of return, the opposite occurred in 2000. Despite poor equity market
returns and declining bond yields during that year, IBM raised its long-term rate of return
assumption by fifty basis points. Nearly five percent of IBM’s income before tax in 2000 and
2001 resulted from the increase in the assumed long-term rate of return from 9.25% to 10.00%.
More generally, IBM’s reported pretax income grew at a compound annual growth rate of 6.7%
from 1995 to 2001; without these changes, income would have grown at only a 5.6% rate. As
Table 1 shows, these changes in pension assumptions coincided with deteriorating operating
performance.
This example illustrates how senior managers can use pension accounting to boost their
firms’ reported profits. Coronado and Sharpe (2003) present evidence that investors did not
‘pierce the veil’ of pension finance accounting during the 1990s; they show that earnings
associated with changed pension assumptions were capitalized into prices to the same degree as
operating earnings.2 Their results suggest that managers can boost both reported profits and
stock prices through the simple mechanism of pension accounting. We investigate the degree to
which managers are opportunistic with these assumed returns and evaluate the extent to which
choices on assumed returns interact with their own option exercises and with the merger activity
of their firms. Finally, we examine whether managers alter asset allocation within pension plans
to justify these assumed returns.
In order to identify the relative incentive to use this lever of earnings manipulation, we
begin by constructing a measure of the sensitivity of a firm’s overall profits to the assumed long-
tem rate of return on pension assets. We show that this sensitivity measure is an important
determinant of the levels of, and changes in, assumed rates of return. Specifically, a firm whose
pension assets are twice as large relative to its operating income as the median firm in our
sample makes a long-term rate of return assumption that is, on average, approximately ten basis
points higher than the median. A firm in the 90th percentile of sensitivity, on average, has a long-
term rate of return assumption that is 40 basis points higher than a firm in the 10th percentile.
These differences in return assumptions can have an economically meaningful impact on
2 In a related vein, Franzoni and Marin (2003) conclude that firms with underfunded plans are overvalued by the
market.
2