NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FIRMS’ HISTORIES AND THEIR CAPITAL STRUCTURES
Ayla Kayhan
Sheridan Titman
Working Paper 10526
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10526
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2004
This paper has benefited from useful comments from Andres Almazan, Aydogan Alti, Malcolm Baker, Long
Chen, John Graham, Charlie Hadlock, Mike Lemmon, Gordon Phillips, and Husayn Shahrur. We thank
seminar participants at NYU, Cornell, the 2003 FMA meetings, the Spring 2004 NBER Corporate Finance
Meetings, and the first annual UBC finance conference for their useful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Ayla Kayhan and Sheridan Titman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Firms’ Histories and Their Capital Structures
Ayla Kayhan and Sheridan Titman
NBER Working Paper No. 10526
May 2004
JEL No. G3
ABSTRACT
This paper examines how cash flows, investment expenditures and stock price histories affect
corporate debt ratios. Consistent with earlier work, we find that these variables have a substantial
influence on changes in capital structure. Specifically, stock price changes and financial deficits (i.e.,
the amount of external capital raised) have strong influences on capital structure changes, but in
contrast to previous conclusions, we find that their effects are subsequently at least partially
reversed. These results indicate that although a firm's history strongly influence their capital
structures, that over time, financing choices tend to move firms towards target debt ratios that are
consistent with the tradeoff theories of capital structure.
Ayla Kayhan
Department of Finance
McCombs School of Business
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712-1179
akayhan@mail.utexas.edu
Sheridan Titman
Department of Finance
McCombs School of Business
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712-1179
and NBER
titman@mail.utexas.edu

I. Introduction
Capital structure theory suggests that firms determine what is often referred to as a target
debt ratio, which is based on various tradeoffs between the costs and benefits of debt
versus equity. In a recent survey of CFOs, Graham and Harvey (2001) report that 37% of
their respondents have a flexible target, 34% have a somewhat tight target or range and
10% have a strict target. Consistent with the idea that targets may be flexible, capital
structure theory provides arguments based on information asymmetries, market
inefficiencies, and transaction costs that explain why firms’ cash flows, investment
expenditures and stock price histories can lead them to deviate from the targets suggested
by the traditional tradeoff theories. Indeed, a substantial part of the recent literature on
capital structure focuses on those forces that move firms away from their target ratios and
often gives the impression that a firm’s history is a more important determinant of capital
structure than are firm characteristics that proxy for the costs and benefits of debt versus
equity financing.
This paper provides a comprehensive analysis of how cash flows, investment
expenditures and stock price histories affect capital structure choices. Our analysis
confirms that history does in fact have a major influence on observed debt ratios.
However, the long-term effects of a firm’s history on its capital structure has been
exaggerated in the recent literature, and as we show, changes in debt ratios tend to be
consistent with the hypothesis that they move towards target ratios based on traditional
tradeoff variables.
Our analysis focuses on the following variables, which we describe and discuss in
detail later in the paper:
1

1) Past profitability: Titman and Wessels (1988) and others find that firms with
higher past profits tend to have lower debt ratios. This evidence, which has been
attributed to the Donaldson (1961) and Myers (1984) pecking order of financing
preferences, is consistent with tax, transaction costs, and adverse selection
arguments that imply that internally generated equity is less costly than equity
capital that is raised externally.
2) Financial deficits: Shyam-Sunder and Myers (1999) find that firms with higher
financial deficits, i.e., firms that raise more external capital, tend to increase their
leverage. This evidence is consistent with Myers and Majluf’s (1984) adverse
selection model.1
3) Past stock returns: Graham and Harvey’s (2001) survey evidence suggests that
firms issue equity following stock price increases because CFOs believe that they
can raise equity capital under more favorable terms in such situations. This
observation is consistent with a number of articles that find that firms tend to
issue equity following increases in their stock prices and tend to repurchase shares
following stock price declines, which is the opposite of what one might expect if
firms tended to rebalance their capital structures towards a static target.2 This
1 Frank and Goyal (2003) examine a larger sample of firms and also find a strong relation between financial
deficits and changes in debt ratios. However, they note that the relation between financial deficits and
changes in the debt ratio is stronger for larger and older firms. Since these firms might be expected to be
less subject to asymmetric information problems, they argue that this evidence is inconsistent with Myers
and Majluf (1984).
2 Taggart (1977), Marsh (1982), Asquith and Mullins (1986), Korajczyk, Lucas and McDonald (1991),
Jung, Kim and Stulz (1996), and Hovakimian, Opler and Titman (2001) demonstrate evidence for market
timing with seasoned equity. Loughran and Ritter (1995) and Pagano, Panetta, and Zingales (1998) show
that firms tend to initiate IPOs when they have high market valuations. Ikenberry, Lakonishok, and
Vermaelen (1995) provide evidence for market timing with share repurchases. See Ritter (2002) for a
detailed list of papers that provide evidence for market timing.
2