NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SPENDING LESS TIME WITH THE FAMILY:
THE DECLINE OF FAMILY OWNERSHIP IN THE UK
Julian Franks
Colin Mayer
Stefano Rossi
Working Paper 10628
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10628
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2004
This paper has been written for the National Bureau of Economic Research Programme on the History of
Corporate Ownership: The Rise and Fall of Great Business Families. We are grateful for helpful suggestions
on this and a companion paper (“The Origination and Evolution of Ownership and Control”) from participants
at conferences at the American Finance Association meetings in Washington DC, January 2003, the National
Bureau of Economic Research Programme on the Evolution of Family Ownership conference in Boston,
INSEAD and Lake Louise, the Political Economy of Financial Markets Conference at Princeton, September
2003 and the RIETI Conference on Comparative Corporate Governance: Changing Profiles of National
Diversity in Tokyo, January 2003, and at seminars at the Bank of England, the Bank of Italy, Cambridge
University, the London Business School, the London School of Economics, SNS, Stockholm, the Stern
School, New York University, Université Libre de Bruxelles, University of Bologna and UCLA. We have
received helpful comments from Brian Cheffins, Barry Eichengreen, Charles Hadlock, Leslie Hannah, Cliff
Holderness, Gregory Jackson, Kose John, Hideaki Miyajima, Randall Morck, Hyun Song Shin, Oren
Sussman, Elu von Thadden and Xavier Vives. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Julian Franks, Colin Mayer, and Stefano Rossi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Spending Less Time with the Family: The Decline of Family Ownership in the UK
Julian Franks, Colin Mayer, and Stefano Rossi
NBER Working Paper No. 10628
July 2004
JEL No. G32
ABSTRACT
Family ownership was rapidly diluted in the twentieth century in Britain. The main cause was equity
issued in the process of making acquisitions. In the first half of the century, it occurred in the
absence of minority investor protection and relied on directors of target firms protecting the interests
of shareholders. Families were able to retain control by occupying a disproportionate number of
seats on the boards of firms. However, in the absence of large stakes, the rise of hostile takeovers
and institutional shareholders made it increasingly difficult for families to maintain control without
challenge. Potential targets attempted to protect themselves through dual class shares and strategic
share blocks but these were dismantled in response to opposition by institutional shareholders and
the London Stock Exchange. The result was a regulated market in corporate control and a capital
market that looked very different from its European counterparts. Thus, while acquisitions facilitated
the growth of family controlled firms in the first half of the century, they also diluted their
ownership and ultimately their control in the second half.
Julian Franks
London Business School
jfranks@london.edu
Colin Mayer
University of Oxford
colin.mayer@said-business-school.oxford.ac.uk
Stefano Rossi
London Business School
srossi@london.edu

Entrebrawneurial Britain
I strut around my stately life
Hand in hand with lover and wife.
I even own a share or two
In a family firm my father grew.
Of course I have not the slightest view
On what this firm is supposed to do.
Nor have I any reason to care
Since in absentia I sit in a Chair,
Of a Board that yesterday I chose to hire
And tomorrow I’ve decided that I will fire.
1 Introduction
The UK is a strange country. It does not have concentrated ownership; most countries
do. It does not have pyramid structures; most countries do. Family ownership is of
limited significance; in most countries it is extensive. There are few dual class shares;
in many countries they are extensive. It has an active market in corporate control;
elsewhere, it is largely non-existent.
By way of a measure of its peculiarity, Becht and Mayer (2001) report that in a
majority of listed Austrian, German and Italian firms there is a single voting block of
shares that commands a majority of votes in these companies. Families account for
45% of blocks in Austria, 32% in Germany and 30% in Italy. The average size of the
blocks is 26% in Austria, 27% in Germany and 20% in Italy. In the UK, on average
the largest voting block will usually cast under 10% of votes, while less than 5% of
blocks are attributable to families and the average size of their blocks is only 5%.
There is a stark contrast in the significance of families in corporate control between
the UK and the rest of Europe.
Even by the standards of the US, the UK is odd. Dual class shares are by no means
absent from the US. Powerful families established some of the largest corporations in
the US and pyramids were at least at one stage widespread. The US may be odd but
Britain is even more peculiar.
Why is the UK so different? Was it always so deviant? The British business history
literature would seem to suggest not. Family ownership has been a dominant theme in
1

British business history. Alfred Chandler developed a thesis of comparative industrial
performance around differences between managerial capitalism in North America and
family organizations in Europe. He argued that the UK was held back at the turn of
the century by a continuing reliance on family as against professional managerial
capitalism. Successes were restricted to industries in which there were modest
investment requirements, most notably branded packaged goods. Companies such as
Beechams, Cadbury, Colman, Reckitt and Rowntree were dominated by their owners
and had little professional management. The consequences were most seriously felt in
those industries that required large-scale investments – chemicals, electrical
equipment and metals; these declined markedly in relation to their German and US
competitors. David Landes (1965, pp 536-64) described the stereotypical image of
the British family firm as being an organization founded by fanatical fathers and
succeeded by squabbling siblings who “worked at play and played at work”.
According to this view, at the beginning of the 20th century, as in most other
countries, powerful families dominated the British corporate sector. They may have
been incompetent but at least they were there and presumably their extinction was a
consequence of their incompetence. As a result, the origins of the British corporate
system are quite conventional and its current anomalous status is a consequence of the
normal workings of market forces.
Plausible though this story is, we argue in this paper that it is probably not an accurate
and certainly not a complete description of what transpired. At the very least it does
not capture the rich interaction that occurred between financial markets and
companies in the UK.
There are many aspects of this that are misleading. The first is that while families
were important at the beginning of the twentieth century, their significance did not in
general derive from long-term large-scale ownership of British companies. By way of
ownership, families were rapidly marginalized. The pattern of ownership, which we
report above as characterizing corporate Britain today, emerged early in the twentieth
century.
2