NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE HISTORY AND POLITICS OF
CORPORATE OWNERSHIP IN SWEDEN
Peter Högfeldt
Working Paper 10641
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10641
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2004
Special thanks to Martin Holmén for help and comments and to Jan Glete for providing data. I have benefited
from constructive discussions and comments by Marco Becht, Lennart Erixon, Silvia Giacomelli, Colin
Mayer, Randall K. Morck, Marco Pagano, Krishna Palepu, Raghuram G. Rajan, Ailsa Roell, Örjan Sjöberg
and Steen Thomsen, as well as from participants at the University of Alberta Business School and NBER
conference at Lake Louise, Alberta, Canada, June 21-22, 2003 and participants at the CEPR/ECGI/INSEAD/
NBER/University of Alberta joint conference on The Evolution of Corporate Governance and Family
Firms in Fontainebleau January 30-31, 2004 for valuable comments. I also appreciate the generosity of The
Bank of Sweden Tercentenary Foundation. An article based on this paper was published in the European
and US editions of Financial Times on October 16, 2003: Socialist ideal that tied up Swedish riches. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Peter Högfeldt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The History and Politics of Corporate Ownership in Sweden
Peter Högfeldt
NBER Working Paper No. 10641
July 2004
JEL No. G3, N2, N4
ABSTRACT
Not despite but because of persistent Social Democratic political influence since the Great Reversal
in 1932 have a few families and banks controlled the largest listed firms in Sweden. The Social
Democrats have de facto been the guarantor rather than the terminator of private capitalism since
the political and corporate incumbencies have been united by strong common interests. Incumbent
owners need the political support to legitimize that their corporate power rests on extensive use of
dual-class shares and pyramiding. While the Social Democrats only get the necessary resources and
indirect support for their social and economic policies from the private sector if the largest firms
remain under Swedish control so that capital does not migrate. The extensive use of mechanisms to
separate votes from capital however drives a significant wedge between the costs of internal and
external capital that causes an enhanced (political) pecking order of financing where new external
equity is strongly avoided. By not encouraging outsiders to create new firms and fortunes, and by
not fully activating the primary equity markets, the heavy politicized system has redistributed
incomes but not property rights and wealth. The result is an ageing economy with an unusually large
proportion of very old and very large firms with well-defined owners in control. 31 of the 50 largest
listed firms in 2000 were founded before 1914, only 8 in the post-war period and none after 1970.
Peter Högfeldt
Department of Finance
Stockholm School of Economics
Box 6501
SE-113 81Stockholm
Sweden
peter.hogfeldt@hhs.se

One of the ironies of European business history of the 20th century is the relative stability
(resiliency) of corporate ownership structures despite the unprecedented political turmoil with
devastating wars and the interregnum of socialism. It is however still impossible to understand the
strong historical path dependence without analyzing how political factors have profoundly affected
the development of corporate ownership by first setting the stage and then changing the conditions
in systematic ways (see e.g. Roe (2002a and b)). Not only through the design of the legal system
(regimes) and corporate laws, and the efficiency of legal enforcement and supervision. But also by
changing the balance of interests between labor and capital by regulation of labor, product and
capital markets, and development of tax-financed, public welfare systems with egalitarian ambitions
to redistribute resources and opportunities.
Another historical irony is that previous adversarial relations between capital and labor
have given way to a corporatist society where heavily entrenched private ownership of the largest
listed firms co-exits and cooperates with labor unions whose members enjoy strong employee
protection, and are represented on the board (see Pagano and Volpin (2001)). Since financial
markets are conducive to structural changes, which often run counter to the status quo interests of
incumbent labor and capital, they tend to be less developed in corporatist countries, and firms also
less dependent on external financing through equity markets (see e.g. Rajan and Zingales (2003a)).
This is particularly true in Continental Europe and in Scandinavia where proportional voting
systems tend to favor formation of minority or coalition governments and consensus decision
making, which fosters political rent seeking by the firms’ stakeholders, and larger public sectors.1
Corporate ownership in a country does therefore not only rest on the corporate law and on the legal
regime but ultimately on the political acceptance at large of entrenched private ownership. The
1 In a cross-country analysis of the relation between political institutions and policy outcomes, Persson and Tabellini
(2003) find that presidential regimes have smaller governments than parliamentary systems. Majoritarian elections induce
smaller governments, less welfare spending and smaller deficits than do proportional elections. In particular, they report
systematic differences in spending patterns: Proportional and parliamentary democracies alone display a ratchet effect in
spending, with government outlays as a percentage of GDP rising in recessions, but not reverting in booms. All countries
cut taxes in election years. Presidential regimes postpone fiscal contractions until after the elections, while parliamentary
regimes do not; welfare-state programs are expanded in the proximity of elections, but only in democracies with
proportional elections.
2

structure of corporate ownership and governance, as well as the development of the financial
system, are thus very much integrated parts of a country’s political history.
But how do the economic, political, legal and historical conditions interact? The challenge
in comparative historical analysis of corporate ownership is to try to separate which factors are
primarily exogenous and which are predominantly endogenously determined, and then evaluate
their relative importance and causal relations by comparing the realized, historical paths across
countries. History is of course not deterministic since the actual equilibrium path is only one of
many possible and temporary random events like financial crises and subsequent regulatory
responses may have long-term effects through path dependence (see Rajan and Zingales (2003b)).
The underlying assumption is thus that there is enough structural stability in societies for the
comparative analysis to map out the major decisive factors of corporate ownership over time.
This is of course a very tall order but fortunately some institutions and factors (e.g.
constitutions, legal regimes and enforcement, economic geography) are surprisingly stable over
time and therefore natural candidates as exogenous determinants in the causal, historical analysis.
Protection of property rights, freedom of contracting and the openness of the civic society have
basically been exogenous factors over a longer time period but sometimes exposed to the strong
winds of political change. Changes in external competition and major technological changes are
also primarily exogenous, in particular for a small open market economy, and often catalysts for
structural changes. Other pivotal factors have a much less exogenous character since they are more
influenced by changing economic and political conditions. For example, the domestic economy’s
openness to trade and capital flows, choice of exchange rate regimes and policies to promote
flexible labor markets and development of financial markets. The strongest endogenous factor in the
20th century has definitely been how political ideology (e.g. socialism or egalitarianism) in general,
and voice of parties and organized stakeholders, in particular labor, have rallied political support for
and implemented policies that absorb and assuage effects of brute, tempestuous markets forces.
3