NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE RISE AND FALL OF THE WIDELY HELD FIRM –
A HISTORY OF CORPORATE OWNERSHIP IN CANADA
Randall Morck
Michael Percy
Gloria Tian
Bernard Yeung
Working Paper 10635
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10635
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2004
We are grateful for comments from participants in the National Bureau of Economic Research Conference
on the History of Corporate Ownership in Lake Louise, the Canadian Economic Association in Ottawa, the
INSEAD-University of Alberta- National Bureau of Economic Research Conference in Fontainebleau, and
the Multinational Finance Society in Istanbul. We also thank seminar participants at the Bank of Canada,
Hitotsubashi University, New York University, Queen’s University, the University of Minnesota, and the
University of Toronto’s Olin Lecture. We are especially indebted to John Baldwin, Steven Globerman, Enrico
Perotti, Ed Safarian, Andrei Shleifer, Jordan Siegel, and Javier Suárez for thoughtful comments and
suggestions. Financial support from the University of Alberta School of Business, the University of Alberta
Centre for Entrepreneurship & Family Enterprise, and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council,
is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Randall Morck, Michael Percy, Gloria Tian, and Bernard Yeung. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Rise and Fall of the Widely Held Firm – A History of Corporate Ownership in Canada
Randall Morck, Michael Percy, Gloria Tian, and Bernard Yeung
NBER Working Paper No. 10635
July 2004
JEL No. G3
ABSTRACT
A panel of corporate ownership data, stretching back to 1902, shows that the Canadian corporate
sector began the century with a predominance of large pyramidal corporate groups controlled by
wealthy families or individuals. By mid-century, widely held firms predominated. But, from the
1970s on, pyramidal groups controlled by wealthy families and individuals resurge, restoring a
situation similar to that a century earlier. Institutional factors underlying this resurgence are shown
to have antecedents deep in the country's colonial past.
Randall Morck
School of Business
University of Alberta
Edmonton, Alberta
Canada T6G 2R6
and NBER
randall.morck@ualberta.ca
Michael Percy
School of Business
University of Alberta
Edmonton, Alberta
Canada T6G 2R6
michael.percy@ualberta.ca
Gloria Tian
School of Business
University of Alberta
Edmonton, Alberta
Canada T6G 2R6
ytian@ualberta.ca
Bernard Yeung
Department of Economics
Stern School of Business
New York University
New York, NY 10012
byeung@stern.nyu.edu

Abstract
A panel of corporate ownership data, stretching back to 1902, shows that the Canadian corporate sector
began the century with a predominance of large pyramidal corporate groups controlled by wealthy
families or individuals. By mid-century, widely held firms predominated. But, from the 1970s on,
pyramidal groups controlled by wealthy families and individuals resurge, restoring a situation similar to
that a century earlier. Institutional factors underlying this resurgence are shown to have antecedents
deep in the country’s colonial past.
1. Introduction
At the beginning of the 20th century, large pyramidal corporate groups, controlled by wealthy families or
individuals, dominated Canada’s large corporate sector, as in modern continental European countries.
Over several decades, a large stock market, high taxes on inherited income, a sound institutional
environment, and capital account openness accompany the rise of widely held firms. At mid-century, the
Canadian large corporate sector was primarily freestanding widely held firms, as in the modern large
corporate sectors of the United States and United Kingdom. Then, in the last third of the century, a series
of institutional changes took place. These include a more bank-based financial system, a sharp abatement
in taxes on large estates, a likely rise in the value of superior rent seeking skills, and foreign investment
restrictions. These were accompanied by a decline in the importance of freestanding widely held firms
and a commensurate rise in the prevalence of family pyramidal groups.
The reasons for the relative decline in importance of Canada’s stock market as compared to its
banking system in the last decades of the century are unclear. The introduction of a capital gains tax at
the onset of a period of high inflation may have been factors; but the stock market did not recover its prior
level of importance after inflation abated.
The advent of the capital gains tax accompanied the end of succession taxes. After 1972,
inherited income became tax exempt. Capital gains taxes were theoretically due on the decedent’s assets
at death. But the realization of capital gains could be postponed two generations through family trusts,
structures viable only for very large estates. Several large family corporate groups were clearly broken
into freestanding widely held firms to pay succession taxes, so the succession tax clearly accounts, in part
at least, for the rise of the widely held firm.
The last third of the century actually saw much more profound transformations of public finances.
Corporate taxes rose, and became intricately complicated, filled with implicit subsidies and intricate
incentives and penalties. A proliferation of agencies administered a vast array of subsidies directly and
through regional or industrial development funds. In a comprehensive study of Canadian public finances,
Savoie (1990) concludes that “Especially since the early 1960s … in certain areas of the country at least,
there is a government subsidy available for virtually every type of commercial activity. He goes on to
quote Canadian Business thus: “Some firms are in the happy position of being able to employ staff or
consultants whose sole function is to sniff out all the juicy morsels the politicians and policy makers
throw in the public trough.”
Corproate groups are a response to a weak institutional environment. One version of this
hypothesis, developed by Khanna and Palepu (2000, 2001, 2002), proposes that corporate groups are a
second best solution in economies whose product, labor, and capital markets are underdeveloped and
inefficient. Substantial evidence supports this explanation in emerging economies. A second version of
this hypothesis, proposed by Morck and Yeung (2004), holds that family controlled corporate groups
have superior political rent seeking skills. Political rent-seeking, corporate investment in political
influence, is commonplace in most countries, and usually legal. Family groups’ most important
advantages include: Groups can act more discretely than freestanding firms, for one group firm can
invest in influencing a politician while another, perhaps privately held, collects the reward. Family firms
have long time horizons, and so can better invest in influence now to reap subsidies in the distant future.
Widely held firms, in contrast, change CEOs every few years, and so require a faster payback. Thus, as
political influence became an increasingly important determinant of financial success in the last decades
of the century, family controlled group firms eclipsed freestanding widely held firms.
Finally, this rise of interventionism also entailed restrictions on foreign investment. Nationalist
politicians, seeking to safeguard Canadian control of major corporations, perhaps encouraged family
1

groups to serve as white knights. In some sectors, notably energy and cultural industries, this was overt –
locking in future subsidies and tax advantages. In others, the rewards may have been more indirect.
This heightened importance of political influence, and the nationalist overtones surrounding it,
have resounding echoes through Canada’s economic history. Jean Baptiste Colbert, the intellectual father
of French Mercantilism, owned Canada and used the colony as a laboratory for mercantilist experiments.
Colonial Canada featured state subsidized iron works, ship building, canals, brick making, shoe making,
beer making, wool production, mining, lumbering, eel packing, sea oil, and cod salting, among many
others. In general, these were owned by the colonial political elite (and Colbert), and subsidized by the
French government. The British conquerors, appreciating the benefits of this system to the colonial elite
(now themselves), preserved it. British North America repeatedly bankrupted itself subsidizing all
manner of canal and railway projects owned, directly or indirectly, by colonial politicians. Canadian
corporate investment continued in this vein long after independence, almost to the twentieth century.
Around the turn of the 20th century, the Liberal Prime Minister Wilfrid Laurier greatly reduced corruption
and adopted laissez-fair policy (until near the end of his last term). The country enjoyed an
unprecedented surge of development. After World War II, C.D. Howe, a powerful cabinet minister in a
series of Liberal governments, professionalized the civil service and moved the country back towards
laissez-faire. He also virtually monopolized the awarding of remaining subsidies and tax favors. In the
1960s, shareholder rights were formalized, and Canada’s mercantilist past seemed buried. This
corresponded to the greatest extent of large widely held freestanding firms – about eighty percent of the
corporate sector by assets.
Two factors changed this in the late 1960s.
One was the Révolution tranquille in Québec, which reignited Canada’s dormant linguistic
quarrels and created a national identity crisis. Separatist politicians sought to build a Québécois nation
with sweeping industrial policies. To counter this, federal politicians nurtured Canadian identity with
nationalist rhetoric. This led to concern about foreign control of Canadian companies, and probably to
Canadian family groups serving as white knights to safeguard widely held firms from foreign acquirers.
The second factor was a renewed political respectability for state intervention. Each previous
political philosophy – the Tory rejection of the American Revolution, 19th century liberalism, the
progressive movement, and agrarian socialism in turn – quickly took on mercantilist garb upon touching
Canadian soil. The Keynesian and social democratic philosophies of the 1970s were especially open to
this. Canada’s mercantilist undercurrent transformed idealistic plans to improve society into a morass of
political rent-seeking. In this environment, family controlled corporate groups had an edge.
Thus, our findings support Burkart et al. (2002) and La Porta et al. (1999), who relate widely held
ownership of corporations to sound institutions. They also support the general approach of Acemoglu et
al. (2000, 2001, 2002, 2003), who stress the importance of colonial institutions in determining modern
institutions. Our findings also give credence to the arguments of Morck and Yeung (2004) that family
controlled corporate groups have an advantage in weak institutional environments because of superior
rent seeking skills. However, they in no way undermine the thesis of Khanna and Palepu (2000, 2001,
2002) that other institutional deficiencies can also confer advantages on groups.
The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section 2 describes our ownership data. Section 3
describes Canada’s colonial institutions. Section 4 describes institutions and large corporate ownership
structures at the beginning of the twentieth century. Section 5 describes the evolution of large
corporations ownership structures and proffers explanations. Section 6 concludes.
2. Description of the Data
To explore the evolution of corporate ownership, we require a picture of its initial conditions on the eve
of industrialization. Continuous quantitative data are unavailable until the 20th century; however,
qualitative descriptions of business ownership are possible. Such descriptions are useful in assessing the
influence of Canada’s colonial heritages on her industrial era institutions, and in interpreting quantitative
data in later years when it becomes available.
These qualitative descriptions summarize relevant parts of the writings of several business
historians. Bliss (1986) presents a thorough review of Canadian business history that is broadly
sympathetic to the country’s business elite, emphasizing their entrepreneurial ventures and risk taking as
2