NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GO DOWN FIGHTING:
SHORT SELLERS VS. FIRMS
Owen A. Lamont
Working Paper 10659
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10659
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2004
I thank Nicholas Barberis, Douglas Diamond, Karl Diether, Toby Moskowitz, Rob Stambaugh, Will
Goetzmann, and seminar participants at Berkeley, Boston College, Carnegie Mellon, the Chicago Quantitative
Alliance, the London School of Economics, the NASD, the NBER, the Q Group, and Stanford for helpful
comments. I thank Karl Diether and Yan Zhang for research assistance. I thank the NYSE and Toby
Moskowitz for data. I gratefully acknowledge support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Center for
Research in Securities Prices at the University of Chicago Graduate School of Business, the National Science
Foundation, and the Q group. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Owen A. Lamont. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Go Down Fighting: Short Sellers vs. Firms
Owen A. Lamont
NBER Working Paper No. 10659
August 2004
JEL No. G14
ABSTRACT
I study battles between short sellers and firms. Firms use a variety of methods to impede short
selling, including legal threats, investigations, lawsuits, and various technical actions intended to
create a short squeeze. These actions create short sale constraints. Consistent with the hypothesis
that short sale constraints allow stocks to be overpriced, firms taking anti-shorting actions have in
the subsequent year very low abnormal returns of about -2 percent per month.
Owen A. Lamont
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
owen.lamont@yale.edu

Short sale constraints can allow stocks to be overpriced. Constraints include various
costs and risks, such as the expense and difficulty of borrowing stock, legal and institutional
restrictions, and the risk that the short position will have to be involuntarily closed due to recall
of the stock loan. If these impediments prevent investors from sufficiently shorting certain
stocks, these stocks can be overpriced and thus have low future returns until the overpricing is
corrected. By identifying stocks with particularly high short sale constraints, one can identify
stocks with particularly low future returns. These constraints are difficult to measure, however,
and researchers have struggled to find appropriate data to test the overpricing hypothesis.
In this paper, I test whether overpricing increases when firms deliberately raise the level
of short sale constraints. Firms can take a variety of actions to impede short selling of their
stock. Firms take legal and regulatory actions to hurt short sellers, such as accusing them of
crimes, suing them, hiring private investigators to probe them, and requesting that the authorities
investigate their activities. Firms take technical actions to make shorting difficult, such as splits
or distributions specifically designed to disrupt short selling. Firms can coordinate with
shareholders to withdraw shares from the stock lending market, thus preventing short selling by
causing loan recall. These battles between short sellers and firms can be extraordinarily
acrimonious. The following statement from the sample used in this paper gives a flavor of
attitudes toward short sellers: "Your activities are mean, shameful and loathsome. They are
motivated by appalling avarice and greed, and they will not be permitted to go unanswered."
(Fulman, 1998)
An example of the various anti-shorting strategies used by firms is provided by Solv-Ex,
a firm that claimed to have technology for economically extracting crude oil from tar-laden sand.
Short sellers claimed that Solv-Ex was a fraud. On 2/5/96, the management of Solv-Ex faxed a
Go down fighting – Page 1

letter to brokers and shareholders: “To help you control the value of your investment…we
suggest that you request delivery of the Solv-Ex certificates from your broker as soon as
possible.” (Weiss, 1996). This suggestion, entirely legal on the part of Solv-Ex, was essentially
an attempt at market manipulation. The letter was an attempt to orchestrate a short squeeze
using the stock lending system (the mechanics of stock lending are described further in section
I).
Any shareholder heeding Solv-Ex’s suggestion would have withdrawn his shares from
the stock lending market, potentially forcing short sellers to cover their positions. On 2/2/96,
before the letter, Solv-Ex’s price was at $24.875. By 2/21/96, the price had risen to $35.375,
perhaps due to Solv-Ex’s attempted squeeze. Solv-Ex took other action against short sellers as
well. Later in 1996, Solv-Ex said that it had hired private investigators to find out who was
spreading misinformation about the firm, and subsequently it filed suit against a well-known
short seller, claiming he had spread false information. However, in this case it was Solv-Ex
which was engaged in illegal activities, not the short sellers. Solv-Ex delisted at 7/1/97 at $4.25,
it entered Chapter 11 bankruptcy in 1997, and in 2000 the court ruled that the firm had indeed
defrauded investors.
In this case, the evidence is consistent with the idea that Solv-Ex was overpriced in
February 1996, since it subsequently fell sharply. This paper looks at long-term returns for a
sample of 266 similar firms who threaten, take action against, or accuse short sellers of illegal
activities or false statements. The sample is constructed using publicly observable actions from
news reports and firm press releases.
It turns out that (as in the Solv-Ex case) sample firms have very low returns in the year
subsequent to taking anti-shorting action. Abnormal returns are approximately -2 percent per
Go down fighting – Page 2