NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LEARNING ON THE QUICK AND CHEAP:
GAINS FROM TRADE THROUGH IMPORTED EXPERTISE
James R. Markusen
Thomas F.Rutherford
Working Paper 10603
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10603
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2004
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by James R. Markusen and Thomas F. Rutherford. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Learning on the Quick and Cheap: Gains from Trade Through Imported Expertise
James R. Markusen and Thomas F. Rutherford
NBER Working Paper No. 10603
June 2004
JEL No. F2, F23, O1, O3
ABSTRACT
Gains from productivity and knowledge transmission arising from the presence of foreign firms has
received a good deal of empirical attention, but micro-foundations for this mechanism are weak .
Here we focus on production by foreign experts who may train domestic unskilled workers who
work with them. Gains from training can in turn be decomposed into two types: (a) obtaining
knowledge and skills at a lower cost than if they are self-taught at home, (b) producing domestic
skilled workers earlier in time than if they the domestic economy had to rediscover the relevant
knowledge through "reinventing the wheel". We develop a three-period model in which the economy
initially has no skilled workers. Workers can withdraw from the labor force for two periods of self
study and then produce as skilled workers in the third period. Alternatively, foreign experts can be
hired in period 1 and domestic unskilled labor working with the experts become skilled in the second
period. We analyze how production, training, and welfare depend on two important parameters: the
cost of foreign experts and the learning (or "absorptive") capacity of the domestic economy.
James R. Markusen
Department of Economics
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309-0256
and NBER
james.markusen@colorado.edu
Thomas F. Rutherford
Department of Economics
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309-0256
rutherford@colorado.edu

1. Introduction
Trade regimes across countries are often more liberal than investment regimes which are
in turn generally more liberal than restrictions on temporary migration. This is interesting in the
context of the literature on the transmission of technical/managerial knowledge and productivity
“spillovers” between countries and whether trade or investment is a more important channel of
transmission (Keller, 1998, 2002a,b, Gong and Keller 2003).
In the latter vein of literature, several different ideas for the micro-foundations of the
transmission mechanism have been proposed or modeled. Theoretical models have looked at
linkages as a source of productivity spillover, so that upstream and/or downstream firms benefit
from the arrival of multinationals (Markusen and Venables, 1999). This has generally been in
the form of variety effects from supporting an increased number of intermediate or final goods.
A second stream of theoretical analysis looks at workers or local firms learning from watching or
working for foreign firms with a resulting increase in their productivity (Fosfuri, Motta, and
Rønde 2001, Glass and Saggi 2002, Ethier and Markusen 1996, Markusen 2001). Empirical
work in search of spillovers to local firms include Blomström and Kokko (1998), Blomström and
Sjöholm (1999), Aiken and Harrison and Lipsey (1996), Smarzynska (2004), and Smarzynska
and Spatareanu (2003). Other empirical literature has documented that local firms and their
managers often get their start as employees of multinational firms (Katz 1987, Hobday 1995,
Hall and Khan 2003).
Very little in this literature is directed at modeling the precise micro-mechanism of how
foreign skilled workers impart those skills to domestic workers. That then is the purpose of this
paper. We focus on direct imports of the services of foreign experts as a method of both
1

2
providing an important good or service and for training domestic workers faster and/or cheaper
than they can learn on their own. We depart from the tradition of comparative steady-state
analysis used in new growth theory, since we want to explicitly consider timing issues rather
than merely steady-state levels and growth rates. For this reason, we use a very simple
competitive constant-returns model with no spillovers, externalities, or other bells-and-whistles.
The economy lasts three periods and initially has no skilled workers who are needed to
produce a non-traded good X. Unskilled workers can withdraw from production (of good Y) for
two periods and learn to be skilled workers through a self-learning process (“reinventing the
wheel) and become skilled workers in period three.
Instead of relying on learning by studying (LBS), the economy may import foreign
experts who have accumulated expertise from previous activities. Foreign experts can produce
good X working alone in any period. Alternatively, foreign experts can produce X in the
first/second period and domestic unskilled labor working with them become skilled in the
second/third period. We refer to this as learning by watching (LBW). In the latter event, in the
second period these newly skilled domestic workers can produce X and can train additional
domestic workers for period 3. As in the case of foreign experts, domestic skilled workers may
also produce alone without training additional workers.
We solve for a perfect-foresight, competitive equilibrium, initially with the economy
allowed to borrow subject to three-period trade balance constraint. A period-by-period trade-
balance constraint is considered in an appendix. There are nine possible training/production
activities, and the set of activities operating in equilibrium is referred to as the regime.
An important parameter in the model is the cost of foreign experts in terms of the