ESTIMATING THE EFFECTS OF A TIME LIMITED
EARNINGS SUBSIDY FOR WELFARE LEAVERS
David Card
Dean R. Hyslop
Working Paper 10647

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ESTIMATING THE EFFECTS OF A TIME LIMITED
EARNINGS SUBSIDY FOR WELFARE LEAVERS
David Card
Dean R. Hyslop
Working Paper 10647
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10647
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2004
We are grateful to SDRC for research support and for making the SSP data available, and to three anonymous
referees, Costas Meghir, Douglas Tattrie, Ken Chay, Guido Imbens, David Lee, Jack Porter, James Powell,
Charles Michalopoulos, and seminar participants at UC Berkeley, Princeton University, and University
College London for helpful discussions. All conclusions in this paper are solely the responsibility of the
authors, and do not represent the opinions or conclusions of SDRC or the sponsors of the Self Sufficiency
Project. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by David Card and Dean R. Hyslop. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

David Card and Dean R. Hyslop
NBER Working Paper No. 10647
July 2004
JEL No. I38
ABSTRACT
In the Self Sufficiency Program (SSP) welfare demonstration, members of a randomly assigned
treatment group could receive a subsidy for full time work. The subsidy was available for three
years, but only to people who began working full time within 12 months of random assignment. A
simple optimizing model suggests that the eligibility rules created an "establishment" incentive to
find a job and leave welfare within a year of random assignment, and an "entitlement" incentive to
choose work over welfare once eligibility was established. Building on this insight, we develop an
econometric model of welfare participation that allows us to separate the two effects and estimate
the impact of the earnings subsidy on welfare entry and exit rates among those who achieved
eligibility. The combination of the two incentives explains the time profile of the experimental
impacts, which peaked 15 months after random assignment and faded relatively quickly. Our
findings suggest that about half of the peak impact of SSP was attributable to the establishment
incentive. Despite the extra work effort generated by SSP the program had no lasting impact on
wages, and little or no long run effect on welfare participation.
David Card
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94705-3880
and NBER
card@econ.berkeley.edu
Dean R. Hyslop
New Zealand Treasury
PO Box 3724
Wellington
New Zealand
dean.hyslop@treasury.govt.nz

Over the past decade the United States, Britain, and other countries have reformed their income
support systems to enhance the financial incentives for work (see, e.g., Blundell and Hoynes, 2004).
Traditional means-tested welfare programs impose high tax rates on program participants, reducing or
even eliminating the payoff to work. Many analysts have argued that the result is a dynamic welfare trap.
Once in the system, welfare recipients have little incentive to work, and the subsequent erosion of their
skills and work habits makes it less likely they can leave in the future.1
In the early 1990s the Canadian government funded an innovative demonstration project – the
Self Sufficiency Project or SSP – designed to test whether a time-limited earnings subsidy could help
long term welfare recipients make a permanent break from program dependency. Unlike other subsidy
programs (e.g., the U.S. Earned Income Tax Credit or the U.K. Working Families Tax Credit) SSP was
only available for full time work.2 Moreover, participants had to take up the subsidy within a year of
being informed of their potential eligibility – otherwise they lost all future eligibility. Those who met the
deadline were entitled to receive up to three years of payments, and could move back and forth between
welfare and work, receiving the subsidy whenever they were working full time. At the end of three years
they returned to the regular welfare environment.
The SSP evaluation used a randomized design. One half of a group of long-term welfare
recipients was offered the supplement, while the other half remained in the regular welfare system. Data
were collected for six years to measure the short-term impacts of the subsidy and any lasting effects once
payments ended. Comparisons between the treatment and control groups show that SSP had significant
short-term impacts on welfare participation and work, raising the full time employment rate and lowering
1See Plant (1984) for an explicit model of a dynamic welfare trap. The idea that welfare participation
creates a dependency trap is a very old one. For example, Hexter (1917) analyzed the duration of relief
spells at a private charity and found that people on relief longer had a lower likelihood of leaving. High
implicit tax rates also create incentives to participate in the underground sector: see Fortin, Fechette, and
Lemieux (1994).
2Phelps (1994) has argued for a general wage subsidy program for all low wage workers.