NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LAW AND FIRMS’ ACCESS TO FINANCE
Thorsten Beck
Asli Demirgüç-Kunt
Ross Levine
Working Paper 10687
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10687
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2004
The authors thank Andrei Shleifer and an anonymous referee for very helpful comments. This paper’s
findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent
the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2004 by Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Law and Firms’ Access to Finance
Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 10687
August 2004
JEL No. K4, G3, H1, O16
ABSTRACT
This paper contributes to the literature on how a country's legal origin influences the operation of
its financial system by using firm-level survey data on the obstacles that firms face in raising
external finance. The paper assesses two channels through which legal origin may influence the
financial system. It finds that the adaptability of a country's legal system is more important for
explaining the obstacles that firms face in accessing external finance than the political
independence of the judiciary.
Thorsten Beck
World Bank
tbeck@worldbank.org
Asli Demirgüç-Kunt
World Bank
ademirguckunt@worlbank.org
Ross Levine
Finance Department, Room 3-257
Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
rlevine@csom.umn.edu

1. Introduction
Substantial research finds a robust relationship between the origin of a country’s
legal tradition and the operation of its financial system. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
Shleifer, and Vishny (1997, 1998, henceforth LLSV) show that whether a country’s
Commercial/Company law is based on British, French, German, or Scandinavian legal
origins is important for explaining cross-country differences in aggregate measures of
financial development, such as the size of the banking sector and national stock market
capitalization.1 At the microeconomic level, empirical work suggests that legal systems
influence the external financing constraints faced by firms.2
Hayek (1960) emphasizes two major differences across legal traditions that may
help account for the relationship between legal origin and the functioning of the financial
system: (1) the political independence of the judiciary and (2) the adaptability of the legal
system. The “political” --or “judicial independence” -- channel holds that (a) the
protection of private property rights forms the basis of financial activities and (b) legal
traditions differ in terms of the priority they attach to private property rights vis-à-vis the
rights of the State. According to Hayek (1960), Dawson (1960, 1968), Merryman (1985),
and others, the English Common law evolved as an independent institution that over time
protected private property owners against the crown. This made private agents more
confident about making financial transactions, with positive ramifications for financial
development.3 In contrast, LLSV (1999) argue that the French and German civil codes in
the 19th century were constructed to solidify state power. Over time, state dominance of
the judiciary produced legal traditions that focus more on the power of the state and less
on the rights of individual investors, with negative ramifications for financial
1

development (Mahoney, 2001). Thus, the political channel argues that the degree to
which the judiciary is independent of the State is a legal system trait that substantively
shapes the financial environment, including the ease with which firms can contract to
raise external finance.
Hayek (1960) also argues that legal systems differ in terms of their ability to adapt
to changing conditions. The “adaptability channel” stresses that (a) legal traditions that
adapt efficiently to minimize the gap between the contracting needs of the economy and
the legal system’s capabilities will more effectively foster financial development in
general and external finance in particular than more rigid systems and (b) legal traditions
differ in their ability to evolve with changing conditions. An influential, although not
unanimous, strand of the comparative law literature holds that the common law evolves
efficiently as judges respond case-by-case to unforeseen and changing conditions
(Posner, 1973). Several scholars argue that since the common law grants substantial
discretion to judges, inefficient laws are challenged in the courts and through repeated
litigation efficient rules replace inefficient ones.4 In contrast, Dawson (1960, 1968) and
Merryman (1985) argue that the French Revolution sought to change French law
radically by (i) eliminating jurisprudence, (ii) reducing judges to a purely administrative
role, and (iii) adhering to strict, formal legal processes that reduce judicial flexibility.
These scholars add that, since the more rigid aspects of the Napoleonic legal doctrine did
not work well in practice and conflicted with France’s long legal history, the French
courts eventually circumvented many of the inflexible characteristics of the doctrine.
Unlike France, however, Merryman (1985, 1996) argues that many French Legal Origin
colonies have been unable to shed the inefficient rigidity of the Napoleonic doctrine.
2