NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAN MUTUAL FUND MANAGERS PICK STOCKS?
EVIDENCE FROM THEIR TRADES
PRIOR TO EARNINGS ANNOUNCEMENTS
Malcolm Baker
Lubomir Litov
Jessica Wachter
Jeffrey Wurgler
Working Paper 10685
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10685
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2004
We thank Andrew Metrick, Lasse Pedersen, and Robert Stambaugh for helpful comments. We thank
Christopher Blake and Russ Wermers for assistance with data. Baker gratefully acknowledges financial
support from the Division of Research of the Harvard Business School. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Malcolm Baker, Lubomir Litov, Jessica Wachter, and Jeffrey Wurgler. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Can Mutual Fund Managers Pick Stocks? Evidence from the Trades Prior to Earnings
Announcements
Malcolm Baker, Lubomir Litov, Jessica Wachter, and Jeffrey Wurgler
NBER Working Paper No. 10685
August 2004
JEL No. G2
ABSTRACT
We test whether fund managers have stock-picking skill by comparing their holdings and trades
prior to earnings announcements with the returns realized at those events. This approach largely
avoids the joint-hypothesis problem with long-horizon studies of fund performance. Consistent with
skilled trading, we find that, on average, stocks that funds buy earn significantly higher returns at
subsequent earnings announcements than stocks that they sell. Funds display persistence in our event
return-based metrics, and those that do well tend to have a growth objective, large size, high
turnover, and use incentive fees to motivate managers.
Malcolm Baker Jeffrey Wurgler
Harvard Business School Stern School of Business, Suite 9-190
Morgan Hall 361 New York University
Boston, MA 02163 44 West 4th Street
and NBER New York, NY 10012
mbaker@hbs.edu and NBER
jwurgler@stern.nyu.edu
Lubomir Litov
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
llitov@stern.nyu.edu
Jessica A. Wachter
Department of Finance
2300 SH-DH
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
jwachter@wharton.upenn.edu

I. Introduction
Can mutual fund managers pick stocks that earn abnormal returns? This question
has long interested financial economists due to its practical importance for investors and
the light it sheds on market efficiency. Despite the many and varied approaches taken to
address this question, a common difficulty emerges: defining risk-adjusted returns.
Portfolio performance must be adjusted for risk, and the proper adjustment is unknown.
This joint hypothesis problem, articulated by Fama (1970), clouds the interpretation of
most fund manager performance studies and has led to prolonged debate about whether
fund managers can pick stocks.1
In this paper, we introduce a new methodology to measure stock-selection ability
based on returns around earnings announcements. The core idea is to associate skill with
the tendency to hold stocks that are about to enjoy high earnings announcement returns
and likewise to avoid stocks that are about to suffer low announcement returns.
An advantage of this methodology is that it largely avoids the joint-hypothesis
problem. As Brown and Warner (1985) show, inference based on daily returns around
announcement dates is relatively insensitive to the risk adjustment model. We apply this
insight to performance evaluation. Just as stock returns around earnings announcements
are mostly abnormal, regardless of the risk adjustment, a mutual fund’s returns from
holding that stock are also mostly abnormal. A related advantage of this approach is that
it makes intensive use of the segment of returns data—returns around earnings
announcements—that contains the most concentrated information about a firm’s
1 Long-horizon studies that discuss or center on the risk-adjustment issue, reaching varying conclusions,
include Lehman and Modest (1987), Elton, Gruber, Das, and Hlavka (1993), Grinblatt and Titman (1993),
Malkiel (1995), Ferson and Schadt (1996), Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997), Carhart (1997),
Metrick (1999), Pastor and Stambaugh (2002), and Lynch, Wachter, and Boudry (2004), among others.
1

fundamentals and hence about a fund manager’s skill at fundamental analysis. As a
result, our “earnings announcement alpha” methodology allows for fairly sharp new tests
for information-based trading.2
The data set merges mutual funds’ portfolio holdings with the respective returns
that each holding realized at its next quarterly earnings announcement. The portfolio
holdings are drawn from mandatory, periodic SEC filings which have been tabulated by
Thompson Financial. These data have been used by Grinblatt and Titman (1989) and
Wermers (1999), among others. For each fund-date-holding observation in these data, we
merge in the return that that stock earned in the 3-day window around its next earnings
announcement. The sample covers 1980 through 2002 and contains 6.3 million fund-
report date-holding observations with associated earnings announcement returns.
We start our analysis by following the earnings announcement returns of fund
holdings, but the cleanest results involve fund trades. In particular, for each fund, we
track the subsequent earnings announcement returns of the stocks on which it increases
portfolio weight over the prior period and the stocks on which it decreases the portfolio
weight. Our main finding is that the average mutual fund shows stock-picking skill in the
sense that the subsequent earnings announcement returns on its weight-increasing stocks
is significantly higher than that of its weight-decreasing stocks. The difference is about
12 basis points over the three-day window around the quarterly announcement, or,
multiplying by four, about 47 “annualized” basis points. The contrast between buys that
initiate a fund’s position in a stock, and sells that close out a position, is even larger.
2 Previous researchers, following investors other than individual mutual fund managers, have also made use
of trading prior to earnings announcements to detect information-based trading. For instance, Seasholes
(2000) examines trading by foreign investors in emerging markets; Ali, Durtschi, Lev, and Trombley
(2004) examine trading patterns of categories of institutional investors; Ke, Huddart, and Petroni (2003)
follow trading by corporate insiders; and Christophe, Ferri, and Angel (2004) follow short sellers.
2