NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AN EMPIRICAL MODEL OF STOCK ANALYSTS’ RECOMMENDATIONS:
MARKET FUNDAMENTALS, CONFLICTS OF INTEREST,
AND PEER EFFECTS
Patrick Bajari
John Krainer
Working Paper 10665
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10665
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2004
We would like to thank Paul Ellickson and Ali Hortacsu for helpful comments. This research was partially
supported by the Bureau of Economic Analysis and the National Science Foundation grants to Bajari. The
views expressed in this paper and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco or the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Patrick Bajari and John Krainer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

An Empirical Model of Stock Analysts’ Recommendations: Market Fundamentals, Conflicts of
Interest, and Peer Effects
Patrick Bajari and John Krainer
NBER Working Paper No. 10665
August 2004
JEL No. G3, L1, L5, C1
ABSTRACT
In this paper we develop an empirical model of equity analyst recommendations for firms in the
NASDAQ 100 during 1998-2003. In the model we allow recommendations to depend on publicly
observed information, measures of an analyst's beliefs about a stock's future earnings, investment
banking activity, and peer group effects which determine industry norms. To address the reflection
problem, we propose a new approach to identification and estimation of models with peer effects
suggested by recent work on estimating games. Our empirical results suggest that recommendations
depend most heavily on publicly observable information about the stocks and on industry norms.
In most of our specifications, the existence of an investment banking deal does not have a
statistically significant relationship with analysts' stock recommendations.
Patrick Bajari
219B Social Science Building
Department of Economics
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708-0097
and NBER
bajari@econ.duke.edu
John Krainer
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
101 Market Street
San Francisco, CA 94105
john.krainer@sf.frb.org

1 Introduction
Equityanalystsplayanimportantroleinstockmarketsbyreducingtheduplicationofcostlyeffortandby
gathering information necessary for the efficient pricing of stocks. For as long as there have been equity
analysts,however,therehavebeenquestionsabouttheaccuracyoftheirforecastsandtheirimplicitbuyand
sell recommendations (see Cowles (1933)). This is particularly true in the wake of the sharp stock price
declinesfortechnologyfirmsin2000. Notonlydidrecommendedstocksvastlyunderperformthemarketas
awholeduringthisperiod,buthighly-publicizedallegationsofconflictsofinteresthavecalledintoquestion
whetheranalystsweremoreconcernedwithhelpingtheirfirmswininvestmentbankingbusinessthanwith
producingaccurateassessmentsoftheprospectsforthefirmsunderscrutiny.
In this paper, we develop an empirical model of the recommendations generated by stock analysts.
We quantify the relative importance of four factors influencing the production of recommendations in a
sampleofhightechnologystocksduringthetimeperiodbetween1998and2003. First,recommendations
mustdependonfundamentalsandcommonlysharedexpectationsaboutthefutureprofitabilityofthefirm.
Theseexpectationswillbeembeddedinthestockprice. Second,analystsareheterogeneous,bothinterms
of talent and perhaps in terms of access to information. We try to capture an individual analyst’s private
beliefaboutthestockbylookingatthedifferencebetweenthequarterlyearningsforecastsubmittedbythe
analyst(ortheanalyst’sbrokeragefirm)andthedistributionofforecastsfromotherfirms. Mindfulofthe
large number of inquiries into possible conflicts of interest among research analysts, we include as a third
2

factoradummyvariableforaninvestmentbankingrelationshipbetweenthefirmandtheanalyst’semployer.
Finally, we consider the influence of peers on the recommendation decision. Peer effects can impact the
recommendation in different ways. Individual analysts have incentive to condition their recommendation
on the recommendations of their peers, because even if their recommendations turn out to be unprofitable
ex-post, performance evaluation is typically a comparison against the performance of peers. More subtly,
recommendations are relative rankings of firms and are not easily quantifiable (or verifiable) objects. As
such, ratings scales usually reflect conventions and norms. The phenomenon is similar to the college
professor’s problem of assigning grades. If a professor were to award the average student with a C while
other faculty give a B+ to the average student, the professor might incorrectly signal his views of student
performance. Even while there is heterogeneity in how individual professors feel about grading, most
conformtonormsifonlytocommunicateclearlywithstudents(andtheirpotentialemployers)abouttheir
performance. Similarly,analystshaveanincentivetobenchmarktheirrecommendationsagainstperceived
industrynorms.
The choice of a recommendation is naturally modeled as a discrete choice problem. It is important to
recognize,however,thatifanalystsbenchmarktheirrecommendationtotherecommendationsoftheirpeers,
thenthechoiceofoneanalystissimultaneouslydeterminedwiththechoicesofotheranalysts. Therefore,
ourprincipaleconometricmodel is a systemofsimultaneous discretechoice models. Recently, industrial
organization economists have proposed computationally simple estimators that can be applied to discrete
games. Examples include Bresnahan and Reiss (1990, 1991), Berry (1992), Tamer (2002), Seim (2003),
Aguirregabiria and Mira (2003), Berry and Pakes (2002), Pakes, Ovstrovsky, and Berry (2003), Bajari,
Benkard and Levin (2003), Pesendorfer and Schmidt-Dengler (2003), Bajari, Hong and Ryan (2004) and
3