NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FISCAL DISCIPLINE AND THE COST OF PUBLIC DEBT SERVICE:
SOME ESTIMATES FOR OECD COUNTRIES
Silvia Ardagna
Francesco Caselli
Timothy Lane
Working Paper 10788
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10788
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004
We are grateful to Ignazio Angeloni, Pierluigi Balduzzi, Paolo Paesani, Fabio Schiantarelli, Ludger
Schuknecht, Rolf Strauch, an anonymous referee, and to participants to the seminar at the European Central
Bank Fiscal Policy Division for useful discussions and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Silvia Ardagna, Francesco Caselli, and Timothy Lane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Fiscal Discipline and the Cost of Public Debt Service: Some Estimates for OECD Countries
Silvia Ardagna, Francesco Caselli, and Timothy Lane
NBER Working Paper No. 10788
September 2004
JEL No. H6
ABSTRACT
We use a panel of 16 OECD countries over several decades to investigate the effects of government
debts and deficits on long-term interest rates. In simple static specifications, a one-percentage-point
increase in the primary deficit relative to GDP increases contemporaneous long-term interest rates
by about 10 basis points. In a vector autoregression (VAR), the same shock leads to a cumulative
increase of almost 150 basis points after 10 years. The effect of debt on interest rates is non-linear:
only for countries with above-average levels of debt does an increase in debt affect the interest rate.
World fiscal policy is also important: an increase in total OECD-government borrowing increases
each country's interest rates. However, domestic fiscal policy continues to affect domestic interest
rates even after controlling for worldwide debts and deficits.
Silvia Ardagna
Harvard University
sardagna@fas.harvard.edu
Francesco Caselli
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Building
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
caselli@harvard.edu
Timothy Lane
IMF
tlane@imf.org

1 Introduction
After years of Þscal consolidation in the 1990s, governments of many OECD countries have
again embarked on expansionary Þscal policies. In 2003, the US government deÞcit reached
4.5 percent of GDP, compared with 1.5 percent in 2000, and is projected to increase further
in the future. Over the same period, Germany’s deÞcit rose to 3.75 percent of GDP from 1
percent; France’s to 3.5 compared with 1.5, and Italy’s to 2.5 from 0.75 percent; as a result,
the Stability and Growth Pact has come under strain, possibly weakening the resistance to
larger deÞcits in Europe in the future.
One of the main concerns raised by governments’ increased Þscal laxity is its effect
on long-term interest rates. Undergraduate macroeconomic textbooks teach that budget
deÞcits push interest rates up, leading to decreased investment and growth in the long-run.
However, many economists and policymakers have argued that more sophisticated theorizing
leads to less dire predictions, if not to an outright reversal of the textbook story, or that the
quantitative signiÞcance of the effect is likely to be small.1 Given that theory does not settle
the matter (as it rarely does) the focus now is on empirical evidence.
The effects of Þscal imbalances on interest rates have been the subject of an extensive
but hiterto inconclusive empirical literature.2 However, estimates of the impact of debts and
deÞcits on interest rates vary widely.3 Almost all of this work is based on time series evidence
from single countries, typically the US. This suggests that there may be signiÞcant beneÞts
1See Barth et al. (1991) and Gale and Orszag (2002) for a comprehensive review of the literature.
2An incomplete list includes Barro (1987), Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1990), Blanchard and Summers
(1984), Canzoneri, Cumby and Diba (2002), Evans (1985) and (1987), Hoelscher (1986), Laubach (2003),
Miller and Russek (1991) and (1996), Orr et al. (1995), Paesani and Strauch (2003), Perotti (2002), Plosser
(1987), Reinhart and Sack (2000), and Tavares and Valkanov (2003).
3CoefficientsofÞscalpolicyvariablesininterestratesregressionsspanfrombeingpositiveandsigniÞcant
to being insigniÞcant. For example, while Hoelscher (1986) Þnds that in the US each 100 billion dollars of
federaldeÞcitincreasesthe10-yearTreasurybondsinterestratebyabout143basispoints,Evans(1987)Þnds
thateurocurrencyratesarenotsensitivetochangesintheÞscalstanceinCanada,France,Germany, Japan,
the UK and the US. More recently, Canzoneri, Cumby and Diba (2002) show that in the US an increase
in projected future deÞcit by one percentage point of GDP leads to an increase in long-term interest rates
relative to the short-term interest rate from 53 to 60 basis points. This result is also supported by Laubach
(2003) who Þnds that a one percentage point surge in the projected deÞcit-to-GDP ratio raises long-term
interest rates in the US by about 25 basis points. To the contrary, in a VAR framework, Mountford and
Uhlig(2000) donot Þnd apermanenteffectofdeÞcitshocks onshort-terminterestrates, andPerotti(2002)
shows that increases in government spending lead to a small decrease in the real short-term interest rates in
the US.
1

from bringing cross-country evidence to bear on this question. This is the goal of the present
paper.
We examine the effects of Þscal policy on interest rates in a broad panel of 16 OECD
countriescoveringamaximumtimespanfrom1960to2002. Theresultsindicatestatistically
and economically signiÞcant effects of Þscal imbalances on long-term interest rates. In our
preferred speciÞcation, a one percentage point increase of the primary deÞcit-to-GDP ratio
is associated with a 10-basis-point rise in the nominal interest rate on 10-year government
bonds. The increase is larger when one also considers the effect that a positive shock to the
primary deÞcit has on expected future Þscal policy and macro variables in the long-run: in
a dynamic VAR a one percentage point increase in the primary deÞcit-to-GDP ratio leads
to a cumulative increase of almost 150 basis points after 10 years.
In addition to the current deÞcit, it is important to examine the implications of
changes in the stock of public debt. We Þnd that the effect is non-linear and that the
response of long-term interest rates is positive and statistically signiÞcant only when the
stock of public debt is above a given threshold. While in a country with a debt-to GDP ratio
of 119 per cent (Italy in 2002) a one-standard-deviation increase in government debt leads
to an increase in the nominal interest rate on 10-year government bonds of about 36 basis
points, an increase by the same amount where the public debt-to-GDP ratio is 58 percent
(the US in 2002) leads to a 5 basis points decrease in the interest rate.4
We also Þnd that a worsening of public Þnances abroad has an effect on national
interest rates, which is evidence that OECD countries’ Þnancial markets are to some extent
internationally integrated. However, the degree of globalization is far from complete: con-
trolling for the average value of the primary deÞcit and public debt to GDP ratios across
OECD countries, a shock to each country’s primary balance still affects national long-term
interest rates.5 In a similar vein, we investigate whether the impact of Þscal variables on in-
terest rates is more severe in Þnancially less developed countries, and we Þnd some evidence
to this effect.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and the
econometric technique used in the estimation. Section 3 investigates the relation between
4Note,however,thattheratioofgovernmentdebttoGDPhasastandarddeviationequalto26percent,
hence a one-standard-deviation increase in the public debt is quite a substantial change. The response of
interest rates to a one percent change of the stock of public debt to GDP ratio would be really minimal,
even in countries with extreme low or high values of public debt.
5Besides incomplete Þnancial-market integration, differential government default risks may also explain
this result.
2