NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
NEOCLASSICAL GROWTH AND THE ADOPTION OF TECHNOLOGIES
Diego Comin
Bart Hobijn
Working Paper 10733
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10733
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2004
The views expressed in this paper solely reflect those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, nor those of the Federal Reserve System as a whole. We would like to thank
Bess Rabin and Rebecca Sela for their great research assistance. We have benefited a lot from comments and
suggestions by Jess Benhabib, Simon Gilchrist, Boyan Jovanovic, John Leahy, and Peter Rousseau, as well
as seminar participants at NYU, the SED, and UC Santa Cruz.The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Diego Comin and Bart Hobijn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Neoclassical Growth and the Adoption of Technologies
Diego Comin and Bart Hobijn
NBER Working Paper No. 10733
August 2004
JEL No. E13, O14, O33, O41
ABSTRACT
We introduce a growth model of technology diffusion and endogenous Total Factor Productivity
(TFP) levels both at the sector and aggregate level. At the aggregate, the model behaves as the
Neoclassical growth model. Our goal is for this model to bridge the gap between the theoretical and
empirical studies of technology adoption and economic growth. We bridge this gap in three
important directions.
First of all, we use our model to show how one unified theoretical framework is broadly consistent
with the observed dynamics of both economic growth as well as of many different measures of
technology adoption, like adoption rates, capital to output ratios, and output ratios. Secondly, we
estimate our model using a broad range of technological adoption measures, covering 17
technologies and 21 industrialized countries over the past 180 years. This allows us to show how
its predicted adoption patterns fit those observed in the data. Finally, we estimate the disparities in
sectoral productivity levels as well as aggregate TFP that can be attributed to the differences in the
range of technologies in use across countries.
These disparities are almost completely determined by the quality of the worst technology in use,
rather than by the quality of the newest technology that has just been adopted or by the number of
technologies in use. Further, we find that the TFP component attributable to the range of
technologies used is highly correlated with overall sectoral TFP differences across countries, though
the variance is smaller.
Diego Comin Bart Hobijn
Department of Economics Domestic Research Function
New York University Federal Reserve Bank of New York
269 Mercer Street, 725 33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10003 3rd Floor
and NBER New York, NY 10045
diego.comin@nyu.edu bart.hobijn@ny.frb.org

1. Introduction
Recent evidence, like Jerzmanowski (2002), Hall and Jones (1999) and Klenow and Rodríquez-Clare (1997),
suggests that the bulk of cross-country differences in levels of output per capita is due to differences in the level
of total factor productivity (TFP) rather than differences in the levels of factor inputs. These cross-country TFP
disparities can essentially be divided into two parts. The first part consists of the productivity differences due to
countries using different ranges of technologies. The second part is due to the different levels of efficiency with
which all technologies are operated.
There are several theories that propose mechanisms that might lead countries to adopt different sets of
available technologies. Among these are Basu and Weil (1998) and Parente and Prescott (1994) for example. The
problem with theories that claim that technology adoption lags, i.e. the first component of TFP disparities
described above, are an important factor part of TFP differences is that there is little or no empirical evidence to
this extend. There are two important reasons why the empirical growth literature trails the theoretical one in this
respect.
First and foremost there used to be no data sets that would allow for an extensive analysis of cross-country
differences in the adoption patterns of several technologies. Because of this lack of data, most of the studies on
technology adoption differences focused on one particular technology, a small number of countries, and only a
few points in time. Recent examples of this approach are Saxonhouse and Wright (2000) and Caselli and
Coleman (2001). However, Comin and Hobijn (2004) introduced a historical cross-country data set on
technology adoption that covers not only a relatively broad sample of countries but also a broad range of
technologies as well as a very long time period.
The second reason for the gap between the empirical and theoretical literature on technology adoption is
that there are not many macroeconomic models that provide a mapping between their theoretical concept of
technological progress and variables that are actually measurable in the data. On the theoretical side, most
models provide predictions on the path of capital labor and capital output ratios. On the empirical side,
conventional measures of technology adoption, like the adoption shares analyzed in Griliches (1957), Mansfield
(1961), and Gort and Klepper (1982), are not directly interpretable in the context of these variables. They are also
harder to compute, since they require a measure of the number of potential adopters.
In this paper we introduce a growth model where different firms simultaneously produce intermediate goods
with various productivity levels. New intermediate goods are potentially more productive, but are initially
operated below their full-efficiency. The array of intermediate goods adopted for production is endogenous. At
the micro level, our model is a model of slow diffusion of technologies (embobied in new intermediate goods)
qualitatively consistent with the stylized facts: S-shaped diffusion curves and investment in old vintages. The
endogenous adoption of new technologies provides a theory of TFP both at the sector and aggregate level.
Further, the aggregate behavior of our model is identical to the Neoclassical growth model.
The theoretical literature on growth and diffusion is quite thin. Chari and Hopenhayn (1991) present the
model that we believe comes closest to ours. There are several important differences between Chari and
Hopenhayn (1991) and our model: First, our model has capital. This is important because most of the
technologies that we measure are embodied. Chari and Hopenhayn instead model disembodied technologies.
2

Second, our model aggregates to the Neoclassical growth model. This greatly simplifies the investigation of the
aggregate and sectoral behavior of our model along the transition path. But, beyond the independent interest of
our model, what is important for our purposes is that it is very well suited to bridge the existing gap between the
theory on growth and adoption and the data.
In the tradition of the growth literature, our model provides predictions for the path of aggregate capital-
output ratios. It also has implications for the paths of technology specific capital-output and output ratios. It
shows how the latter can be used as measures of technology adoption and what growth theory predicts about
their dynamic behavior. It also shows how these measures map into the more conventional adoption shares,
which were used by Griliches (1957) and Mansfield (1961). The advantage of developing a theory in terms of
capital-output and output ratios is that these correspond directly to the cross-country measures of technology
adoption for which we have most data.
We use the Historical Cross-Country Adoption Data set (HCCTAD), introduced in Comin and Hobijn
(2004), to estimate our model. Specifically, we use data for 17 technologies in 21 industrialized countries
spanning 180 years. We show that the dynamics of technology adoption predicted by the model are qualitatively
and quantitatively consistent with the general patterns of technology adoption observed in the data for this broad
range of technologies and countries. Our results suggest that there are substantial differences in the rate at which
countries absorb new technologies and increase the efficiency level at which they use them.
Finally, we use the structural estimates that we obtain from our model to measure the productivity
differentials between countries that can be attributed to the disparities in the technology adoption patterns that
we observe. This component of productivity is determined mainly by the level of the least advanced technology
in use. We call this margin capital dragging. We observe also that different countries tend to lead in the
productivity component associated with technology adoption for different technologies.
These differences are, in general, significantly correlated with overall sectoral productivity disparities.
However, their variance is substantially smaller. Hence, our analysis still leaves a large part of sectoral
productivity differences to be explained by conventional TFP factors that affect all technologies that are used in
the same way.
The structure of this paper is as follows. In the next section, we introduce our model. In Section 3 we derive
its equilibrium dynamics. Section 4 contains the main theoretical contribution of the paper. It explains what we
assume for the path of vintage specific technological progress in this model and what it implies for the adoption
of technologies. Section 5 is devoted to mapping our theoretical concept of technological change into variables
that are measured in the data. Section 6 contains a description of our estimation strategy, while Section 7
contains the results obtained by applying it to the data from Comin and Hobijn (2004). Section 8 concludes.
2. Model
Our aim is to model the interaction between economic growth and the adoption of several major technologies.
This is why we consider a multi-sector growth model in which each sector uses a major technology.
3