NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WORKING THE SYSTEM:
FIRM LEARNING AND THE ANTIDUMPING PROCESS
Bruce A. Blonigen
Working Paper 10783
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10783
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004
This paper was prepared for the conference,“The 100th Anniversary of Anti-Dumping Regulation”,
sponsored by the Leverhulme Centre for Research on Globalisation and Economic Policy (GEP) at the
University of Nottingham, United Kingdom, and held June 2004. I thank my discussant, Doug Nelson, as
well as other conference participants for many insightful and useful comments. Any remaining errors or
omissions are the responsibility of the author. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Bruce A. Blonigen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Working the System: Firm Learning and the Antidumping Process
Bruce A. Blonigen
NBER Working Paper No. 10783
September 2004
JEL No. F13
ABSTRACT
This paper takes the first systematic look at how prior experience by US firms in filing US AD
petitions affects future AD filing activity and outcomes. Such prior experience may affect both the
cost of filing petitions, as well as the likelihood of successful outcomes and dumping margin
magnitudes. Statistical analysis of data on US AD cases finds that prior AD experience leads to
greater filing activity and likelihood of affirmative decisions or suspension agreements, but
significantly lower dumping margins. The latter result suggests that experience does not affect
dumping margins as much as it lowers filing costs, leading to petitioning of weaker cases.
Bruce A. Blonigen
Department of Economics
University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
and NBER
bruceb@uoregon.edu

1. Introduction
Antidumping (AD) investigations begin with a petition by an “interested” domestic party.
This is typically a producer (or group of producers) competing with the imported product subject
to the investigation. AD authorities then determine whether there is indeed dumping, defined as
pricing by the foreign firm below “fair” or “normal” value, and whether such trade practices are
injuring the domestic industry represented by the petitioners. If these criteria are satisfied, an
AD duty equal to the calculated dumping margin is applied to the imported products. In the
United States (US), the dumping margin calculations are conducted by the International Trade
Administration of the US Department of Commerce (USDOC), while the US International Trade
Commission (USITC) makes the injury determination.
There is a substantial amount of interaction between petitioners and AD authorities in the
US. The petitioning party must present the AD authorities with a reasonable petition that
presents their case for the investigation and then provide substantial information, as well as legal
analysis and arguments, during the course of the investigation. The legal details, as well as the
practical issues of how government agencies apply the law, are substantial. This complexity of
petitioning and obtaining AD remedies suggests that prior experience, or learning, by petitioning
parties may play an important role in antidumping filings and outcomes. In particular, prior
experience is hypothesized to lower future filing costs, while also increasing petitioners’
effectiveness in arguing their case and generating higher probabilities of favorable outcomes.
Such learning effects should clearly increase filing activity, but its effect on outcomes is
theoretically ambiguous as we detail more in the next section. While learning may increase non-
negative decision probabilities in these cases, the greater selection of weaker cases due to lower
filing costs may outweigh such effects.
1

This paper is the first to systematically estimate and examine the potential effects of
learning on AD filings and outcomes. We use detailed data on US AD filings and outcomes that
span the 1980s and 1990s to examine our hypotheses. Our empirical analysis reveals that
learning has a large impact on filing activity. Everything else equal, including controls for time-
invariant industry effects, prior AD activity in a 4-digit SIC industry increases the likelihood of
an AD filing in a year for an average industry from a base of 2% to 9%. Learning (or prior
experience) by petitioners also affects US AD outcomes. In the case of AD margins, prior
experience actually leads to dumping margins that are about 12 percentage points lower, where
the sample average dumping margin is 43.5%. This evidence is consistent with a scenario where
the effect of prior experience on filings costs (and the resulting increase in the filing of weaker
cases) dominates any effect that experience has on petitioners obtaining higher dumping
margins. On the other hand, we find evidence that the probability of an affirmative decision
increases from about 42% to 54% when petitioners have prior experience, despite this same
selection effect of weaker cases from lower filing costs. In similar manner, prior experience
raises the probability of a suspension agreement from 3% to 7%. In summary, prior experience
leads to increased filing activity and evidence suggests that this increased filing volume is due to
weaker cases. Prior experience increases petitioners’ abilities to achieve higher probabilities of
favorable outcomes, but little impact on dumping margins, such that the increase in weaker cases
leads to significantly lower dumping margins for repeat petitioners. On a final note, while the
steel industry is responsible for the bulk of repeat petitioners in US AD cases, our results are not
steel-specific and do not change substantially when we omit observations on steel industry AD
activity from our sample.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section provides a simple theoretical
discussion for how prior experience may affect filing activity and US AD outcomes. Section 3
2