NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE ROLE AND FUNCTIONING OF PUBLIC-INTEREST
LEGAL ORGANIZATIONS IN THE ENFORCEMENT
OF THE EMPLOYMENT LAWS
Christine Jolls
Working Paper 10708
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10708
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2004
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Christine Jolls. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Role and Functioning of Public-Interest Legal Organizations in the Enforcement of the
Employment Laws
Christine Jolls
NBER Working Paper No. 10708
August 2004
JEL No. J00, J78, K31, K49
ABSTRACT
Many laws create important rights for today's employees, but the availability of legal representation
for employees seeking to enforce those rights is uncertain. The goal of the present paper, part of the
Emerging Labor Market Institutions for the 21st Century Project at the National Bureau of
Economic Research, is to examine some of the distinctive public-interest legal organizations that
exist to help to enforce the employment laws. The chapter focuses on two broad categories of such
organizations: "national issue organizations," which are organizations that focus on one or more
broad-based issues and are funded predominantly by private donations; and legal services
organizations, which serve exclusively low-income individuals and are funded primarily by the
government.
Christine Jolls
Harvard Law School
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
cjolls@nber.org

The Role and Functioning of Public-Interest Legal Organizations
in the Enforcement of the Employment Laws
Christine Jolls*
Introduction
Today’s American legal system affords a significant array of protections to employees.
Although most workers in this country do not enjoy a general right to be dismissed only for
cause−a right characteristic of many European countries (Issacharoff 1996:1806-07) and now of
one American state, Montana (Mont. Code Ann. secs. 39-2-901 to 39-2-915)–they benefit from a
host of specific prohibitions on arbitrary or inappropriate behavior by employers. Examples
include prohibitions on discriminatory behavior (on the basis of race, sex, religion, national
origin, age, or disability) and on behavior that interferes with other personal rights of employees.
Employers are also under certain affirmative obligations to employees, including the obligation
to provide a safe workplace and the obligation (indirectly, through experience-rated insurance
premiums) to fund unemployment benefits for employees who are out of work.1
There is, however, a critical and oft-emphasized distinction between the law “on the
books” and the law “in action,” as the Legal Realist movement famously taught long ago (Pound
1910). What ultimately matters for many, if not most, purposes is how the law actually operates,
not what protections it ostensibly provides. The law “in action” includes not only how courts
* Professor of Law, Harvard Law School, and Research Associate, NBER. This research was
prepared for the NBER/MacArthur Project on Emerging Labor Market Institutions for the 21st
Century. The research was prepared in 1999-2001 and reflects facts and sources as they existed
at that time. Sam Bagenstos and Margo Schlanger offered extremely helpful comments on and
reactions to this work. Thanks go as well to Amanda Rocque for outstanding research assistance,
and to participants in the May 1999 and August 2000 Emerging Labor Market Institutions
conferences for helpful suggestions. Special thanks to Kip Viscusi and David Weil, the
commentators on this chapter at the August 2000 session, for their help. Finally, financial
support from the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics and Business at Harvard Law School
is gratefully acknowledged.
1 For an overview of legal obligations on employers, see Willborn, Schwab and Burton (1998).
1

apply the law as written (the original emphasis of the Realists) but also how well the law is
enforced by the institutions and parties affected by it (Llewellyn 1930:435 n.3).
The distinction between law “on the books” and law “in action” is clearly important in
the employment law context, where employees are ordinarily not in a strong position to enforce
their rights. Indeed, Roscoe Pound (1910:35), the father of “on the books”-“in action”
distinction, wrote almost a century ago that “our copious labor legislation for the most part fails
of effect because of defective administration.” The significant decline in union membership in
recent decades, from its high in the middle of the twentieth century, can only have exacerbated
the problem.
The goal of the present chapter is to examine some of the distinctive public-interest legal
organizations that exist to help to enforce the employment laws. The chapter focuses on two
broad categories of such organizations: “national issue organizations” (for instance, the NAACP
Legal Defense and Education Fund), which are defined here as organizations that focus on one or
more broad-based issues and are funded predominantly by private donations; and legal services
organizations, which serve exclusively low-income individuals and are funded primarily by the
government. The focus, as just indicated, is on “enforcement” (or “implementation”) of existing
laws, not “enactment” of new laws, to use the dichotomy drawn by David Weil (2001:[draft at
3]) in his contribution to this volume.
Many different mechanisms exist for “enforcing” the employment laws. The
mechanisms include, most obviously, providing conventional legal representation to employees
whose rights may have been violated, but they also include providing information to workers
about what rights the law gives them, facilitating the enforcement of these rights through means
other than filing lawsuits, and providing research and support assistance to attorneys providing
2