NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CORPORATE OWNERSHIP IN FRANCE:
THE IMPORTANCE OF HISTORY
Antoin E. Murphy
Working Paper 10716
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10716
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2004
My thanks to Michel Lutfalla, Roger Nougaret (Crédit Lyonnais), Cormac Ó Gráda (Department of
Economics, University College Dublin), Daniel Raff (Wharton School) and two anonymous referees for their
assistance with this paper. The usual disclaimer applies.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Antoin E. Murphy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Much Might Universal Health Insurance Reduce Socioeconomic Disparities in Health? A
Comparison of the US and Canada
Antoin E. Murphy
NBER Working Paper No. 10716
August 2004
JEL No. B1, Go, G3, N2
ABSTRACT
This paper attempts to show the importance of history in influencing the structure of corporate
ownership in France. The strong concentration of family ownership in France is traced to historical
weaknesses in the money and capital markets that forced families to have recourse to self-financing.
The weaknesses in the money and capital markets were greatly influenced by two eighteenth century
financial traumas arising from John Law’s Mississippi System (1716-20) and the financing of the
French Revolution through the issue of the assignats in the 1790s.These financial traumas delayed
significantly the emergence of banks and the capital market. Further historical factors influencing
French corporate ownership were the changes in the inheritance law system at the start of the
nineteenth century and, more recently, the emphasis on a pay-as-you-go pension system.
Antoin E. Murphy
Department of Economics
Trinity College Dublin
Dublin 2
Ireland
aemurphy@tcd.ie

The French model of corporate ownership and control is quite distinct from the Anglo-
American model. It has been described as an insider model because it contains a high degree of
concentration of ownership, while the wider dispersion of ownership characterised by the U.K.
and U.S. models has been termed an outsider model. Why are there such widely differing
models between France, and, indeed, many Continental European countries, on the one hand,
and the U.S. and the U.K., on the other? La Porta, Lopez-De-Silvanes and Shleifer (1998) have
advanced the view that ownership in capital markets is concentrated where there is an absence
of strong investor protection embodied in the legal system and regulatory arrangements. La
Porta et al. highlight the role of contemporary institutions but downplay, aside from legal
developments, the role of historical factors in shaping the structure of capital markets. More
recently La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny (2000) asserted that:
Common law countries have the strongest protection of outside investors – both
shareholders and creditors – whereas French civil law countries have the weakest
protection. (2000, 8)
Their explanation appears to be that the legal system and regulatory controls determine the
structure of corporate ownership. The civil law system is perceived to be linked to a system of
weaker control and protection for investors, ergo, it is natural to find a high degree of
concentration of ownership in countries such as France because of investors trepidation about
investing in a relatively unprotected investment environment. In a post Enron, Tyco,
WorldCom world French jurists and financiers might be permitted a wry smile at the
implication that the common law system is linked to a strong system of corporate control.1
This paper emphasises the importance of history in the shaping of corporate ownership
structures. The theme of this paper is that historical elements can produce profound shocks and
deep after waves, the effects of which move through an economy for many generations
fashioning the collective psyche of people in such a way as to present barriers to innovation and
change. The financing of a corporation may arise in three ways: (1) bank borrowing; (2)
borrowing from the capital market; (3) self-financing through the use of retained profits.
Borrowing from the banking sector and the capital markets dilutes the ownership of a
1 By the end of December 2000 Enron had a market capitalization of over $60 billion and had been ranked, by
Fortune Magazine as the most innovative large company in the United States. Its bankruptcy raises the issue
of corporate governance in the U.S. Healy and Palepu (2003) made the following observations:
‘Despite what they call an elaborate corporate governance network, Enron was able to attract large sums of
capital to fund a questionable business model, conceal its true performance through a series of accounting and
financial manoeuvres and hype its stock to unsustainable levels.’
2

corporation. Self-financing, on the other hand, strengthens the concentration of ownership. In
France over the last three hundred years historical factors have produced a weak capital and
banking structure. Because of these weaknesses there has been, until relatively recently, a
significant reliance on self-financing. Self-financing in turn implies that ownership remains
concentrated in the hands of individuals and families.
Chart 1 outlines some of the most significant historical factors that have influenced the
structure of corporate ownership in France. The presentation starts with two major financial
traumas in the eighteenth century. These were (1) the rise and collapse of John Law’s
Mississippi System and (2) the hyperinflationary experience generated by the assignats during
the French Revolution. It is contended that these financial traumas, reinforced in the nineteenth
century through the collapses of the Crédit Mobilier and the Union Générale, produced a weak
banking and capital market structure in France. Deprived of access to banks and capital markets
entrepreneurs developed the tradition of reliance on self-financing. This self-financing led to
high degrees of concentration of ownership in France. Chart 1 suggests that this self-financing
tradition was reinforced by a further historical factor, namely the changes in the inheritance law
introduced at the start of the nineteenth century by Napoleon. Primogeniture had been
perceived by the revolutionaries as a system that had aided and abetted the survival and
strength of the aristocracy. The new post-revolutionary regime, embodied in the Napoleonic
code, destroyed the system of primogeniture and replaced it with one based on an equal
allocation of property rights amongst all the children in the family. Younger children could no
longer be disinherited. The property of the parents was deemed, in large part, to be the property
of the children after the death of the former. Paradoxically, this element involves a legal
dimension, but not the type of legal dimension that La Porta et al. (1998, 2000) envisaged. In
the French civil law it is practically impossible to disinherit one’s offspring. Faced with the
potential ‘idiot heir’ problem families have successfully used the grandes écoles system to
provide educated new leaders of the next generation. Adept recourse to trusts (les indivisions)
and insurance has enabled family wealth to be transferred from generation to generation,
minimising in the process the burden of inheritance taxes. Add to this legal change favouring
the rights of all the children, a type of cultural mentalité that each generation is just the
temporary custodian of the family’s property (patrimoine) faced with the objective of passing it
on in even better shape to the next generation, and one finds a different set of factors that
helped shape the development of France’s corporate ownership structure.
3