NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A COMMON CURRENCY: EARLY U.S. MONETARY POLICY
AND THE TRANSITION TO THE DOLLAR
Peter L. Rousseau
Working Paper 10702
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10702
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2004
]
The author thanks Michael D. Bordo, Benjamin Chabot, William K. Hutchinson, Hugh Rockoff, Richard
Sylla, David Weiman, Robert E. Wright, and participants at the 2003 meetings of the Economic History
Association, the 2004 meetings of the American Economic Association , and the Economic History Seminar
at the University of Michigan for helpful comments and discussions. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Peter L. Rousseau. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Common Currency: Early U.S. Monetary Policy and the Transition to the Dollar
Peter L. Rousseau
NBER Working Paper No. 10702
August 2004
JEL No. E44, N11, N21
ABSTRACT
The transition of the U.S. money supply from the mixture of paper bills of credit, certificates, and
foreign coins that circulated at various exchange rates with the British pound sterling during the
colonial period to the unified dollar standard of the early national period was rapid and had far-
reaching consequences. This paper documents the transition and highlights the importance of this
standardization in bringing order to the nation's finances and in facilitating the accumulation and
intermediation of capital. It describes how the struggle of the colonies to maintain viable substitutes
for hard money set the stage for the financial leaders of the Federalist period, led by Alexander
Hamilton, to settle upon the dollar, attach it to a convertible metallic base, and create a national
Bank that issued notes denominated in the new monetary unit. It also presents recently-constructed
estimates of the U.S. money stock for 1790-1820 and relates them to measures of the nation's early
modernization.
Peter L. Rousseau
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
Box 1819 Station B
Nashville, TN 37235
and NBER
peter.l.rousseau@vanderbilt.edu

1. Introduction
The U.S. economy’s transition to the dollar early in the Federal period (1790-1811) marks
the emergence of the monetary system that for the most part exists today. With it came a central
bank, the start of modern banking and securities markets, and newly-found confidence among
investors in the ability of the young nation to service its financial obligations. The importance of
these events for the nation’s early growth has only recently begun to receive the attention that it
warrants (e.g., Sylla 1998; Rousseau and Sylla 1999, 2004). In some respects, however, the impact
of Alexander Hamilton’s financial “revolution” on real activity should come as little surprise given
the monetary conditions that existed in the years leading up to the Federal Constitution of 1789. At
that time unbacked issues of fiat money that helped to finance the American victory in the
Revolutionary War gave way to an inflationary spiral, debt depreciation, and a scarcity of real
money balances. The need to unify the nation’s currency and to restore the public’s confidence in it
weighed heavily in the minds of the forefathers as they drafted a Constitution that forbade
emissions of paper money by individual states in favor of committing to a securely-backed
transactions asset.
The decision to forbid issues of paper money by states was based on experience. The
colonial money stock, essentially a combination of state-issued bills of credit and foreign coins,
functioned adequately at times in colonies such as Pennsylvania and New York, but was hardly
ever more than a temporary remedy for hardships imposed by wars and the extractive policies of the
mother country. When the system functioned badly, as it did at various times in New England and
the Carolinas, it caused serious difficulties for individuals involved in market transactions.
Scholars in the late 19th century such as A. M. Davis tended to emphasize the more severe
malfunctions of colonial monetary arrangements when engaged in debates with contemporaries
about expanding the money supply (see the discussion in Ferguson 1953, pp. 153-54), but in doing
1

so probably over-stressed the long-run importance of these negative events. Later historians such as
Brock (1941, 1992), Ferguson (1953) and Perkins (1994) have taken a more moderate stance,
commenting instead on how surprisingly well the colonial monetary arrangements seemed to work
much of the time. None of these scholars, however, have contended that the young U.S. economy
would have been better off had it retained state-issued bills of credit into the 19th century.
While recognizing that the colonial experience with paper money was not entirely
unsatisfactory, and perhaps even necessary given the challenges of financing wars, promoting
agriculture, and providing a medium of exchange in the face of restrictions imposed by England on
coinage and specie imports, in this paper I take a quantitative approach to documenting its
deficiencies and the degree to which monetary conditions improved in the early Federal period. The
transition to the dollar and all that came with it mattered because, over time, it succeeded in
monetizing the modern sector of the U.S. economy. This was not possible in an era when colonial
legislatures were unable to commit credibly to backing currency emissions.
A failure to monetize meant that a large portion of transactions occurred through barter,
bookkeeping credit, and other informal means, and that transactions frictions were serious. These
frictions held the level of economic development in the colonies below what might have been
achieved in a location so rich in the fixed factors of production. When states issued paper money in
quantities small enough that the public retained confidence in the underlying resolve to impose the
taxes required for its redemption, paper money held its value against specie, the real money stock
expanded and monetization proceeded. When issues became so large that the public began to
question the commitment to redeem the bills, rightfully or not, depreciation quickly set in and
monetization halted. Calomiris (1988) makes this same point, though focusing primarily on the
depreciation of the federally-issued “continentals” issued to finance the War of Independence.
2