NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SOVEREIGN DEBT AND REPUDIATION:
THE EMERGING-MARKET DEBT CRISIS IN THE U.S. STATES, 1839-1843
John Joseph Wallis
Richard E. Sylla
Arthur Grinath III
Working Paper 10753
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10753
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by John Joseph Wallis, Richard E. Sylla, and Arthur Grinath III. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Sovereign Debt and Repudiation: The Emerging-Market Debt Crisis in the U.S. States, 1839-1843
John Joseph Wallis, Richard E. Sylla, and Arthur Grinath III
NBER Working Paper No. 10753
September 2004
JEL No. N2, N4, H1, H2, H3, H7, F3, E6
ABSTRACT
In 1841 and 1842, eight states and the Territory of Florida defaulted on their sovereign debts.
Traditional histories of the default crisis have stressed the causal role of the depression that began
with the Panic of 1837, unexpected revenue shortfalls from canal and bank investments as a result
of the depression, and an unwillingness of states to raise tax rates. This paper shows that none of
these stylized facts fits the experience of states at all well. The majority of state debts in default in
1842 were contracted after the Panic of 1837; most states did not expect canal investments to return
substantial revenues by 1841 and so could not experience unexpected shortfalls in those revenues;
and, finally, most states were willing to raise tax rates substantially. The relationship between land
sales and land values explains much of the timing of state borrowing and the default experience of
western and southern states. Pennsylvania and Maryland defaulted because they postponed the
imposition of a state property tax until it was too late.
John Joseph Wallis
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
wallis@econ.umd.edu
Richard E. Sylla
Stern School of Business, Economics
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
rsylla@stern.nyu.edu
Arthur Grinath III
ag@micradc.com

Sovereign Default and Repudiation:
The Emerging-Market Debt Crisis in U.S. States, 1839-1843
The oft-called “era of internal improvement” in the United States took place in the
quarter century after 1815. During the period, U.S. states borrowed more than $200 million by
selling long-term bonds in domestic and international financial markets to finance transportation
and banking projects. Total borrowing by the states approached a level nearly twice as high as
the debt of the federal government at its peak in the half-century between1790-1840. The federal
debt represented mostly the costs of the War of Independence and the War of 1812. Each of
these wars ran up a debt of less than half what the states borrowed for peaceful investment
purposes during the improvement era. In 1841, state debts outstanding totaled $198 million.
Then the improvement era came to a screeching halt. In 1841 and 1842, eight states and
the territory of Florida defaulted on their debts. Three other states narrowly avoided default.
Five of the nine defaulting states repudiated all or part of their debts. The credit of the U.S.
federal government, which never defaulted after the debt restructuring of 1790, was tarnished.
The credit of all U.S. states, not just defaulting states, was deeply impaired.
International capital markets were relatively new institutions in the early nineteenth
century. The United States was a new country on the international scene. Half of the U.S. states,
including all but two of the defaulters, were even newer than the country. For all of these
reasons, it seems appropriate to describe the events of the early 1840s as an emerging-markets
debt crisis. Although “emerging markets” is a term of relatively recent vintage, there are
parallels of the events of the early 1840s and the LDC debt crises of the 1980s, the Mexican,
Asian, Russian-LTCM, and Brazilian crises of the 1990s, and the Argentine crisis of the early
2000s.
Our objectives in revisiting the state debt crisis of the early 1840s are several. One is to
advance our understanding of the crisis as history by emphasizing some features of it that
previous accounts have missed. Previous discussions seldom note, much less explain, why more
than half of the state debts outstanding in 1841 was incurred after the financial panic of 1837.
1

The panic is often—but wrongly—regarded as marking the beginning of the end of the
improvement era.
Another objective is to show that earlier general explanations of the crisis—such as that
the borrowing states were naïve and incompetent, or that they were victims of corruption and
crony capitalism, or that they were unlucky and victimized by larger forces beyond their
control—simply do not work as general explanations of the crisis. In demonstrating this, we do
not argue that each state default was unique. Instead, we show that there were three different
patterns to the defaults, corresponding to different regions of the country with economies at
different stages of economic development. This, we think, is an important point, for it implies
that the United States in the nineteenth century was not just a country like other countries. It was
more akin to the empires of that era with distinct economies reflecting geographical and climatic
differences, and also differences related to whether a component state had long been settled and
possessed established institutions or was one of recent settlement and newly developing
institutions.
A final objective of the essay is to draw parallels with the emerging-markets debt crises
of our own time. One lesson of the 1840s crisis is that emerging-market debt defaults and
repudiations need not be unavoidable or inevitable consequences of international capital markets.
Only 9 of 28 U.S. states and territories defaulted in the crisis of the early 1840s. Twelve of the
19 that did not default had debts and might have defaulted. In revisiting the crisis, we show that
states made choices at all stages of the improvement-era episode, and that some of those choices
led to default while others did not. No default was inevitable, but we show that some of them
were more avoidable than others.
In Section I, we show which states defaulted, which did not, and suggest a simple reason
for the dichotomy. We review general explanations of the debt crisis and their deficiencies.
Section II discusses the interesting timing and regional patterns of debt incurrence, the purposes
for which debts were incurred, and the different methods that were adopted for servicing debts.
Section III relates the temporal pattern of state borrowing to a general underlying factor, rising
land values and the land-sales boom of the 1830s. A specific feature of the process by which
U.S. public lands were transformed into private property explains why so many states borrowed
so much after 1836. Section IV addresses the question of why some defaulting states—
2