NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SUPPLY OR DEMAND:
WHY IS THE MARKET FOR LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE SO SMALL?
Jeffrey R. Brown
Amy Finkelstein
Working Paper 10782
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10782
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004
We thank David Cutler, John Cutler, Cheryl DeMaio, Robert Gagne, Estelle James, Kathleen McGarry,
JaneMarie Mulvey, Dennis O’Brien, Ben Olken, Al Schmitz, Karl Scholz, Jonathan Skinner, Mark
Warshawsky, Steve Zeldes, and participants at the University of Wisconsin, the NBER Public Economics
meetings, the Risk Theory seminar and the American Risk and Insurance Association annual meeting for
helpful comments and discussions. We are especially grateful to Jim Robinson for generously sharing his
data on long-term care utilization, and to Norma Coe for exceptional research assistance. We are grateful to
the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, TIAA-CREF and the Campus Research Board at the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the IMF.
©2004 by Jeffrey R. Brown and Amy Finkelstein All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Supply or Demand: Why is the Market for Long-Term Care Insurance So Small?
Jeffrey R. Brown and Amy Finkelstein
NBER Working Paper No. 10782
September 2004
JEL No. H0, I11, G22, J14
ABSTRACT
Long-term care represents one of the largest uninsured financial risks facing the elderly in the United
States. Whether the small size of this market is driven primarily by supply side market imperfections
or by limitations to demand, however, is unresolved, largely due to the paucity of data about the
structure of the private market. We provide what is to our knowledge the first empirical evidence on
the pricing and benefit structure of long-term care insurance policies. We estimate that the typical
policy purchased by a 65-year old has an average pricing load of about 18 percent and has a very
limited benefit structure, covering only one-third of the expected present discounted value of long-
term care expenditures. These findings are consistent with the presence of supply side market
(cid:1)
imperfections. However, we also find enormous gender differences in pricing typical loads are
(cid:1)
44 cents on the dollar for men but better than actuarially fair for women that do not translate into
differences in coverage. And, although purchased policies provide limited benefits, we demonstrate
that more comprehensive policies are widely-available at similar loads, but are rarely purchased.
These findings suggest that while supply-side market imperfections exist, they are not the primary
cause of the small size of the private long-term care insurance market.
Jeffrey R. Brown
Department of Finance
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
340 Wohlers Hall, MC-706
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
brownjr@uiuc.edu
Amy Finkelstein
Harvard Society of Fellows and
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
afinkels@nber.org

1. Introduction
As the baby-boom generation approaches retirement, concerns about financial security in retirement
are increasing in importance as a public policy issue. One of the largest uninsured financial risks facing
the elderly in the United States today is expenditures for long-term care, such as home health care and
nursing homes. Expenditures for long-term care were $135 billion in 2004, representing 8.5% of total
health expenditures for all ages and about 1.2% of GDP. Importantly, only 4 percent of these
expenditures are paid for by private insurance, while one-third are paid for out of pocket (CBO, 2004). By
contrast, in the health sector as a whole, private insurance pays for 35 percent of expenditures and only 17
percent are paid for out of pocket (National Center for Health Statistics, 2002).
The limited insurance coverage for long-term care expenditures has important implications for the
welfare of the elderly. Its importance will only become more pronounced as the population continues to
age and as medical care costs continue to rise. Indeed, the Congressional Budget Office projects that real
long-term care expenditures will triple by 2040 (CBO, 1999).
Standard insurance theory suggests that the random and costly nature of long-term care expenditures
makes this precisely the type of risk for which risk averse individuals would find insurance valuable. As a
result, an extensive theoretical literature has proposed a host of potential explanations for the limited size
of the private long-term care insurance market (see Sloan and Norton, 1997 or Norton, 2000 for a review
of this literature). An important divide in these explanations is whether they assume that the limited size
of the market is due primarily to factors that limit demand for private insurance (such as the public
Medicaid program, the informal insurance provided by family members, or limited consumer rationality)
or to supply side market failures (such as asymmetric information, imperfect competition, or uninsured
aggregate risks).
Conceptually, it is possible to learn about the existence and importance of supply side market
imperfections by studying the characteristics of the insurance policies that are offered and purchased in
the private market. This is because the major potential supply side limitations, including high
transactions costs, imperfect competition, asymmetric information, or the aggregate risk of rising costs,
1

have at least one of two empirical implications. First, these imperfections may cause prices to be higher
than actuarially fair levels. Second, these imperfections may cause contracts to offer a constrained set of
benefit options that are less than fully comprehensive; we refer to a restriction on the comprehensiveness
of offered insurance contracts as “quantity rationing.”
Unfortunately, the literature thus far has been hampered by the paucity of relevant information about
the basic characteristics of the private long-term care insurance market. In addition to limiting our
economic understanding of the causes of the small market size, the lack of evidence impairs informed
public policy making as well. For example, concerns about perceived high prices in this market have
recently motivated the introduction of generous tax subsidies to long-term care insurance at both the
federal and state level (Wiener et al., 2000; Cohen and Weinrobe, 2000) as well as proposals for further
expansion of these subsidies (Lewis et al., 2003). Yet we know of no evidence on whether prices are
substantially above actuarially fair levels in this market, let alone whether this is an important factor in
explaining the market’s limited size.
To begin filling this void, this paper provides, to our knowledge, the first estimates of the loads on
private insurance policies and the share of expenditure risk covered by these policies. To do so, we
develop an analytical framework for estimating the pricing load and the comprehensiveness of private
long-term care insurance contracts. We implement these frameworks using detailed actuarial data on the
distribution of long-term care expenditure risk and market-wide survey data on the characteristics of
typical policies. We also investigate the extent to which supply-side market failures are important in
understanding the limited size of the private market.
The key findings of this paper are that supply side limitations do exist in this market, but that these
limitations are not primarily responsible for the limited size of the market. The evidence for the existence
of supply side imperfections is that commonly purchased policies exhibit high average prices and limited
benefits. Our central pricing estimates indicate that the typical policy purchased by a 65-year old (which
is roughly the average age of purchase) and held until death has a load of 0.18. In other words, on
average, an individual who buys a long-term care insurance policy will get back only 82 cents in expected
2