NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BORROWING CONSTRAINTS, COLLEGE AID,
AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY
Eric A. Hanushek
Charles Ka Yui Leung
Kuzey Yilmaz
Working Paper 10711
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10711
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2004
This research was funded by grants from the Packard Humanities Institute and Direct Grant and Summer
Research Grant of the Chinese University of Hong Kong. Helpful comments were received from Doug
Bernheim, Bruce Chapman, Betsy Caucutt, Charles Clotfelter, Dennis Epple, Martin Feldstein, Roger
Gordon, Rachel Ngai, and seminar participants at LSE and the NBER. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Eric A. Hanushek, Charles Ka Yui Leung, and Kuzey Yilmaz. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Borrowing Constraints, College Aid, and Intergenerational Mobility
Eric A. Hanushek, Charles Ka Yui Leung, and Kuzey Yilmz
NBER Working Paper No. 10711
August 2004
JEL No. H2, I2, D5, J3
ABSTRACT
The current level and form of subsidization of college education is often rationalized by appeal to
capital constraints on individuals. Because borrowing against human capital is difficult, capital
constraints can lead to nonoptimal outcomes unless government intervenes. We develop a simple
dynamic general equilibrium model of the economy that permits us to explore the impact of
alternative ways of subsidizing higher education. The key features of this model include
endogenously determined bequests from parents that can be used to finance schooling, uncertainty
in college completion related to differences in ability, and wage determination based upon the
amount of schooling in the economy. Because policies toward college lead to large changes in
schooling, it is very important to consider the general equilibrium effects on wages. Within this
structure, we analyze tuition subsidies such as exist in most public colleges, alternative forms of
need-based aid, income contingent loans, and merit-based aid. Each of these policies tends both to
improve the efficiency of the economy while yielding more intergenerational mobility and greater
income equality. But, the various policies have quite different implications for societal welfare, and
the underlying subsidy patterns vary widely.
Eric A. Hanushek Charles Ka Yui Leung Kuzey Yilmaz
Hoover Institution Department of Economics Department of Economics
Stanford University Chinese University of Koc University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010 Hong Kong 80910 Istanbul
and NBER Shatin, Hong Kong Turkey
hanushek@stanford.edu charlesl@cuhk.edu.hk kuyilmaz@ku.edu.tr

1 Introduction
Education holds a special position in most societies around the world. Governments quite uni-
formly subsidize schooling heavily, often making it free to the student. But it is not obvious why
governmentsintervenetothisextent, particularlywhendiscussinghighereducation. Norisitclear
why government might choose one form of college subsidy over another. This paper explores the
implications of alternative subsidy schemes both from e¢ ciency and equity perspectives.
On the policy side, any suggestion that a government contemplates raising student fees for
higher education frequently brings a wave of protests. In the United States, political concerns
about rising tuition costs have led the U.S. Congress to hold hearings and contemplate legislation,
even though tuition policies are the province of state governments.1
Government intervention in education has nonetheless received relatively little research atten-
tion, particularly given the magnitude of programs. For K-12 education, government subsidy can
be rationalized by arguments about externalities related to socialization, facilitating democratic
government, and reducing crime.2 But such externalities appear considerably less important when
considering college education. Our earlier paper (Hanushek, Leung and Yilmaz (2003)) considered
pure redistributional motives along with externalities of education in production, but provided
limited general support for this form of government subsidization.3
A remaining argument for subsidization revolves around capital market imperfections and the
inability to borrow against human capital (e.g., Becker 1993[1964] or Garratt and Marshall 1994).
Because human capital is not good collateral for loans, individuals can …nd it di¢ cult to fund
college if the family cannot readily self-…nance. Further, because any borrowing constraints are
likely to be related to parental income, the resulting decisions on college tend to inhibit intergen-
erational mobility. To the extent that society wishes to disentangle opportunities of individuals
from the socioeconomic status of their parents, subsidizing college may directly meet societal goals
1The pattern of net tuition by income groups in the U.S. is analyzed in Congressional Budget O¢ ce (2004).
2Of course as raised previously by Friedman (1962), these arguments do not establish the case either for the
magnitude of current intervention or for the form that involves direct production as opposed to subsidy.
3Consideration of direct distributional objectives is also the main thrust of Benabou (2002) and Caucutt and
Kumar (2003), although those papers are also directly related to our work here in that they explicitly consider the
dynamics of the problem.
1

for distributional outcomes.
The existence and importance of credit constraints has been the subject of debate. In an
in‡uentialsetofpapers(CameronandHeckman1999,2001;CarneiroandHeckman2002),Heckman
and his coauthors argue that short run credit constraints are small even if longer run constraints
deriving from transmission of achievement are more substantial.4 As discussed below, while we
do not try to estimate the magnitude of these e¤ects, we base our analysis on a presumption that
both exist.
This analysis delves directly into the intergenerational outcomes of various college subsidy
schemes in the presence of borrowing constraints. But, our previous paper demonstrated that
general equilibrium e¤ects are very important to consider, because policies that have signi…cant
impacts on college attendance and completion necessarily have direct e¤ects on wages in the econ-
omy. Thus, any policy consideration must be embedded within a model that can accommodate
aggregate impacts on the economy. Systematic study into aspects of both the e¢ ciency and dis-
tributional impacts of educational policies has been growing over time (see, for example, Lowry
(1981), Glomm and Ravikumar (1992), Iyigun (1999), and Fender and Wang (2003)), and this
analysis is a natural extension of these inquiries.
Our objective is to develop a dynamic general equilibrium model that can provide insights into
the implications of various college aid policies for both the e¢ ciency of the economy and for the
distribution of outcomes over time. We begin in a world where short run borrowing constraints
stop some families from making optimal schooling decisions, implying that society will not achieve
its …rst best outcome without government intervention. Government has, however, a variety of
instruments for subsidizing education, and these instruments have di¤erent implications for the
economy in both the short and long run.
To capture the dynamic nature of the problem, we employ an overlapping generations model
4Note that we do not separately analyze the importance of borrowing constraints but simply concentrate on the
implicationsthatsuchconstraintswouldhavefortheeconomyandthedistributionofwelfare. Forotherdiscussions
of the magnitude and nature of constraints on college attendance, see Keane and Wolpin (2001) and Kane (1999).
Other discussions such as the e¤ect on enrollment of eliminating Social Security tuition support for children with a
deceased, disabled, or retired parent are relevant to our development of models where some children are constrained
by insu¢ cient parental support (Dynarski (2003)).
2