NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE PRE-PRODUCERS
Boyan Jovanovic
Working Paper 10771
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10771
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Boyan Jovanovic. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Pre-Producers
Boyan Jovanovic
NBER Working Paper No. 10771
September 2004
JEL No. L0, G3
ABSTRACT
Until its sales of a product materialize, a firm is a "pre-producer" in the market for that product. That
firm may may be a new start-up, or it may already sell other products. Firms that do not succeed in
generating sales eventually become discouraged and move on to other activities. When this fate
befalls a lot of firms, as it recently did in several IT-related businesses, the industry experiences a
"shakeout." In the model that I will present, during the shakeout some firms switch to flatter, safer
earnings. This switch raises earnings at the time of the shakeout but lowers them in the long run, and
it therefore raises earnings-price ratios. This has happened on the Nasdaq since March, 2000 when
the Nasdaq shakeout began.
Boyan Jovanovic
Department of Economics
New York University
269 Mercer Street
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
bj2@nyu.edu

The Pre-Producers
Boyan Jovanovic
∗
September 6, 2004
Abstract
Until its sales of a product materialize, a firm is a “pre-producer” in the
market for that product. That firm may may be a new start-up, or it may
already sell other products. Firms that do not succeed in generating sales
eventually become discouraged and move on to other activities. When this
fate befalls a lot of firms, as it recently did in several IT-related businesses,
the indistry experiences a “shakeout.” In the model that I will present, during
the shakeout some firms switch to flatter, safer earnings. This switch raises
earnings at the time of the shakeout but lowers them in the long run, and it
therefore raises earnings-price ratios. This has happened on the Nasdaq since
March, 2000 when the Nasdaq shakeout began.
1 Introduction
Since March of 2000, a wave of e-commerce and computer companies have folded.
Several years after their founding, many had not managed to sell anything. And
at the tail end of the 19th century some 90% of the hundreds of automobile pre-
producers never sold a single car — the median pre-production time was less than a
year but some were at it for more than 10 years (Carroll and Hannan, 2000).
Pre-producers predominate in new industries. It is new industries, where com-
mercial success is risky and delayed, and where market share is up for grabs, that
show most volatility in stock-price indexes (Mazzucato 2002). This paper will link
these facts with a simple model.
In the model, a pre-producer of a product is born when a firm starts devoting re-
sources to that product market or diverting them from its activities in other markets.
Pre-production ends when sales start coming in. The waiting time until sales start
I thank D. Evans, M. Hannan, S. Klepper, and C. Syverson for comments on an earlier draft.
∗
Special thanks to J. Montoriol who supplied and analyzed the Spanish data, and to I. Guler for
supplying and helping analyze the VC data. Thanks also to J. Prat for correcting an important
error and to A. Gavazza for ably assisting on the project.. Thanks, finally, to the NSF for support.
1

is a random variable, drawn independently by firms from the same distribution. The
main results are
1. Firms that remain pre-producers eventually become discouraged and move on
to other activities — a “shakeout.”
2. The shakeout is when firms opt for flatter, safer income streams. This switch
raises earnings at the time of the shakeout but lowers them in the long run, and
it therefore raises earnings-price ratios. This is indeed what has happened on
the Nasdaq since March, 2000 when the shakeout began.
By waiting for sales to materialize, a pre-producer creates value — a form of or-
ganization capital. As the industry matures and as the product price declines, that
capital gradually loses its value. The implications for stock prices depend in part on
whether pre-producers are mainly new firms, or lateral entrants that own capacity in
other industries. On the other hand, the mix of de novo and de alio capital has no
bearing on the industry price, quantity and on the size of the shakeout.
2 Evidence
First we shall review evidence on pre-production, a period during which firms wait
for their sales to materialize, and during which some firms succeed ahead of others.
Section 2.1 reports evidence on this. The implications for the stock market hinge
on there being lateral entry and on firms being able to re-focus their activities when
faced with declining markets. Section 2.2 will report evidence on that.
2.1 Pre-production
The model dichotomizes a firm’s life-cycle experience into a “start-up” and a “matu-
rity” phase, and ignores all intermediate stages. This gets some support from several
sources. In the pharmaceutical industry the fortune of a new firm is tied to whether
its patented drug will be approved — the average time from a drug’s first worldwide
patentapplicationtoitsapprovalbytheFDAis13years(DranoveandMeltzer1994).
Elsewhere the lag is shorter: Carroll and Hannan (2000) report evidence on automo-
bile and beer pre-producers where the pre-production period was closer to a year.
Related evidence on time to build (Koeva 2002) and on patent-gestation lags (Pakes
and Schankerman 1984) puts the lag (which in this case has a different meaning) at
about 2 years.
These are estimates of average waiting times. Next I shall show evidence that
waiting times differ considerably across firms.
2