NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY DO INCUMBENT SENATORS WIN?
EVIDENCE FROM A DYNAMIC SELECTION MODEL
Gautam Gowrisankaran
Matthew F. Mitchell
Andrea Moro
Working Paper 10748
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10748
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004
We thank Ethan Bueno de Mesquita, Zvi Eckstein, Barton Hamilton, Antonio Merlo, Larry Samuelson,
Kenneth Wolpin, seminar participants at numerous institutions and 2002-03 Industrial Organization graduate
students at Harvard and Yale for their insightful comments and Anita Todd for editorial assistance.
Gowrisankaran acknowledges financial support from the National Science Foundation (Grant SES-0318170).
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation, the Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, or the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Gautam Gowrisankaran, Matthew F. Mitchell, and Andrea Moro. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Why Do Incumbent Senators Win? Evidence from a Dynamic Selection Model
Gautam Gowrisankaran, Matthew F. Mitchell, and Andrea Moro
NBER Working Paper No. 10748
September 2004
JEL No. H1, J2, C5
ABSTRACT
Since 1914, incumbent U.S. senators running for reelection have won almost 80% of the time. We
investigate why incumbents win so often. We allow for three potential explanations for the
incumbency advantage: selection, tenure, and challenger quality, which are separately identified
using histories of election outcomes following an open seat election. We specify a dynamic model
of voter behavior that allows for these three effects, and structurally estimate the parameters of the
model using U.S. Senate data. We find that tenure effects are negative or small. We also find that
incumbents face weaker challengers than candidates running for open seats. If incumbents faced
challengers as strong as candidates for open seats, the incumbency advantage would be cut in half.
Gautam Gowrisankaran
John M. Olin School of Business
Washington University in St. Louis
Campus Box 1133
One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130
and NBER
gowrisankaran@wustl.edu
Matthew F. Mitchell
Department of Economics
University of Iowa
matthew-mitchell@uiowa.edu
Andrea Moro
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
amoro@econ.umn.edu

1 Introduction
In a variety of electoral situations, incumbents win substantially more than half of
the time. This is sometimes referred to as an incumbency advantage. This paper
investigates the sources of the incumbency advantage in the U.S. Senate, where
incumbents win almost 80% of the time.
While many explanations have been posited to explain the incumbency advan-
tage, including pork-barrel spending, media coverage, and incumbent visibility, one
important explanation is that some of the incumbency advantage is due to a selec-
tion effect: becoming an incumbent requires winning, and winning candidates will
tend to be of relatively high quality. In this case the incumbency advantage is not
due to any direct benefit of incumbency but is rather a consequence of the different
distributionofqualityforincumbents. Thegoalofthispaperistoempiricallydisen-
tangle the selection effect from other sources of incumbency advantage, principally
the effect of tenure and the fact that the quality of challengers facing incumbents
running for reelection may be low relative to the quality of candidates in open seat
elections (that is, elections without incumbents).
We formulate a simple model of voter decisions for candidates incorporating
selection and other effects that can explain the incumbency advantage. The model
implies that the tenure of the incumbent and the history of the seat following an
open seat election (e.g., how many terms were served by each candidate who was
later defeated by another candidate) will influence the probability of reelection in
different ways depending on the relative importance of selection and other effects.
We first examine what simple counts from U.S. Senate data of winning probabilities
byincumbent’stenureandtermssinceanopenseatelectionimplyaboutthesources
of the incumbency advantage. To more precisely understand the implications of the
data, we structurally estimate the parameters of the model, and use the estimated
model to examine the relative importance of the different sources of incumbency
advantage.
The model of voters and candidates we present in Section 3, though stylized,
seeks to capture some of the basic forces of incumbency advantage. In our model,
1

voters obtain utility from their elected official through two sources. First, each
candidatehasapermanent,idiosyncraticquality,whichvotersvalue. Second,voters
value the tenure of their elected official. There are several possible sources of tenure
effects. Elected officials may learn on the job, they may use tenure to achieve better
status within the Senate, or they may use the exposure of incumbency to their
advantage in elections. It also could be that candidates become out-of-step with
their constituents or that their skills deteriorate over time. We do not attempt to
separate these different sources of the tenure effects, as it is beyond the scope of our
model and data. Instead, we simply seek to evaluate the importance and variation
of tenure effects, and to separate them from the selection effect. Importantly, we do
not restrict the tenure effects to be increasing in tenure or follow any other pattern.
We model voters in each senatorial seat as identical dynamically optimizing
agents. Voters observe the permanent quality of two current candidates and then
elect one of them. Permanent candidate quality is drawn from a fixed distribution,
whichvariesdependingonwhethertheelectionisanopenseatelectionoronewhere
an incumbent is running. Once quality is drawn, the only change in the utility flow
from a candidate over his career is his tenure effect, which moves in an identical
way across elected officials. An incumbent leaves the Senate with an exogenous exit
probability that depends on tenure. As such, we do not account for the selection
bias that may result from senators choosing when to retire based on their electoral
prospects.1
We base our estimation onU.S. Senate data since 1914, which marks the start of
the elected senate. Our data contain the history of senatorial seats, recording how
candidates came to office, how long they served in office and the reason they left
office. Conditional on a given vector of structural parameters, the solution to the
1 Although we are not aware of any evidence on the exogeneity of retirement from the Senate,
KiewietandZeng(1993)findthatageisthemostimportantdeterminantoftheretirementdecision
forHouserepresentatives,withscandalsadistantsecond. Indicatorsofqualitysuchaschairmanship
ofacommittee,partyleadership,orthevictorymargininthepreviouselectionarenotstatistically
significant. These findings support our choice of exogenous exit probabilities to the extent that
they apply to the behavior of senators. Ansolabehere and Snyder Jr. (2004), using term limits as
an instrumental variable, also find no evidence that candidates are strategic in their retirement
decisions.
2