NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STOCK MARKET TRADING AND MARKET CONDITIONS
John M. Griffin
Federico Nardari
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 10719
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10719
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2004
Griffin is an Associate Professor of Finance at the McCombs School of Business, University of Texas at
Austin. Nardari is an Assistant Professor of Finance at the WP Carey School of Business, Arizona State
University. Stulz is the Everett D. Reese Chair of Banking and Monetary Economics, Ohio State University,
and a Research Associate at the NBER. We are very grateful to Sriram Villupuram for superb research
support. We thank Keith Brown, Stijn Claessens, Martijn Cremers, Enrico Perotti, Simon Potter, Laura Starks,
Paul Tetlock, Sheridan Titman, Selim Topaloglu as well as seminar participants at Queen’s University, the
University of Amsterdam, and the University of Texas at Austin Accounting and Finance mini-conference.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by John M. Griffin, Federico Nardari, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Stock Market Trading and Market Conditions
John M. Griffin, Federico Nardari, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 10719
August 2004
JEL No. G1
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the dynamic relation between market-wide trading activity and returns in 46
markets. Many stock markets exhibit a strong positive relation between turnover and past returns.
These findings stand up in the face of various controls for volatility, alternative definitions for
turnover, and differing sample periods, and are present at both the weekly and daily frequency.
However, the magnitude of this relation varies widely across markets. Several competing
explanations are examined by linking cross-country variables to the magnitude of the relation. The
relation between returns and turnover is stronger in countries with restrictions on short sales and
where stocks are highly cross-correlated; it is also stronger among individual investors than among
foreign or institutional investors. In developed economies, turnover follows past returns more
strongly in the 1980s than in the 1990s. The evidence is consistent with models of costly stock
market participation in which investors infer that their participation is more advantageous following
higher stock returns.
John M. Griffin René M. Stulz
McCombs School of Business Fisher College of Business
University of Texas Ohio State University
john.griffin@mail.utexas.edu 806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Federico Nardari Columbus, OH 43210-1144
WP Carey School of Business and NBER
Arizona State University stulz@cob.osu.edu
federico.nardari@asu.edu

It is part of market folklore that liquidity dries up following poor returns. In bear markets,
trading volume is down, brokers make less money, fewer equity issues take place, and stock
mergers become scarce. Although there is some evidence of a relation between turnover and past
returns, there is neither a comprehensive documentation of it nor a generally agreed upon
explanation for it.1 In this paper, we investigate the relation between volume and lagged returns
for 46 markets across the world using weekly data. The use of international data makes it
possible to evaluate the robustness of the relation. Further, and perhaps more importantly, we can
exploit cross-country differences in the relation to test possible explanations for it.
Our primary trading measure is turnover, or dollar trading volume normalized by market
capitalization. Using a trivariate Vector Autogression (VAR) of the market return, market
volatility, and turnover with weekly data from 1993 through 2003, we find that a positive shock
to returns leads to a significant increase in volume after ten weeks in 24 countries and to a
significant decrease in no country. The economic magnitude of the return-turnover relation is
large; a one standard deviation shock to returns leads to a 0.46 standard deviation increase in
turnover on average after ten weeks. This effect of returns on volume is 0.72 in developing
markets but only 0.26 on average in high-income countries. Perhaps surprisingly, the return-
turnover relation is small and insignificantly negative for the U.S. in the 1993-2003 period.
Why is the return-turnover relation typically positive across countries? Why does it vary
across countries? Theories of trading based on heterogeneity among rational agents due to
1 In his review, Karpoff (1987) states that the two stylized empirical facts about the price-volume relation are that
there is (1) a positive correlation between volume and the absolute level of the price change and (2) a positive
correlation between volume and the level of the price change. Karpoff points out that the latter correlation is more
sensitive to sample periods and measurement intervals than the former. The literature Karpoff reviews primarily
focuses on this contemporaneous relation. Smirlock and Starks (1988) present evidence of higher volume following
intradaily positive price movements for individual stocks, but only during days of information arrival. Lakonishok
and Schmidt (1986) document the tendency for daily trading volume on individual stocks to be positively related to
past performance. However, Tse (1991) and Saatcioglu and Starks (1998) conclude that there is little evidence that
returns lead volume at the market level in Japan and six Latin American markets.
1

differences in information or taxes do not seem to be helpful to explain the return-turnover
relation. For such information asymmetries to explain the return-turnover relation, they would
have to increase following positive market returns, but the literature offers no convincing
argument for why it should be so. The evidence in Lakonishok and Smidt (1986) is inconsistent
with the view that trading for tax reasons is an important determinant of trading volume. The tax
trading hypothesis predicts more trading in stocks that have done poorly, and they find the
opposite. In any case, tax reasons could not explain results obtained using weekly or daily
frequencies.
In models with rational investors, a positive relation between return and volume can arise
also because of a shock to the cost of trading.2 The net worth of liquidity providers falls as stock
prices decrease (as they are long stocks on average). Hence the increase in trading (liquidity)
costs leads to a decrease in volume following low past returns. We would expect the liquidity
effect to be stronger in markets with relatively less trading activity, but in cross-sectional
analysis we find this not to be the case. Additionally, the liquidity costs argument mostly applies
to liquidity drying up in down markets. Using an asymmetric VAR we find, instead, that positive
shocks to returns are followed by increases in volume of approximately the same magnitude as
those following negative shocks to returns.
Binding restrictions to short sales affect the volume of trade since investors who would
sell short cannot do so. Hence, if investors want to sell short more following poor market returns,
2 Existing models of liquidity predict that a decrease in liquidity is associated with a fall in stock prices. As a result,
as investors learn that liquidity is falling or will fall, we would expect a negative return on the market. For this
argument to be compelling, it would have to be that the liquidity shocks are viewed as long-lasting. The liquidity
explanation implies that the market return does not cause the change in liquidity, but rather the change in liquidity
causes the market return. Following the liquidity shock, expected returns would have to be higher and realized
returns lower. Recent evidence by Jones (2002) shows that high liquidity predicts low returns. However, as pointed
out by Baker and Stein (2003), the magnitude of the decrease in returns associated with an increase in liquidity
seems extremely large to be explained by theoretical models where the cost of trading impacts the expected return of
stocks.
2