NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STEALTH COMPENSATION VIA RETIREMENT BENEFITS
Lucian Arye Bebchuk
Jesse M. Fried
Working Paper 10742
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10742
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004
This paper was prepared for the August 2003 symposium on promoting long-term value for public
shareholders co-sponsored by the Berkeley Business Law Journal and the Mercatus Center. A fuller account
of the role of camouflage and stealth compensation in the design of executive compensation is developed in
our forthcoming book, Pay without Performance: The Unfulfilled Promise of Executive Compensation. For
financial support, we are grateful to the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business, and to the
Boalt Hall Fund and U.C. Berkeley’s Committee on Research. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Jesse M. Fried. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Stealth Compensation Via Retirement Benefits
Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Jesse M. Fried
NBER Working Paper No. 10742
September 2004
JEL No. D23, G32, G34 G38, J33, J44, K22, M14
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes an important form of "stealth compensation" provided to managers of public
companies. We show how boards have been able to camouflage large amount of executive
compensation through the use of retirement benefits and payments. Our study highlights the
significant role that camouflage and stealth compensation play in the design of compensation
arrangements. Our study also highlights the significance of whether information about compensation
arrangements is not merely publicly available but also communicated in a way that is transparent and
accessible to outsiders.
Lucian Arye Bebchuk
Harvard Law School
1557 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu
Jesse M. Fried
University of California at Berkeley
friedj@law.berkeley.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
This paper focuses on an important form of “stealth compensation”
provided to managers of public companies. We show how designers of
compensation arrangements for these managers have been able to camouflage
large amount of executive compensation through the use of retirement benefits
and payments. Our study highlights the significant role that camouflage and
stealth compensation play in the design of compensation arrangements. Our study
also highlights the importance of ensuring that information about compensation
arrangements not only be placed in the public domain but also be communicated
in a way that is transparent and accessible to outsiders.
We begin by discussing the critical role of outrage costs and camouflage in
the setting of executive compensation. Managers have considerable influence over
their pay and use their influence to extract pay that is both higher and less
performance sensitive than arm’s length bargaining with the board would
produce. The difference between what managers’ power enables them to receive,
and what they would receive under arm’s length bargaining, constitutes “rents.”
Managers’ ability to extract rents, however, is hardly unlimited. When a board
approves a compensation arrangement that favors managers at the expense of
shareholders, executives and directors will bear certain economic and social costs.
The magnitude of these costs will depend on how the arrangement is perceived by
outsiders whose views matter to the directors and executives. An arrangement
that is perceived as outrageous might reduce shareholders’ willingness to support
incumbents in a proxy contest or takeover bid, might lead to shareholder pressure
on managers and directors, and might embarrass directors and managers or harm
their reputations. The more outrage a compensation arrangement is expected to
generate, the more reluctant directors will be to approve it and the more hesitant
managers will be to propose it in the first place.
The critical role of outsiders’ perception of executives’ compensation, and
the significance of outrage costs, explain the importance of “camouflage.” The
desire to minimize outrage gives designers of compensation arrangements a
strong incentive to try to obscure and justify—or, more generally, to camouflage—
both the level and performance-insensitivity of executive compensation.
Camouflage thus allows executives to reap benefits at the expense of shareholders.
More importantly, attempts to camouflage can lead to the adoption of inefficient
compensation structures that harm managers’ incentives and in turn company
performance, imposing even greater costs on shareholders.
We discuss elsewhere how various forms of non-retirement compensation,
including bonuses, stock option plans, and executive loans, have been designed
1

with an eye to camouflaging rents and minimizing outrage.1 In this paper, we
examine how retirement arrangements have often been designed in a way that
serves this goal. As disclosure requirements for executive salaries, bonuses, and
long-term compensation have become stricter, firms have increasingly turned to
postretirement payments and benefits as ways to compensate managers.
Postretirement value has been provided to executives through four main channels:
retirement pensions, deferred compensation, postretirement perks, and
guaranteed consulting fees. As we will explain these methods enable firms to
provide a substantial amount of performance-insensitive value in a less
transparent form than, say, salary. Firms have used these channels to make less
transparent both the total amount of compensation received by managers and the
extent to which pay is decoupled from managers’ own performance.
Before describing outrage costs and camouflage in more detail and
discussing each of the four channels, we should note two attributes they all share.
First, these arrangements differ substantially from those that firms elect to provide
to other employees. Although firms often provide pensions and deferred
compensation to lower-level employees, they do so only to the extent that these
arrangements receive a tax subsidy. This pattern suggests that, absent such a
subsidy, pensions and deferred compensation are generally not efficient. Yet most
of the arrangements provided to executives do not enjoy similar tax advantages.
Furthermore, consistent with economists’ belief that in-kind benefits are
inefficient, firms do not generally provide retired employees with coverage for
specified consumption expenses. Such benefits are, however, given to high-level
executives. And although firms occasionally use retired employees as consultants
when the need arises, they generally do not guarantee lifetime consulting fees to
any employees other than executives.
The second shared attribute of these various retirement payments is that
they all make it possible to obscure large amounts of performance-decoupled
compensation. As we shall see, firms do not have to disclose the value transferred
to executives through these channels in the same way that other forms of
compensation—such as salary, bonuses, and stock options—must be disclosed.
1 .See Lucian Arye Bebchuk, Jesse M. Fried, and David I. Walker, Managerial Power and
Rent Extraction in the Design of Executive Compensation, 69 U. Chicago L. Rev. 751, 795-
837 (2002); Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Jesse M. Fried, Executive Compensation as an
Agency Problem, 17 J. Econ. Perspectives, 71, 81-87; Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Jesse M.
Fried, Pay Without Performance: The Unfulfilled Promise of Executive Compensation
(Harvard University Press, forthcoming 2004), Chapters 9-14.
2