NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ROBIN HOOD AND HIS NOT-SO-MERRY PLAN:
CAPITALIZATION AND THE SELF-DESTRUCTION OF TEXAS’
SCHOOL FINANCE EQUALIZATION PLAN
Caroline M. Hoxby
Ilyana Kuziemko
Working Paper 10722
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10722
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2004
All errors are the authors' own. Nevertheless, they gratefully thank the Russell Sage Foundation's Special
Project on Social Inequality for generous support and also thank the MacArthur Foundation's Inequality
Network for support. The authors gratefully acknowledge helpful comments from Douglas Bernheim,
Michael Boskin, Edward Glaeser, Joseph Gyourko, Jonathan Gruber, Robert Inman, Brigitte Madrien,
Thomas Nechyba, James Poterba, Antonio Rangel, Todd Sinai, seminar participants at Harvard University,
MIT, Stanford University, The University of California - Berkeley, Wharton, and the National Bureau of
Economic Research. For help with data, the authors are especially grateful to Doug Smith of the Texas
Education Agency, Division of State Funding. In addition, the authors gratefully acknowledge the many
helpful conversations they have had with Texans, who have helped them to appreciate the state's special
circumstances. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Caroline M. Hoxby and Ilyana Kuziemko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Robin Hood and His No-So-Merry Plan: Capitalization and the Self-Destruction of Texas’
School Finance Equalization Plan
Caroline M. Hoxby and Ilyana Kuziemko
NBER Working Paper No. 10722
August 2004
JEL No. H2, H24, H7, H71, H72, I2, K11, R5
ABSTRACT
School finance schemes control the allocation of $370 billion a year in the United States, but their
economics are poorly understood. We examine an illuminating example: Texas' "Robin Hood"
scheme, which was enacted in 1994, allocates about $30 billion a year, and is currently collapsing
and likely to be abandoned. We show that the collapse was predictable. Robin Hood's design causes
substantial negative capitalization, shrinking its own tax base. It relies only slightly on relatively
efficient (pseudo lump sum) redistibution and heavily on high marginal tax rates. Although Robin
Hood reduced the spending gap between Texas' property-poor and property-rich districts by $500
per pupil, it destroyed about $27,000 per pupil in property wealth. The magnitude of this loss is
important: if the state had efficiently confiscated the same wealth and invested it, it would generate
sufficient annual income to make all Texas schools spend at a high level. The Robin Hood scheme
is stringent but not bizarre: other states' systems share its features to some degree. We provide
estimates of the effects of school finance system parameters, which policy makers could use to
design systems that are more efficient and stable.
Caroline M. Hoxby
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
choxby@harvard.edu
Ilyana Kuziemko
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
kuziemko@nber.org

1
I. Introduction
School finance is one of the most important public policies in the United States. It can determine
whether cities or suburbs grow; it can create or destroy investment in education. School finance
programs govern the allocation of approximately 370 billion dollars a year in the United States and 30
billion dollars a year in Texas alone. Despite their importance, these programs are poorly understood by
economists. Every good public economist knows the income tax code and how social security works, but
he probably knows little about school finance. Even more worrisome is the fact that the creators of
school finance formulas often lack economic expertise. They rarely foresee capitalization (the response
of property prices to the burdens and rewards created by the formula). Indeed, they sometimes set up
systems that maximize property wealth destruction, given the tax revenue collected and the redistribution
achieved. Often, they do not foresee that school districts may respond to perverse incentives that the
formula creates. For instance, a formula might create incentives for districts to maximize the number of
children who are classified as disabled.
In this paper, we show how a school finance program derailed itself. We examine Texas' so-
called "Robin Hood" formula, first implemented in 1993-94. Robin Hood is not odd: most other states'
systems share its features to some degree. We focus on Robin Hood because it strongly exhibits all of
the problems listed above. In less than a decade, the system is approaching collapse: it has exhausted its
own capacity. We show that the collapse was predictable: Robin Hood's design maximizes the negative
capitalization it causes, shrinking its own tax base. It relies only slightly on relatively efficient (pseudo
lump sum) redistibution and heavily on high marginal tax rates.
We wish to state at the outset that we believe that school finance is an important and legitimate
problem for state governments. However, it is essentially a tax problem and, like other tax problems, can
be solved more or less well. The scale of the mistakes can be massive, simply because school finance
operates on a massive scale. We estimate that the Robin Hood plan destroyed about 81 billion dollars of

2
property wealth in Texas ($27,000 of property wealth per pupil). To get a sense of the magnitude of this
number, suppose that the state had somehow confiscated this wealth, instead of destroying it. The state
would have been able to endow a permanent fund that would generate sufficient annual income (about
$1,350 per pupil) to let every one of its districts spend what the top 5 percent of its districts currently
spend.
Our goal is not to criticize all efforts to provide equal educational opportunities, but to use Robin
Hood to illustrate some problems of school finance and estimate the effects of school finance parameters.
We do not attempt to be prescriptive, but we do refer to more efficient systems than Texas' .1 Good
intentions about redistribution are not enough in school finance: understanding the economics is
important too.
II. A Brief Primer on American School Finance
In the United States, education is primarily the responsibility of state governments and local
school districts. Districts are the entities that spend money on schools. Their main way to raise revenue
by themselves is a proportional tax on the value of local property.2 Districts also spend revenue that they
receive from their states as aid.3 Aid may be negative –that is, a tax on districts' revenues from local
property taxes. Roughly speaking, the goal of school finance is to allocate state aid so that districts'
choice of the appropriate level of school spending is (up to a point) independent of the permanent income
1 Results from Hoxby (2001) can used to compare different school finance systems. She estimates effects
using all 50 states over 30 years.
2 Some districts also get revenue from fees and local sales taxes, but local property taxes account for over
95 percent of districts' revenue. Property tax systems are often slightly progressive because they exempt the first
$10,000 to $25,000 of a house's value (a "homestead exemption") and allow exemptions for the elderly, disabled,
veterans, and so on.
3 In addition, districts may receive some federal aid, but it is too small (only 7 percent of public school
spending) and too simply categorical (grants for the disabled, limited English proficient, and so on) to concern us
here. The major goals of school finance can be achieved only through state school finance, given the allocation of
responsibility for schools in the American federalist system.