WHY DO COUNTRIES MATTER SO MUCH FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE?
Craig Doidge
G. Andrew Karolyi
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 10726

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY DO COUNTRIES MATTER SO MUCH FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE?
Craig Doidge
G. Andrew Karolyi
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 10726
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10726
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2004
René Stulz is grateful for the hospitality of the Kellogg Graduate School of Management at Northwestern
University and the George G. Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and State at the University of
Chicago. Andrew Karolyi is grateful to the Dice Center for Research in Financial Economics for financial
support. We thank Ian Byrne for providing the S&P Transparency and Disclosure ratings. We are grateful
to participants at the American Economic Association meetings, the NBER Summer Institute, and at seminars
at Delaware, London Business School, Ohio State, Northwestern, University of British Columbia, Virginia,
Wilfred Laurier, and Yale, and to Lucian Bebchuk, Bernard Black, Kent Daniel, Olivier Jeanne, Kose John,
Simon Johnson, Han Kim, Mitch Petersen, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Bernard Yeung for useful
comments. Rodolfo Martell and Carrie Pan provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Craig Doidge, G. Andrew Karolyi, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Why Do Countries Matter So Much for Corporate Governance?
Craig Doidge, G. Andrew Karolyi, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 10726
August 2004
JEL No. G15
ABSTRACT
This paper develops and tests a model of how country characteristics, such as legal protections for
minority investors, and the level of economic and financial development, influence firms' costs and
benefits in implementing measures to improve their own governance and transparency. The model
focuses on an entrepreneur who needs to raise funds to finance the firm's investment opportunities
and who decides whether or not to invest in better firm-level governance mechanisms to reduce
agency costs. We show that, for a given level of country investor protection, the incentives to adopt
better governance mechanisms at the firm level increase with a country's financial and economic
development. When economic and financial development is poor, the incentives to improve firm-
level governance are low because outside finance is expensive and the adoption of better governance
mechanisms is expensive. Using firm-level data on international corporate governance and
transparency ratings for a large sample of firms from around the world, we find evidence consistent
with this prediction. Specifically, we show that (1) almost all of the variation in governance ratings
across firms in less developed countries is attributable to country characteristics rather than firm
characteristics typically used to explain governance choices, (2) firm characteristics explain more
of the variation in governance ratings in more developed countries, and (3) access to global capital
markets sharpens firm incentives for better governance, but decreases the importance of home-
country legal protections of minority investors.
René M. Stulz
Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz_1@cob.osu.edu
Craig Doidge
University of Toronto
Andrew Karolyi
The Ohio State University

1. Introduction
Corporate governance deals with the mechanisms that ensure that investors in corporations
get a return on their investments (Shleifer and Vishny, 1997). Corporate governance varies
widely across countries and across firms. Better governance enables firms to access capital
markets on better terms, which is valuable for firms intending to raise funds. We would, therefore,
expect firms that plan to access capital markets – especially those with valuable growth
opportunities that cannot be financed internally – to adopt mechanisms that commit them to better
governance.
With the availability of data on corporate governance and disclosure practices of individual
companies around the world, provided first by the Center for International Financial Analysis and
Research (CIFAR) and, more recently, by Credit Lyonnais Securities Asia (CLSA) and Standard
and Poor’s (S&P) among others, several studies have investigated whether governance and
transparency scores are related to firm characteristics, such as investment opportunities, external
financing needs, asset size, or ownership structure, and to the efficiency of the legal regime in
protecting minority shareholder interests (Durnev and Kim, 2004; Francis, Khurana, and Pereira,
2003; Klapper and Love, 2003; Krishnamurty, Sevic, and Sevic, 2003). In general, they find
supporting evidence that the quality of governance practices is positively related to growth
opportunities, the concentration of ownership, the need for external financing, and the protection
of investor rights. However, until now, the importance of other country characteristics, such as
the financial and economic development of the country in which a company is domiciled, and
how that importance is affected by financial globalization, has not been investigated. This is
surprising since a number of studies show that other country characteristics besides measures of
investor protection have a significant impact on country-level measures of
2