NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PREDATORY TRADING
Markus Brunnermeier
Lasse Heje Pedersen
Working Paper 10755
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10755
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004
This paper is a reflection of the December 3003 version. We are grateful for helpful comments from Dilip
Abreu,William Allen, Ed Altman, Yakov Amihud, Patrick Bolton, Menachem Brenner, Robert Engle,
Stephen Figlewski, Gary Gorton, Rick Green, Joel Hasbrouck, Burt Malkiel, David Modest, Michael Rashes,
Jose Scheinkman, Bill Silber, Ken Singleton, Jeremy Stein, Marti Subrahmanyam, Peter Sørensen, Nikola
Tarashev, Jeff Wurgler and an anonymous referee. We would also like to thank seminar participants at NYU,
McGill, Duke University, Carnegie Mellon University, Washington University, Ohio State University,
University of Copenhagen, London School of Economics, University of Rochester, University of Chicago,
UCLA, Bank of England, University of Amsterdam, Tilburg University, Wharton, Harvard University and
New York Federal Reserve Bank as well as conference participants at Stanford’s SITE conference and the
annual meeting of the European Finance Association. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Markus Brunnermeier and Lasse Heje Pedersen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Predatory Trading
Markus Brunnermeier and Lasse Heje Pedersen
NBER Working Paper No. 10754
September 2004 (Revised December 2003)
JEL No. G0, G1
ABSTRACT
This paper studies predatory trading: trading that induces and/or exploits other investors' need to
reduce their positions. We show that if one trader needs to sell, others also sell and subsequently buy
back the asset. This leads to price overshooting and a reduced liquidation value for the distressed
trader. Hence, the market is illiquid when liquidity is most needed. Further, a trader profits from
triggering another trader's crisis, and the crisis can spill over across traders and across markets.
Markus K. Brunnermeier
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton University
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540-5296
markus@princeton.edu
Lasse Heje Pedersen
Department of Finance
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
lpederse@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
Large traders fear a forced liquidation, especially if their need to liquidate is known
by other traders. For example, hedge funds with (nearing) margin calls may need to
liquidate, and this could be known to certain counterparties such as the bank financing
the trade; similarly, traders who use portfolio insurance, stop loss orders, or other
risk management strategies can be known to liquidate in response to price drops; a
short-seller may need to cover his position if the price increases significantly or if
his share is recalled (i.e., a “short squeeze”); certain institutions have an incentive
to liquidate bonds that are downgraded or in default; and intermediaries who take
on large derivative positions must hedge them by trading the underlying security. A
forced liquidation is often very costly since it is associated with large price impact and
low liquidity.
We provide a new framework for studying the strategic interaction between large
traders. Traders are large in the sense of having market impact and they trade continu-
ously, limiting their trading intensity to minimize temporary price impact costs. Some
of the traders may end up in financial difficulty, and the resulting need to liquidate is
known by the other strategic traders.
Our analysis shows that if a distressed large investor is forced to unwind his posi-
tion (and needs liquidity the most), then other strategic traders initially trade in the
same direction. That is, to profit from price swings, other traders conduct predatory
trading and withdraw liquidity instead of providing it. This predatory activity makes
liquidation costly and leads to price overshooting. Moreover, predatory trading can
even induce the distressed trader’s need to liquidate, and hence, predatory trading
can enhance the risk of financial crisis. We show that predation is profitable if the
distressed trader’s position is large relative to the capacity on the sideline, and if the
market is illiquid, and that predation is most fierce if there are few predators.
These findings are in line with anecdotal evidence as summarized in Table 1. A
well-known example is the alleged trading against LTCM’s positions in the fall of 1998.
2

Business Week wrote:
“... if lenders know that a hedge fund needs to sell something quickly,
they will sell the same asset – driving the price down even faster. Goldman,
Sachs & Co. and other counterparties to LTCM did exactly that in 1998.”1
Cramer (2002) describes hedge funds’ predatory intentions in colorful terms:
“When you smell blood in the water, you become a shark. ... when you
know that one of your number is in trouble ... you try to figure out what
he owns and you start shorting those stocks ...”
Also, Cai (2002) finds that “locals” on the CBOE pits exploited knowledge of LTCM’s
short positions in the treasury bond futures market. Another indication of the fear
of predatory trading is evident in the opposition to UBS Warburg’s proposal to take
over Enron’s traders without taking over its trading positions. This proposal was
opposed on the grounds that “it would present a ‘predatory trading risk’ because
Enron’s traders would effectively know the contents of the trading book.”2 Similarly,
many institutional investors are forced by law or their own charter to sell bonds of
companies which undergo debt restructuring procedures. Hradsky and Long (1989)
documents price overshooting in the bond market after default announcements.
Furthermore, our model shows that an adverse wealth shock to one large trader,
coupled with predatory trading, can lead to a price drop that brings other traders
in financial difficulty, leading to further predation, and so on. This ripple effect can
cause a widespread crisis in the financial sector. Consistently, the testimony of Alan
Greenspan in the U.S. House of Representatives on Oct. 1st, 1998 indicates that the
Federal Reserve Bank was worried that LTCM’s financial difficulties might destabilize
the financial system as a whole:
1“The Wrong Way to Regulate Hedge Funds”, Business Week, February 26th, 2001, page 90.
2AFX News Limited, AFX – Asia, January 18th, 2002.
3