NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHEN IT RAINS, IT POURS: PROCYCLICAL CAPITAL FLOWS
AND MACROECONOMIC POLICIES
Graciela L. Kaminsky
Carmen M. Reinhart
Carlos A. Végh
Working Paper 10780
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10780
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004
Kaminsky was visiting the IMF Institute and Végh was Senior Resident Scholar at the IMF’s Research
Department when this paper was written. They both gratefully acknowledge the IMF’s hospitality. Kaminsky
and Végh also wish to thank the Institute of Public Policy at George Washington University and the UCLA
Senate, respectively, for financial support. The authors wish to thank Peter Benczur, Mark Gertler, Gita
Gopinath, Ayhan Kose, Pablo Lopez Murphy, Attila Raftai, Raghu Rajan, Alessandro Rebucci, Vincent R.
Reinhart, Roberto Rigobon, Kenneth S. Rogoff, Evan Tanner, and Guillermo Tolosa for useful comments
and suggestions and Eric Bang and, especially, Ioannis Tokatlidis for excellent research assistance. This
paper was prepared for the NBER’s 19th Conference on Macroeconomics, organized by Mark Gertler and
Kenneth S. Rogoff. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the
IMF or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Graciela L. Kaminsky, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Carlos A. Végh. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

When it Rains, it Pours: Procyclical Capital Flows and Macroeconomic Policies
Graciela L. Kaminsky, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Carlos A. Végh
NBER Working Paper No. 10780
September 2004
JEL No. F41, E52, E62
ABSTRACT
Based on a sample of 104 countries, we document four key stylized facts regarding the interaction
between capital flows, fiscal policy, and monetary policy. First, net capital inflows are procyclical
(i.e., external borrowing increases in good times and falls in bad times) in most OECD and
developing countries. Second, fiscal policy is procyclical (i.e., government spending increases in
good times and falls in bad times) for the majority of developing countries. Third, for emerging
markets, monetary policy appears to be procyclical (i.e., policy rates are lowered in good times and
(cid:1) (cid:1)
raised in bad times). Fourth, in developing countries and particularly for emerging markets
periods of capital inflows are associated with expansionary macroeconomic policies and periods of
capital outflows with contractionary macroeconomic policies. In such countries, therefore, when it
rains, it does indeed pour.
Graciela L. Kaminsky
George Washington University
Department of Economics
Washington, DC 20052
and NBER
graciela@gwu.edu
Carmen M. Reinhart
School of Public Affairs and
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
4105 Van Munching Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
creinhar@umd.edu
Carlos A. Végh
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
cvegh@ucla.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
Any expert on financial crises in emerging markets could cite ample anecdotal evidence to
support the view that macroeconomic policies are highly procyclical, at least in moments of extreme
duress. At the time that economic activity is contracting (often markedly) amidst a crisis, the fiscal
authority cuts budgets deficits while the central bank raises interest rates – possibly exacerbating the
economic contraction. Procyclical policies, however, do not appear to be limited to crisis periods in many
developing countries. In fact, the roots of most of the debt crises in emerging market are all too often
found in governments that go through bouts of high spending and borrowing when the times are favorable
and international capital is plentiful.1
Gavin and Perotti (1997) first called attention to the phenomenon of procyclical fiscal policy by
showing that fiscal policy in Latin America tends to be expansionary in good times and contractionary in
bad times. Talvi and Végh (2000) argued that, far from being a phenomenon peculiar to Latin America,
procyclical fiscal policy seems to be the norm in the developing world just as fiscal policy is acyclical in
the advanced economies. Using a different econometric approach, Braun (2001) reaches a similar
conclusion for developing countries, though he finds evidence that fiscal policy is countercyclical in
OECD countries. Lane (2003b) also provides evidence on the procyclicality of fiscal policy in
developing countries compared to OECD countries. In the same vein, Gupta et al (2004) find
econometric support for the procyclicality of government spending in developing countries, though the
degree of procyclicality varies across spending categories.
Several explanations have been advanced to explain the procyclicality of fiscal policy in
developing countries compared to industrial countries. Gavin and Perotti (1997), among others, have
argued that developing countries face credit constraints that prevent them from borrowing in bad times.
Hence, they are “forced” to repay in bad times, which requires a contractionary fiscal policy. In contrast,
Tornell and Lane (1999) develop a political-economy model in which competition for a common pool of
1 See Reinhart, Rogoff, and Savastano (2003) for an analysis of borrowing/default cycles.
1

funds among different units (ministries, provinces) leads to the so-called “voracity effect,” whereby
expenditure could actually exceed a given windfall. Taking as given such a political distortion, Talvi and
Végh (2000) show how policymakers would find it optimal to run smaller primary surpluses in good
times by increasing government spending and reducing tax rates. Lastly, Riascos and Végh (2003) show
how incomplete markets could explain procyclical fiscal policy as the outcome of a Ramsey problem
without having to impose any additional frictions.
In terms of monetary policy, while the impression certainly exists that developing countries often
tighten the monetary strings in bad times (see Lane, 2003b), systematic empirical work is scant.2 This is
probably due to the notorious difficulties (present even for advanced countries) in empirically
characterizing the stance of monetary policy.3
Relying on data for 104 countries for the period 1960-2003, this paper revisits the evidence on the
procyclicality of fiscal policy and, as far as we know, presents a first systematic effort to document
empirically the cyclical properties of monetary policy in developing countries. It departs from earlier
efforts investigating fiscal policy cycles in several dimensions. First, it provides an analytical framework
for how to interpret the behavior of a broad variety of fiscal indicators, which leads to a reinterpretation of
some earlier results in the literature. Second, it analyzes countries grouped by income levels to capture
the fact that while wealthier countries have continuous access to international capital markets, low-
income countries are almost exclusively shut out at all times, and middle-income countries have a
precarious and volatile relationship with international capital. Third, it examines closely the interaction
2 Of course if “bad times” are defined exclusively as currency or banking crises, then there is a small but growing
theoretical literature on monetary policy in general and interest rate defenses in particular (see, for instance, Aghion,
Bacchetta, and Banerjee (2001), Flood and Jeanne (2000), and Lahiri and Végh (2003)). The empirical evidence in
this area is, however, rather inconclusive.
3 For a discussion of some of the challenges in estimating monetary policy rules for industrial countries, see Clarida,
Gali, and Gertler (1999).
2