NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ON THE INDUSTRY CONCENTRATION OF
ACTIVELY MANAGED EQUITY MUTUAL FUNDS
Marcin Kacperczyk
Clemens Sialm
Lu Zheng
Working Paper 10770
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10770
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004
Kacperczyk is from the Sauder School of Business at University of British Columbia. Sialm and Zheng are
from the Michigan Business School, Ann Arbor. We thank Sreedhar Bharath, Sugato Bhattacharyya, Fang
Cai, Joel Dickson, William Goetzmann, Rick Green, Gautam Kaul, Lutz Kilian, Zbigniew Kominek, Francine
Lafontaine, Luboš Pástor, Tyler Shumway, Laura Starks, Steve Todd, Zhi Wang, Russ Wermers, Toni
Whited, and especially an anonymous referee. We also benefited from helpful comments by seminar
participants at the 2002 CIRANO seminar in Montreal, the 2003 European Financial Management
Association Meeting in Helsinki, the 2003 Summer Meeting of the Econometric Society, the 2004 European
Finance Association Meeting in Maastricht, Michigan State University, the University of Colorado at
Boulder, the University of Florida, the University of Michigan, and the University of St. Gallen. We are
grateful to Paul Michaud for his support with the CDA/Spectrum database. We thank the authors of DGTW
(1997) for providing us with the characteristic-adjusted stock returns reported in their paper. We
acknowledge the financial support from Mitsui Life Center in acquiring the CDA/Spectrum data. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2004 by Marcin Kacperczyk, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

On the Industry Concentration of Actively Managed Equity Mutual Funds
Marcin Kacperczyk, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng
NBER Working Paper No. 10770
September 2004
JEL No. G2
ABSTRACT
Mutual fund managers may decide to deviate from a well-diversified portfolio and concentrate their
holdings in industries where they have informational advantages. In this paper, we study the relation
between the industry concentration and the performance of actively managed U.S. mutual funds from
1984 to 1999. Our results indicate that, on average, more concentrated funds perform better after
controlling for risk and style differences using various performance measures. This finding suggests
that investment ability is more evident among managers who hold portfolios concentrated in a few
industries.
Marcin Kacperczyk
Sauder School of Business
University of British Columbia
2053 Main Mall
Vancouver, B.C. Canada V6T 1Z2
marcin.kacperczyk@sauder.ubc.ca
Clemens Sialm
University of Michigan Business School
701 Tappan Street
D3219
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
sialm@umich.edu
Lu Zheng
University of Michigan Business School
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
luzheng@umich.edu

Actively managed mutual funds are an important constituent of the financial sector.
Despite the well-documented evidence that, on average, actively managed funds
underperform passive benchmarks, mutual fund managers might still differ substantially
in their investment abilities.1 In this paper, we examine whether some fund managers
create value by concentrating their portfolios in industries where they have informational
advantages.
Conventional wisdom suggests that investors should widely diversify their
holdings across industries to reduce their portfolios’ idiosyncratic risk. Fund managers,
however, might want to hold concentrated portfolios if they believe some industries will
outperform the overall market or if they have superior information to select profitable
stocks in specific industries. Consistent with this hypothesis, we would expect funds with
skilled managers to hold more concentrated portfolios. As a result, we should observe a
positive relation between fund performance and industry concentration.
Mutual fund managers may also hold concentrated portfolios due to a potential
conflict of interest between fund managers and investors. Several studies indicate that
investors reward stellar performance with disproportionately high money inflows but do
not penalize poor performance equivalently.2 This behavior results in a convex option-
like payoff profile for mutual funds. Consequently, some managers, especially those with
1 For evidence on fund performance, see, for example, Jensen (1968); Grinblatt and Titman (1989); Elton,
Gruber, Das, and Hlavka (1993); Hendricks, Patel, and Zeckhauser (1993); Malkiel (1995); Brown and
Goetzmann (1995); Ferson and Schadt (1996); Gruber (1996); Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers
(DGTW 1997); Baks, Metrick, and Wachter (2001); Kosowski, Timmermann, White, and Wermers (2001);
Carhart, Carpenter, Lynch and Musto (2002); Cohen, Coval, and Pástor (2004); and Lynch, Wachter, and
Boudry (2004).
2 Numerous studies have called attention to the nonlinearity in the performance-flow relation, for example,
Ippolito (1992), Gruber (1996), Chevalier and Ellison (1997), Goetzmann and Peles (1997), Sirri and
2

lower investment abilities, may have an incentive to adopt volatile investment strategies
to increase their chances of having extreme performance. Consistent with this hypothesis,
funds pursuing such gaming strategies would hold more concentrated portfolios. In this
case, we should not observe a positive relation between fund performance and industry
concentration.
The literature analyzing the net returns of mutual funds documents that mutual
funds, on average, under-perform passive benchmarks by a statistically and economically
significant margin. However, several studies based on the gross returns of the portfolio
holdings of mutual funds conclude that managers who follow active investment strategies
have stock-picking abilities. For example, Grinblatt and Titman (1989, 1993); Grinblatt,
Titman, and Wermers (1995); Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (DGTW 1997);
Wermers (2000); and Frank, Poterba, Shackelford, and Shoven (2004) find evidence that
mutual fund managers outperform their benchmarks based on the returns of fund
holdings.
Coval and Moskowitz (1999, 2001) show that mutual funds exhibit a strong
preference for investing in locally headquartered firms where they appear to have
informational advantages. Nanda, Wang, and Zheng (2004) provide evidence that fund
families following more focused investment strategies across funds perform better, likely
due to their informational advantages. To further investigate the informational advantages
or investment abilities of mutual fund managers, we analyze in this paper whether some
fund managers can create value by holding portfolios concentrated in specific industries.
Tufano (1998), Del Guercio and Tkac (2002), and Nanda, Wang, and Zheng (2004).
3