NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PUTTING THE BRAKES ON SUDDEN STOPS:
THE FINANCIAL FRICTIONS-MORAL HAZARD
TRADEOFF OF ASSET PRICE GUARANTEES
Enrique G. Mendoza
Ceyhun Bora Durdu
Working Paper 10790
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10790
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004
Work on this project began while Mendoza was a visiting scholar at the Research Department of the Inter-
American Development Bank. Comments and suggestions by Guillermo Calvo, Reuven Glick, Olivier
Jeanne, Urban Jermann, Alejandro Izquierdo, Katherine Smith, Linda Tesar and Diego Valderrama are
gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Enrique G. Mendoza and Ceyhun Bora Durdu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Subjective Mortality Risk and Bequests
Enrique G. Mendoza and Ceyhun Bora Durdu
NBER Working Paper No. 10790
September 2004
JEL No. F41, F32, E44, D52
ABSTRACT
The hypothesis that Sudden Stops to capital inflows in emerging economies may be caused by global
capital market frictions, such as collateral constraints and trading costs, suggests that Sudden Stops
could be prevented by offering price guarantees on the emerging-markets asset class. Providing these
guarantees is a risky endeavor, however, because they introduce a moral-hazard-like incentive
similar to those that are also viewed as a cause of emerging markets crises. This paper studies this
financial frictions-moral hazard tradeoff using an equilibrium asset-pricing model in which margin
constraints, trading costs, and ex-ante price guarantees interact in the determination of asset prices
and macroeconomic dynamics. In the absence of guarantees, margin calls and trading costs create
distortions that produce Sudden Stops driven by occasionally binding credit constraints and Irving
Fisher's debt-deflation mechanism. Price guarantees contain the asset deflation by creating another
distortion that props up the foreign investors' demand for emerging markets assets. Quantitative
simulation analysis shows the strong interaction of these two distortions in driving the dynamics of
asset prices, consumption and the current account. Price guarantees are found to be effective for
containing Sudden Stops but at the cost of introducing potentially large distortions that could lead
to 'overvaluation' of emerging markets assets.
Enrique G. Mendoza Ceyhun Bora Durdu
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of Maryland University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742 College Park, MD 20742
and NBER durdu@econ.bsos.umd.edu
mendozae@econ.umd.edu

1
1. Introduction
The Sudden Stop phenomenon of emerging markets crises is characterized by three stylized facts:
a sudden reversal of private capital inflows and current account deficits, a collapse in production and
private absorption, and large relative price corrections in domestic goods prices and asset prices. A large
fraction of the literature on this subject is based on the premise that world capital markets are inherently
imperfect, and hence prone to display contagion and overreaction in the determination of asset positions
and asset prices relative to levels consistent with “fundamentals” (see Arellano and Mendoza (2003) for a
short survey of this literature). The findings of some of this literature suggest that an international
financial organization (IFO) could help prevent Sudden Stops by providing ex ante price guarantees for
the emerging-markets asset class. Calvo (2002) put forward a formal proposal for setting up this facility.
The goal of ex-ante price guarantees is to create a trading environment in which emerging-
markets asset prices can be credibly expected to remain above the crash levels that trigger Sudden Stops
driven by international capital market frictions. Calvo views this facility as keen to an open-markets
operation facility: it would commit to exchange a liquid, riskless asset (e.g., short-term U.S. T-bills) for
an index of emerging markets assets whenever the value of the index falls by a certain amount, and would
re-purchase the riskless asset when the index price recovers. The optimal response of market participants
would incorporate their expectations that these guarantees would be executed if a systemic fire-sale were
to crash emerging-markets asset prices, and hence a properly-designed system of price guarantees could
rule out rational expectations equilibria in which Sudden Stops driven by financial frictions can take
place. If these frictions are the only cause of Sudden Stops and the support of the probability distribution
of the events that can cause Sudden Stops is known (i.e., if there are no truly “unexpected” shocks), the
facility would rarely trade.
A potentially important drawback of the above system of price guarantees is that it would
strengthen moral hazard incentives among global investors. Everything else the same, the introduction of
the guarantees would increase the foreign investors’ demand for emerging markets assets, since the
downside risk of holding these assets in bad states of nature is transferred to the IFO providing the

2
guarantees. This can be a serious drawback because the moral hazard argument itself has been forcefully
put forward as a competing explanation of Sudden Stops, and has been used to propose major reforms to
the international financial system (see the report of the Meltzer Commission and the article by Lerrick and
Meltzer (2001)).
Proponents of the moral hazard view argue that Sudden Stops are induced by excessive
indebtedness of emerging economies driven by the expectation of private capital market participants that
IFOs will bail out countries in financial difficulties. Based on this premise, Lerrick and Meltzer (2001)
argue for the use of ex-post price guarantees to be offered by an IFO to anchor the orderly resolution of a
default once it has been announced and agreed to with the IFO. The IFO would determine the crash price
of the defaulted asset and would require the country to commit to re-purchase the asset at its crash price
(making the commitment credible by having the IFO commit itself to buy the asset at a negligible
discount below the crash price if the country were unable to buy it). If the only cause of Sudden Stops is
moral hazard, the announcement of this arrangement should remove the moral hazard distortion and
reduce debt levels, and in practice the arrangement itself would rarely be activated.
The tension between the financial frictions and moral hazard approaches to explain Sudden Stops
and their alternative proposals for using price guarantees reflect an important tradeoff that ex ante price
guarantees create. On one hand, ex ante price guarantees could endow IFOs with an effective policy tool
to prevent and manage Sudden Stops driven by frictions affecting international capital markets. On the
other hand, ex-ante guarantees could end up making matters worse by strengthening moral hazard
incentives (even if it were true that capital market frictions were the only cause of the Sudden Stops of the
last decade).
The financial frictions-moral hazard tradeoff implies that making the case for ex ante price
guarantees requires their advocates to show that it is possible to design a system of price guarantees such
that its benefits, in terms of undoing the distortions induced by financial frictions, outweighs its costs, in
terms of inducing moral hazard. The goal of this paper is to study this issue from the perspective of the
quantitative predictions of a dynamic, stochastic general equilibrium model of asset pricing and current