NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAN CENTRAL BANK TRANSPARENCY GO TOO FAR?
Frederic S. Mishkin
Working Paper 10829
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10829
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2004
For presentation at the Reserve Bank of Australia’s conference The Future of Inflation Targeting, Sydney,
August 9-10, 2004. I thank Emilia Simeonova for her excellent research assistance. I also thank Don Kohn,
Ken Kuttner, my discussant Warwick McKibbin, and participants at the conference. Any views expressed
in this paper are those of the author only and not those of Columbia University or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Frederic S. Mishkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Can Central Bank Transparency Go Too Far?
Frederic S. Mishkin
NBER Working Paper No. 10829
October 2004
JEL No. E5
ABSTRACT
This paper asks the question: can central bank transparency go too far? Transparency is beneficial
only when it serves to simplify communication with the public and helps generate support for central
banks to conduct monetary policy optimally with an appropriate focus on long-run objectives. This
paper argues that some suggestions for increased transparency, particularly a central bank
announcement of its objective function or projections of the path of the policy interest rate, will
complicate the communication process and weaken support for a central bank focus on long-run
objectives. Transparency can indeed go too far.
However, central banks can improve transparency in discussing that they do care about reducing
output fluctuations . By describing procedures for how the path and horizon of inflation targets
would be modified in the face of large shocks, by emphasizing that monetary policy will be just as
vigilant in preventing inflation from falling too low as it is from preventing it from being too high,
and by indicating that the central bank will pursue expansionary policies when output falls very far
below potential, central banks can show that they do care about output fluctuations. These steps to
improve transparency will increase support for the central bank's policies and independence, but
avoid a focus on the short run that could interfere with the ability of the central bank to do its job
effectively.
Frederic S. Mishkin
Graduate School of Business
Uris Hall 619
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
fsm3@columbia.edu

I.
What Are the Issues?
Since the beginning of the 1990s, we have seen a revolution in the way central banks
communicate with the markets and the public. In the old days, central banks were generally very
secretive institutions. Not only did they not clarify what their objectives and strategies were, but
they even kept the markets guessing about what were the actual setting of policy instruments.
Central banks were perfectly happy to cultivate a mystique as wise but mysterious institutions,
prompting popular books about central banks to have titles like The Secrets of the Temple
(Greider, 1987).
The rationale for the secretive behavior of central banks was that, as one former Fed
official put it bluntly, “secrecy is designed to shield the Fed from political oversight.”1 Although
central bank secrecy reflects the natural desire of a bureaucracy to maximize power and prestige
by avoiding accountability, the theory of time-inconsistency of optimal policies articulated by
Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Calvo (1978) suggests that there might be a rationale for
central bank secrecy because as this same Fed official stated, “most politicians have a shorter
time horizon than is optimal for monetary policy.” In order to avoid the pressures from
politicians on central banks to pursue overly expansionary monetary policy to exploit the short-
run tradeoff between employment and inflation, central banks might want to obscure their
actions and avoid the time-inconsistency problem by focusing on the long-run and “just doing it”
1As quoted in “Monetary Zeal: How Federal Reserve Under Volcker Finally Slowed
Down Inflation,” Wall Street Journal, December 7, 1984, p. 23.

as McCallum (1995) has proposed.2 Another way to deal with the time-inconsistency problem is
to appoint conservative central bankers, as suggested by Rogoff (1985), who put more weight on
controlling inflation relative to output than does the general public and thus will resist
inflationary policies. However, for this to work, conservative central bankers need to be
independent of the political process, which is facilitated by central bank secrecy.
There are several problems with this secrecy approach to dealing with the time-
inconsistency problem. First, having secretive central banks is inherently undemocratic.
Although it makes sense to insulate central banks from short-run pressures to pursue overly
expansionary monetary policy, basic democratic principles require that the central bank be
accountable for its actions: this requires that the public understands what the central bank is
doing. In addition, democratic principles indicate that the preferences of policymaking need to
be aligned with those of the society at large. Furthermore, in the long run a central bank cannot
operate without the support of the public. A secretive central bank may heighten suspicions that
it is not acting in the public interest and so can eventually lead to curbs on its independence.
With the advent of inflation targeting in the early 1990s, central banks have been taking a
different route to solving the time-inconsistency problem. They now recognize that transparency
and improved communication with the public and the markets is key to having a successful
monetary policy. Inflation targeting has promoted a huge increase in transparency about
inflation objectives and stresses regular communication with the public.3 Inflation-targeting
2The model of Barro and Gordon (1983) has the time-inconsistency problem residing
inside the central bank. But as I have argued elsewhere in Mishkin (2000), the source of the
time-inconsistency problem is in the political process because central bankers are very aware of
the time-inconsistency problem and are indeed extremely adverse to falling into a time-
inconsistency trap.
3For example, see Bernanke et al (1999) and Mishkin (1999).
-2-