NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MICROSTRUCTURE OF THE YEN/DOLLAR
FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET:
PATTERNS OF INTRA-DAY ACTIVITY REVEALED
IN THE ELECTRONIC BROKING SYSTEM
Takatoshi Ito
Yuko Hashimoto
Working Paper 10856
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10856
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2004
The authors are grateful to EBS for their understanding the value of academic research and providing a
proprietary data set for the academic purpose with few restrictions and a modest fee. Also, we are grateful
to EBS analysts in New York for guidance on the nature of the data. A long-time encouragement from
Professor Charles Goodhart has been instrumental in moving forward this line of research. Helpful comments
from Bob Rankin (Reserve Bank of Australia) during the preparatory stage were appreciated. We are grateful
to Graham Elliott and Rich Lyons for their comments and suggestions on an earlier version of the paper.
Comments by Ryan Love on an earlier draft is also helpful. Discussions with foreign exchange dealers in
New York and London in the fall of 2003 were also helpful in understanding the structure of the market. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Takatoshi Ito and Yuko Hashimoto. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Microstructure of the Yen/Dollar Foreign Exchange Market: Patterns of Intra-day Activity
Revealed in the Electronic Broking System
Takatoshi Ito and Yuko Hashimoto
NBER Working Paper No. 10856
October 2004
JEL No. F31, F33, G15
ABSTRACT
This paper establishes several intra-day patterns of the high-frequency exchange rate behavior, using
the firm bid-ask quote, transaction of the EBS data set. First, the activity of quote and transactions
is high in the beginning hours of the three major currency markets – Tokyo, London, and New York
and low during the Tokyo and London lunch hours and late afternoon in New York. Second, a new
observation is obtained in that activity does not increase toward the end of business hours in the three
major markets, even during the closing hours of New York on Friday. Third, an average bid-ask
spread is narrow (wide), when quote and deal frequencies are high (low, respectively), except the
beginning hour of Tokyo (GMT 0), when the bid-ask spread is wide despite high levels of activity.
Takatoshi Ito
Graduate School of Economics
University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033
JAPAN
and NBER
itointokyo@aol.com
Yuko Hashi
Department of Economics
Toyo University
5-28-20 Hakusan, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo 112-8606 Japan
yhashi@toyonet.toyo.ac.jp

1. Introduction
This paper describes the intra-day patterns of market activities—frequencies of quote
revisions, transactions, and bid-ask spread—of the yen/dollar spot exchange rate using a
newly available data. The data, provided by the EBS, consist of global electronic broking
bid-ask quotes and transactions for three years starting January 01, 1999 at the frequency
of every one second.1 This data set has advantage over the frequently-used, indicative
quotes of a foreign exchange market tick-by-tick data set, such as FXFX of Reuters, in at
least in two important aspects. First, the quotes in the electronic broking are “firm” quotes,
in that the banks are committed to trade at those quoted prices.2 The firm quotes can be
hit, without recourse, for transactions by any counter-party in the system, provided that
the counterparty has a credit line with the bid/ask posting institution. In contrast, the
indicative quotes of FXFX screen are those input by dealers to give market information
without any commitment for trade. The reliability of indicative quotes as a market reality
is much less than firm quotes in the electronic broking system. Second, transactions data
that are available in the electronic broking system is simply not available in the FXFX
screen.
Major findings include the following: (1) Activity—measured by the number of quote
entries (price changes) and the number of deals—and bid-ask spreads have a distinct
intra-day pattern; (2) Activity is high in the beginning hours of the three major currency
markets—Tokyo, London, and New York; (3) There is little evidence that the activity
increases toward the end of business hours in the three major markets, even during the
closing hours of New York on Fridays, thus there is little evidence of U-shape
pattern—this is a new observation; (4) Activity is quite low during the lunch hours of
Tokyo and London, late afternoon hours of New York; (5) An average bid-ask spread is
narrow (wide), when quote and deal frequencies are high (low, respectively), except the
beginning hour of Tokyo (GMT 0), when the bid-ask spread is wide despite high levels of
activity.
The contribution of this paper to the literature is three-fold. First, the paper presents a
careful description of intra-day activities, using the newly-available data consisting of
“firm” quotes and deals, taking into account time zone and daylight saving time of major
markets, national holidays, day of the week effect, and other factors. Second, it is found
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
1 The data set was provided for fee by the EBS Co., for the use at the University of Tokyo, Research
Center for the Advanced Science and Technology. The authors are grateful to EBS for such an
arrangement.
2 See Goodhart and O’Hara (1997: p.78) for general discussions on the difference between the
indicative and firm quotes.
(cid:1) (cid:2)(cid:1)

that in the foreign exchange market, unlike the stock market, there is no U-shape pattern
of activities. Third, a negative correlation between the number of deals and the width of
bid-ask spread is generally observed during the active time of the day, but the first
business hour of Tokyo has wider bid ask spread and higher activities than the following
hour.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 explains the basics of the
structure of the foreign exchange market, and the role of electronic broking system. The
importance of electronic broking system may be far beyond what is commonly believed.
Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 is a main part of this paper, establishing intra-day
patterns of activities. Various tests are conducted to establish the patterns revealed in the
data. Section 5 concludes the paper.
2. A rise of the electronic broking system
2.1. Global Survey
The state of the global foreign exchange market is available from a market survey by
central banks conducted under coordination of the Bank for International Settlements
(BIS(2002)), once every three years. The most recent survey was conducted in April
2001, and the BIS report was issued in 2002.
According to the survey, in April 2001, the average daily turnovers of the foreign
exchange were $1.2 trillion, down from $1.5 trillion in April 1998. Of these turnovers,
spot transactions accounted for $387 billion, outright forward $131 billion, and swaps
$656 billion. Decomposing into currency pairs, $/Euro accounts for $354 billion, $/Yen
$231 billion, $/GBP $125 billion. Foreign exchange transactions may be between
reporting dealers ($689 billion), between a dealer and other financial institutions ($329
billion), or between a dealer and non-financial customers ($156 billion). Trades could
be between local parties ($499 billion), or between cross-border parties ($674 billion)
Trends, revealed from the past surveys (up to 2001), are as follows. (1) Spot trades are on
the decline; (2) Swaps are on the rise. (3) trades among reporting dealers fell
substantially.
The decline in the spot turnovers (14% decline form the 1998 survey) is attributed to “the
introduction of the euro, the growing share of electronic broking in the spot interbank
market, consolidation in the banking industry and international concentration in the
corporate sector appear to have been the main factors driving the fall in turnover.” (BIS
(cid:1) (cid:3)(cid:1)