NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ASSET PRICING WITH LIQUIDITY RISK
Viral V. Acharya
Lasse Heje Pedersen
Working Paper 10814
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10814
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004
We are grateful for conversations with Andrew Ang, Joseph Chen, Sergei Davydenko, Francisco Gomes, Joel
Hasbrouck, Andrew Jackson, Tim Johnson, Martin Lettau, Anthony Lynch, Stefan Nagel, Lubos Pastor, Tano
Santos, Dimitri Vayanos, Luis Viceira, Jeff Wurgler, and seminar participants at London Business School,
London School of Economics, New York University, the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER)
Summer Institute 2002, the Five Star Conference 2002,Western Finance Association Meetings 2003, and the
Texas Finance Festival 2004. We are especially indebted to Yakov Amihud and to an anonymous referee for
help and many valuable suggestions. All errors remain our own. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Viral V. Acharya and Lasse Heje Pedersen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Asset Pricing with Liquidity Risk
Viral V. Acharya and Lasse Heje Pedersen
NBER Working Paper No. 10814
September 2004
JEL No. G0, G1, G12
ABSTRACT
This paper solves explicitly an equilibrium asset pricing model with liquidity risk – the risk arising
from unpredictable changes in liquidity over time. In our liquidity-adjusted capital asset pricing
model, a security's required return depends on its expected liquidity as well as on the covariances
of its own return and liquidity with market return and market liquidity. In addition, the model shows
how a negative shock to a security's liquidity, if it is persistent, results in low contemporaneous
returns and high predicted future returns. The model provides a simple, unified framework for
understanding the various channels through which liquidity risk may affect asset prices. Our
empirical results shed light on the total and relative economic significance of these channels.
Viral V. Acharya
London Business School
Regents’s Park
London NW1 4SA
United Kingsom
vacarya@london.edu
Lasse Heje Pedersen
NYU Stern Finance
44 West Fouth Street
Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012

1 Introduction
Liquidity is risky and has commonality: it varies over time both for individual
stocks and for the market as a whole (Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2000),
Hasbrouck and Seppi (2000), and Huberman and Halka (1999)). Liquidity risk is
oftennotedinthepress,forinstance:
The possibility that liquidity might disappear from a market, and so
not be available when it is needed, is a big source of risk to an in-
vestor.
(cid:151)TheEconomist September23,1999
andinthe(cid:2)nancialindustry:
thereisalsobroadbeliefamongusersof(cid:2)nancialliquidity(cid:151)traders,
investors and central bankers (cid:151) that the principal challenge is not
the average level of (cid:2)nancial liquidity ... but its variability and un-
certainty
(cid:151)Persaud(2003)
This paper presents a simple theoretical model that helps explain how asset
prices are affected by liquidity risk and commonality in liquidity. The model
provides a uni(cid:2)ed theoretical framework that can explain the empirical (cid:2)ndings
thatreturnsensitivitytomarketliquidityispriced(PastorandStambaugh(2003)),
thataverageliquidityispriced(AmihudandMendelson(1986)),andthatliquidity
comoves with returns and predicts future returns (Amihud (2002), Chordia, Roll,
and Subrahmanyam (2001), Jones (2001), and Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad
(2003)).
2

Inourmodel,riskaverseagentsinanoverlapping-generationseconomytrade
securities whose liquidity varies randomly over time. We solve the model ex-
plicitly and derive a liquidity-adjusted capital asset pricing model (CAPM). Our
modelofliquidityriskcomplementstheexistingtheoreticalliteratureonliquidity
and transactions costs, which deals with deterministic trading costs (for instance,
AmihudandMendelson(1986),Constantinides(1986),Vayanos(1998),Vayanos
and Vila (1999), Ga(cid:136)rleanu and Pedersen (2000), Huang (2002)). In the liquidity-
adjusted CAPM, the expected return of a security is increasing in its expected
illiquidity and its (cid:147)net beta,(cid:148) which is proportional to the covariance of its return,
ri, net of illiquidity costs, ci, with the market portfolio’s net return, rM (cid:0) cM.
The net beta can be decomposed into the standard market beta and three betas
representing different forms of liquidity risk. These liquidity risks are associated
with(i)commonalityinliquiditywiththemarketliquidity,cov(ci;cM);(ii)return
sensitivitytomarketliquidity,cov(ri;cM);and(iii)liquiditysensitivitytomarket
returns,cov(ci;rM).
We explore the cross-sectional predictions of the model using NYSE and
AMEXstocksovertheperiod1963(cid:150)1999. WeusetheilliquiditymeasureofAmi-
hud (2002) to proxy for ci. We (cid:2)nd that the liquidity-adjusted CAPM fares better
than the standard CAPM in terms of R2 for cross-sectional returns and p-values
inspeci(cid:2)cationtests,eventhoughbothmodelsemployexactlyonedegreeoffree-
dom. The model has a good (cid:2)t for portfolios sorted on liquidity, liquidity varia-
tion, and size, but the model cannot explain the cross-sectional returns associated
withthebook-to-market effect.
AninterestingresultthatemergesfromourempiricalexercisesbasedonAmi-
hud’silliquiditymeasureisthatilliquidsecuritiesalsohavehighliquidityrisk. In
particular, a security that has high average illiquidity ci also tends to have high
3