NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CEO OVERCONFIDENCE AND CORPORATE INVESTMENT
Ulrike Malmendier
Geoffrey Tate
Working Paper 10807
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10807
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004
We are indebted to Brian Hall and David Yermack for providing us with the data. We are very grateful to
Jeremy Stein for his invaluable support and comments. We also would like to thank Philippe Aghion, George
Baker, Stefano DellaVigna, Edward Glaeser, Rick Green, Brian Hall, Oliver Hart, Caroline Hoxby, Dirk
Jenter, Larry Katz, Tom Knox, David Laibson, Andrei Shleifer and various participants in seminars at
Harvard University, MIT, University of Chicago, Northwestern University, UC Berkeley, Stanford
University, UCLA, CalTech, Yale University, Univeristy of Michigan, Duke University, NYU, Columbia
University, Wharton, LSE, CREST, CEMFI, LMU Munich, and at the EER, the Russell Sage Summer
Institute for Behavioral Economics and at the SITE for helpful comments. Mike Cho provided excellent
research assistance. Malmendier acknowledges financial support from Harvard University (Dively
Foundation) and the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD). The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Ulrike Malmendier and Geoffrey Tate. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

CEO Overconfidence and Corporate Investment
Ulrike Malmendier and Geoffrey Tate
NBER Working Paper No. 10807
September 2004
JEL No. G31, G32, D21, D23, D82
ABSTRACT
We argue that managerial overconfidence can account for corporate investment distortions.
Overconfident managers overestimate the returns to their investment projects and view external
funds as unduly costly. Thus, they overinvest when they have abundant internal funds, but curtail
investment when they require external financing. We test the overconfidence hypothesis, using panel
data on personal portfolio and corporate investment decisions of Forbes 500 CEOs. We classify
CEOs as overconfident if they persistently fail to reduce their personal exposure to company-specific
risk. We find that investment of overconfident CEOs is significantly more responsive to cash flow,
particularly in equity-dependent firms.
Ulrike Malmendier
Graduate School of Business
518 Memorial Way
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
ulrikem@stanford.edu
Geoffrey Tate
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
tate@wharton.upenn.edu

In this paper, we argue that personal characteristics of CEOs in large corporations lead to
distortions in corporate investment policies. In particular, we study the investment deci-
sions of CEOs who overestimate the future returns of their companies, measured by failure
to divest company-specific risk on their personal accounts. We find that overconfident CEOs
have a heightened sensitivity of corporate investment to cash flow, particularly among equity-
dependent firms.
Thetwotraditionalexplanationsforinvestmentdistortionsarethemisalignmentofmanagerial
and shareholders interests (Jensen and Meckling (1976), Jensen (1986)) and asymmetric infor-
mation between corporate insiders and the capital market (Myers and Majluf (1984)). Both
cause investment to be sensitive to the amount of cash in the firm. Under the agency view,
managersoverinvesttoreapprivatebenefitssuchas“perks,”largeempires, andentrenchment.
Sincetheexternalcapitalmarketlimitstheextenttowhichmanagerscanpursueself-interested
investment, aninfluxof cashflowenablesthemanager to investmoreandincreasesinvestment
distortions. Under asymmetric information, the managers themselves (who act in the interest
of shareholders) restrict external financing in order to avoid diluting the (undervalued) shares
of their company. In this case, cash flow increases investment, but reduces the distortion.
The empirical literature, starting with Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen (1988), confirms the
existence and robustness of investment-cash flow sensitivity after controlling for investment
opportunities. While most of the literature relates investment-cash flow sensitivity to imper-
fections in the capital market, this interpretation remains controversial (Kaplan and Zingales,
(1997), (2000); Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen, (2000)).
We propose an alternative explanation for investment-cash flow sensitivity and suboptimal
1

investment behavior. Rather than focusing on firm-level characteristics, we relate corporate
investmentdecisionstopersonalcharacteristicsofthetopdecision-makerinsidethefirm. Build-
ing on Roll (1986) and Heaton (2002), we argue that one important link between investment
levels and cash flow is the tension between the beliefs of the CEO and the market about the
value of the firm. Overconfident CEOs systematically overestimate the return to their invest-
ment projects. If they have sufficient internal funds for investment and are not disciplined by
the capital market or corporate governance mechanisms, they overinvest relative to the first
best. If they do not have sufficient internal funds, however, they are reluctant to issue new
equity because they perceive the stock of their company to be undervalued by the market. As
a result, they curb their investment. Additional cash flow provides an opportunity to invest
closer to their desired level.
Our overconfidence story builds upon a prominent stylized fact from the social psychology
literature, the “better than average” effect. When individuals assess their relative skill, they
tend to overstate their acumen relative to the average (Larwood and Whittaker, (1977); Sven-
son, (1981); Alicke, (1985)). This effect extends to economic decision-making in experiments
(Camerer and Lovallo (1999)). It also affects the attribution of causality. Because individuals
expect their behavior to produce success, they are more likely to attribute good outcomes to
theiractions,butbadoutcomesto(bad)luck(MillerandRoss(1975)). Executivesappeartobe
particularly prone to display overconfidence, both in terms of the “better-than-average effect”
and in terms of “narrow confidence intervals” (Larwood and Whittaker, (1977); Kidd, (1970);
Moore, (1977)).1 Thisfindingisattributedtothreemainfactors, whichtriggeroverconfidence:
the illusion of control, a high degree of commitment to good outcomes, and abstract reference
2