NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO STOCK PRICES REALLY REFLECT FUNDAMENTAL VALUES?
THE CASE OF REITs
William M. Gentry
Charles M. Jones
Christopher J. Mayer
Working Paper 10850
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10850
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2004
We thank David Geltner, Joe Gyourko, Peter Linneman, Steve Ott, Todd Sinai and seminar participants at
the AREUEA Annual Meeting, the Columbia Business School, the Homer Hoyt Institute, the University of
California at Berkeley, the University of Southern California, the University of Wisconsin, and the Wharton
School for helpful comments. Dou-Yan Yang, Dimo Pramatarov, and Tobias Muhlhofer provided excellent
research assistance. We are especially grateful to Jon Fosheim, Mike Kirby, and Green Street Advisors for
providing crucial data used in this study. This paper was previously titled “Deviations between stock price
and fundamental value for real estate investment trusts” and “REIT reversion: stock price adjustment to
fundamental value.” The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by William M. Gentry, Charles M. Jones, and Christopher J. Mayer. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Stock Prices Really Reflect Fundamental Values? The Case of REITs
William M. Gentry, Charles M. Jones, and Christopher J. Mayer
NBER Working Paper No. 10850
October 2004
JEL No. G0, G12
ABSTRACT
Real estate investment trust (REIT) stock prices deviate substantially from net asset values (NAV).
Using REIT data since 1990, we find large positive excess returns to a strategy of buying stocks that
trade at a discount to NAV, and shorting stocks trading at a premium to NAV. Estimated alphas from
this strategy are between 0.9% and 1.8% per month, with little risk. Trading costs and short-sale
constraints are not prohibitive and the results strengthen when we control for differences in liquidity
or the extent of institutional ownership. We find that some variation in P/NAV makes sense, as
premiums are positively related to recent and future NAV growth. However, there appears to be too
much volatility in P/NAV, giving rise to potential profits from short-term mean reversion. The
closed-end fund literature has some similar findings on stock price deviations from fundamental
value, but compared to closed-end funds REITs are much larger and have much higher insider and
institutional ownership. These differences suggest that REIT premiums and discounts reflect more
than just small investor sentiment, which is a common explanation of why closed-end fund prices
deviate from their fundamental value.
William M. Gentry
Williams College
william.m.gentry@williams.edu
Charles M. Jones
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
cj88@columbia.edu
Christopher J. Mayer
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall #808
New York, NY 10025
and NBER
cm310@columbia.edu

1. Introduction
Do stock prices reflect fundamental values? This question has badgered the finance
profession for decades. For most operating companies, or for the market as a whole, it is
difficult to assess fundamental value. Fundamental value requires an assessment of future cash
flows, along with an appropriate risk-adjusted discount rate.
In this paper, we look at a class of publicly traded operating companies where it is much
easier to measure fundamental values: real estate investment trusts (REITs). REITs own and
operate relatively illiquid real estate assets. However, these underlying assets can be valued
fairly precisely by real estate professionals based on rental data, square footage, and transactions
in comparable properties and locations, among other inputs. 1 We have obtained estimates of
NAV from Green Street Advisors, a buy-side investment advisor that regularly appraises the real
estate holdings of major REITs. This enables us to look at REIT premiums and discounts to
NAV, and whether these premiums and discounts can be used to generate profitable trading
strategies.
We find that there are large cross-sectional differences in expected returns. It is
profitable to buy REITs trading at a relative discount, and short REITs trading at a relative
premium to NAV. The results are robust. Trading costs are low relative to excess returns.
Short-sale constraints are not important, because most of the excess returns are on the long side.
In fact, this strategy has better risk-return characteristics than momentum, widely considered the
most persistent and unexplained excess return anomaly.
If REIT prices eventually revert toward NAV, what causes them to deviate in the first
place? It turns out that premiums and discounts are associated with future changes in NAV,
which suggests that stock prices have some predictive power for future fundamental value. This
predictive power would justify modest departures from P/NAV = 1. However, our mean-
reversion evidence on the predictability of returns implies that the stock market exhibits excess
volatility for some reason – the premium or discount is too large.
1 This methodology is not limited to REITs. In fact, analysts often use a similar methodology to assess the value of
natural resource companies, multiplying the amount of proven reserves by the current and forecast price of the
resource and subtracting off an estimate of extraction costs. While such estimates of fundamental value may be less
precise than for real estate, nonetheless they provide an attractive benchmark for valuation that is used in many
contexts.
2

In some ways, REITs are similar to closed-end funds. Both are investment trusts, and in
both asset types fundamental value can be assessed by valuing the underlying assets. Thus, our
results are closely related to the literature on closed-end fund prices. Closed-end funds pose a
similar puzzle: most closed-end funds hold publicly traded securities, with net asset values
(NAVs) that are published weekly, yet their share prices wander considerable distances from
NAV. It is impossible to do justice here to the complete literature on closed-end funds; Dimson
and Minio-Kozerski (1999) provide a useful survey. There are reasons to expect prices to differ
from NAV, including expected future trading and management costs (Malkiel, 1977), expected
manager performance (Chay and Trzcinka, 1999), tax liabilities and tax timing (Brickley,
Manaster, and Schallheim, 1991), and market segmentation (Bonser-Neal, Brauer, Neal, and
Wheatley, 1990). However, most of these effects are invariant through time. It is much more
difficult to account for the time-variation in discounts and premiums without a behavioral
explanation.
Lee, Shleifer, and Thaler (1991) claim that discounts on closed-end funds reflect
(individual) investor sentiment. They point out that closed-end funds are mainly held by
individuals and are largely shunned by institutional investors. In contrast, REIT institutional
ownership is quite high, with institutions owning about half of REIT shares, and we find that the
predictability of REIT returns is weakly increasing in the level of institutional ownership. Both
these facts suggest that discounts and premiums on REITs are not solely due to investor
sentiment, unless institutions themselves are subject to the same kinds of sentiment.
This paper is also related to empirical studies on how specific fundamental information is
incorporated into prices. For example, Womack (1996) finds that stock prices react strongly and
quickly to changes in analyst recommendations, though prices continue to drift in the same
direction over the next several months. In contrast, for REITs, we find that information
incorporation is surprisingly slow. When NAVs are released to clients, they can immediately
trade on the information. A week later, less than half of the information has found its way into
price.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a quick overview of real estate
investment trusts. Section 3 details the Green Street appraisal data that we use and discusses
reasons why REIT share prices might depart from the assessment of net asset value. Section 4
provides the main results, based on sorting REITs into portfolios based on their ratio of price to
3