NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ACCOUNTING FOR CROSS-COUNTRY INCOME DIFFERENCES
Francesco Caselli
Working Paper 10828
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10828
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2004
This is the draft of a chapter on Development Accounting for the forthcoming Handbook of Economic
Growth, edited by P. Aghion and S. Durlauf. A previous draft circulated with the title: “The Missing Input:
Accounting ...” A data set will be posted at www.economics.harvard.edu. I thank Silvana Tenreyro for
comments, and Mariana Colacelli, Kalina Manova, and Andrea Szab`o for research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2004 by Francesco Caselli. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences
Francesco Caselli
NBER Working Paper No. 10828
October 2004
JEL No. E2, O1, O2, O3, O4, O5
ABSTRACT
Why are some countries so much richer than others? Development Accounting is a first-pass attempt
at organizing the answer around two proximate determinants: factors of production and efficiency.
It answers the question ``how much of the cross-country income variance can be attributed to
differences in (physical and human) capital, and how much to differences in the efficiency with
which capital is used?'' Hence, it does for the cross-section what growth accounting does in the time
series. The current consensus is that efficiency is at least as important as capital in explaining income
differences. I survey the data and the basic methods that lead to this consensus, and explore several
extensions. I argue that some of these extensions may lead to a reconsideration of the evidence.
Francesco Caselli
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Building
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
caselli@harvard.edu

Contents
1 Introduction
2 The Measure of Our Ignorance
2.1 Basic Data
2.2 Basic Measures of Success
2.3 Alternative Measures Used in the Literature
2.4 Sub-samples
3 Robustness: Basic Stuff
3.1 Depreciation Rate
3.2 Initial Capital Stock
3.3 Education-Wage Profile
3.4 Years of Education 1
3.5 Years of Education 2
3.6 Hours Worked
3.7 Capital Share
4 Quality of Human Capital
4.1 Quality of Schooling: Inputs
4.1.1 Teachers’ Human Capital
4.1.2 Pupil-Teacher Ratios
4.1.3 Spending
4.2 Quality of Schooling: Test Scores
4.3 Experience
4.4 Health
4.5 Social vs. Private Returns to Schooling and Health
5 Quality of Physical Capital
5.1 Composition
5.2 Vintage Effects
5.3 Further Problems with K
6 Sectorial Differences in TFP
6.1 Industry Studies
6.2 The Role of Agriculture
6.3 Sectorial Composition and Development Accounting
7 Non-Neutral Differences
7.1 Basic Concepts and Qualitative Results
7.2 Development Accounting with Non-Neutral Differences
8 Conclusions
1

1 Introduction
Thischapterisaboutdevelopmentaccounting. Itiswidelyknown, andwillbefoundagainto
betruehere, thatcross-countrydifferencesin incomeper workerareenormous. Development
accounting uses cross-country data on output and inputs, at one point in time, to assess the
relative contribution of differences in factor quantities, and differences in the efficiency with
which those factors are used, to these vast differences in per-worker incomes. Hence, it is the
same idea of growth accounting (illustrated by Jorgenson’s chapter in this Handbook), with
cross-country differences replacing cross-time differences.
Conceptually, development accounting can be thought of as quantifying the relation-
ship
Income =F(Factors, Efficiency). (1)
Like growth accounting, this is a potentially useful tool. If one found that Factors are able
to account for most of the differences, then development economics could focus on explaining
low rates of factor accumulation. There would of course be ample scope for controversy over
the policies better suited to engineering higher investment rates in various types of capital,
buttherewouldbeconsensusoverthefactthattheintermediategoalofdevelopmentpolicyis
toengineerthosehigherrates. Instead, shouldonefindthatEfficiencydifferencesplayalarge
role, then one would have to confront the additional task of explaining why some countries
extract more output than others from their factors of production. Experience suggests that
this additional question is the hardest to crack.
The consensus view in development accounting is that Efficiency plays a very large
role. A sentence commonly used to summarize the existing literature sounds something like
“differences in efficiency account for at least 50% of differences in per capita income.” The
next section of this chapter (Section 2) will survey the existing literature, replicate its basic
findings, and update them with more recent data. Looking at a cross-section of 93 countries
in the year 1996, I confirm that standard procedures assign to Efficiency the role of the chief
culprit.
Operationally, the key steps in development accounting are: (1) choosing a functional
form for F, and (2) accurately measuring Income and Factors. Efficiency is backed out as a
residual. AsfortheSolowresidual, thisresidualisa“measureofourignorance”onthecauses
of poverty and under-development. And, as in growth accounting, one potentially promising
research strategy is to try to “chip away” at this residual by improving on steps (1) and
(2), i.e. by looking at alternative functional forms, and by attempting a more sophisticated
measurement of Income and Factors. For example, one could try to include information on
quality differences in the capital stock — instead of relying exclusively on quantity.
2