NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ACQUIRING CONTROL IN EMERGING MARKETS:
EVIDENCE FROM THE STOCK MARKET
Anusha Chari
Paige P. Ouimet
Linda L. Tesar
Working Paper 10872
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10872
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2004
The authors thank Andrew Bernard, Michael Dooley, Atif Mian, Arturo Bris, Peter Henry, Luigi Zingales
and seminar participants at Berkeley, Dartmouth, Princeton, IFM-NBER Summer Institute, EFA Meeting-
Maastricht, the 9th Mitsui Life Emerging Markets Symposium, and the Department of Economics and the
Finance Group at the University of Michigan for helpful comments and suggestions. Chari thanks the Mitsui
Life Financial Research Center for financial support. Chari and Tesar acknowledge a grant from the Center
for International Business Education at the University of Michigan. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Anusha Chari, Paige P. Ouimet, and Linda L. Tesar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Acquiring Control in Emerging Markets: Evidence from the Stock Market
Anusha Chari, Paige P. Ouimet, and Linda L. Tesar
NBER Working Paper No. 10872
October 2004
JEL No. F3, G3
ABSTRACT
When firms from developed markets acquire firms in emerging markets, market-capitalization-
weighted monthly joint returns show a statistically significant increase of 1.8%. Panel data
estimations suggest that the value gains from cross-border M&A transactions stem from the transfer
of majority control from emerging-market targets to developed market acquirers – joint returns range
from 5.8% to 7.8% when majority control is acquired. Announcement returns for acquirer and target
firms estimate the distribution of gains and show a statistically significant increase of 2.4% and
6.9%, respectively. The evidence suggests that the stock market anticipates significant value creation
from cross-border transactions that involve emerging-market targets leading to substantial gains for
shareholders of both acquirer and target firms.
Anusha Chari
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
achari@umich.edu
Paige P. Ouimet
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
pshelby@umich.edu
Linda L. Tesar
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
ltesar@umich.edu

1. Introduction
Cross-border mergers and acquisitions (M&A) in emerging markets surged during
the 1990s. From 1991 through 2000 cross-border M&As accounted for 61% of foreign
direct investment (FDI) in Latin America and 48% in East Asia, up from 10% and 4% in
the 1980s (Figure 1).
Before the surge in cross-border M&A, FDI in emerging markets consisted
primarily of green-field investments. Cross-border M&A and green-field investments are
conceptually quite different. By definition, green-field investments create value by
bringing new investment in physical assets to the recipient country. In contrast, cross-
border M&As involve the foreign purchase of existing assets, which may not necessarily
increase productive capacity (Froot, 1991).
Alternatively, cross-border M&A transactions may create value by allowing firms
to vertically integrate lines of production across borders and through positive externalities
such as transfers of technology and skills between firms (Andrade, Mitchell, and
Stafford, 2001). M&A transactions will also create value if they provide acquirers with
access to target markets or lower the cost of capital for target firms (Caves 1996).
Do cross-border mergers and acquisitions create surplus value in emerging
markets? This paper uses the stock market to provide an answer. When a cross-border
M&A transaction takes place, there are two parties to consider—a developed-market
acquirer and an emerging-market target. On the date that a cross-border M&A
transaction is announced, changes in acquirer- and target-firm stock prices reveal
information about (i) the potential wealth creation from the transaction, and (ii) the
distribution of the gains and losses from the transaction to the acquirer and target firms.
2

We use the Securities Data Corporation (SDC) Thompson’s International Mergers
and Acquisitions database to identify merger and acquisition events in emerging markets
over the period 1988-2003. Stock price information is taken from Datastream and
Bloomberg. Changes in market-weighted joint returns for acquirers and targets serve as a
summary statistic for value creation through cross-border M&A activity. Changes in
acquirer- and target-firm stock prices provide an estimate of the value gains or losses to
their respective shareholders.
At first blush, our results suggest that cross-border M&A transactions lead to a
creation of surplus value. Panel data estimations suggest that market-capitalization-
weighted joint returns for targets and acquirers show a statistically significant increase of
1.8% when a cross-border M&A transaction is announced. Joint-return increases are
robust to the inclusion of controls for country, time, industrial diversification, method of
payment effects, as well as acquirer- and target-firm characteristics such as size and
liquidity.
Moving beyond the basic issue of measuring the creation of surplus value, lies the
more fundamental question of why firms would be worth more under foreign rather than
domestic control (Kindleberger, 1969). A key feature of the cross-border M&A
transactions in our data is the acquisition of majority control by developed market
acquirers. For instance, 628 out 842 acquirers in the sample did not own any shares in
the target before the cross-border M&A announcement, but moved to majority or full
ownership following the announcement. For 153 transactions where the acquirer had a
minority interest in the target, 31 resulted in a transfer of majority control or full
ownership following the transaction. The pattern of shifting majority control is
consistent with the evidence that when foreign ownership restrictions are removed in an
3