NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DIVIDEND TAXES AND CORPORATE BEHAVIOR:
EVIDENCE FROM THE 2003 DIVIDEND TAX CUT
Raj Chetty
Emmanuel Saez
Working Paper 10841
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10841
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2004
This paper is an updated and expanded version of “Do Dividend Payments Respond to Taxes? Preliminary
Evidence from the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut”, NBER Working Paper No. 10572. We thank Alan Auerbach,
Malcolm Baker, Abhijit Banerjee, David Card, Dhammika Dharmapala, Martin Feldstein, John Graham, Day
Manoli, Igor Osobov, Francisco Perez-Gonzalez, James Poterba, John Quigley, Nikolai Roussanov, Jeremy
Stein, Arnold Zellner, and numerous seminar participants for very helpful comments and discussions. Bhuvan
Jain, Kory Kroft, Brandon Lehr, and especially Joe Rosenberg provided outstanding research assistance.
Financial support from NSF Grant SES-0134946 and the Sloan Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Raj Chetty and Emmanuel Saez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Dividend Taxes and Corporate Behavior: Evidence from the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut
Raj Chetty and Emmanuel Saez
NBER Working Paper No. 10841
October 2004
JEL No. H3, G3
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the effects of dividend taxation on corporate behavior using the large tax cut on
individual dividend income enacted in 2003. Using data spanning 1980 to 2004-Q2, we document
a sharp and widespread surge in dividend payments following the tax cut, along several dimensions.
First, an unprecedented number of firms initiated regular dividend payments after the reform. As a
result, the number of publicly traded firms paying dividends, after having declined continuously for
more than two decades, began to increase precisely in 2003. Second, many firms that were already
paying dividends prior to the reform raised regular dividend payments significantly. Third, special
dividends also rose. All of these effects are robust to introducing controls for profits and other firm
characteristics. Additional evidence for specific groups of firms suggests that the tax cut induced
increases in total payout rather than substitution between dividends and repurchases. The tax
response was confined to firms with lower levels of forecasted growth, consistent with an
improvement in capital allocation efficiency. The response to the tax cut was strongest in firms with
strong principals whose tax incentives changed (presence of large taxable institutional owners or
independent directors with large share holdings), and in firms where agents had stronger incentives
to respond (large executive ownership and low levels of executive stock-options outstanding). These
findings show that principal-agent issues play a central role in corporate responses to taxation.
Raj Chetty Emmanuel Saez
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley University of California, Berkeley
521 Evans Hall #3880 549 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720 Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER and NBER
chetty@econ.berkeley.edu saez@econ.berkeley.edu

1 Introduction
Thetaxationofdividendincomehasgeneratedmuchinterestandcontroversybothinthepub-
lic economics literature and among tax policy makers, largely because it creates a particularly
stark version of the equity-efficiency tradeoff. Dividend income, and especially taxable divi-
dendincome,accruesverydisproportionatelytowealthyindividuals.1 Hence,taxingdividends
seems desirable for redistributive reasons. However, taxing dividend income may also generate
large efficiency costs. Dividend taxes reduce the net return to investors, potentially reducing
savings and the capital stock in the economy. In addition, taxing dividend income at the indi-
vidual level could induce firms to reduce their tax burdens by retaining earnings rather than
distributing dividends. If agency problems lead to inefficient investment of retained earnings
(as suggested by e.g., Jensen 1986, Scharfstein and Stein 2000, LaPorta et al., 2000), dividend
taxation could reduce the efficiency of capital allocation in addition to distorting the amount
of investment.2 In view of this tradeoff, it is important to know firms’ behavioral responses
to taxation to evaluate optimal dividend taxation. Despite extensive research, the effects of
taxation on dividend policies and corporate behavior more generally remain disputed, largely
because of the lack of a sharp tax experiment, and therefore of a fully convincing research
design (see Auerbach (2003) and Allen and Michaely (2003) for recent surveys).
TheJobsandGrowthTaxReliefReconciliationActof2003intheUnitedStates(hereafter,
the “2003 tax reform”) provides a unique opportunity to understand the effects of dividend
taxation on corporate behavior. One of the key provisions of the reform was to introduce
favorable treatment for individual dividend income whereby dividends are taxed at a rate of
15% instead of facing the regular progressive individual income tax schedule with a top rate of
35%.3 This tax change effectively gave to dividend income the same favorable tax treatment
1Individual Income Tax Statistics for year 2000 (U.S. Treasury Department, 2003) show that about two
thirds of taxable dividends are earned by the top 10% income taxpayers. More than half ofAmerican families
now hold stock through pension or college funds but returns on those assets are exempted from income taxes
and hence not affected by the 2003 tax reform.
2Indeed, Corporate America has traditionally lobbied for corporate tax reductions but not dividend tax
reductions,suggestingthatmanagersoflargecorporationsmightprefertoretainearningsratherthandistribute
dividends.
3Moreprecisely,taxpayersinthebottomtwoincometaxbrackets(facingaregularmarginaltaxrateof10%
or15%) facea new dividend tax rate ofonly 5%, whiletaxpayersin thetop fourbrackets (facing marginal tax
rates of 25, 28, 33, or 35%) face a new dividend tax rate is 15%. Taxpayers on the Alternative Minimum Tax
schedule (flat rate of 28%) benefit as well from the reduced 15% tax rate on their dividend income.
1

as realized capital gains income.4 The tax reform was officially signed into law at the end
of May 2003, but was first proposed by the Bush administration on January 7, 2003.5 The
tax cut on dividend income was made retroactive to the beginning of 2003. Therefore, during
the first two quarters of 2003, corporations knew that dividends would face lower taxes with
substantial probability. Starting in June 2003, this became certain. The tax cut is scheduled
to expire by 2009, but the actual duration is contingent on political developments.6
This paper uses the 2003 dividend tax cut to estimate the effect of dividend taxes on div-
idend payments by publicly traded corporations. The leading example for both the incentive
and distributional consequences of the tax cut is Microsoft, the company with the largest
accumulated cash holdings in the U.S. Microsoft initiated regular dividend payments for the
first time in 2003. In July 2004, Microsoft announced an additional special one-time dividend
payment of $32 billion to be paid in December 2004, an amount that far exceeds any dividend
payment previously made by a single U.S. corporation. The tax-savings associated with these
payments will clearly benefit wealthy taxpayers disproportionately, starting with Bill Gates
the richest person in the United States, but they might also affect the investment decisions
of Microsoft and other companies. The goal of this paper is to examine whether Microsoft’s
behavior is an anomaly or whether it is representative of a broader shift in payout policies
associated with the tax cut. We investigate this issue using data on dividend payments by
publicly traded corporations, currently available up to the second quarter of 2004 from the
Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP).
We find that the level of total regular dividends has surged by approximately 20% since
the beginning of 2003, the point at which the lower tax rate was first proposed and ultimately
retroactively applied. We need to surmount two important econometric challenges in order
to identify a causal link between this change and the tax reform. First, dividend payments
are extremely concentrated. The top 20 payers account for more than half of total dividends
4IndividualdividendincomeearnedthroughtaxfavoredinstrumentssuchasIRAs,401(k)sandotherpension
andcollegefundswasnotaffectedbythetaxchange. Dividendincomeearnedbygovernmentagencies,nonprofit
organizations, and corporations was not affected either.
5Auerbach and Hassett (2004) discuss the timing of the tax reform legislative process in detail. They find
that the reduction of dividend taxation was not discussed seriously before the end of December 2002. It was
notmentioned intheBush 2000campaignplatform either, suggestingthattherewasnoanticipation thatsuch
a tax change would take place before the very end of 2002.
6If President Bush wins again in 2004, the tax cut might well be made permanent. If Senator Kerry wins,
as Congress is predicted to almost certainly remain Republican, gridlock and no further change is the most
plausible outcome.
2