NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PSEUDO MARKET TIMING AND PREDICTIVE REGRESSIONS
Malcolm P. Baker
Ryan Taliaferro
Jeffrey Wurgler
Working Paper 10823
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10823
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2004
We thank Yakov Amihud, John Campbell, Owen Lamont, Alex Ljungqvist, Tim Loughran, Jay Ritter, Andrei
Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, Jim Stock, Sam Thompson, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho for helpful comments, and Owen
Lamont, Inmoo Lee, and Nejat Seyhun for data. Baker gratefully acknowledges financial support from the
Division of Research of the Harvard Business School. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Malcolm P. Baker, Ryan Taliaferro, and Jeffrey Wurgler. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Pseudo Market Timing and Predictive Regressions
Malcolm P. Baker, Ryan Taliaferro, and Jeffrey Wurgler
NBER Working Paper No. 10823
October 2004
JEL No. G12, G14, G32, C15
ABSTRACT
A number of studies claim that aggregate managerial decision variables, such as aggregate equity
issuance, have power to predict stock or bond market returns. Recent research argues that these
results may be driven by an aggregate time-series version of Schultz's (2003) pseudo market timing
bias. We use standard simulation techniques to estimate the size of the aggregate pseudo market
timing bias for a variety of predictive regressions based on managerial decision variables. We find
that the bias can explain only about one percent of the predictive power of the equity share in new
issues, and that it is also much too small to overturn prior inferences about the predictive power of
corporate investment plans, insider trading, dividend initiations, or the maturity of corporate debt
issues.
Malcolm Baker
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 361
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mbaker@hbs.edu
Ryan Taliaferro
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall
Boston, MA
rtaliaferro@hbs.edu
Jeffrey Wurgler
Stern School of Business, Suite 9-190
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
jwurgler@stern.nyu.edu

I. Introduction
Market timing is the tendency of firms to issue equity before low equity market returns.
In contrast, pseudo market timing, as recently defined by Schultz (2003), is the tendency of firms
to issue equity following high returns. In small samples, pseudo market timing can give the
appearance of genuine timing. Consider an extreme example of pure pseudo market timing with
only two returns. If the first return is high, equity issues rise; if the first return is low, equity
issues fall. The first return can be mechanically explained ex post: Relatively low equity issues
precede a high first return and relatively high equity issues precede a low first return. Even
though the returns are random, equity issues “predict” returns in sample more often than not.
In a provocative article, Butler, Grullon, and Weston (2004a) argue that an aggregate
version of the pseudo market timing bias explains why the variable in Baker and Wurgler (2000),
the equity share in new equity and debt issues, predicts stock market returns in sample. While
Butler et al. focus their critique on a particular link between financing patterns and stock returns,
their general argument—that the pseudo market timing bias extends to time-series predictive
regressions—is of considerably broader interest, because virtually every aggregate managerial
decision variable that has been used in predictive regressions, not just equity issuance, is
correlated with returns in the direction that induces a bias.
Consider the following examples. Seyhun (1992, 1998) and Lakonishok and Lee (2001)
find that high aggregate insider buying appears to predict high stock market returns. However,
aggregate insider buying increases as stock prices fall, raising the possibility that their result is
driven by the bias. Baker, Greenwood, and Wurgler (2003) find that a high ratio of long-term
debt issuance to total debt issuance appears to predict lower excess bond returns. However, as
Butler et al. (2004b) observe, long-term debt issues are relatively more common as interest rates
1

fall (and excess bond returns rise), again raising the potential for bias. Lamont (2000) finds that
corporate investment plans forecast lower stock market returns, but planned investment increases
with stock prices. And, finally, Baker and Wurgler (2004) find that the aggregate rate of dividend
initiation is inversely related to the future returns on dividend payers over nonpayers. But again,
the initiation rate increases with the relative returns on payers. Thus, in each of these papers, in
addition to those involving equity issuance, the bias is a potentially serious concern. The size of
the bias needs to be empirically pinned down before any of the above results can be accepted, or
rejected, with confidence.1
In this paper, we empirically estimate the aggregate pseudo market timing bias that
affects predictive regressions based on managerial decision variables. We start by observing that
none of this is a fundamentally new question in asset pricing or time series econometrics. While
Butler et al. (2004a) do not make the connection, aggregate pseudo market timing is simply a
new name for the small-sample bias studied by Stambaugh (1986, 1999), Mankiw and Shapiro
(1986), Nelson and Kim (1993), Elliott and Stock (1994), Kothari and Shanken (1997),
Campbell and Yogo (2003), Amihud and Hurvich (2004), Lewellen (2004), Polk, Thompson,
and Vuolteenaho (2004) and others. These studies focus on valuation ratios, like dividend yield
or market-to-book, which exhibit an extreme and mechanical form of pseudo market timing—for
example, when the market crashes, the dividend yield automatically rises. Our predictors are
different, but the bias is the same, and it can be estimated using the same standard methods.
1 It is important to note that the aggregate pseudo market timing bias discussed in this paper, and in Butler et al.
(2004a,b), is a purely time-series phenomenon. It is not the bias emphasized by Schultz (2003), who discusses the
potential for bias in “event time” studies of abnormal IPO returns. There, the problem arises when the number of
firms going public increases following high abnormal returns on previous IPOs. For studies of that conceptually
distinct type of bias, see Schultz (2003, 2004), Ang, Gu, and Hochberg (2004), Dahlquist and de Jong (2004), and
Viswanathan and Wei (2004). For a general discussion, see Ritter (2003).
2