NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ARE INVESTORS NAIVE ABOUT INCENTIVES?
Ulrike Malmendier
Devin Shanthikumar
Working Paper 10812
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10812
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004
We would like to thank Nick Barberis, Stefano DellaVigna, Ming Huang, Charles Lee, Roni Michaely,
Marco Ottaviani, Oguz Ozbas, Josh Pollet, Richard Thaler, Kent Womack and seminar participants at
Harvard, London Business School, Northwestern University, Stanford, Università Bocconi (IGIER),
University of Florida, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, University of Madison-Wisconsin, USC,
UT Austin, University of Utah, Washington University in St. Louis as well as the SITE (Economics &
Psychology) 2003, NBER Behavioral Finance Fall 2003, and the WFA 2004 conferences for helpful
comments. Burak Guner and Michael Jung provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Ulrike Malmendier and Devin Shanthikumar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Are Investors Naive About Incentives?
Ulrike Malmendier and Devin Shanthikumar
NBER Working Paper No. 10812
September 2004
JEL No. D14, D21, G24, G18, M41, D82, D83
ABSTRACT
Traditional economic analysis of markets with asymmetric information assumes that uninformed
agents account for the incentives of informed agents to distort information. We analyze whether
investors in the stock market internalize such incentives. Stock recommendations of security analysts
are likely to be biased upwards, particularly if the issuing analyst is affiliated with the underwriter
of the recommended stock. Using the NYSE Trades and Quotations database, we find that large
(institutional) traders account for the upward bias and exert no abnormal trade reaction to buy
recommendations, and significant selling pressure in response to hold recommendations. Small
(individual) traders do not account for the upward shift and exert significantly positive pressure for
buys and zero pressure for hold recommendations. Moreover, large traders discount positive
recommendations from affiliated analysts more than from unaffiliated analysts, while small traders
do not distinguish between them. The naive trading behavior of small investors induces negative
abnormal portfolio returns.
Ulrike Malmendier
Graduate School of Business
518 Memorial Way
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
ulrikem@stanford.edu
Devin Shanthikumar
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Filed
Boston, MA 02163
dshanthikumar@hbs.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
Traditional economic analysis of markets with asymmetric information builds on the assumption
that uninformed agents account for the incentives of informed agents to distort information. In
the lemons model [Akerlof, 1970], the uninformed agent understands that the informed agent
does not have an incentive to reveal negative features of the product and that he would rather
advertise the lemon as a “hidden gem.” Consequently, the uninformed agent does not rely on
such unverifiable information, and the informed agent abstains from providing it in the first
place. To put it in the context of cheap talk games, if all Sender-types have the same preferences
over the Receiver’s action, e.g. that the Receiver buys the good the Sender is selling, then cheap
talk cannot be informative [Crawford and Sobel, 1982].
This result changes if the uninformed agent is naive about the information provided. In
this case, the uninformed agent would accept cheap talk at face value, and the informed agent
would want to provide biased information to extract maximum profits from subsequent economic
interactions.
What happens in real markets? Are agents sophisticated enough to understand the
informed agents’ incentives to distort information? Or do they naively trust the informed agents?
In this paper, we analyze naiveté about information provision in the market for stocks and stock
recommendations. Analysts of brokerage firms are more informed about the value of a stock and
provide investors with information in the form of buy, hold, and sell recommendations. They
have, however, incentives to distort this information upward. Positive recommendations are more
likely to generate trading commissions than negative ones, given short-selling constraints.
Positive recommendations also allow analysts to gain continued access to information from the
management of the recommended firm.1 The incentives to bias recommendations upward are
even stronger for “affiliated” analysts, whose brokerage belongs to an investment bank
underwriting security issuances of the firms covered by the analyst. Positive analyst coverage
after an equity issuance is often viewed as part of an implicit agreement between underwriter and
1

issuer.2 Moreover, analysts’ compensation depends, either directly or indirectly, on their
“support” in generating profits for the corporate finance department.3
If investors are rational, they account for such informational distortions of analyst
recommendations. First, they should discount positive and neutral recommendations, i. e. exert
less buy pressure in response to buy and strong buy recommendations than they would if these
recommendations were undistorted. Second, they should discount even more recommendations
from analysts who are affiliated with the underwriter of an issuer. If, however, investors are
naive and do not discount enough for analysts’ incentives, they might overreact to positive
recommendations and not account for affiliation.
Naive behavior adversely affects investors’ wealth since investors misallocate their
funds. It also impacts the industrial organization of brokerage firms. If investors are naive,
independent brokerage is unlikely to be a profitable business since those firms with analysts and
corporate finance divisions united under one roof get (at least) as much attention from investors
while having informational advantages.
We examine empirically whether investors account for analysts’ incentives in their
trading decision. First, using the I/B/E/S data set, we show that the vast majority of
recommendations are positive or neutral; only 4.5% are negative. The distribution is even more
skewed for recommendations of affiliated analysts. We also show that a trading strategy that
takes recommendations literally induces losses. Moreover, these losses are significantly larger
for recommendations of affiliated analysts compared to those of unaffiliated analysts, consistent
with previous literature on analyst affiliation [Lin and McNichols, 1998; Michaely and Womack,
1999]. Over any investment horizon between three months and five years, the portfolio based on
unaffiliated recommendations outperforms the portfolio based on affiliated recommendations.
Second, we analyze the trade reaction of investors to the issuance of analyst
recommendations. We distinguish between small and large investors to allow for the possibility
that individual agents are subject to biases, while firms and their associated professionals
rationally account for informational distortions. This distinction follows the previous behavioral
2