NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHEN IN PERIL, RETRENCH:
TESTING THE PORTFOLIO CHANNEL OF CONTAGION
Fernando A. Broner
R. Gaston Gelos
Carmen M. Reinhart
Working Paper 10941
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10941
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2004
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the IMF
or IMF policy. The authors are grateful to Guillermo Vuletin for able research assistance and to Pierre-
Olivier Gourinchas, Alejandro Justiniano, Laura Kodres, Miguel Messmacher, Paolo Pesenti, Raghuram
Rajan, Juan Solé, Jeremy Stein, and seminar participants at the Bank of Spain, the AEA Annual Meetings
(San Diego), the Fourth Annual IMF Research Conference, and the FRBSF and University of Maryland
Emerging Markets Conference for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Fernando A. Broner, R. Gaston Gelos, and Carmen M. Reinhart. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

When in Peril, Retrench: Testing the Portfolio Channel of Contagion
Fernando A. Broner, R. Gaston Gelos, and Carmen M. Reinhart
NBER Working Paper No. 10941
December 2004
JEL No. F02, F30, F32, F36
ABSTRACT
One plausible mechanism through which financial market shocks may propagate across countries
is through the effect of past gains and losses on investors' risk aversion. The paper first presents a
simple model examining how heterogeneous changes in investors' risk aversion affects portfolio
decisions and stock prices. Second, the paper shows empirically that, when funds' returns are below
average, they adjust their holdings toward the average (or benchmark) portfolio. In other words, they
tend to sell the assets of countries in which they were "overweight", increasing their exposure to
countries in which they were "underweight." Based on this insight, the paper discusses a matrix of
financial interdependence reflecting the extent to which countries share overexposed funds.
Comparing this measure to indices of trade or bank linkages indicates that our index can improve
predictions about which countries are likely to be affected by contagion from crisis centers.
Fernando A. Broner
CREI
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Ramon Trias Frgas, 25-27
08005 Barcelona, Spain
R. Gaston Gelos
International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC
ggelos@imf.org
Carmen Reinhart
University of Maryland
School of Public Affairs and Department of Economics
4105 Van Munching Hall
College Park, Maryland 20742

1. Introduction
How do financial crises spread across countries? As a result of the large number of currency and
banking crises observed over the last decade, substantial research effort has been devoted to answering
this question. A growing consensus has emerged that financial linkages and frictions are likely to play
a significant role in the propagation of shocks across countries.
At a theoretical level, various authors have sought to explain international financial contagion
effects with models of investor portfolio choice. Schinasi and Smith (2000) highlight that contagion
effects can be the result of simple portfolio rebalancing within a mean-variance or VaR framework. In
Kodres and Pritsker (2002), differentially informed investors transmit idiosyncratic shocks from one
market to others by rebalancing their portfolios’ exposures to common macroeconomic risks. Kyle and
Xiong (2001) model contagion as a wealth effect in a model with two risky assets and different types of
traders. Wealth effects as a source of contagion also figure prominently in the models of Goldstein and
Pauzner (2001) and Yuan (2004). In a different approach, Calvo and Mendoza (2000) describe fund
managers’ investment decisions using a mean-variance framework with short-selling constraints,
including fixed costs of information acquisition about countries and assuming that fund managers’
performance schemes create incentives against deviating too much from benchmark indices.
Empirically, there are also some indications that financial links matter. Kaminsky and Reinhart
(2000), Hernández and Valdés (2001), Van Rijckeghem and Weder (2001), and Caramazza, Ricci, and
Salgado (2000) provide evidence that if two countries borrow from banks located in a common third
country, crises are transmitted more easily. However, they do not directly identify the particular
mechanism accounting for this phenomenon. Providing empirical support for Calvo’s and Mendoza’s
model, Disyatat and Gelos (2001) show that emerging market funds’ asset allocation can be well
approximated by model with short-sale constraints and mean-variance optimization around benchmark
indices. Van Rijckeghem and Weder (2003) provide evidence that bank exposures to crisis countries
can help predict flows to third countries after the Mexican and Asian crises. None of these studies,
however, has used cross-sectional information in portfolio positions at the micro level to identify the
exact nature of financial linkages. For example, the studies stressing common lender effects through
banks are based on aggregate information on bank positions, as reported by the BIS.1
1 See Kaminsky, Reinhart, and Vegh (2003) for a recent discussion of the evidence on contagion.
1

In this paper, we study the trading behavior of emerging market mutual funds and its role in the
transmission of shocks across countries. We take advantage of a large database of emerging market
funds that contains disaggregated information on the investments of hundreds of funds. For each fund,
the database contains monthly data on its asset allocation by country for the period January 1996
through December 2000. This detailed information allows us to characterize the behavior of
international investors to a greater extent than was possible in previous studies. Although we focus on
a particular type of investor, their behavior is likely representative of other types of investors as well.
Importantly, the portfolio allocation of mutual funds is heterogeneous. This heterogeneity implies not
only that funds are affected to different extents during crises, but also that the resulting portfolio
reallocations transmit the crisis to some countries more than others.
We present a simple model that analyzes the effect of changes in investors’ risk aversion on
portfolio decisions and stock prices. The model incorporates three main ingredients: (i) investors hold
heterogeneous portfolios and may differ in their levels of risk aversion, (ii) changes in an investor's
level of risk aversion affect his portfolio decisions, and (iii) portfolio decisions affect stock prices. The
model shows that, if an investor cares about his performance relative to that of other investors, in
response to an increase in risk aversion he would shift his portfolio towards the average portfolio.
Namely, he would sell assets of countries to which he is “overexposed,” and buy assets of countries to
which he is “underexposed.” The model also shows how crises may be transmitted through the
interaction of risk aversion and heterogeneous portfolios. Since crises affect most those investors who
are most exposed to the crisis country and those investors, in turn, adjust their portfolios away from
other countries in which they are overexposed, crises are transmitted through common overexposed
investors.2
In the empirical analysis, we first examine the effect of gains and losses on investors’ portfolios.
Consistent with the model, we find that when the returns of a fund are low relative to the returns of
other funds, it tends to reduce its weight in countries in which it was overexposed and increase its
weight in countries in which it was underexposed, thereby adjusting its portfolio in the direction of the
average portfolio. We interpret these results as suggesting that past performance has an effect on funds
2 In the model, investors care about both absolute returns and returns in excess of those of other investors. The model is
related to, but simpler than, models in which investors’ utility is a decreasing function of the variance of their excess returns
over that of other investors (tracking error variance). See Disyatat and Gelos (2001).
2