NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE INFORMATION OF OPTION VOLUME
FOR FUTURE STOCK PRICES
Jun Pan
Allen Poteshman
Working Paper 10925
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10925
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2004
Pan is with the MIT Sloan School of Management and NBER, junpan@mit.edu. Poteshman is at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, poteshma@uiuc.edu. We thank Joe Levin, Eileen Smith, and
Dick Thaler for assistance with the data used in this paper, and Harrison Hong and Joe Chen for valuable
initial discussions. We are grateful for the extensive comments and suggestions of an anonymous referee and
the comments of Michael Brandt, Darrell Du.e, John Gri.n, Chris Jones, Owen Lamont, Jon Lewellen,
Stephan Nagel, Maureen O’Hara, Neil Pearson, Mark Rubinstein, Paul Tetlock, and seminar participants
at MIT, LBS, UIUC, the April 2003 NBER Asset Pricing Meeting, Kellogg, the Summer 2003 Econometric
Society Meetings, the Fall 2003 Chicago Quantitative Alliance Meeting, the June 2004WFA Meeting,
McGill, Stanford, Berkeley, UBC, INSEAD, IMA, Duke Econ, and Texas. Reza Mahani and Sophie Xiaoyan
Ni provided excellent research assistance. Pan thanks theMIT Laboratory for Financial Engineering for
research support, and Poteshman thanks the O.ce for Futures and Options Research at UIUC for .nancial
support. This paper can be downloaded from www.mit.edu/~junpan or www.business.uiuc.edu/poteshma.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Jun Pan and Allen Poteshman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Information of Option Volume for Future Stock Prices
Jun Pan and Allen Poteshman
NBER Working Paper No. 10925
November 2004
JEL No. G1
ABSTRACT
We present strong evidence that option trading volume contains information about future stock price
movements. Taking advantage of a unique dataset from the Chicago Board Options Exchange, we
construct put-call ratios from option volume initiated by buyers to open new positions. On a risk-
adjusted basis, stocks with low put-call ratios outperform stocks with high put-call ratios by more
than 40 basis points on the next day and more than 1% over the next week. Partitioning our option
signals into components that are publicly and non-publicly observable, we find that the economic
source of this predictability is non-public information possessed by option traders rather than market
inefficiency. We also find greater predictability from option signals for stocks with higher
concentrations of informed traders and from option contracts with greater leverage.
Jun Pan
MIT Sloan School of Management
50 Memorial Drive
Rm E52-454
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
junpan@mit.edu
Allen Poteshman
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
poteshma@uiuc.edu

1 Introduction
This paper examines the informational content of option trading for future movements in
underlying stock prices. This topic addresses the fundamental economic question of how
information gets incorporated into asset prices and is also of obvious practical interest. Our
main goals are to establish the presence of informed trading in the option market and also
to explore several key issues regarding its nature.
Our focus on the informational role of derivatives comes at a time when derivatives play
an increasingly important role in financial markets. Indeed, for the past several decades,
the capital markets have experienced an impressive proliferation of derivative securities,
ranging from equity options to fixed-income derivatives to, more recently, credit derivatives.
The view that informed investors might choose to trade derivatives because of the higher
leverage offered by such instruments has long been entertained by academics [e.g., Black
(1975)] and can often be found in the popular press.1 A formal treatment of this issue is
provided by Easley, O’Hara, and Srinivas (1998), who allow the participation of informed
traders in the option market to be decided endogenously in an equilibrium framework. In
their model, informed investors choose to trade in both the option and the stock market – in
a “pooling equilibrium” – when the leverage implicit in options is large, when the liquidity
in the stock market is low, or when the overall fraction of informed traders is high.
Our main empirical result directly tests whether the stock and option market are in the
pooling equilibrium of Easley, O’Hara, and Srinivas (1998). Using option trades that are ini-
tiated by buyers to open new positions, we form put-call ratios to examine the predictability
of option trading for future stock price movements. We find predictability that is strong
in both magnitude and statistical significance. For our 1990 through 2001 sample period,
stocks with positive option signals (i.e., those with lowest quintile put-call ratios) outperform
those with negative option signals (i.e., those with highest quintile put-call ratios) by over
40 basis points per day and 1 percent per week on a risk-adjusted basis. When the stock
returns are tracked for several weeks, the level of predictability gradually dies out, indicating
that the information contained in the option volume eventually gets incorporated into the
underlying stock prices.
Although our main empirical result clearly documents that there is informed trading
in the option market, it does not necessarily imply that there is any market inefficiency,
because the option volume used in our main test – which is initiated by buyers to open
new positions – is not publicly observable. Indeed, information-based models [e.g., Glosten
and Milgrom (1985), Easley, O’Hara, and Srinivas (1998)] imply that prices adjust at once
to the public information contained in the trading process but may adjust slowly to the
private information possessed by informed traders. As a result, the predictability captured
in our main test may well correspond to the process of stock prices gradually adjusting to
the private component of information in option trading.
1For example, on July 25, 2002, the Wall Street Journal reported that the Chicago Board Options
Exchange was investigating “unusual trading activity” in options on shares of Wyeth, the pharmaceuticals
giantbasedin Madison,N.J., whichexperienceda sharpincreaseintradingvolume earlierthatmonth. The
optionvolumeuptickoccurreddaysbeforethereleaseofagovernmentstudybytheJournaloftheAmerican
MedicalAssociationthatdocumentedaheightenedriskofbreastcancer,coronaryheartdisease,strokesand
blood clots for women who had been taking Wyeth’s hormone-replacement drug Prempro for many years.
2

Motivated by the differing theoretical predictions about the speed at which prices adjust
to public versus private information, we explore the predictability of publicly versus non-
publicly observable option volume. Following previous empirical studies in this area [e.g.,
Easley, O’Hara, and Srinivas (1998), Chan, Chung, and Fong (2002)], we use the Lee and
Ready (1991) algorithm to back out buyer-initiated put andcall optionvolume frompublicly
observable trade and quote records from the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE). We
find that the resulting publicly observable option signals are able to predict stock returns for
only the next 1 or 2 trade days. Moreover, the stock prices subsequently reverse which raises
the question of whether the predictability from the public signal is a manifestation of price
pressure rather than informed trading. In a bivariate analysis which includes both the public
and non-public signals, the non-public signal has the same pattern of information-based
predictability as when it is used alone, but there is no predictability at all from the public
signal. This set of findings underscores the important distinction between public and non-
public signals and their respective roles in price discovery. Further, the weak predictability
exhibited bythepublic signalsuggeststhattheeconomicsourceofourmainresult isvaluable
private information in the option volume rather than an inefficiency across the stock and
option market.
Central to allinformation-basedmodels aretheroles of informedanduninformed traders.
In particular, the concentration of informed traders is a key variable in such models with
important implications for the informativeness of trading volume. Using the PIN variable
proposed by Easley, Kiefer, and O’Hara (1997) and Easley, Hvidkjaer, and O’Hara (2002)
as a measure of the prevalence of informed traders, we investigate how the predictability
from option volume varies across underlying stocks with different concentrations of informed
traders. We find a higher level of predictability from the option signals of stocks with a
higher prevalence of informed traders.2
While the theoretical models define informed and uninformed traders strictly in terms
of information sets, we can speculate outside of the models about who the informed and
uninformed traders might be. Our dataset is unique in that in addition to recording whether
the initiator of volume is a buyer or a seller opening or closing a position, it also identifies the
investor class of the initiator. We find that option signals from investors who trade through
fullservice brokerage houses provide much stronger predictability thanthesignals fromthose
who tradethroughdiscount brokeragehouses. Giventhat theoptionvolume fromfullservice
brokerages includes that from hedge funds, this result is hardly surprising. It is interesting,
however, that the option signals from firm proprietary traders contain no information at all
about future stock price movements. In the framework of the information-based models,
this result suggests that firm proprietary traders are uninformed investors who come to the
option market primarily for hedging purposes.
Finally, a unique feature of the multimarket stock and option setting is the availability of
securities with differing leverage. Black (1975) asserts that leverage is the key variable which
determines whether informed investors choose to trade in the option market, and Easley,
O’Hara, and Srinivas (1998) demonstrate that under a natural set of assumptions this is
2Given that stocks with higher PIN are typically smaller stocks, our result could be driven by the fact
that there is higher predictability from option signals of smaller stocks. We show that this is not the case.
In particular, our PIN result remains intact after controlling for size.
3