NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A THEORY OF HOUSING COLLATERAL,
CONSUMPTION INSURANCE AND RISK PREMIA
Hanno Lustig
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Working Paper 10955
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10955
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2004
The authors thank Thomas Sargent, Dave Backus, Andrew Abel, Fernando Alvarez, Timothey Cogley,
Harold Cole, Steven Grenadier, Robert Hall, Lars Peter Hansen, Urban Jermann, Narayana Kocherlakota,
Dirk Krueger, Martin Lettau, Sydney Ludvigson, Sergei Morozov, Lee Ohanian, Monika Piazzesi, Martin
Schneider, Kenneth Singleton, Laura Veldkamp, Pierre-Olivier Weill and Amir Yaron. We also benefited
from comments from seminar participants at Duke University, Stanford GSB, University of Iowa, Universite
de Montreal, New York University Stern, University of Wisconsin, University of California at San Diego,
London Business School, London School of Economics, University College London, University of North
Carolina, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Yale University, University of Minnesota, University of
Maryland, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Boston University, University of Pennsylvania Wharton,
University of Pittsburgh, Carnegie Mellon University GSIA, Northwestern University Kellogg, University
of Texas at Austin, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, University of Gent, UCLA, University of Chicago,
Stanford University, the Society for Economic Dynamics Meeting in New York, and the North American
Meeting of the Econometric Society in Los Angeles. For computing support we thank NYU Stern, especially
Norman White. Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh acknowledges financial support from the Stanford Institute for
Economic Policy research and the Flanders Fund for Scientific Research. This project was started while
Lustig was at the University of Chicago. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Hanno Lustig and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

A Theory of Housing Collateral, Consumption Insurance and Risk Premia
Hanno Lustig and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
NBER Working Paper No. 10955
December 2004, Revised February 2006
JEL No. G0
ABSTRACT
In a model with housing collateral, a decrease in house prices reduces the collateral value of housing,
increases household exposure to idiosyncratic risk, and increases the conditional market price of risk.
This collateral mechanism can quantitatively replicate the conditional and the cross-sectional
variation in risk premia on stocks for reasonable parameter values. The increase of the conditional
equity premium and Sharpe ratio when collateral is scarce in the model matches the increase
observed in US data. The model also generates a return spread of value firms over growth firms of
the magnitude observed in the data, because the term structure of consumption strip risk premia is
downward sloping.
Hanno Lustig
Department of Economics
UCLA
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
hlustig@econ.ucla.edu
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
NYU Stern School of Business
44 W Fourth Street
New York, NY 10012
svnieuwe@stern.nyu.edu

Introduction
The canonical consumption-based asset pricing model of Breeden (1979) and Lucas (1978)
implies small and roughly constant equity risk premia over time and little or no risk premium
variation in the cross-section. Yet, recent research in empirical asset pricing has documented
striking differences in risk premia between equity and bonds, between equity at different
points in time, and between portfolios formed by sorting equities on their book-to-market ra-
tio. Time-variation in risk premia, documented, among others, by Ferson and Harvey (1991)
and Whitelaw (1997)), implies that returns are predictable (Cochrane (2001)). Many papers
have documented predictability, especially at longer holding periods.1 The predictability
comes mostly from changes in risk premia, rather than changes in expected dividend growth
(Campbell and Shiller (1988)). Recently, Jagannathan, McGrattan and Scherbina (2000)
and Fama and French (2002) have argued that there has been a long-run decline in US risk
premia. Risk premia also vary substantially across securities. According to Fama and French
(1992), value stocks earn returns that are on average six percent higher than growth stocks;
this premium is of the same size as the equity risk premium itself.
The two most common approaches to tackling the shortcomings of the Lucas-Breeden
model are changing the preferences2, or changing the dynamics of the aggregate consumption
process.3 The most successful model in the first class is arguably the habit formation model.
However, it is hard to find direct empirical evidence for this specification of preferences and
habit-style preferences have unappealing public policy implications (Ljungqvist and Uhlig
(2000)). As for the second approach, it is hard to distinguish between i.i.d. consumption
growth and a specification that includes a small, predictable component based on the avail-
1Fama and French (1988), Campbell and Shiller (1988), Cochrane (1991), Goetzman and Jorion (1993),
Hodrick (1992), and Lettau and Van Nieuwerburgh (2005) find that the dividend-price ratio has predictive
power. Other variables have also been found to be powerful predictors of long horizon returns (e.g. Lamont
(1998),LettauandLudvigson(2001),Menzly,SantosandVeronesi(2004),andLustigandVanNieuwerburgh
(2005a).
2Habit style preferences are most commonly used, see Abel (1990), Constantinides (1990), Ferson and
Constantinides(1991),Abel(1999),CampbellandCochrane(1999),andMenzlyetal.(2004)forearlycontri-
butions. Anotherapproachistomodelnon-separablepreferencesoverasecondgood,suchashousing(Flavin
(2001) and Piazzesi, Schneider and Tuzel (2004)) or durables (Dunn and Singleton (1986), Eichenbaum and
Hansen (1990), and Yogo (2005))
3Bansal and Yaron (2004) introduce a small but very persistent component in aggregate consumption
and dividend growth. Bekaert, Engstrom and Grenadier (2004) combine this specification with habit style
preferences.
1

able data. Furthermore, these models can only address the long-run decline in the US equity
premium through a radical change in the time series process for aggregate consumption
growth, which again is hard to detect in the data.4
Instead of staying within the representative agent framework, we introduce heterogeneity
among agents. Our focus is on the impact of time variation in risk sharing on asset prices.
In the model, households differ only by their income histories. They share income risk
by trading contingent claims, but they cannot borrow more than the value of their house.
When housing collateral is scarce, collateral constraints constrain risk sharing more, and,
as a result, risk premia are higher. Thus, risk premia vary over time and with the housing
collateral ratio. This modest friction is a realistic one for an advanced economy like the US.5
The main contribution of this paper is to demonstrate that the endogenous time variation
in the amount of housing collateral can quantitatively account for three of the differences in
expected returns: between equity and the risk-free asset, between equity at different points
in time, and between value and growth portfolios. In addition, our model replicates the
long-run decline in the equity premium and in the volatility of the risk-free rate in the US
during the second half of the 20th century. This paper fits in a broader research agenda
that includes Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2005a) and Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh
(2005b). The second paper explains why regional consumption growth in the US is more
cross-correlated when the housing collateral supply increases. This finding offers direct
support for the collateral mechanism. In the first paper, we test our model’s Euler equation
on the cross-section of US stock returns. To do so, we take the returns from the data and
we approximate the wealth distribution, an unobservable, as a function of the collateral
ratio and consumption shocks. Our results provide qualitative support for the mechanism.
In the current paper, we generate the returns and the wealth distribution dynamics inside
4Lettau, Ludvigson and Wachter (2005) explore the effect of the apparent decline in aggregate consump-
tion growth volatility.
5Our emphasis on housing, rather than financial assets, reflects three features of the US economy: the
participation rate in housing markets is very high (2/3 of households own their home), the value of the
residentialreal estate makesup overseventy-fivepercentof total assets for themedian household (Surveyof
Consumer Finances, 2001), and housing is a prime source of collateral (75 percent of household borrowing
in the data is collateralized by housing wealth, US Flow of Funds, 2003). To keep the model exposition
simple, we abstract from financial assets or other kinds of capital (such as cars) that households may use to
collateralizeloans. However,inthecalibrationweexploretheeffectsofusingabroadermeasureofcollateral.
2