NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MANUFACTURER LIABILITY FOR HARMS
CAUSED BY CONSUMERS TO OTHERS
Bruce Hay
Kathryn E. Spier
Working Paper 10972
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10972
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2004
The authors are from the Harvard Law School and the Kellogg School of Management and NBER,
respectively. The authors thank Rick Brooks, Howard Chang, Jim Dana, Andy Daughety, Xinyu Hua, Mitch
Polinsky, Jennifer Reinganum, Scott Schaefer, seminar audiences at Kellogg and the NBER, and especially
Steve Shavell, Tim Besley, and the referees for helpful comments and suggestions. The second author thanks
the Searle Fund for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Bruce Hay and Kathryn E. Spier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Manufacturer Liability for Harms Caused by Consumers to Others
Bruce Hay and Kathryn E. Spier
NBER Working Paper No. 10972
December 2004
JEL No. K13, D62
ABSTRACT
Should the manufacturer of a product be held legally responsible when a consumer, while using the
product, harms someone else? We show that if consumers have deep pockets then manufacturer
liability is not economically efficient. It is more efficient for the consumers themselves to bear
responsibility for the harms that they cause. If homogeneous consumers have limited assets, then the
most efficient rule is "residual-manufacturer liability" where the manufacturer pays the shortfall in
damages not paid by the consumer. Residual-manufacturer liability distorts the market quantity when
consumers' willingness to pay is correlated with their propensity to cause harm. It distorts product
safety when consumers differ in their wealth levels. In both cases, consumer-only liability may be
more efficient.
Bruce Hay
Harvard Law School
Griswold Hall 401
1563 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
hay@law.harvard.edu
Kathryn E. Spier
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
k-spier@kellogg.northwestern.edu

1. Introduction
Should the manufacturer of a product be held legally responsible when a consumer, while
using the product, harms someone else? Manufacturers might be held liable for accidental
harms caused by the consumer, such as when a lawnmower flings a stone that hits a neighbor in
the eye or when a driver of a car hits a pedestrian.2 Manufacturers might also be held liable if
the consumer intentionally caused harm, for example when a gun is used to commit murder.
Indeed, recently many lawsuits have been brought recently against firearms manufacturers for
the deaths and injuries caused by criminals who use guns. Although such lawsuits have
generally been unsuccessful,3 these issues remain hotly discussed in the legal and political
arenas.4
We consider a model of a dangerous product supplied by a perfectly competitive market.
The product’s use has some tendency to harm others -- either accidentally or intentionally -- and
both the manufacturers and the consumers can take actions to reduce the likelihood of the harm.
For example, gun owners can take greater care while handling and storing their guns to avoid
accidental shootings and can refrain from committing crimes; likewise, gun manufacturers can
make investments in safety features such as mechanical gun locks (reducing the likelihood that a
2 See Dugan v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 447 N.E.2d 1055 (Ill. App. 1983) (lawnmower) and Houvenagle v.
Wright, 340 N.W.2d 783 (Ia. App. 1983) (automobile). Lawsuits involving other products such as
alchohol, pesticides, cigarette lighters, and computer games abound.
3 Exceptions involve situations where the consumer accidentally injured someone as a result of a product
malfunction. If a car’s brakes fail, for example, the pedestrian may be able to recover from the
manufacturer provided that the brake failure is not the consumer’s fault. However, if the product
functioned as it was designed to, or if the consumer deliberately inflicted the injury, courts have
traditionally refused to hold the manufacturer liable.
4 A number of lawsuits are pending in federal and state courts in which the plaintiffs seek to relax or
bypass the traditional rule immunizing manufacturers from deliberately inflicted harms. State and federal
legislatures have responded by attempting to codify the manufacturers’ immunity from liability. For
example, two bills in Congress, H.R. 1036 and S. 696, would "prohibit civil liability actions from being
brought or continued against manufacturers, distributors, dealers or importers of firearms or ammunition
for damages resulting from the misuse of their products by others." The former bill has made it through
the U.S. House of Representatives while the latter is pending in the U.S. Senate.
2

child inadvertently shoots a sibling) or can refrain from producing highly lethal products, such as
armor-piercing bullets.
We show that consumer liability is more efficient than manufacturer liability when
consumers have deep pockets and can pay for the harms that they cause; solvent consumers fully
internalize the social risks associated with their product use. This has three desirable effects.
First, consumers take the optimal degree of care when using dangerous products. Second, they
demand optimal safety features in the products that they buy. Third, the equilibrium market
quantity is efficient because the market price plus the consumer's expected liability reflects the
true social cost of the dangerous product.5
On the other hand, manufacturer liability may be more efficient when consumers lack the
financial resources to pay for the harms that they cause. In a representative-consumer setting, we
show that it is more efficient for the consumer to bear primary responsibility for the damages
while manufacturers are held responsible for the shortfall not covered by the consumer. We call
this rule "residual-manufacturer liability." Although consumers take inadequate precautions
when using risky products,6 this rule gives manufacturers the correct incentive to design and
produce safer products and insures that the market price reflects the manufacturers’ expected
future liability, leading to the efficient market quantity.7
Importantly, we show that residual-manufacturer liability may distort market outcomes
when consumers are heterogeneous. Residual-manufacturer liability leads to quantity
distortions, for example, when the consumers' elasticity of demand is systematically correlated
with the social harm that they cause. If safe consumers are more price sensitive than their
5 See Hamada (1976). This may not be true if consumers misperceive risks (Spence, 1977).
6 Shavell (1986) formalizes the so-called "judgment-proof problem.”
7 Shavell (1980) showed that the higher price leads to a more efficient market quantity but did not discuss
residual-manufacturer liability or the heterogeneity issues discussed here.
3