NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RESOLVING THE PUZZLE OF THE
UNDERISSUANCE OF NATIONAL BANK NOTES
Charles W. Calomiris
Joseph R. Mason
Working Paper 10951
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10951
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2004
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Charles W. Calomiris and Joseph R. Mason. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Resolving the Puzzle of the Underissuance of National Bank Notes
Charles W. Calomiris and Joseph R. Mason
NBER Working Paper No. 10951
December 2004
JEL No. E5, E42, G21, G28, N11, N21
ABSTRACT
The puzzle of underissuance of national bank notes disappears when one disaggregates data, takes
account of regulatory limits, and considers differences in opportunity costs. Banks with poor lending
opportunities maximized their issuance. Other banks chose to limit issuance. Redemption costs do
not explain cross-sectional variation in issuance and the observed relationship between note issuance
and excess reserves is inconsistent with the redemption risk hypothesis of underissuance. National
banks did not enter primarily to issue national bank notes, and a “pure arbitrage” strategy of
chartering a national bank only to issue national bank notes would not have been profitable. Indeed,
new entrants issued less while banks exiting were often maximum issuers. Economies of scope
between note issuing and deposit banking included shared overhead costs and the ability to reduce
costs of mandatory minimum reserve and capital requirements.
Charles W. Calomiris
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu
Joseph R. Mason
Drexel University
LeBow College of Business
3141 Chestnut Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104
joe.mason@drexel.edu

I. Introduction
During the Civil War, the federal government began to charter national banks.
These banks enjoyed the privilege of being licensed to issue national bank notes, which
were default risk-free liabilities of the banks, backed 111% by U.S. Treasury bonds
deposited by issuing banks at the U.S. Treasury.1 The creation of these new banks,
combined with a 10% annual tax on state bank note issues, soon resulted in the
supplanting of state banks’ notes by the new national bank notes.
Scholars have long puzzled over the observation that national banks did not take
greater advantage of the authority to issue notes. The aggregate supply of notes never
reached its maximum permissible level, despite calculations measuring the profitability
of allocating capital toward bank note supply collateralized by bonds (e.g., as derived by
Cagan 1965) indicating that national bank note issuance was more profitable than the
typical profit earned by allocating bank capital toward lending funded by a combination
of deposits and capital. Friedman and Schwartz (1963, p. 23) write:
Before 1890 the amount outstanding ranged around 20 per cent of the possible
maximum, by 1900 it had risen to about 28 per cent, and by World War I to about
80 percent. The maximum was in fact approached only in the twenties, when for
the first time U.S. bonds deposited to secure circulation and government deposits
(which also required such security) nearly equaled the total of eligible bonds.
Before 1905, the capital stock of national banks set narrower limits to their
maximum possible note issue than did the total of eligible bonds, but the actual
issue did not approach this lower limit either. Thereafter, the capital stock of
national banks exceeded the total of eligible bonds and hence was not the
effective limit on note issue. Yet, despite the failure to use fully the possibilities
of note issue, the published market prices of government bonds bearing the
circulation privilege were apparently always low enough to make note issue
profitable except in the years 1884 to 1891. The fraction of the maximum issued
fluctuated with the profitability of issue, but the fraction was throughout lower
than might have been expected. We have no explanation for this puzzle.
1 After 1874, banks also had to deposit a 5% minimum cash redemption fund at the Treasury in
addition to these bonds.
1

Friedman and Schwartz (1963) and Cagan (1965) argued that profits from note issue
were large on the margin, because bond issues to back note issues remained cheap and
because banks could easily leverage their capital devoted to those bond purchases.2 In
their discussions of potential constraints on bank note issues, they pointed to the more
than adequate aggregate supply of bonds, and while they recognized that regulations
constrained bank note issuing relative to bank capital, they argued that bank capital was
not a constraint because its aggregate amount exceeded the amount required for
increased note issues.
The reasoning typically advanced to explain low national bank note issuance
posits hidden transacting costs, either in the form of physical note redemption costs or the
costs of maintaining cash balances in support of bank note issues. Authors like Bell
(1912), Cagan (1965), Goodhart (1965), Cagan and Schwartz (1991), Duggar and Rost
(1969), and Champ, Wallace, and Weber (1992) argue that redemption costs may have
been large enough to explain bankers’ reluctance to issue despite the seeming
profitability from expanding the supply of notes.
James (1978) was the first to suggest that aggregate calculations, like those
provided by Cagan and Friedman and Schwartz, might be providing a misleading picture
of national bank note profitability. He showed that cross-sectional variation in the
regional supply of bank notes was large and consistent with regional variation in the
opportunity cost of note issuance (that is, regional variation in the profitability of bank
2 Cagan and Schwartz (1991) point out that one can restate the puzzle of underissuance as the
puzzling absence of a large premium on U.S. Treasury bonds (i.e., lower bond yields). High
profits from note issuing should have led national banks to bid up the price of bonds (in order to
satisfy legal backing requirements for note issues), which should have raised the premium on
bonds, and thus eliminated allegedly excess profits.
2