NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW DO BANKS MANAGE LIQUIDITY RISK?
EVIDENCE FROM EQUITY AND DEPOSIT MARKETS
IN THE FALL OF 1998
Evan Gatev
Til Schuermann
Philip E. Strahan
Working Paper 10982
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10982
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2004
We would like to thank Brian Madigan and participants at the NBER conference on “Risks of Financial
Institutions,” Oct. 2004 (Woodstock, VT) for their comments, Gretchen Weinbach for help with the data and
Kristin Wilson for her excellent research assistance. All errors are ours. Any views expressed represent those
of the authors only and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal
Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Evan Gatev, Til Schuermann, and Philip E. Strahan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

How do Banks Manage Liquidity Risk? Evidence from Equity and Deposit Markets in the Fall of
1998
Evan Gatev, Til Schuermann, and Philip E. Strahan
NBER Working Paper No. 10982
December 2004
JEL No. G18, G21
ABSTRACT
We report evidence from the equity market that unused loan commitments expose banks to
systematic liquidity risk, especially during crises such as the one observed in the fall of 1998. We
also find, however, that banks with higher levels of transactions deposits had lower risk during the
1998 crisis than other banks. These banks experienced large inflows of funds just as they were
needed -- when liquidity demanded by firms taking down funds from commercial paper backup lines
of credit peaked. Our evidence suggests that combining loan commitments with deposits mitigates
liquidity risk, and that this deposit-lending synergy is especially powerful during period of crises as
nervous investors move funds into their banks.
Evan Gatev
Boston College
evan.gatev@bc.edu
Til Schuermann
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Philip E. Strahan
Carroll School of Management
324B Fulton Hall
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
philip.strahan@bc.edu

I. Introduction
The rise of the commercial paper market and the subsequent growth of the junk bond
market in the 1980s and 1990s have seemingly reduced the role of banks in the financing of large
businesses (Mishkin and Strahan, 1998). This much-remarked-upon evolution away from banks
and toward the securities markets has not rendered banks irrelevant (Boyd and Gertler, 1994).
While they do provide less funding than before, banks remain important to large firms as
providers of liquidity support to the commercial paper market. Banks act as the “liquidity
provider of last resort” by promising to offer cash on demand through commercial paper backup
lines of credit.3 This liquidity insurance role became especially notable in the fall of 1998, when
many firms turned to their banks to provide liquidity normally supplied by the commercial paper
market. During this episode, banks faced a systematic increase in the demand for liquidity. This
paper studies how banks were able to manage this systematic liquidity risk and thus weather the
1998 crisis successfully.
Banks have traditionally provided liquidity, not only to borrowers with open lines of
credit and loan commitments (we use these terms interchangeably), but also to depositors in the
form of checking and other transactions accounts. Both contracts allow customers to receive
liquidity (cash) on short notice. In fact, a financial intermediary combining these two products
offers a reasonable definition of what most scholars and regulators mean by “bank.” This
liquidity insurance role exposes banks to the risk that they will have insufficient cash to meet
3Banks also continue to bear significant credit risk through off-balance sheet guarantees such as standby letters of credit.
1

random demands from their depositors and borrowers.4
To the extent that liquidity demands are independent across customers, a bank can use
scale to mitigate its need to hold cash to meet unexpected liquidity shocks.5 In fact, Kashyap,
Rajan and Stein (2002) present a model in which a risk-management motive explains the
combination of transactions deposits and loan commitments: as long as the demand for liquidity
from depositors through the checking account is not highly correlated with liquidity demands
from borrowers, an intermediary will be able to reduce its need to hold cash by serving both
customers. Thus, their model yields a diversification synergy between demand deposits (or
transactions deposits more generally) and loan commitments. As evidence, they show that banks
offering more transaction deposits (as a percentage of total deposits) tend also to make more loan
commitments (also scaled appropriately). The correlation is robust across all size categories of
banks.
A bank offering liquidity insurance may face a problem if, rather than facing
idiosyncratic demands for cash, it sometimes faces systematic increases in liquidity demand. For
example, during the first week of October 1998, following the coordinated restructuring of the
hedge fund Long Term Capital Management (LTCM), spreads between safe Treasury securities
and risky commercial paper rose dramatically. Many large firms were unable to roll over their
commercial paper as it came due, leading to a sharp reduction in the amount of commercial
paper outstanding and a corresponding increase in take-downs on pre-existing lines of credit
4 Liquidity risk has been used to justify government deposit insurance (e.g. Diamond and Dybvig, 1983).
5 In a Modigliani-Miller world, holding cash is not costly. However, in a world with taxes, financial distress, or
agency costs, holding cash or other liquid assets is costly for banks and other firms (e.g. Myers and Rajan, 1998).
2