NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CORPORATE FINANCING DECISIONS WHEN INVESTORS
TAKE THE PATH OF LEAST RESISTANCE
Malcolm Baker
Joshua Coval
Jeremy C. Stein
Working Paper 10998
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10998
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2004
This research is supported by the National Science Foundation and the Division of Research at Harvard
Business School. Thanks to Heitor Almeida, Lucian Bebchuk, Jon Bernstein, Rob Daines, Peter DeMarzo,
Darrell Duffie, John Friedman, Mark Garmaise, Peter Henry, David Laibson, Ulrike Malmendier, Rich
Matthews, Stefan Nagel, Michael Ostrovsky, Jay Ritter, Andrei Shleifer, Ilya Strebulaev, Ivo Welch, Jeff
Zwiebel, and seminar participants at Duke, Harvard Business School, the University of Illinois, Stanford,
Notre Dame, the University of Texas, McGill, Columbia, the USC conference on Financial Economics and
Accounting, and the NBER for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Malcolm Baker, Joshua Coval, and Jeremy C. Stein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Corporate Financing Decisions When Investors Take the Path of Least Resistance
Malcolm Baker, Joshua Coval, and Jeremy C. Stein
NBER Working Paper No. 10998
December 2004
JEL No. G32, G34
ABSTRACT
We explore the consequences for corporate financial policy that arise when investors exhibit inertial
behavior. One implication of investor inertia is that, all else equal, a firm pursuing a strategy of
equity-financed growth will prefer a stock-for-stock merger to greenfield investment financed with
an SEO. With a merger, acquirer stock is placed in the hands of investors, who, because of inertia,
do not resell it all on the open market. If there is downward-sloping demand for acquirer shares, this
leads to less price pressure than an SEO, and cheaper equity financing as a result. We develop a
simple model to illustrate this idea, and present supporting empirical evidence. Both individual and
institutional investors tend to hang on to shares granted them in mergers, with this tendency being
much stronger for individuals. Consistent with the model and with this cross-sectional pattern in
inertia, acquirers targeting firms with high institutional ownership experience more negative
announcement effects and greater announcement volume. Moreover, the results are strongest when
the overlap in target and acquirer institutional ownership is low and when the demand curve for the
acquirer's shares appears to be steep.
Malcolm Baker Jeremy C. Stein
Harvard Business School Department of Economics
Morgan Hall 361 Harvard University
Boston, MA 02163 Littauer 209
and NBER Cambridge, MA 02138
mbaker@hbs.edu and NBER
jeremy_stein@harvard.edu
Joshua Coval
Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jcoval@hbs.edu

I. Introduction
Much of finance theory rests on the assumption that investors continuously monitor their
portfolios and condition their investment decisions on the most recently available information.
Even in models with transaction costs (e.g., Constantinides (1986)) or behavioral biases (e.g.,
Barberis, Shleifer and Vishny (1998), Daniel, Hirshleifer and Subrahmanyam (1998), and Hong
and Stein (1999)), where trade may not be continuous and updating may not be fully rational,
investors still can be thought of as processing new information and re-evaluating the decision of
whether or not to trade on a constant basis.
While this assumption is convenient for modeling purposes, it is also unrealistic. A large
body of existing evidence – which we add to below – suggests that people often behave in a way
that might be characterized as inertial, or as taking the path of least resistance. Inertial behavior
can arise from a variety of sources, including endowment effects (Thaler (1980), Kahneman,
Knetsch and Thaler (1990, 1991)), a tendency to procrastinate in decision making (Akerlof
(1991), O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999)), or the cognitive fixed costs associated with re-
evaluating and re-optimizing an existing portfolio.1
In this paper, we argue that investor inertia may exert a significant influence on financial-
market outcomes. Our particular focus is the consequences of inertia for corporate financial
policy, and the main idea can be illustrated with a simple example. Consider a firm A that needs
to acquire a new physical asset – say a chemical plant – and that has no spare cash or debt
capacity. The firm is faced with two options. First, it can do a seasoned equity offering (SEO)
and use the proceeds to build the chemical plant from scratch. Alternatively, it can engage in a
1 In a famous experiment, Kahneman, Knetsch and Thaler (1990) demonstrate that students who are randomly
endowed with a coffee mug subsequently place a much higher reservation price on it than students who are not
given a mug, and who are asked to bid on one. They argue that this behavior arises out of loss aversion (Kahneman
and Tversky (1979)).
1

stock-for-stock merger with another firm T whose only asset is an exactly identical plant. Of
course, there are a variety of real-side distinctions, such as time-to-build delays, merger premia,
and competitive effects, as well as taxes and transaction costs that might weigh in this decision.
However, setting these considerations aside, the basic question we pose is whether investor
inertia also has an incremental impact on the assessment of the two alternatives.
Note that in the standard corporate-finance framework, there is no meaningful difference
between the two transactions, and hence no reason for firm A to prefer one over the other. In
either case, the firm winds up with the same assets, and the same capital structure. Even if
managers have superior information about the prospects of the acquiring firm as in Myers and
Majluf (1984), this argument still applies: equity-financed investment is equity-financed
investment, so either deal should in principle carry the same information content.
We entertain two departures from the standard framework. First, we assume that there is
a downward-sloping demand curve for firm A’s shares. This downward-sloping demand curve
arises not from asymmetric information, but rather from irreducible differences of opinion
among investors as to the value of A’s pre-existing assets. Second, and crucially, we assume that
some investors in the target firm T are inertial in the following sense: they will not make the
active decision to buy shares in A in an SEO, but if they are granted these shares in a stock-for-
stock merger, they will also not make the active decision to sell them.2
Under these conditions, a stock-for-stock merger will be strictly more attractive to firm A
than SEO-financed greenfield investment. The reason is that with a merger, some firm-A shares
are simply absorbed by the inertial T investors, and thus are not ever floated on the open market.
2 These two assumptions place the model in the broader literature of behavioral corporate finance that considers the
impact of less-than-fully-rational investors on corporate investment and financing decisions. Early work in this area
includes Fischer and Merton (1984), Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1990a), Blanchard, Rhee, and Summers (1993),
and Stein (1996). Behavioral papers on the specific topic of mergers include Roll (1986), Shleifer and Vishny
(2003), Malmendier and Tate (2003), and Friedman (2004). See Baker, Ruback, and Wurgler (2004) for a survey.
2