NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CHINA’S NEW REGIONAL TRADE AGREEMENTS
Agata Antkiewicz
John Whalley
Working Paper 10992
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10992
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2004
This paper has been prepared as part of the Economic Governance Programme of the Centre for International
Governance Innovation, Waterloo, Ontario. We are grateful to Li Wu Shi, Liang Fan, Yi Ming Wang,
Shuming Zhang, and Terry Sicular for comments and discussion. We are grateful to a seminar group at
University of Western Ontario for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Agata Antkiewicz and John Whalley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

China’s New Regional Trade Agreements
Agata Antkiewicz and John Whalley
NBER Working Paper No. 10992
December 2004
JEL No. F02, F10, O24
ABSTRACT
This paper discusses the recent regional trade agreements that China has concluded rapidly following
accession to the WTO in 2002. Agreements are in place with Hong Kong, Macao, ASEAN,
Australia, and New Zealand, and are either in negotiation or under discussion with South Africa,
Chile, India, and the Gulf Cooperation Council. These agreements differ sharply in form and
substance, and involve process commitments to ongoing negotiation and cooperation on a wide range
of issues. Differences relating to the regional agreements negotiated by the EU and the US are
emphasized, as are later potential difficulties these agreements create in moving to an Asian trade
bloc centred on them.
Agata Antkiewicz
Centre for International Governance and Innovation (CIGI)
Waterloo
antkiewicza@tlen.pl
John Whalley
Department of Economics
Social Science Centre
University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario N6A 5C2 CANADA
and NBER
jwhalley@uwo.ca

1.Introduction
Most of the recent discussion of Chinese trade policy from outside China has
been of China's WTO accession, assessing both the commitments themselves and the
process of implementation (Bhattasali, Li, and Martin (2004), Whalley (2003)). Less
attention has been given to the network of post WTO accession regional trade
agreements that China is now in the process of negotiating. Agreements, or initial
frameworks of agreements are now in place with Hong Kong, Macao, ASEAN,
Australia, and New Zealand. Discussions on possible FTAs with India, Chile,
Singapore, South Africa, the Gulf Cooperation Council are underway. Possible direct
or indirect arrangements involving Korea and Japan are the subject of speculation.
Thus, what we may be witnessing with China's new regional trade agreements is the
emergence of a third wave of large power regional agreements which will likely set
the precedent for other Chinese regional agreements to follow in future years.
China, like other large powers in the trading system (the US and the EU) has
clear incentive to commit to multilateral disciplines in the WTO as a way of gaining
non discriminatory access to large markets and head off discrimination against her
either in both these or smaller third country markets by fellow large powers. But
closer to home (and as with the US and the EU) China has equally clear incentive to
negotiate supplemental regional arrangements which deal with interests in local
markets in ways which go beyond WTO disciplines. The US with NAFTA, and the
EU with accession and other agreements have encountered similar incentives with
similar results.
But there are several striking features of China's emerging network of
agreements which differentiate it both from to the one off negotiation of NAFTA by
the US in 1991 and the process of ever deeper EU integration initiated by the 1957

Treaty of Rome. The first is the diversity of these agreements, both in form and
coverage. For example, the agreement with Hong Kong is concrete and focused on
both goods trade and cross border investment and financial activities, while the
agreements with Australia and New Zealand are largely general indicative statements
of intent in much wider number of areas. Diversity of approach while it seems to be
the hallmark potentially makes the later emergence of an Asian trade bloc centred on
these agreements more problematical.
A second feature is their seeming brevity, and hence the inevitably vagueness
of the texts involved (the Hong Kong and Macao Closer Economic Partnership
Agreements (CEPA) have only thirteen pages of main text with additional annexes).
Much seems to be left to subsequent joint agreement and mutual management of the
trade relationship. A third feature is the absence (unlike especially the US agreements)
of explicit and clear dispute resolution procedures with conciliation between the
parties being relied upon. Other features are extensive lists of specific bilateral
commitments in services (especially in the case of CEPA) which go beyond the form
and type of commitments undertaken by most WTO members in the GATS. Another
is extensive attention devoted to arrangements both for joint ventures and the
operation of financial institutions in a joint regulatory environment in the Hong Kong
Arrangement.
The focus of recent US bilateral initiatives seemingly on gaining unilateral
access for key service sectors in partner countries in return for accelerated bilateral
tariff elimination (see Schott (2004)), and of recent EU bilaterals on wider diplomatic
linkage to trade and competition policy (see Brenton (2002)) find no parallels in these
emerging Chinese agreements. Instead, the emphasis for now is primarily on trade
access for manufactures through bilateral tariff reduction/elimination and bilaterally