NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXPLAINING THE MAGNITUDE OF LIQUIDITY PREMIA:
THE ROLES OF RETURN PREDICTABILITY, WEALTH SHOCKS
AND STATE-DEPENDENT TRANSACTION COSTS
Anthony W. Lynch
Sinan Tan
Working Paper 10994
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10994
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2004
The authors would like to thank Viral Acharya, George Constantinides, Joel Hasbrouck, John Heaton, Lasse
Pedersen, Hans Stoll and the participants of the NBER Spring Asset Pricing Group Meeting, NYU Monday
Finance Seminar, the NYU Macro-Finance Reading Group, the NHH Finance Seminar, the UCLA Finance
Seminar and the Vanderbilt Finance Seminar for helpful comments and suggestions. All remaining errors
are of course the authors’ responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Anthony W. Lynch and Sinan Tan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Explaining the Magnitude of Liquidity Premia: The Roles of Return Predictability, Wealth Shocks
and State-dependent Transaction Costs
Anthony W. Lynch and Sinan Tan
NBER Working Paper No. 10994
December 2004
JEL No. G11, G12
ABSTRACT
The seminal work of Constantinides (1986) documents how, when the risky return is calibrated to
the U.S. market return, the impact of transaction costs on per-annum liquidity premia is an order of
magnitude smaller than the cost rate itself. A number of recent papers have formed portfolios sorted
on liquidity measures and found a spread in expected per-annum return that is definitely not an order
of magnitude smaller than the transaction cost spread: the expected per-annum return spread is found
to be around 6-7% per annum. Our paper bridges the gap between Constantinides' theoretical result
and the empirical magnitude of the liquidity premium by examining dynamic portfolio choice with
transaction costs in a variety of more elaborate settings that move the problem closer to the one
solved by real-world investors. In particular, we allow returns to be predictable and transaction costs
to be stochastic, and we introduce wealth shocks, both stationary multiplicative and labor income.
With predictable returns, we also allow the wealth shocks and transaction costs to be state dependent.
We find that adding these real world complications to the canonical problem can cause transactions
costs to produce per-annum liquidity premia that are no longer an order of magnitude smaller than
the rate, but are instead the same order of magnitude. For example, predictable returns and i.i.d. labor
income growth causes the liquidity premium for an agent with a wealth to monthly labor income
ratio of 0 or 10 to be 1.68\% and 1.20\% respectively; these are 21-fold and 15-fold increases,
respectively, relative to that in the standard i.i.d. return case. We conclude that the effect of
proportional transaction costs on the standard consumption and portfolio allocation problem with
i.i.d. returns can be materially altered by reasonable perturbations that bring the problem closer to
the one investors are actually solving.
Anthony W. Lynch Sinan Tan
Stern School of Business Stern School of Business
New York University New York University
44 West Fourth Street, #9-190 44 West Fourth Street, #9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126 New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER stan@stern.nyu.edu
alynch@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
A number of recent papers have found a difference in expected return across portfolios sorted on
liquidity measures. While the finding of a difference is not surprising, the magnitude is, with
expected return differences on the order of 6-7% per annum.1 The magnitude of the difference
seems too large to be explained by realistic transactions costs. In particular, the seminal work of
Constantinides(1986)documentshowinvestorutilityislargelyinsensitivetotransactioncostswhen
the investor solves the canonical problem of i.i.d. returns calibrated to U.S. data, no non-financial
income, and a constant proportional cost rate. For realistic proportional costs, Constantinides
shows that the per-annum liquidity premium that must be offered to induce an CRRA investor
to hold the transaction-cost asset instead of an otherwise identical no-transaction-cost asset is an
order of magnitude smaller than the transaction cost rate itself. Constantinides also provides the
intuition for this result. Investors respond to transaction costs by turning over the portfolio much
less frequently than annually, and since the value function is insensitive to quite large deviations
from the optimal no-transaction-cost portfolio allocation, the overall impact of transaction costs
on utility is small. Our paper bridges the gap between this theoretical result and the empirical
magnitude of the liquidity premium by examining dynamic portfolio choice with transaction costs
in a variety of more elaborate settings that move the problem closer to the one solved by real-world
investors. In particular, we allow returns to be predictable and transaction costs to be stochastic,
andweintroducewealthshocks, bothstationarymultiplicativeandlaborincome. Withpredictable
returns, we also allow the wealth shocks and transaction costs to be state dependent.
We find that adding these real world complications to the canonical problem can cause transac-
tions costs to produce per-annum liquidity premia that are no longer an order of magnitude smaller
than the rate, but are instead the same order of magnitude. In particular, return predictability and
i.i.d labor income calibrated to U.S. data are sufficient to obtain per-annum liquidity premia of the
same order of magnitude as the cost rate, for realistic wealth income ratios. For this reason, our
resultsprovideanimportantnewinsightintotheeffectoftransactioncostsoninvestorbehavior. In
particular, the effect of proportional transaction costs on the standard consumption and portfolio
allocation problem with i.i.d. returns can be materially altered by reasonable perturbations that
bringtheproblemclosertotheoneinvestorsareactuallysolving. Moreover,iftheagentweconsider
can be regarded as the marginal investor, then the implication is that equilibrium liquidity premia
can be the same order of magnitude as the cost rate, once the theoretical economy is complicated
1See, for example, Brennan and Subrahmanyam (1996) and Pastor and Stambaugh (2003).
1

along the dimensions we consider. Further, so long as the agent we consider is one who holds low
liquiditystocks(whichwerecognizeisabigif), thentheliquiditypremiumwereportcanbeviewed
as a lower bound on the equilibrium liquidity premium for the economy that the agent inhabits.
Our canonical agent has power utility with a relative risk aversion coefficient of 6 and has
access to a risky asset whose return is calibrated to that of a portfolio of low liquidity stocks. This
portfolio is formed from the 13 least liquid of 25 liquidity sorted U.S stock portfolios (see Acharya
and Pedersen, 2002). Proportional one-way transactions costs on this portfolio are set at 2%, as
a lower bound on the difference between the cost rate for low and high liquidity portfolios formed
by bifurcating on the basis of liquidity. We rely on recent empirical work by Lesmond, Ogden and
Trzcinka (1999) who quantify the transaction costs associated with trading individual stocks and
find a 3% cost for the 5 smallest size deciles and a 1% cost for the 5 largest.
We find that return predictability calibrated to that in the data increases the liquidity premium
on the low liquidity portfolio by a factor of 5. An important wealth shock is labor income which
we calibrate with a permanent and a temporary component, as in Carroll (1996, 1997) and Viceira
(1997), using parameter estimates obtained from U.S. PSID data by Gakidis (1997). In the i.i.d.
return case with a fixed transaction cost rate, we find that liquidity premia are unaffected by
excluding the temporary component. Consequently, we ignore the temporary component when
examiningtheeffectsoflaborincomeonliquiditypremia. Withi.i.d. returnsandafixedtransaction
cost rate, the inclusion of labor income causes the liquidity premium on the low liquidity portfolio
to become 1.42% for an agent with no financial wealth, an almost 18-fold increase relative to the
canonical i.i.d. case. Even if the agent’s wealth to permanent monthly income ratio is 100, the
increase is still 3.4-fold. Once returns are allowed to be predictable (the transaction cost rate
remains a constant), i.i.d. labor income causes the liquidity premium to be 1.68% and 1.20% for
an agent with a wealth to monthly labor income ratio of 0 and 10 respectively. These represent
21-fold and 15-fold increases, respectively, relative to the standard i.i.d. case. The premium does
drop to 0.61% per annum once the wealth to permanent monthly income ratio hits 100 but it can
be made as high as 0.87% by allowing labor income growth to be state-dependent.
We also consider multiplicative wealth shocks, for which comparative static analysis is easier
because of the lighter computational burden. The liquidity premium also increases by a factor
of 5 when i.i.d. wealth shocks to portfolio wealth are introduced with an annualized volatility of
17% and a mean of zero. The simultaneous presence of return predictability and wealth shocks
can generate liquidity premia up to 42 times larger than in the standard i.i.d. return case. When
2