NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THEFT AND TAXES
Mihir A. Desai
Alexander Dyck
Luigi Zingales
Working Paper 10978
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10978
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2004
A previous version of this paper circulated under the title Corporate Governance and Taxation. We thank
Mehmet Beceren, Kent McNellie, Bill Simpson, and James Zeitler for their valuable research assistance. We
also thank Milton Harris (who suggested the title), Joel Slemrod, Per Stromberg, René Stulz, and participants
at seminars at the University of Chicago, the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, the University of
Michigan, the Kennedy School of Government, Harvard Business School, the NBER University Research
Conference, the NBER Public Economics Summer Institute, Vanderbilt University, the Wharton School and
Moscow’s NES for their comments. Desai and Dyck thank the Division of Research at Harvard Business
School and Zingales the Center for Research on Security Prices and the George Stigler Center at the
University of Chicago for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Mihir A. Desai, Alexander Dyck, and Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Theft and Taxes
Mihir A. Desai, Alexander Dyck, and Luigi Zingales
NBER Working Paper No. 10978
December 2004
JEL No. G0, G1, G2, G3
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the interaction between corporate taxes and corporate governance. We show that
the characteristics of a taxation system affect the extraction of private benefits by company insiders.
A higher tax rate increases the amount of income insiders divert and thus worsens governance
outcomes. In contrast, stronger tax enforcement reduces diversion and, in so doing, can raise the
stock market value of a company in spite of the increase in the tax burden. We also show that the
corporate governance system affects the level of tax revenues and the sensitivity of tax revenues to
tax changes. When the corporate governance system is ineffective (i.e., when it is easy to divert
income), an increase in the tax rate can reduce tax revenues. We test this prediction in a panel of
countries. Consistent with the model, we find that corporate tax rate increases have smaller (in fact,
negative) effects on revenues when corporate governance is weaker. Finally, this approach provides
a novel justification for the existence of a separate corporate tax based on profits.
Mihir A. Desai
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
Alexander Dyck
University of Toronto
adyck@rotman.utoronto.ca
Luigi Zingales
Graduate School of Business
The University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637

1. Introduction
The state, thanks to its tax claim on cash flows, is de facto the largest minority shareholder in
almost all corporations. Yet, the state’s actions are not part of the standard analysis of corporate
governance, which has typically emphasized legal protections for outside investors (as in La Porta et al.
(1998) and Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002)), the role of boards (e.g., Hermalin and Weisbach (1998)),
and the presence of large shareholders (Morck, Shleifer and Vishny (1988)).1 At the same time, the
public finance literature on taxation typically ignores any effects of governance on the functioning of the
corporate tax system (see Auerbach (2002), Hassett and Hubbard (1999), and Slemrod andYitzhaki
(2002)).
In this paper, we provide a simple reason for why the analysis of corporate governance and
taxation should be integrated. Most transactions aimed at diverting corporate value toward controlling
shareholders also reduce corporate tax liabilities. Similarly, many procedures aimed at enforcing a
corporate tax liability make it more difficult for controlling shareholders to divert corporate value to
their own advantage. More generally, the level of diversion and the amount of taxes paid are determined
in a game that involves three parties – the state, insiders, and outside shareholders. Our claim is simply
that each bilateral interaction has important spillover effects on the third party. How the state designs
and enforces taxes influences the relationship between insiders and outside shareholders and the nature
of the relationship between insiders and outside shareholders (corporate governance) influences the
corporate taxation system.
In a model that adopts this simple insight, we analyze how the corporate tax system affects the
level of managerial diversion. A higher tax rate increases the return to stealing by controlling
shareholders and worsens governance outcomes. By contrast, increased tax enforcement reduces the
amount of private benefits these shareholders can enjoy. Most interestingly, an increase in tax
enforcement can increase the amount outside shareholders will receive, even accounting for increased
levels of taxation. Accordingly, for a given tax rate, an increase in tax enforcement can increase (rather
than decrease) the stock market value of a company.
1 This absence is even more remarkable, given that corporate taxes are an integral part of the literature on corporate financing and
investment decisions (e.g. Graham (2003)).
2

Much as the structure of taxation affects corporate governance, the model introduced in the paper
also demonstrates that corporate governance affects the working of the tax system. When it is difficult to
divert income, we derive the standard result of a relatively direct relation between tax rates and tax
revenues. By contrast, when the corporate governance system is ineffective (i.e., when it is easy to
divert income) an increase in the tax rate can reduce tax revenues, generating a hump-shaped
relationship between corporate tax rates and corporate tax revenues. This arises for the simple reason
that when it is easy to divert income, the manager will behave as a residual claimant, accentuating his
incentive to shelter income to avoid taxation. As a result, the revenue maximizing tax rate is higher in
countries with a better corporate governance system.
This corporate governance view of taxes provides a novel justification for the existence of a
corporate tax. A separate tax on corporate profits generates an incentive for the government to verify
income, ameliorating the agency problem between insiders and outside shareholders. This rationale for
the corporate tax is also able to explain why interest payments are tax deductible: being in cash, interest
payments do not need any additional certification by the government, and hence have no reason to be
subject to a “certification” tax.
We then test the corporate governance and tax policy predictions of our model. To test the
corporate governance implications, we focus on Russia, an environment where both managerial
diversion and tax evasion are manifest. We study the effect that an increase in tax enforcement (which
followed Putin’s election) had on stock prices and the value of control (a proxy for the amount of
managerial diversion). As predicted by the model, the stock market values of companies targeted by
enforcement actions increase and the voting premium for these stocks decrease after the increase in tax
enforcement. We also document that increased tax enforcement leads to substantial organizational
changes in the targeted companies, changes that make managerial diversion more difficult.
We then test the corporate tax implications of our model by using a panel of countries that vary
with respect to their corporate governance rules. In particular, we test the model prediction that the
relationship between tax rates and tax revenues will depend upon the underlying corporate governance
relationship between inside and outside shareholders. We do this by investigating the revenue
consequences of corporate tax rate changes from 1979-1997. Consistent with the model, we find that
corporate tax rate increases have a lower impact on tax revenues in countries characterized by weaker
3