NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE DETERMINANTS OF PROGRESSIVE ERA REFORM:
THE PURE FOOD AND DRUGS ACT OF 1906
Marc T. Law
Gary D. Libecap
Working Paper 10984
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10984
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2004
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Marc T. Law and Gary D. Libecap. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Determinants of Progressive Era Reform: The Pure Food and Drugs Act of 1906
Marc T. Law and Gary D. Libecap
NBER Working Paper No. 10984
December 2004
JEL No. I1, N4, L5
ABSTRACT
We examine three theories of Progressive Era regulation: public interest, industry capture, and
information manipulation by the federal bureaucracy and muckraking press. Based on analysis of
qualitative legislative histories and econometric evidence, we argue that the adoption of the 1906
Pure Food and Drugs Act was due to all three factors. Select producer groups sought regulation to
tilt the competitive playing field to their advantage. Progressive reform interests desired regulation
to reduce uncertainty about food and drug quality. Additionally, rent-seeking by the muckraking
press and its bureaucratic allies played a key role in the timing of the legislation. We also find that
because the interests behind regulation could not shape the enforcing agency or the legal
environment in which enforcement took place, these groups did not ultimately benefit from
regulation in the ways originally anticipated.
Marc T. Law
Department of Economics
University of Vermont
Old Mill Building
94 University Place
Burlington, VT 05405-0114
marc.law@uvm.edu
Gary D. Libecap
Department of Economics
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721-0108
and NBER
glibecap@eller.arizona.edu

1
I. Introduction
The late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries witnessed the birth of the
American regulatory state. During the Progressive Era, federal authority over banking,
insurance, transportation, competition, and interstate trade in food and drug products
greatly expanded. Indeed, it is during this period that the federal government began to
displace state and local governments as the primary source of regulation in the economy.
Government regulation not only became more federal, but more intrusive. The question is
why.
Broadly speaking, there are three views of the emergence of the federal regulatory
state. One is a public interest view that argues that federal regulation arose to solve
market failures that state and local governments could not address, and that Progressive
Era reformers interested in improving consumer welfare lobbied in favor of these
regulations. While this account is supported by a large historical literature, it fails to
explain why regulation, as opposed to the court system, was needed to safeguard
consumer welfare (Glaeser and Schleifer 2003). A second view is that regulation was
adopted to give a competitive advantage to business groups. This regulatory capture
argument is intuitively appealing, but it cannot account for why there was so much
contemporaneous popular support for regulation. A third view emphasizes the role played
by the muckraking press and entrepreneurial bureaucrats in galvanizing public support
for regulation. The exact mechanisms by which these interests influenced the adoption of
1 We thank Dan Carpenter, Ed Glaeser, Claudia Goldin, and participants of the NBER
Corruption and Reform Conference for their helpful comments. Tomas Nonenmacher and
Lee Alston graciously provided data on reform interest groups.
1

regulation, however, have not been explored. While the first view emphasizes the
efficiency-improving role of regulation, the latter two suggest that regulation may have
had dubious effects on consumer welfare.
In this chapter, we examine these three explanations for the adoption of
Progressive Era regulation through the lens of federal food and drugs legislation. In 1906
the federal government enacted the Pure Food and Drugs Act, the first federal law that
gave regulators unprecedented authority over interstate trade in food and drug products.
The central issues we investigate are the timing and nature of support for the food and
drugs act. We also explore the early enforcement of this law and its effects on consumer
welfare. The passage of this act can reveal much about the entire Progressive agenda and
the establishment of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).2
We find that aspects of all three views of regulation explain the adoption of the
Pure Food and Drugs Act, that producer, consumer, and bureaucratic interests
maneuvered to mold the law to their benefit, and that the muckraking press influenced the
timing of adoption. Both the legislative history and statistical analysis underscore the
desires of various producer groups to tilt the competitive playing field, of federal
bureaucrats to expand their regulatory mandates, and of Progressive reform interests to
ensure that consumers were not deceived about the quality of food and drugs they
purchased. Even so, while several pure food and drugs bills were considered during the
1890s and early 1900s, none were passed. Conflict among these competing interests made
2 Until the late 1920s, the organization that we know today as the FDA was the Bureau of
Chemistry, an agency within the federal Department of Agriculture. In 1927 the
regulatory portion of this agency was re-named the Food, Drug and Insecticide
Administration. In 1930 its name was shortened to the Food and Drug Administration.
2