NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCE, FIRM SIZE, AND GROWTH
Thorsten Beck
Asli Demirguc-Kunt
Luc Laeven
Ross Levine
Working Paper 10983
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10983
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2004
We would like to thank Maria Carkovic, Stijn Claessens, and seminar participants at the World Bank and
the University of North Carolina for helpful comments, and Ying Lin for excellent research assistance. This
paper’s findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Finance, Firm Size, and Growth
Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 10983
December 2004
JEL No. G2, L11, L25, O1
ABSTRACT
This paper examines whether financial development boosts the growth of small firms more than
large firms and hence provides information on the mechanisms through which financial development
fosters aggregate economic growth. We define an industry's technological firm size as the firm size
implied by industry specific production technologies, including capital intensities and scale
economies. Using cross-industry, cross-country data, the results indicate that financial development
exerts a disproportionately large effect on the growth of industries that are technologically more
dependent on small firms. This suggests that financial development accelerates economic growth by
removing growth constraints on small firms and also implies that financial development has sectoral
as well as aggregate growth ramifications.
Thorsten Beck
World Bank
tbeck@worldbank.org
Asli Demirguc-Kunt
World Bank
ademirguckunt@worldbank.org
Luc Laeven
World Bank
llaeven@worldbank.org
Ross Levine
Finance Department, Room 3-257
Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
rlevine@csom.umn.edu

I. Introduction
Although a large literature suggests that financial development fosters economic growth,
considerably less research examines the cross-firm, cross-industry distributional effects of financial
development.1 Some theories imply that financial development boosts economic growth by
disproportionately fostering small firm growth. If smaller, less wealthy firms face tighter credit
constraints than large firms face due to greater informational barriers or high fixed costs associated
with accessing financial systems, then financial development that ameliorates market frictions will
exert an especially positive impact on smaller firms (Banerjee and Newman, 1993; Galor and Zeira,
1993; Aghion and Bolton, 1997).2 In contrast, other research suggests that most small, less wealthy
firms, especially in poor countries, cannot afford financial services, so that financial development
disproportionately facilitates the growth of large firms (Greenwood and Jovanovic, 1990).3
This paper assesses whether financial development boosts the growth of small firms more
than large firms and hence sheds empirical light on (1) debates concerning the distributional
implications of financial development, (2) one mechanism through which financial development
may affect aggregate economic growth, and (3) a large policy-oriented literature that stresses the
importance of small firm growth for economic development. In terms of public policies, the World
Bank (1994, 2002, 2004) argues that small firms foster competition, innovation, and employment to
a greater degree than large firms and has devoted more than $10 billion in the last five years toward
1 See Levine (2005) for a review of the literature on financial development and growth. Specifically, cross-country
studies (King and Levine 1993; Beck, Levine, and Loayza 2000; Levine, Loayza, and Beck 2000), firm-level studies
(Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic 1998), and industry-level studies (Rajan and Zingales 1998; Wurgler 2000) find that
the level of financial development is positively related to growth and this relationship is not due only to simultaneity
bias. Aghion, P., Howitt, and D. Mayer-Foulkes (2005) find that financial development accelerates the speed of
convergence toward a steady state, but does not influence steady-state growth.
2 In these models, financial development that lowers information or transaction costs disproportionately benefits less
wealthy entrepreneurs. In terms of U.S. banks, Jayaratne and Strahan (1998) find that efficiency improvements reduced
fixed costs included in loan prices, helping small firms.
3 Levine and Schmukler (2003, 2004) provide evidence that international financial liberalization has primarily benefited
large, rich firms. Also, local banking monopolies may foster close relationships between banks and small firms and
1

promoting small enterprises. Rather than examining whether small firms per se accelerate growth,
we examine whether financial under-development exerts a particularly onerous impact on small
firms. Furthermore, while considerable research suggests that finance is closely associated with
economic growth, dissecting the mechanisms connecting finance and growth provides information
on whether – and if so how -- financial development causes growth, or whether financial
development is simply associated with fast growing economies. Toward this end, this paper
examines whether financial development accelerates growth by boosting small firm growth.
Finally, as stressed above, financial development may have distributional implications. This paper
examines whether financial development is particularly good for large firms or small firms, or
whether financial development has a balanced impact on firms of different sizes.
We examine whether industries that are composed of small firms for technological reasons
grow faster in economies with well-developed financial systems. As formulated by Coase (1937),
firms should optimally internalize some activities, but size enhances complexity and coordination
costs. Thus, an industry’s optimal firm size depends on that industry’s particular production
technologies, including capital intensities and scale economies (Kumar, Rajan, and Zingales, 2001).
Given estimates of each industry’s technological firm size, we use a sample of 44 countries and 36
industries in the manufacturing sector to examine the growth rates of different industries across
countries with different levels of financial development. If “small-firm industries” – industries
naturally composed of small firms for technological reasons – grow faster than “large-firm
industries” in economies with more developed financial systems, then this suggests that (i) financial
development boosts the growth of small-firm industries more than large-firm industries and (ii) one
mechanism through which financial development accelerates growth is by fostering the growth of
thereby increase credit availability to small firms (Petersen and Rajan, 1994, 1995). If financial development intensifies
competition and breaks these monopolies, it may also hurt small firms.
2