NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A DYNAMIC THEORY OF OPTIMAL CAPITAL
STRUCTURE AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
Andrew Atkeson
Harold L.Cole
Working Paper 11083
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11083
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2005
Atkeson gratefully acknowledge support from the National Science Foundation. Cole acknowledges the
support of NSF SES 0137421. We thank Narayana Kocherlakota, Andrzej Skrzypacz, and Steve Tadelis for
helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Andrew Atkeson and Harold L. Cole. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

A Dynamic Theory of Optimal Capital Structure and Executive Compensation
Andrew Atkeson and Harold L. Cole
NBER Working Paper No. 11083
January 2005
JEL No. G3
ABSTRACT
We put forward a theory of the optimal capital structure of the firm based on Jensen's (1986)
hypothesis that a firm's choice of capital structure is determined by a trade-off between agency costs
and monitoring costs. We model this tradeoff dynamically. We assume that early on in the
production process, outside investors face an informational friction with respect to withdrawing
funds from the firm which dissipates over time. We assume that they also face an agency friction
which increases over time with respect to funds left inside the firm. The problem of determining the
optimal capital structure of the firm as well as the optimal compensation of the manager is then a
problem of choosing payments to outside investors and the manager at each stage of production to
balance these two frictions.
Andrew Atkeson
Bunche Hall 9381
Department of Economics
UCLA
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
andy@atkeson.net
Harold Cole
Economics Department
University of California
405 Hilgard Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
hlcole@econ.ucla.edu

1. Introduction
We put forward a theory of the optimal capital structure of the firm and the optimal
compensation of the firm’s managers based on Jensen’s (1986) hypothesis that a firm’s choice
of capital structure is determined by a trade-off between agency costs and monitoring costs.
Wemodelthistrade-offdynamicallybyassumingthatoutsideinvestorsinafirmfacedifferent
obstaclestorecoupingtheirinvestmentatdifferenttimes. Earlyonintheproductionprocess,
outside investors face an information friction – the output of the firm is private information
to the manager of the firm unless the outside investors pay a fixed cost to monitor the firm.
With time, the output of the firm is revealed to outside investors and, hence, the information
friction disappears. At this later stage in the production process however, outside investors
face an agency friction – the firm’s manager can divert resources not paid out to investors
in the early phases of production towards perquisites that provide him with private benefits.
The problem of determining the optimal capital structure of the firm as well as the optimal
compensation of the manager is then a problem of choosing payments to outside investors
and the manager at each stage of production to balance these two frictions.
Our theory is developed in an dynamic optimal contracting framework, and, as a
result, our model yields predictions about the joint dynamics of a firm’s capital structure
and its executive compensation. The choice of compensation for the manager is shaped by
the assumption that the manager is risk averse while the outside investors are risk neutral.
Our theory has the following implications regarding optimal capital structure and executive
compensation. Each period, the payouts from the firm can be divided into payments to the
managerthatconsistofanon-contingentbasepayandaperformancecomponentofpaybased
on the realized output of the firm, as well as two distinct payments to the outside investors

that resemble payments to debt and outside equity respectively. The debt-like payment to
outside investors is made early in the period. It comes in the form of a fixed lump – the
failure of which to pay leads to monitoring. The equity-like payment to outside investors
comes in the form of a residual which depends upon the performance of the firm and is paid
at the end of the period.
In our model, the fact that the manager receives some form of performance based
pay is not motivated by the desire to induce the manager to exert greater effort or care in
managing the firm. Instead, the performance based component of the manager’s pay simply
serves to induce the manager to forsake expenditures on perquisites for his own enjoyment.
Hence, our model’s predictions for whether it is optimal to have the performance component
of the manager’s compensation depend on the total market value of the firm or on some
narrower measure of current performance such as current sales are determined entirely by our
assumptions regarding the extent of theagencyfriction. If the manager is able to appropriate
a broad measure of the firm’s resources for his own benefit, then his performance bonus will
be based on this broad measure. If the manager’s ability to appropriate resources is more
limited in scope, then his bonus pay will be based on this narrower measure of performance.
Our theory also has implications for the relationship between the optimal financial
structure of the firm and its optimal production plan. Our theory predicts that there is a
wedge between the marginal product of capital in the firm and rental rate on capital that
depends upon the expected monitoring costs associated with bankruptcy and the inefficient
risk-sharingbetweenoutsideinvestorsandthemanagerinducedbytheagencyfriction. Under
certainparametricassumptions, weareabletocomputethemagnitudeof thiswedgebetween
the marginal product of capital and its rental rate in terms of readily observed features of
2