NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PIPE DREAMS? THE PERFORMANCE OF
COMPANIES ISSUING EQUITY PRIVATELY
David J. Brophy
Paige P. Ouimet
Clemens Sialm
Working Paper 11011
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11011
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2004
All authors are from the Stephen M. Ross School of Business at the University of Michigan. Contact
Information: 701 Tappan Street; Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234. E-mails: djbrophy@umich.edu;
pshelby@umich.edu; and sialm@umich.edu. We thank Sugato Bhattacharyya, Serdar Dinc, Ken French,
Radha Gopalan, Marcin Kacperczyk, Arif Khurshed, Han Kim, Bob Kyle, Tom Nohel, Amit Seru, Sophie
Shive, Tyler Shumway, Vijay Singal, Jeremy Stein, Lu Zheng, and seminar participants at the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the European Financial Management Association Meetings in
Basel, the Rutgers Conference on Financial Innovation, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, and
the University of Michigan for helpful comments and discussions. We are very grateful to Sagient Research
for providing us with the PIPEs data. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by David J. Brophy, Paige P. Ouimet, and Clemens Sialm. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

PIPE Dreams? The Performance of Companies Issuing Equity Privately
David J. Brophy, Paige P. Ouimet, and Clemens Sialm
NBER Working Paper No. 11011
December 2004
JEL No. G1, G2, G3
ABSTRACT
Private Investments in Public Equity (PIPEs) have become an important source of financing for
young, publicly traded firms whose poor operating performance may limit alternative financing
options. We propose that firms are motivated to sell these securities to minimize costs associated
with asymmetric information. We find that both the security structure and the investor composition
of a PIPE security matter in the subsequent performance of the issuing firm. Poor post-issuance
performance is associated with securities where investors obtain significant repricing rights, which
protect them from future stock price declines. Furthermore, companies that obtain financing from
hedge funds tend to under-perform companies that obtain financing from other institutional
investors. We argue that hedge funds act as investors of last resort, playing an important role in the
market for young, high-risk firms with substantial asymmetric information. Hedge funds are willing
to fund such high-risk companies because they can protect against possible price declines in the
issuing companies by either negotiating PIPE securities with repricing rights or by entering into short
positions of the underlying stocks of the issuing companies.
David J. Brophy Clemens Sialm
Stephen M. Ross School of Business Stephen M. Ross School of Business
University of Michigan University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street 701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234 Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
djbrophy@umich.edu and NBER
sialm@umich.edu
Paige P. Ouimet
Stephen M. Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
pshelby@umich.edu

1. Introduction
Over the past several years, private investments in public equity (PIPEs) have become an
increasingly popular alternative to public equity offerings as a source of capital for small- and
medium-size public companies whose poor operating performance and high degree of
asymmetric information may limit alternative financing options. PIPE transactions are completed
within relatively short time periods with fewer regulatory requirements than Secondary Equity
Offerings (SEOs). The increasing importance of these securities – $77 billion was raised in 5,260
transactions between 1995 and 2002 – indicates that firms value these characteristics. However,
their popularity has come with controversy. PIPE securities recently have obtained unfavorable
attention in reaction to the poor performance of some firms following the issuance of PIPE
securities.1 We attempt to shed light on this controversy by arguing that PIPEs are a
heterogeneous group of securities bought by a variety of investors. We find that both the security
structure and the investor composition matter for the subsequent performance of the issuing
companies.
PIPEs are financial contracts negotiated directly, or through financial intermediary
agents, with a small number of investors. This allows the investors and the issuing companies to
customize the specific security structure according to their preferences. We distinguish between
two basic security structures: traditional and structured PIPEs. Traditional PIPEs are private
placements of common stocks or fixed convertibles at predetermined prices or conversion ratios.
Investors in traditional PIPEs receive a fixed number of common stocks or can convert their
convertible securities into a fixed number of common stocks of the issuing company. Investors
are attracted to these issuances since the equity is typically issued at a discount relative to the
market price. On the other hand, structured PIPEs are private placements of variable convertibles
at conversion ratios that depend on the performance of the underlying stock after the PIPE
issuance. Structured PIPEs enable investors to convert their PIPE securities into a larger number
of common stocks if the stocks perform poorly after the issuance date, thus effectively protecting
investors against price declines. Though investments in traditional PIPEs are sensitive to changes
in the value of the underlying common stock, investments in structured PIPEs are protected
against value declines through a variable conversion ratio.
1 Examples of recent negative media attention include “Pipe Dream or Problem?”, The New York Times, June 5,
2004, and “SEC Probes Hedge Funds, Brokers On `Pipe' Offerings”, The Wall Street Journal, July 8, 2004.
2

In this paper, we document that companies issuing PIPEs, in general, and structured
PIPEs, in particular, tend to be young firms in high-growth or high-risk sectors, where market
imperfections are most prevalent. These qualities complicate external assessments, resulting in
significant information asymmetries between firm insiders and the external market. Myers
(1984) and Myers and Majluf (1984) propose that the presence of informational asymmetries can
reduce the value at which firms are able to sell their securities. They argue that such firms should
issue informationally insensitive securities, such as conventional debt. However, these same
attributes restrict such firms in their dealings in the debt market due to higher probabilities of and
costs associated with financial distress. Instead, PIPEs may be the optimal solution for these
firms. Since PIPEs are sold to a limited number of qualified investors, issuing a PIPE as
compared to an SEO can reduce the issuing costs associated with information production.2
Furthermore, as argued by Stein (1992), structured PIPEs with their variable conversion price,
may be the ideal security design in the presence of information asymmetries, potentially making
these securities “adverse selection-proof.” Structured PIPEs, although equity securities, can be
structured to be as informationally insensitive as straight debt, with smaller costs of financial
distress.
Though PIPEs may theoretically be an ideal source of financing for firms with a high
degree of asymmetric information, arguments also have been made that these contracts, in
particular structured contracts, are faulty and leave the issuing firm prey to market manipulation.
Hillion and Vermaelen (2004) argue structured PIPEs are imperfect contracts since investors
may have the incentive to engage in manipulative short selling to receive a larger numbers of
shares. The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission has expressed concern after investigating
cases of market manipulation surrounding the issuance of variable convertible PIPEs and has
warned that these securities present the temptation for investors “to engage in manipulative short
selling of the issuer’s stock in order to receive more shares.”3 Corporate executives appear to
have heeded this advice since issuances of structured PIPEs have declined substantially in the
last years, while issuances of traditional PIPEs have grown.
2 The cost of information production as it relates to the decision to sell equity privately versus publicly is explored in
Chemmanur and Fulghieri (1999). Habib and Johnsen (2000) discuss the private placement of debt and outside
equity as an information revelation mechanism.
3 See http://www.sec.gov/news/press/2003-26.htm.
3