NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE GLOBAL HISTORY OF CORPORATE GOVERNANCE –
AN INTRODUCTION
Randall K. Morck
Lloyd Steier
Working Paper 11062
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11062
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2005
We are grateful for helpful comments, insights, and suggestions from Philippe Aghion, Lucien Bebchuk,
Daniel Berkowitz, Brian Cheffins, Stijn Claessens, Paul Frentrop, Brad DeLong, Alexander Dyck, Barry
Eichengreen, Lucas Enriques, Merritt Fox, Rafael LaPorta, Ross Levine, Florencio López-de-Silanes, Marco
Pagano, Enrico Perotti, Katharina Pistor, Mark Rameseyer, Andrei Shleifer, Richard Sylla, and Bernard
Yeung; as well as participants at the University of Alberta/NBER conference at Lake Louise, Alberta and
the CBPR/ECGN/INSEAD/University of Alberta/NBER conference in Fontainebleau, France, the Corporate
Governance Forum of Turkey in Istanbul, the Academy of International Business conference in Stockholm.
This research was supported by the University of Alberta School of Business and the University of Alberta
Centre for Entrepreneurship and Family Enterprise in cooperation with the National Bureau of Economic
Research. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Randall K. Morck and Lloyd Steier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Global History of Corporate Governance: An Introduction
Randall K. Morck and Lloyd Steier
NBER Working Paper No. 11062
January 2005
JEL No. G3, N2
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a synopsis of recent NBER studies of the history of corporate governance in
Canada, China, France, Germany, Japan, India, Italy, the Netherlands, Sweden, the United Kingdom,
and the United States. Together, the studies underscore the importance of path dependence, often as
far back into preindustrial period; legal system origin, though in a more nuanced form than mere
statutory shareholder rights; and wealthy families. They also clarify the roles of ideologies, business
groups, trust, institutional transplants, and politics in institutional evolution and financial
development. Other themes are the universality of business insiders’ investments in, entrenchment,
and a possible behavioral basis for this.
Randall K. Morck
Faculty of Business
University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB CANADA T6G 2R6
and NBER
randall.morck@ualberta.ca
Lloyd Steier
Faculty of Business
University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB CANADA T6G 2R6
lloyd.steier@ualberta.ca

The Global History of Corporate Governance – An Introduction
Randall Morck and Lloyd Steier
This paper presents a synopsis of recent NBER studies of the history of corporate governance in
Canada, China, France, Germany, Japan, India, Italy, the Netherlands, Sweden, the United
Kingdom, and the United States. Together, the studies underscore the importance of path
dependence, often as far back into preindustrial period; legal system origin, though in a more
nuanced form than mere statutory shareholder rights; and wealthy families. They also clarify the
roles of ideologies, business groups, trust, institutional transplants, and politics in institutional
evolution and financial development. Other themes are the universality of business insiders’
investments in, entrenchment, and a possible behavioral basis for this.
1. To Whom Dare We Entrust Corporate Governance?
Capitalism at the beginning of the 21st century is a variegated collection of economic systems. In
America, capitalism is a system where a huge number of independent corporations compete with
each other for customers. Monopolies are illegal, though the courts are sometimes an imperfect
safeguard against them. Each corporation has a CEO who dictates corporate policies and
strategies to a largely passive board of directors. The true owners of America’s great
corporations, millions of middle class shareholders, each owning a few hundred or a few
thousand shares, are disorganized and generally powerless. Only a handful of institutional
investors accumulate large stakes – three or even five percent of an occasional large firm’s stock
– that give them voices loud enough to carry into corporate boardrooms. Corporate CEOs use or
abuse their considerable powers in accordance with their individual political, social, and
economic beliefs. In much of the rest of the world, capitalism is a system where a handful of
immensely wealthy families control almost all of a country’s great corporations, and often its
government to boot. Competition is largely a mirage, for few firms are genuinely independent.
Professional managers are hired help, subservient to oligarchic family dynasties that jealously
safeguard their power, sometimes at great cost to their host economies.
The purpose of this volume is to explore how capitalism came to mean, and to be, such
different things in different parts of the world. How did some economies come to entrust the
governance of their great corporations to a handful of old moneyed families, while others place
their faith in professional CEOs?
Such different usages of the word capitalism make for difficult communication.
American economists are often baffled by the reluctance of seemingly well-educated foreigners to
embrace the tenets of free enterprise, and foreign economists marvel at the naive simplicity of
their American colleagues. In fact, each would do well to take the other more seriously. The rest
of the world is not simply unlike America, but usually poorer to varying degrees. Different
countries’ economies are organized in very different ways, and corporate governance – that is,
decisions about how capital is allocated, both across and within firms – is entrusted to very
different sorts of people and constrained by very different institutions.
A key study that forces this point upon the economics profession is by La Porta et al.
(1999), who contrast the ownership of large and medium sized companies across countries.
Figure 1 illustrates their findings.1 The central message of Figure 1 is how very different
1 La Porta et al. (1999) list several large German and Japanese firms as having no controlling shareholder.
However, because German banks typically vote the shares of small investors, Baums (1995) shows that
these firms are actually controlled by banks. All the large Japanese firms La Porta et al. (1999) list as
having no controlling shareholder are members of corporate groups called keiretsu, in which each firm is
controlled collectively by other firms in the group. Although each group firm’s stake in every other group
1

different countries are. The large corporate sector of Mexico is entirely controlled by a few
enormously wealthy families, whereas all the largest British companies get by with no controlling
shareholders at all. Most Argentine firms are controlled by wealthy families, but most great
American corporations are not. Wealthy family domination of great corporations is not restricted
to poor countries, but also characterizes relatively rich economies like Israel, Hong Kong, and
Sweden.
[Figure 1 about here]
Nonetheless, Claessens et al. (2000), Khanna and Rivkin (2001), and many others
document the ubiquity of family controlled corporate groups in poor countries. In general, poor
economies have corporate sectors controlled by some mixture of state organs and wealthy
families. The variety illustrated in Figure 1 is primarily a feature of the developed world.
The fact that most large United Kingdom and United States firms are widely held, while
most large firms elsewhere are controlled by a few wealthy families, is perhaps insufficient to
explain the different perceptions of capitalism that hold force in different countries, for
independent firms that compete with each other still lead to economic efficiency regardless of
who controls them. However, a second feature of corporate governance in most countries, the
pyramidal business group or pyramid for short, magnifies the economic importance of this
difference enough to create genuinely different economic systems, all of which go by the name of
capitalism.
A pyramid is a structure in which an apex shareholder, usually a very wealthy family,
controls a single company, which may or may not be listed. This company then holds control
blocks in other listed companies. Each of these holds control blocks in yet more listed
companies, and each of these controls yet more listed companies. Structures such as these are
ubiquitous outside the United Kingdom and United States. They can contain dozens or hundreds
of firms, listed and private, and put vast sweeps of a nation’s economy under the control of a
single family. These are the structures that permit tiny elites to control the greater parts of the
corporate sectors of many countries.
Berle and Means (1932), Bebchuk et al. (2000), Morck et al. (2000), Claessens et al.
(2000), and many others demonstrate the severe corporate governance problems that can occur in
pyramidal business groups. However, these problems are only of interest in this volume to the
extent that they motivate the formation of business groups, or their dissolution. Our focus is on
how the differences in corporate control illustrated in Figure 1 came to be.
The remainder of this chapter is laid out as follows: Section 2 explains why the
differences outlined in Figure 1 matter. Indeed, they are the key distinguishing features that
define different forms of capitalism. Section 3 then briefly describes the key arguments and
findings of each chapter. Section 4 then sorts through these findings, highlighting common
threads that connect to current thinking about corporate governance. Section 4 considers the
implications of these threads, and Section 5 provides a summary.
2. Does It Matter?
Capitalism is so-called because it is an economic system organized around the production and
allocation of capital. The savings of individuals are the basis of all capital. Yet the ways in
which economies accumulate and allocate capital are quite different in different countries, and
seem closely related to how each handles corporate governance issues.
firm can be small, these stakes accumulate to control blocks. Figure 1 is based on La Porta et al. (1999) for
all other countries. We are grateful to Raphael La Porta for making the names of the top firms in each
country available to us.
2