NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AN ASSIGNMENT THEORY OF FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT
Volker Nocke
Stephen Yeaple
Working Paper 11003
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11003
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2004
The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support by the National Science Foundation (grant SES-
0422778) and the University of Pennsylvania Research Foundation. We would like to thank seminar
audiences at the University of Pennsylvania, Princeton University, Michigan State University, the University
of Michigan, the University of Texas-Austin, Pennsylvania State University, the 2004 Winter Meeting of the
NBER ITI program (Stanford), and the 2004 International Economics Conference at UC Santa Cruz. The
statistical analysis of firm-level data on U.S. Multinational Corporations reported in this study was conducted
at the International Investment Division, U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, under arrangement that
maintained legal confidentiality requirements. Views expressed are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect those of the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Volker Nocke and Stephen Yeaple. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment
Volker Nocke and Stephen Yeaple
NBER Working Paper No. 11003
December 2004
JEL No. F12, F14, F23, L11
ABSTRACT
We develop an assignment theory to analyze the volume and composition of foreign direct
investment (FDI). Firms conduct FDI by either engaging in greenfield investment or in cross-border
acquisitions. Cross-border acquisitions involve firms trading heterogeneous corporate assets to
exploit complementarities, while greenfield FDI involves building a new plant in the foreign market.
In equilibrium, greenfield FDI and cross-border acquisitions co-exist, but the composition of FDI
between these modes varies with firm and country characteristics. Firms engaging in greenfield
investment are systematically more efficient than those engaging in cross-border acquisitions.
Furthermore, most FDI takes the form of cross-border acquisitions when factor price differences
between countries are small, while greenfield investment plays a more important role for FDI from
high-wage into low-wage countries. These results capture important features of the data.
Volker Nocke
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
nocke@econ.upenn.edu
Stephen Yeaple
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
snyeapl2@ssc.upenn.edu

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment 1
1 Introduction
Multinational enterprises (MNEs) play a dominant role in an increasingly globalized world.
In 1999, the domestic operations of the approximately 2,400 U.S. multinational enterprises
accounted for approximately 26 percent of U.S. GDP, 63 percent of U.S. exports, 37 percent
of U.S. imports, and 68 percent of U.S. R&D expenditures (Mataloni and Yorganson, 2002).
Thatyear, nearlyhalfof allU.S.manufacturingworkerswereemployedbyU.S.multinationals.
Despite their economic importance, the investment decisions of multinationals are not yet
well understood. With few exceptions, the trade literature has not distinguished between
the two modes in which a multinational enterprise can engage in foreign direct investment
(FDI): cross-border acquisition (entering a foreign market by buying an existing enterprise)
and greenfield FDI (entering a foreign market by building a new enterprise). Consequently,
the literature has been preoccupied with understanding the volume of FDI, neglecting its
composition across modes.
To the extent that MNEs do not view cross-border acquisitions and greenfield FDI as per-
fect substitutes, trade economists and policy makers should care not only about the volume
of FDI, but also about its composition. Indeed, governments of many host countries perceive
cross-border acquisitions as being rather different from greenfield FDI.1 Any change in policies
towardsFDIandany variation in country characteristicsislikely to affectcross-border acquisi-
tions and greenfield FDI differently. Therefore, the volume of FDI cannot fully be understood
without first understanding its composition.
If our hypothesis that cross-border acquisitions and greenfield FDI are not perfect substi-
tutes is correct, then this should show up in the data: there should be systematic differences
in FDI mode choice across MNEs. Indeed, if the two FDI modes were perfect substitutes, then
all firms would be indifferent between the two modes, and so there should be no systematic
variation in mode choice across firms within the same industry. In figure 1, we explore the
relationship between a U.S. multinational’s efficiency and its propensity to favor cross-border
acquisitions over greenfield FDI. This figure is constructed using data from the Bureau of
Economic Analysis (BEA) on outward FDI of U.S. multinational enterprises over the period
1994-1998. From this dataset, we construct two measures of a U.S. multinational’s efficiency:
1See, for example, United Nations Center for Transnational Corporations (2000, p. xxiii).

An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Investment 2
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Low Middle High
Firm Efficiency
snoitisiuqcA
redroB-ssorC
fo
erahS
U.S. Sales Gross Product per Worker
Figure1: TheShareofCross-BorderAcquisitionsinTotalU.S.OutwardFDIbyFirmEfficiency
(i) the parent company’s sales in the U.S. (relative to its industry mean),2 and (ii) the parent
company’s value added per worker in the U.S. (relative to its industry mean). Based on each
measure of firm efficiency, we sort MNE’s into three equally-sized bins: “low”, “medium”, and
“high”efficiency. Thefigurerevealsthatfirmsarelesslikelytochoosecross-borderacquisitions
over greenfield FDI the more efficient they are.3 The fact that FDI mode choice varies system-
atically with firm characteristics shows that cross-border acquisitions and greenfield FDI are
not perfect substitutes.
FDI mode choice varies not only across firms, but also across host countries with different
levels of development. In figure 2, we explore the relationship between a host country’s level
2Most models of firm heterogeneity predict a monotonic relationship between firm efficiency and sales.
3As the econometric analyis in the appendix shows, this relationship is robust to including various control
variables that might affect FDI mode choice. Additional information concerning the construction of the data is
also provided in the appendix.