NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXECUTIVE FINANCIAL INCENTIVES AND PAYOUT POLICY:
FIRM RESPONSES TO THE 2003 DIVIDEND TAX CUT
Jeffrey R. Brown
Nellie Liang
Scott Weisbenner
Working Paper 11002
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11002
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2004
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Board. We thank Darrell Ashton, Vivek Choudhary, Yoon Sok Lee, and Lizy Mathai for
excellent research assistance. We thank John Graham, Paul Harrison, Kevin Hassett, and seminar
participants at the University of Illinois, the Federal Reserve Board, the American Enterprise
Institute, and the 2006 AFA Meetings for their comments and constructive suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Jeffrey R. Brown, Nellie Liang, and Scott Weisbenner. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Executive Financial Incentives and Payout Policy: Firm Responses to the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut
Jeffrey R. Brown, Nellie Liang, and Scott Weisbenner
NBER Working Paper No. 11002
December 2004, Revised July 2006
JEL No. G32, G35, H24
ABSTRACT
We test whether executive stock ownership affects firm payouts using the 2003 dividend tax cut to
identify an exogenous change in the after-tax value of dividends. We find that executives with higher
stock ownership were more likely to increase dividends after the tax cut in 2003, whereas no relation
is found in previous periods when the dividend tax rate was higher. Relative to previous years, firms
that initiated dividends in 2003 were more likely to reduce repurchases. The stock price reaction to
the tax cut suggests that the substitution of dividends for repurchases may have been anticipated,
consistent with agency conflicts.
Jeffrey R. Brown Nellie Liang Scott Weisbenner
340 Wohlers Hall Federal Reserve Board 304C David Kinley Hall
University of Illinois 20th and Constitution Avenue, MC-706
at Urbana-Champaign NW University of Illinois at
Champaign, IL 61820 Washington, DC 20551 Urbana-Champaign
and NBER nliang@frb.gov Urbana, IL 61801
brownjr@uiuc.edu and NBER
weisbenn@uiuc.edu

Introduction
Shareholder payouts have changed dramatically over the past two decades, with dividend payout
ratios falling substantially and share repurchases increasing rapidly (Fama and French (2001),
Grullon and Michaely (2002)). Following the dividend tax cut in the Jobs and Growth Tax
Relief Reconciliation Act (JGTRRA) of May 2003, however, dividend activity increased sharply,
particularly the number of dividend initiations (e.g., Blouin, Raedy and Shackelford (2004),
Chetty and Saez (2005)).1 The dividend tax cut represented a large increase in the after-tax
value of dividends to individual investors, as the top marginal tax rate on dividends was cut over
20 percentage points, from 38.6% to 15%.2 This tax change moved from initial proposal to
signed law in under five months, and was thus largely unanticipated prior to 2003. Because this
tax cut is an exogenous increase in the after-tax value of dividends to individual investors, it
represents a unique laboratory for using actual firm behavior to determine the role of taxes and
other factors that affect dividend policy.
We use this dividend tax change to answer three questions. First, what determines how
firms responded to the dividend tax cut? In particular, can executive stock holdings explain the
cross-sectional pattern of dividend increases? Second, do the dividend increases raise total firm
payouts, or are they partially offset by reduced share repurchases? Third, by examining share
price reactions around key events leading to the tax cut, are we able to shed light on whether
these payout policy decisions reflect possible agency problems within firms?
Why might executive stock holdings influence the firm’s reaction to the dividend tax cut?
The 2003 dividend tax cut raised the after-tax value of a $1 dividend to high-income
shareholders from 61.4 cents to 85 cents, a 38% increase. Thus, the cost of initiating or
increasing dividend payments for executives who have large direct stock ownership decreased
substantially in 2003. Moreover, executives who are under-diversified with large company stock
ownership may place additional value on dividends for liquidity reasons, stemming from the fact
that they may face explicit/contractual restrictions (e.g., Core and Guay (1999)) or implicit
1

restrictions (e.g., insider sales may be viewed as a negative signal by the market) on their ability
to sell shares of stock.3
In contrast, firms whose executives are compensated primarily in the form of cash or
stock options would have no such incentives. Because employee stock options are rarely
dividend-protected (Murphy (1999)), executives compensated with options have a personal
financial incentive to limit dividends because they face a 100% implicit “tax” rate on dividends,
both before and after the dividend tax cut. That is, executive options fall in value with the
decline in the share price that would result from a cash dividend which is not offset by the receipt
of the dividend to option holders. Thus, while an executive who holds a large share of their
wealth in options would have a personal financial incentive to keep dividend payments low, this
is true both before and after the dividend tax cut. Indeed, several prior studies have found that
when managers have more of their wealth in the form of options, rather than direct shares, they
tend to use dividends less heavily (Lambert, Lanen and Larcker (1989), Jolls (1998), Weisbenner
(2000), Fenn and Liang (2001), Kahle (2002)).
These prior studies, however, did not have any exogenous shift in the relative cost of
distributing cash through dividends or repurchases. Because of this lack of exogenous variation,
the previous literature is subject to the criticism that the cross-sectional correlation between
executive compensation and payout policy may reflect unobservable characteristics, such as
managerial quality or corporate governance, that generate both compensation policy and
dividend policy. A key contribution of our study is that we use the unexpected and exogenous
shift in the relative cost of paying dividends that arises from the tax change to address these
criticisms and thus provide stronger econometric identification of the relations of interest.
More recently, in work conducted simultaneously with ours, other authors have also
investigated the effect of the 2003 tax cut on firm payout behavior. While Chetty and Saez
(2005) and Nam, Wang and Zhang (2004) are focused primarily on establishing a causal link
between the tax cut and increased dividend activity, they do provide some cross-sectional
evidence that dividend increases are positively related to share ownership by managers.4 Blouin,
2