NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DYNAMIC SCORING:
A BACK-OF-THE-ENVELOPE GUIDE
n. Gregory Mankiw
Matthew Weinzierl
Working Paper 11000
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11000
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2004
We are grateful to Brent Neiman, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Alan Viard for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 2004 by N. Gregory Mankiw and Matthew Weinzierl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Dynamic Scoring: A Back-of-the-Envelope Guide
N. Gregory Mankiw and Matthew Weinzierl
NBER Working Paper No. 11000
December 2004
JEL No. E1, H3, H6
ABSTRACT
This paper uses the neoclassical growth model to examine the extent to which a tax cut pays for itself
through higher economic growth. The model yields simple expressions for the steady-state feedback
effect of a tax cut. The feedback is surprisingly large: for standard parameter values, half of a capital
tax cut is self-financing. The paper considers various generalizations of the basic model, including
elastic labor supply departures from infinite horizons, and non-neoclassical production settings. It
also examines how the steady-state results are modified when one considers the transition path to
the steady state.
N. Gregory Mankiw
Department of Economics
223 Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ngmankiw@harvard.edu
Matthew Weinzierl
Department of Economics
200 Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
weinzer@fas.harvard.edu

Introduction
To what extent does a tax cut pay for itself? This question arises regularly for
economistsworkingatgovernmentagenciesinchargeofestimatingtaxrevenues.
Traditional revenue estimation, called static scoring, assumes no feedback from
taxes to national income. The other extreme, illustrated by the renowned
Laffer curve, suggests that tax cuts can generate so much economic growth
that they completely (or even more than completely) pay for themselves. Most
economists are skeptical of both polar cases. They believe that taxes influence
nationalincomebutdoubtthatthegrowtheffectsarelargeenoughtomaketax
cuts self-financing. In other words, tax cuts pay for themselves in part, and the
open question is the magnitude of the effect.
In2002thestaffoftheJointTaxCommittee,promptedbyseveralmembers
of Congress, started work on the difficult task of dynamic scoring of tax policy.
That is, they started developing a set of economic models that might be used
toestimatethefeedbackeffectsoftaxproposals. Dynamicscoringalsoreceived
prominent discussion in a 2003 report by the Congressional Budget Office and
the 2004 Economic Report of the President. The task of dynamic scoring is
formidable, because there is little agreement about how best to model long-run
economic growth and the effect of taxes on the economy.
The purpose of this paper is to investigate what the neoclassical growth
model can contribute to this endeavor. The neoclassical growth model, first
introduced by Ramsey (1928), is the most widely taught model of capital accu-
mulation and long-run growth and is the workhorse of modern growth theory.
For example, see the popular graduate-level textbooks by Romer (2001) and
Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1999). This model is also widely used for thinking
about issues in public finance (Chamley 1986; Judd 1985). Here we use the
neoclassicalgrowthmodeltoconsidertherevenueeffectsofchangesintaxrates
on capital and labor income. One virtue of the model is that it sheds light on
the key parameters that govern these revenue effects. The model also yields
simple formulas for how much the dynamic estimates of these revenue effects
differ from the static estimates.1
These formulas permit some illuminating back-of-the-envelope calculations.
For conventional parameter values, the model implies substantial feedback ef-
fects in the steady state. For example, suppose that the initial tax rates on
capital and labor are 25 percent, the production function is Cobb-Douglas, the
capital share is one-third, and labor supply is inelastic. Then, in the steady
1Inadditiontotheworksalreadycited,ouranalysisisrelatedtoseveralstrandsoftheliter-
atureonfiscalpolicy. OneprominentexampleisAuerbachandKotlikoff(1987),whoanalyze
taxchangesusingcomputer-basedsimulationsofoverlapping-generationsmodels. Thesubset
of the literature closest to this paper has typically focused on Laffer effects: the possibility
that tax cuts can be fully self-financing (e.g., Pecorino 1995, Ireland 1994, and Novales and
Ruiz 2002). McGrattan (1994) uses a framework similar to ours but is primarily concerned
withtheimpactofchangingtaxesonexplainingeconomicfluctuations;thefeedbackeffectof
tax rates on tax revenue is implicit in her analysis. Despite the large related literature, we
know of no research that derives analytical expressions for the feedback effects that are the
focus of this paper.
2

state,thedynamiceffectofacutincapitalincometaxesongovernmentrevenue
isonly50percentofthestaticeffect. Thatis,one-halfofacapitaltaxcutpays
for itself.
TherearevariouswaysinwhichthebenchmarkRamseymodelcanbegener-
alized. Oneistoincludeelasticlaborsupply. Weshowthatthisgeneralization
has only minor effects on the analysis of capital income taxes, but it has sig-
nificant effects on the analysis of labor income taxes. We assume a form of
preferencesthat yields notrendinhoursworked, astheuncompensatedelastic-
ityoflaborsupplyiszero. Thecompensated(constant-consumption)elasticity
of labor supply, however, need not be zero. If this elasticity is one-half and the
other parameters are as described above, then the steady-state feedback from
a labor income tax cut rises from zero to 17 percent. The model shows that,
regardlessofthelaborsupplyelasticity,ifcapitalandlabortaxratesstartoffat
the same level, cuts in capital taxes have greater feedback effects in the steady
state than cuts in labor taxes.
Many economists are skeptical of the Ramsey model because of its assump-
tion of an infinite-horizon consumer. We therefore introduce finite horizons
in two ways. We first add some rule-of-thumb households that consume their
entire labor income in each period, but we find that this has no effect on the
steady-stateresults. Theinfinite-horizonconsumersdominateinthelongrun,as
is suggested by the earlier work of Judd (1985), Smetters (1999), and Mankiw
(2000). Alternatively, if all consumers have finite horizons, as in Blanchard
(1985), the results change. Yet the changes are quantitatively modest for plau-
sible parameter values. For example, if households have an expected horizon
of 50 years, then the fraction of a capital tax cut paid for by growth falls from
50 percent to 45 percent.
We also consider two widely discussed departures from the neoclassical pro-
duction setting. We first consider the impact of imperfect competition, for
Judd(2002)hasshownthatmarketpowercansubstantiallychangetheanalysis
of optimal tax policy. We find that market power can raise the ability of tax
cuts to be self-financing, but only if there are substantial economic profits not
dissipated by the fixed costs associated with entry. We also examine the possi-
bility that there are positive externalities to capital accumulation, as suggested
by Romer (1987) and DeLong and Summers (1991). In this case, the dynamic
effects of tax changes are much larger than they are in the standard model.
Theneoclassicalmodelyieldsparticularlysimpleexpressionsforsteady-state
feedback effects, but it is also important to consider the transition path to the
steadystate. Wethereforeconsideralog-linearizedversionofthemodelforthe
specialcaseofunitaryintertemporalelasticityofsubstitution. Forourcanonical
parametervalues, wefindthattheimmediaterevenuefeedbackeffectsarequite
similar for capital and labor taxes: slightly more than 10 percent of a tax cut
immediately pays for itself through higher labor supply and national income.
For both types of taxes, the feedbackgrows overtime toward their steady-state
values, reaching halfway after about ten years.
In all experiments that we consider, the government budget constraint is
satisfied, as it must be in any well-specified model. Throughout the paper, we
3