NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PRACTICAL VOLATILITY AND CORRELATION MODELING
FOR FINANCIAL MARKET RISK MANAGEMENT
Torben G. Andersen
Tim Bollerslev
Peter F. Christoffersen
Francis X. Diebold
Working Paper 11069
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11069
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2005
This paper is prepared for Mark Carey and René Stulz (eds.), Risks of Financial Institutions, University of
Chicago Press for NBER. For helpful comments we would like to thank Ken Abbott, Casper de Vries, Philipp
Hartmann, Patricia Jackson, Jim O'Brien, Hashem Pesaran, and Pedro Santa-Clara. For research support,
Andersen, Bollerslev and Diebold thank the U.S. National Science Foundation, and Christoffersen thanks
FQRSC, SSHRC and IFM2. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Torben G. Andersen, Tim Bollerslev, Peter F. Christoffersen, and Francis X. Diebold. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Practical Volatility and Correlation Modeling for Financial Market Risk Management
Torben G. Andersen, Tim Bollerslev, Peter F. Christoffersen, and Francis X. Diebold
NBER Working Paper No. 11069
January 2005
JEL No. G1
ABSTRACT
What do academics have to offer market risk management practitioners in financial institutions?
Current industry practice largely follows one of two extremely restrictive approaches: historical
simulation or RiskMetrics. In contrast, we favor flexible methods based on recent developments in
financial econometrics, which are likely to produce more accurate assessments of market risk.
(cid:1)
Clearly, the demands of real-world risk management in financial institutions in particular, real-
(cid:1)
time risk tracking in very high-dimensional situations impose strict limits on model complexity.
Hence we stress parsimonious models that are easily estimated, and we discuss a variety of practical
approaches for high-dimensional covariance matrix modeling, along with what we see as some of
the pitfalls and problems in current practice. In so doing we hope to encourage further dialog
between the academic and practitioner communities, hopefully stimulating the development of
improved market risk management technologies that draw on the best of both worlds.
Torben G. Andersen Peter F. Christoffersen
Department of Finance Faculty of Management
Kellogg School of Management McGill University
Northwestern University Montreal, Quebec H3A 1G5
Evanston, IL 60208 peter.christoffersen@mcgill.ca
and NBER
t-andersen@kellogg.northwestern.edu Francis X. Diebold
Department of Economics
Tim Bollerslev University of Pennsylvania
Department of Economics Philadelphia, PA 19104
Duke University and NBER
Durham, NC 27708 fdiebold@sas.upenn.edu
and NBER
boller@econ.duke.edu

1. Introduction
It is now widely agreed that financial asset return volatilities and correlations (henceforth
“volatilities”) are time-varying, with persistent dynamics. This is true across assets, asset classes,
time periods, and countries. Moreover, asset return volatilities are central to finance, whether in
asset pricing, portfolio allocation, or market risk measurement. Hence the field of financial
econometrics devotes considerable attention to time-varying volatility and associated tools for its
measurement, modeling and forecasting.
Here we survey, unify and extend recent developments in the financial econometrics of
time-varying volatility, focusing exclusively on practical applications to the measurement and
management of market risk, stressing parsimonious models that are easily estimated. Our
ultimate goal is to stimulate dialog between the academic and practitioner communities,
advancing best-practice market risk measurement and management technologies by drawing
upon the best of both worlds. Three themes appear repeatedly, and so we highlight them here.
The first is the issue of aggregation level. We consider both aggregated (portfolio level)
and disaggregated (asset level) modeling, emphasizing the related distinction between risk
measurement and risk management, because risk measurement generally requires only a
portfolio-level model, whereas risk management requires an asset-level model. At the asset level,
the issue of dimensionality and dimensionality reduction arises repeatedly, and we devote
considerable attention to methods for tractable modeling of the very high-dimensional
covariance matrices of practical relevance.
The second theme concerns the use of low-frequency vs. high-frequency data, and the
associated issue of parametric vs. nonparametric volatility measurement. We treat all cases, but
we emphasize the appeal of volatility measurement using nonparametric methods in conjunction
with high-frequency data, followed by modeling that is intentionally parametric.
The third theme relates to the issue of unconditional vs. conditional risk measurement.
We argue that, for most financial risk management purposes, the conditional perspective is
exclusively relevant, notwithstanding, for example, the fact that popular approaches based on
historical simulation and extreme-value theory typically adopt an unconditional perspective. We
advocate, moreover, moving beyond a conditional volatility perspective to a full conditional
density perspective, and we discuss methods for constructing and evaluating full conditional
density forecasts.
We proceed systematically in several steps. In section 2, we consider portfolio level
analysis, directly modeling portfolio volatility using historical simulation, exponential
smoothing, and GARCH methods. In section 3, we consider asset level analysis, modeling asset
covariance matrices using exponential smoothing and multivariate GARCH methods, paying
special attention to dimensionality-reduction methods. In section 4, we explore the use of high-
frequency data for improved covariance matrix measurement and modeling, treating realized
variance and covariance, and again discussing procedures for dimensionality reduction. In
section 5 we treat the construction of complete conditional density forecasts via simulation
methods. We conclude in section 6.

2. Portfolio Level Analysis: Modeling Portfolio Volatility
Portfolio risk measurement requires only a univariate, portfolio-level model (e.g., Benson
and Zangari, 1997). In this section we discuss such univariate, portfolio-based methods. In
contrast, active portfolio risk management, including portfolio allocation, requires a multivariate
model, as we discuss subsequently in section 3.
In particular, portfolio level analysis is rarely done other than via historical simulation
(defined below). But we will argue that there is no reason why one cannot estimate a
parsimonious dynamic model for portfolio level returns. If interest centers on the distribution of
the portfolio returns, then this distribution can be modeled directly rather than via aggregation
based on a larger and almost inevitably less-well-specified multivariate model.
Berkowitz and O’Brien (2002) find evidence that existing bank risk models perform
poorly and are easy outperformed by a simple univariate GARCH model (defined below). Their
result is remarkable in that they estimate a GARCH model fit to the time series of actual
historical portfolio returns where the underlying asset weights are changing over time. Berkowitz
and O’Brien find that bank’s reported Value-at-Risk (VaRs) on average underestimate risk when
comparing ex post P/Ls with ex ante VaR forecasts. This finding could however simply be due to
the reported P/Ls being “dirty” in that they contain non-risky income from fees, commissions
and intraday trading profits.1 More seriously though, Berkowitz and O’Brien find that the VaR
violations which do occur tend to cluster in time. Episodes such as the Fall 1998 Russia default
and LTCM debacle set off a dramatic and persistent increase in market volatility which bank
models appear to largely ignore, or at least react to with considerable delay. Such VaR violation
clustering is evidence of a lack of conditionality in bank VaR systems which in turn is a key
theme in our discussion below.2
We first discuss the construction of historical portfolio values, which is a necessary
precursor to any portfolio-level VaR analysis. We then discuss direct computation of portfolio
VaR via historical simulation, exponential smoothing, and GARCH modeling.3
2.1 Constructing Historical Pseudo Portfolio Values
In principle it is easy to construct a time series of historical portfolio returns using current
1 Even though the Basel Accord calls for banks to report 1% VaR’s, for various reasons
most banks tend to actually report more conservative VaR’s. Rather than simply scaling up a 1%
VaR based on some “arbitrary” multiplication factor, the procedures that we discuss below is
readily adapted to achieve any desired, more conservative, VaR.
2 See also Jackson, Maude and Perraudin (1997).
3 Duffie and Pan (1997) provide an earlier incisive discussion of related VaR procedures
and corresponding practical empirical problems.
2