NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT VS
FOREIGN PORTFOLIO INVESTMENT
Goldstein Itay
Assaf Razin
Working Paper 11047
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11047
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2005
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Goldstein Itay and Assaf Razin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Foreign Direct Investment vs Foreign Portfolio Investment
Goldstein Itay and Assaf Razin
NBER Working Paper No. 11047
January 2005
JEL No. F3
ABSTRACT
The paper develops a model of foreign direct investments (FDI) and foreign portfolio investments
(FPI). FDI is characterized by hands-on management style which enables the owner to obtain
relatively refined information about the productivity of the firm. This superiority, relative to FPI,
comes with a cost: a firm owned by the relatively well-informed FDI investor has a low resale price
because of a "lemons" type asymmetric information between the owner and potential buyers. The
model can explain several stylized facts regarding foreign equity flows, such as the larger ratio of
FDI to FPI inflows in developing countries relative to developed countries, and the smaller volatility
of FDI net inflows relative to FPI net inflows.
Itay Goldstein
Finance Department
The Warton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
itayg@wharton.upenn.edu
Assaf Razin
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 69978
ISRAEL
and NBER
razin@post.tau.ac.il

Foreign Direct Investment vs Foreign Portfolio Investment
∗
Itay Goldstein and Assaf Razin
† ‡
December 2004
Abstract
Thepaperdevelopsamodelofforeigndirectinvestments(FDI)andforeignportfolioinvest-
ments (FPI). In the model, FDI is characterized by hands-on management style which enables
the owner to obtain relatively refined information about the productivity of the firm. This
superiority, relative to FPI, comes with a cost: a firm owned by the relatively well-informed
FDIinvestorhasalowresalepricebecauseofa”lemons”typeasymmetricinformationbetween
the owner and potential buyers. The model can explain several stylized facts regarding foreign
equity flows, such as the larger ratio of FDI to FPI inflows in developing countries relative to
developed countries, and the greater volatility of FDI net inflows relative to FPI net inflows.
1 Introduction
International equity flows are the main feature of the recent globalization of capital markets both
in developing and in developed economies. These flows take two major forms: Foreign Direct
We thank Patrick Bolton, Amit Goyal, Alexander Guembel, Michael Klein, Enrique Mendoza, Oved Yosha, the
∗
editor (Linda Tesar), and two referees for valuable discussions and comments. We also thank seminar participants
at Cornell University, London Business School, Tel Aviv University, the University of California at Berkeley and
participants at the following conferences: The LACEA annual meeting (October 2002), the fall meeting of the
NBER IFM research group (October 2002), the Summer Meetings of the Econometric Society (June 2003), and the
International Finance Conference at Georgia Tech (April 2004). All remaining errors are ours.
Finance Department, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, 3620 Locust Walk, Philadelphia, PA
†
19104. Tel: 1-215-746-0499. E-mail: itayg@wharton.upenn.edu
Eitan Berglas School of Economics, Tel Aviv University; Department of Economics, Cornell University; CEPR
‡
and NBER. E-mail: razin@post.tau.ac.il.
1

Investments (FDI) and Foreign Portfolio Investments (FPI). An empirical regularity is that the
share of FDI in total foreign equity flows is larger for developing countries than for developed
countries.1 Regarding the second moments of foreign equity flows, it is known that the volatility
of FDI net inflows is, in general, much smaller than that of FPI net inflows.2 Moreover, empirical
analysis has established that the differences in volatility between FPI and FDI flows are much
smaller for developed economies than for developing economies.3
Despite the empirical interest in foreign equity flows, very little work has been done on jointly
explaining FDI and FPI in a rigorous theoretical framework. In this paper, we propose such a
framework, and provide a model of a trade off between FDI and FPI, which is consistent with the
empirical facts mentioned above.
Our model highlights a key difference between the two types of investment: FDI investors, who
take both ownership and control positions in the domestic firms, are in effect the managers of the
firms under their control; whereas FPI investors, who gain ownership without control of domestic
firms, must delegate decisions to managers, but limit their freedom to make decisions because the
managers’ agenda may not be always consistent with that of the owners. Consequently, due to
an agency problem between managers and owners, portfolio investment projects are managed less
efficientlythandirectinvestmentprojects.4 Tobemorespecific,directinvestors,whoacteffectively
as managers of their own projects, are more informed than portfolio investors regarding changes
in the prospects of their projects. This information enables them to manage their projects more
efficiently. Thiseffectgenerates anadvantage, with anadded valuein the capital markets, to direct
investments relative to portfolio investments.
1For a summary, based on World Bank data, see Albuquerque (2003).
2Net inflows account for net investments made by foreign investors (that is, new investments by foreign investors
minus withdrawals of old investments by foreign investors).
Using World Bank data on 111 countries, Albuquerque (2003) shows that 89% of the countries in his sample have
lower coefficient of variation of net FDI inflows than that of other net inflows. A related set of evidence suggests
that FDI has proven to be much more resilient during financial crises, and thus contributes to the stability of the
host country. (See: Chuhan, Perez-Quiros and Popper, 1996; Frankel and Rose, 1996; Lipsey, 2001; and Sarno and
Taylor, 1999).
3Lipsey(1999)showsthattheratioofFDI’svolatilitytootherlong-termflows’volatilityis0.59inLatinAmerica,
0.74 in South East Asia, 0.86 in Europe, and 0.88 in the US. Thus, the differences in volatilities between net FDI
inflows and other types of net inflows are smaller in developed economies.
4For a recent survey on agency problems and their effect on financial contracting, see: Hart (2000).
2