NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REDUCING THE RISK OF INVESTMENT-BASED
SOCIAL SECURITY REFORM
Martin Feldstein
Working Paper 11084
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11084
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2005
This paper is a report on a project that is exploring alternative ways of dealing with the risk in investment-
based Social Security pension plans. I am grateful to Eugene Soltes and Xuan Qin for the calculations in this
paper. The research was supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration through grant #10-P-98363-1
to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the SSA Retirement Research Consortium. The
opinions and conclusions expressed are solely those of the author and do not represent the opinions or policy
of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER.
© 2005 by Martin Feldstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Reducing the Risk of Investment-Based Social Security Reform
Martin Feldstein
NBER Working Paper No. 11084
January 2005
JEL No. H0, H3, H5
ABSTRACT
This paper describes the risks implied by a mixed system of Social Security pension benefits
with different combinations of pay-as-you-go taxes and personal retirement account (PRA) saving.
The analysis shows how these risks can be reduced by using alternative private market guarantee
strategies. The first such strategy uses a blend of equities and TIPS to guarantee at least a positive
real rate or return on each year’s PRA saving. The second is an explicit zero-cost collar that
guarantees an annual rate of return by giving up all returns above a certain level. One variant of these
guarantees uses a two stage procedure: a guaranteed return to age 66 and then a separate guarantee
on the implicit return in the annuity phase. An alternative strategy provides a combined guarantee
on the return during both the accumulation and the annuity phase.
Simulations are presented of the probability distributions of retirement incomes relative to
the “benchmark” benefits specified in current law. Calculations of expected utility show that these
risk reduction techniques can raise expected utility relative to the plans with no guarantees. The
ability to do so depends on the individual’s risk aversion level. This underlines the idea that
different individuals would rationally prefer different investment strategies and risk reduction
options.
Martin Feldstein
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
feldstein@nber.org

Reducing the Risk of Investment-Based Social Security Reform
Martin Feldstein*
Many governments around the world – including Australia and Britain, Sweden and
Mexico, China and Chile – have shifted from pure pay-as-you-go tax financed Social Security
pensions to plans that rely in whole or in part on investments in stocks and bonds. There is now
active discussion about the desirability of doing so in the United States. The Clinton
administration came close to proposing such a plan. President Bush established a bipartisan
presidential commission to advise on detailed aspects of such a plan and, after his reelection in
2004, reiterated his intention to introduce legislation to change Social Security in this way.
Any consideration of introducing an investment-based component into Social Security
immediately raises the issue of the risk associated with uncertain asset returns. Some individuals
would welcome the opportunity to achieve a higher return on their Social Security contributions
even if that entails accepting additional market risk. Others would be reluctant to subject their
retirement income to the uncertainty of investment returns. More generally, individuals differ in
the extent to which they would accept additional risk in exchange for higher returns.
This paper presents a new market-based approach to reducing the risk of investment-
*Professor of Economics, Harvard University and President of the National Bureau of
Economic Research. This paper is a report on a project that is exploring alternative ways of
dealing with the risk in investment-based Social Security pension plans. I am grateful to Eugene
Soltes and Xuan Qin for the calculations in this paper. The research was supported by the U.S.
Social Security Administration through grant #10-P-98363-1 to the National Bureau of Economic
Research as part of the SSA Retirement Research Consortium. The opinions and conclusions
expressed are solely those of the author and do not represent the opinions or policy of SSA, any
agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER.
-1-

based Social Security that could be tailored to individual risk preferences. With this new form of
risk reduction, substituting an investment-based personal retirement account (PRA) for the
traditional pure pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) plan could achieve both a significantly higher expected
retirement income and a very high probability that the investment-based annuity would be at
least as large as the pay-as-you-go benefit. A key feature of the approach developed here is a
guarantee that the individual would not lose any of the real value of each year’s PRA savings and
might be guaranteed to earn at least some minimum real rate of return.
In one example of such a plan that is presented later in this paper, I examine the effect of
replacing the current 12.4 percent pay-as-you-go tax with a mixed plan that has a 6.2 percent pay-
as-you-go tax and 6.2 percent annual PRA savings. This new mixed plan, when fully phased in,
would have the following desirable characteristics:
- The median value of the combined retirement income (i.e., the sum of the pay-as-you-
go benefit and the PRA annuity) would be 147 percent of the traditional pay-as-you-go
benefit.
- There would be a 95 percent probability that the combined retirement income (the pay-
as-you-go benefit and the PRA annuity) exceeds the traditional pay-as-you-go benefit.
- There would be less than one chance in one hundred that the combined retirement
income would be less than 96 percent of the traditional pay-as-you-go benefit.
- Each year’s PRA saving would be guaranteed to earn at least a one percent real rate of
return between the time that it is saved and its value at age 66 (and generally substantially
more). I therefore refer to this as a “No Lose” plan.
- The variable annuity purchased at age 66 would have a similar “No Lose” feature, i.e., a
guaranteed real rate of return of at least one percent.
Section 1 of the paper discusses alternative approaches to risk reduction in investment-
based Social Security plans. The second section summarizes a private market approach to risk
-2-