NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW LAW AND INSTITUTIONS SHAPE FINANCIAL CONTRACTS:
THE CASE OF BANK LOANS
Jun Qian
Philip E. Strahan
Working Paper 11052
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11052
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2005
We appreciate helpful comments from Franklin Allen, Thorsten Beck, Ross Levine, Andrei Shleifer, Amir
Sufi, and seminar/session participants at Bank of England, Boston College, Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation, Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Philadelphia, Harvard, INSEAD, London Business
School, and the Financial Intermediation Research Society meetings in Capri, Italy. Geraldine Hough, Jean-
Marc Donics, Daniel Yang, and Zhe Xu provided excellent research assistance. Financial support from
Boston College is gratefully acknowledged. The authors are responsible for all remaining errors. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Jun Qian and Philip E. Strahan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

How Law and Institutions Shape Financial Contracts: The Case of Bank Loans
Jun Qian and Jun Qian
NBER Working Paper No. 11052
January 2005
JEL No. K0, G2, O5
ABSTRACT
We examine empirically how legal origin, creditor rights, property rights, legal formalism, and
financial development affect the design of price and non-price terms of bank loans in almost 60
countries. Our results support the law and finance view that private contracts reflect differences in
legal protection of creditors and the enforcement of contracts. Loans made to borrowers in countries
where creditors can seize collateral in case of default are more likely to be secured, have longer
maturity, and have lower interest rates. We also find evidence, however, that ?Coasian? bargaining
can partially offset weak legal or institutional arrangements. For example, lenders mitigate risks
associated with weak property rights and government corruption by securing loans with collateral
and shortening maturity. Our results also suggest that the choice of loan ownership structure affects
loan contract terms.
Jun Qian
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA
qianju@bc.edu
Philip E. Strahan
Carroll School of Management
324B Fulton Hall
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
philip.strahan@bc.edu

I. Introduction
In recent years, a substantial body of empirical evidence has linked laws and institutions to
the development of financial and economic systems. Pioneered and developed by La Porta,
Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (LLSV hereafter), among other authors, this literature
documents that the historical origin of a country’s legal system, in particular, countries with
English common-law origin vs. French civil-law origin, is strongly correlated with financial and
economic “outcomes”. For example, countries with English origin (French origin) provide the
strongest (weakest) legal protections to both shareholders and creditors (LLSV, 1998, 2000a).
Countries with English origin also seem to have better institutions, including less corrupt
governments (LLSV, 1999), more efficient courts and bankruptcy procedures (Djankov, La Porta,
Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, DLLS hereafter, 2003), and more informative accounting
standards. These better institutions, in turn, seem to lead to better outcomes for the financial
system. Relative to firms in French-origin countries, firms in English-origin countries have more
dispersed shareholder ownership (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, LLS hereafter, 1999),
rely more on external capital markets to raise funds (LLSV, 1997), have higher values (LLSV,
2002), and can enter a new market or industry more easily (DLLS, 2002).
Despite these connections from legal origin to institutions to financial/economic outcomes,
less is known about how these three links connect and relate to each other. In particular, does
legal origin, through its shaping of a country’s laws and institutions, cause observed differences in
outcomes? If so, through what channels? Related to the LLSV results, there is evidence that legal
origin does play an important role in explaining differences in financial systems and in economic
growth.1 For example, the English common law system is superior to the French civil law system
1 First, there is the finance and growth literature supporting the view that developing financial system stimulates
economic growth (e.g., McKinnon, 1973; King and Levine, 1993; Levine and Zervos, 1998). The second strand of
literature attempts to establish the link and causality of law, finance, and growth: for example, Levine (1999) provides
2

in its ability to adapt to evolving economic conditions (e.g., Hayek, 1960; Posner, 1973; Beck,
Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine, 2003b). As a result, firms in French civil law countries face higher
obstacles in accessing external finance than those in English common law countries (e.g., Beck et
al., 2003c).2
There are factors, however, that can alter the financial and economic outcomes as predicted
by LLSV papers. Perhaps the most important of these factors flows from the Coasian view that,
with low transactions costs, individuals can privately contract and protect each other’s rights and
interests irrespective of the law. According to this logic, “Coasian bargaining” allows agents to
undo the detrimental effects of a weak legal system. If some private contract terms substitute for
legal protections, for example, then links between legal institutions and outcomes ought to be
partially – or even fully – offset. It is reasonable to believe that an important aspect of the
transaction costs in Coasian bargaining is the efficiency of a country’s institutions.3
This paper studies how laws and institutions in different countries shape the ownership of
bank loans as well as the price and non-price terms of these contracts. We employ a data set of
loans originated between 1994 to 2003 in about 60 countries, and test how loan terms vary across
countries in a reduced form setting. We argue that bank loan contracts depend on country-level
variables incorporating legal and institutional factors, and on loan-level variables incorporating
borrower and loan characteristics. Our main focus is on the effects of country-level factors.
evidence at country level, Rajan and Zingales (1998) at the industry level, and Demirgüç-Kunt and Maksimovic
(1998) find firm-level evidence. Jayaratne and Strahan (1996) show that financial deregulation in U.S. banking was
followed by accelerated growth.
2 Other endeavors on understanding institutions include examining the endowment of geography and disease
environment in former colonial countries (e.g., Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2001, 2002; Beck, Demirgüç-
Kunt, and Levine, 2003a), property rights (e.g., Johnson, McMillan, and Woodruff, 2002), and religion and cultural
beliefs (e.g., Greif, 1994; Stulz and Williamson, 2003).
3 In this regard, Acemoglu and Johnson (2003) differentiate laws and institutions governing transactions between the
government/elites and ordinary citizens (property rights institutions) from those governing the transactions among
ordinary citizens (contracting institutions).
3