NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK TRADING RISK AND SYSTEMIC RISK
Philippe Jorion
Working Paper 11037
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11037
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2005
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Philippe Jorion. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bank Trading Risk and Systemic Risk
Philippe Jorion
NBER Working Paper No. 11037
January 2005
JEL No. G11, G21, G28
ABSTRACT
This paper provides an empirical analysis of the risk of trading revenues of U.S. commercial banks.
We collect quarterly data on trading revenues, broken down by business line, as well as the Value
at Risk-based market risk charge. The overall picture from these preliminary results is that there is
a fair amount of diversification across banks and within banks across business lines. These low
correlations do not corroborate systemic risk concerns. Neither is there evidence that the post-1998
period has witnessed an increase in volatility of trading revenues.
Philippe Jorion
University of California, Irvine
pjorion@uci.edu

P. Jorion-Bank Trading Risk and Systemic Risk
I. INTRODUCTION
The last decade has witnessed a revolution in financial risk management. Quantitative
techniques such as option pricing, portfolio insurance, and Value at Risk (VAR) have become
essential tools of portfolio management. The generalized use of these techniques, however, has
raised concerns that they could induce similar trading patterns, or “herding,” across banks using
VAR systems to limit their risks. As the argument goes, some exogenous shock to volatility
could push VAR above the limit, forcing banks to liquidate their positions, further depressing
falling prices.
If so, the generalized use of risk management systems could cause higher volatility in
times of stress, perversely making financial markets less safe than before. This could raise the
prospect of systemic risk, which arises when a shock threatens to create multiple simultaneous
failures in financial institutions.
Various theories have been advanced to explain herding behavior. A necessary
precondition for herding is that investors within a group tend to buy (or sell) when similar
participants buy (or sell). This could reflect the belief that other investors have superior
information, as in informational cascade theories.1 Alternatively, another class of contagion
theories emphasizes the effect of liquidity shocks, which force some market participants to
liquidate their holdings to obtain cash, perhaps due to a call for additional collateral.2 This
applies to participants with high leverage, such as bank proprietary trading desks or hedge funds.
The herding effect due to VAR is closest to this latter explanation. We can classify these herding
theories into “information-based” and “constraint-based” theories.
1 See Bikhchandani et al. (1992), Banerjee (1992), or more recently Morris and Shin (1998). Bikhchandani et al.
(1998) provide a useful survey of contagion models based on information asymmetries.
2 See Kodres and Pritsker (2002).
3

P. Jorion-Bank Trading Risk and Systemic Risk
In practice, the VAR-induced herding effect depends on commonalities in the positions in
financial institutions. As Morris and Shin (1999) have stated, “One theme which has emerged in
the subsequent debate on the performance of the risk management systems has been the criticism
that many financial entities entered the period of turbulence with very similar trading positions.”
Thus, VAR herding requires similar positions across VAR-constrained institutions. This
study tests this hypothesis by investigating the ex-ante and ex-post trading risk profile of U.S.
commercial banks based on quarterly banking reports over the period 1995 to 2003. These
reports contain information on quarterly trading revenues broken down by risk factor category as
well as the overall VAR-based market risk charge. Using segment information, broken down
into fixed-income, currencies, equities, commodities categories, should prove useful to detect
commonalities in positions. To my knowledge, this is the first paper to do so.
Similar positions should be revealed by high correlations between banks’ trading
revenues, as well as between banks’ VAR measures. We also examine correlation patterns
across risk categories to assess diversification effects. Finally, we examine the variance of
aggregate trading returns from banks in the sample and break it down into different components
to examine diversification effects across the industry. As a by-product of the analysis, this paper
also evaluates the profitability of bank trading revenues, thus contributing to the literature on
diversification in banking.3
This paper is structured as follows. Section II provides a review of VAR and herding
theories. Section III presents the empirical analysis and Section IV concludes.
3 Stiroh (2004) provides a review of this literature. He shows that non-interest income has increased in importance
for U.S. banks and is much more volatile than traditional interest income, based on accounting data.
4