NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PRIVATE CREDIT IN 129 COUNTRIES
Simeon Djankov
Caralee McLiesh
Andrei Shleifer
Working Paper 11078
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11078
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2005
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Simeon Djankov, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Private Credit in 129 Countries
Simeon Djankov, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 11078
January 2005, Revised June 2006
JEL No. G3, G32, K22
ABSTRACT
We investigate cross-country determinants of private credit, using new data on legal creditor rights
and private and public credit registries in 129 countries. We find that both creditor protection
through the legal system and information sharing institutions are associated with higher ratios of
private credit to GDP, but that the former is relatively more important in the richer countries. An
analysis of legal reforms also shows that improvements in creditor rights and in information sharing
precede faster credit growth. We also find that creditor rights are extremely stable over time, contrary
to the convergence hypothesis. Finally, we find that legal origins are an important determinant of
both creditor rights and information sharing institutions.
Simeon Djankov
World Bank
Research Department
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
sdjankov@worldbank.org
Caralee McLiesh
World Bank Group
International Finance Corporation
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20433
cmcliesh@worldbank.org
Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
Harvard University
M9 Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu

I. Introduction
Recent research in the development of private credit markets across countries points to an
important role of institutions, such as legal investor protection and credit bureaus, in supporting
these markets (e.g., La Porta et al. 1997, Japelli and Pagano 2002). Although this research has
identified several empirical regularities, it suffers from small samples, weak results, and some
econometric problems. This paper greatly expands the available data set on credit institutions to
cover 129 countries and 25 years of data. The expansion allows an advance on previous research
in five directions. First, the greater country coverage yields statistically more reliable results on
the role of alternative credit institutions in a cross-section. Second, the larger sample allows us
to examine whether different institutions are more effective in countries at different levels of
economic development and judicial efficiency. Third, time series data on institutions allow us
to ask whether these institutions improve over time and/or converge across countries. Fourth, the
new data allow us to analyze the consequences of institutional reforms for financial
development, thereby avoiding some econometric concerns about cross-sectional work. Fifth,
the much larger sample allows us to better distinguish the roles of legal origins and culture in
shaping credit institutions (Stulz and Williamson 2003).
There are two broad views of what determines how much private credit a financial
system would extend to firms and individuals. According to the first, what matters for the
viability of private credit is the power of creditors. When lenders can more easily force
repayment, grab collateral, or even gain control of the firm, they are more willing to extend
credit. These “power” theories of credit have been formalized by Townsend (1979), Aghion and
Bolton (1992), and Hart and Moore (1994, 1998). According to the second view, what matters
for lending is information. When lenders know more about borrowers, their credit history, or
other lenders to the firm, they are not as concerned about the “lemons” problem of financing
2

non-viable projects, and therefore extend more credit. These “information” theories of credit
have been pioneered by Jaffe and Russell (1976) and Stiglitz and Weiss (1981).
We study the importance of information and power theories of credit in explaining the
variation in the size of private credit markets around the world using a new data set on private
credit institutions for 129 countries during the period 1978-2003. To assess the power theories
of credit, we construct a measure of legal rights of creditors in these countries, the “creditor
rights” index first proposed by La Porta et al. (1997, 1998), for every year during this period.
The index measures the legal rights of creditors against defaulting debtors in different
jurisdictions, and has been previously interpreted as a measure of creditor power. To assess the
information theories of credit, we collect data on the existence of public (i.e., government-
owned) and private credit registries in different countries during the same period. These
registries collect information on credit histories and current indebtedness of various borrowers,
and share it with lenders. Credit registries exist in many countries, and have been shown to be
an important factor in determining credit availability (Jappelli and Pagano 2000, 2002, Pagano
and Jappelli 1993, Sapienza 2002).
Our initial empirical strategy is to run cross-country regressions that explain the private
credit to GDP ratio in terms of creditor rights and the presence of registries. In addition, we take
advantage of the time series dimension of the data. First, we ask how stable the institutions of
credit are over time and whether they converge or diverge among different groups of countries.
In particular, we test the hypothesis that countries whose laws derive from different legal
traditions exhibit convergence in their creditor rights scores. Second, by looking at the changes
in either creditor rights or the information institutions, we can ask whether these reforms have
any effect on private credit. This differences-in-differences approach gets around the concern
that credit institutions are endogenous, and presents an alternative to instrumental variable
techniques that have also been criticized (e.g., by Glaeser et al. 2004).
3