NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CONSUMPTION RISK AND THE COST OF EQUITY CAPITAL
Ravi Jagannathan
Yong Wang
Working Paper 11026
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11026
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2005
We thank Kent Daniel, Deborah Lucas, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, and Da Zhi for helpful discussions. We
are responsible for all errors and omissions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Ravi Jagannathan and Yong Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Consumption Risk and the Cost of Equity Capital
Ravi Jagannathan and Yong Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 11026
January 2005
JEL No. G12
ABSTRACT
We demonstrate, using data for the period 1954-2003, that differences in exposure to consumption
risk explains cross sectional differences in average excess returns (cost of equity capital) across the
25 benchmark equity portfolios constructed by Fama and French (1993). We use yearly returns on
stocks to take into account well documented within year deterministic seasonal patterns in returns,
measurement errors in the consumption data, and possible slow adjustment of consumption to
changes in wealth due to habit and prior commitments. Consumption during the fourth quarter is
likely to have a larger discretionary component. Further, given the availability of more leisure time
during the holiday season and the ending of the tax year in December, investors are more likely to
review their asset holdings and make trading decisions during the fourth quarter. We therefore match
the growth rate in the fourth quarter consumption from one year to the next with the corresponding
calendar year return when computing the latter's exposure to consumption risk. We find strong
support for our consumption risk model specification in the data.
Ravi Jagannathan
J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of Management
2001 Sheridan Road
Leverone/Anderson Complex
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
rjaganna@northwestern.edu
Yong Wang J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of Management
2001 Sheridan Road
Leverone/Anderson Complex
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
yongwang@northwester.edu

1 Introduction
There is general agreement in the literature that the cost of equity capital, i.e., the
expected return on stocks, varies across different types of firms in a systematic way.
For example, investors appear to require a lower return on average for investing
in growth firms when compared to value firms, and a higher return for investing in
smallerfirmswhencomparedtolargerfirms. Asubstantial partof theresearcheffort
in finance is directed toward understanding why we would observe such heterogeneity
in expected returns. In an ideal world with perfect capital markets where there are
no arbitrage opportunities, investors would require a higher return on an asset only
if it has a larger exposure to systematic economy wide pervasive risk. According to
standard economic theory1, in such a world with rational investors, the covariance
of the return on an asset with aggregate consumption growth, hereafter referred to
as exposure to consumption risk, determines the asset’s systematic risk. Hence, to
the extent that the perfect market assumption is not unreasonable, we should find
growth firms to be engaged in activities that have less exposure to consumption risk
than value firms; and smaller firms to be exposed to higher consumption risk when
compared to larger firms. In this paper we empirically demonstrate that it is indeed
the case. We find that a substantial part of the variation in the historical average
returns across different firm types can be explained by differences in their historical
exposure to consumption risk.
Thereareapriorireasonstobelievethatthesupportforthestandardtheorywould
be stronger at longer horizons. Brainard, Nelson and Shapiro (1991) recommend
the use of longer horizon returns when examining the relation between consumption
risk and expected returns in order to minimize the effect of measurement errors in
consumption data. Bansal, Ditmar and Lundblat (2004) find that the long run
covariance between consumption and dividends account for a large fraction of the
variation in average returns across commonly studied equity portfolios2. Parker and
Juliard (2004) examine the data in an ingenious way to minimize the influence of
measurement errors in consumption and possible lagged response of consumption to
1Developed by Rubinstein (1976), Breeden (1979), Lucas (1978), Grossman and Shiller (1981),
Hansen and Singleton (1982, 1983).
2Hansen, Heaton and Li (2004) explore the statistical challenges involved in empiricially exam-
ining the relation between riskiness of cash flows far into the future and expected returns, and
provideageneralframeworksuchanalysis. LettauandLudvigson(2001)findempiricalsupportfor
a conditional version of the standard model.
1

changes in wealth, and conclude that the difference in returns across assets are due
to differences in their covariance with consumption growth during the quarter of the
return measurement and several quarters that follow.
We contribute to this literature by showing that exposure to consumption risk
over a one year horizon can also explain the cross section of stock returns. We obtain
results that are different from those reported elsewhere in the literature because we
measure an asset’s exposure to consumption risk over a time interval chosen in such
way as to (a) minimize the effect of transactions costs on an investor’s savings, con-
sumption and investment decisions, and (b) integrate over calendar month seasonal
patterns in stock returns.
The empirical literature in finance and macro economics document pronounced
calendar month and calendar quarter seasonal effects in stock returns and macro
economic aggregates. For example, Keim (1983) documents that smaller stocks earn
most of their risk adjusted return during the first week of January. Roll (1983) and
Reinganum(1983)findsupportfortheviewthismaybeduetoinvestorssellingstocks
to realize losses for tax purposes. Bouman and Jacobsen (2002) find that stocks earn
a higher return during the November through April than other months. Miron and
Beaulieu(1996)findthattheseasonalbehaviorofGDPisdominatedbyfourthquarter
increases and first quarter declines. They argue that the Christmas demand shift
is an important factor in producing seasonal fluctuations. Braun and Evans (1995)
provide evidence supporting the view that the observed seasonal shifts in aggregate
consumption is more due to seasonal shifts in preferences and not technology. Ait-
Sahalia, Parker and Yogo (2004) point out that consumers have more discretion over
their consumption of luxury goods than essential goods, and consumption of the
former covaries more strongly with stock returns.
We therefore match calendar year returns with growth rates in fourth quarter
consumptionofnondurablesandservicesfromoneyeartoanotherinordertogenerate
the most support from the data for standard theory. The use of calendar year
returns would avoid the need to explain the January effect, and the sell in May
and go away effects documented in stock returns. Working with longer horizon
attenuates the errors that may arise due to ignoring the effect of habit formation on
preferences3. Further, fourth quarter consumption may be less subject to habit-like
3Sundaresan(1989),Constantinides(1990),Abel(1990)andCampbellandCochrane(1999)take
the stand that there are important time variations in effective risk aversion due to habit formation.
2