NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO CURRENCY MARKETS ABSORB NEWS QUICKLY?
Martin D.D. Evans
Richard K. Lyons
Working Paper 11041
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11041
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2005
Respective affiliations are Georgetown University and NBER, and UC Berkeley and NBER. We thank the
following for helpful comments: Carol Osler, Michael Melvin, and seminar participants at the 8th
International Conference on Macroeconomic Analysis and International Finance. Both authors thank the
National Science Foundation for financial assistance, which includes funding for a web clearinghouse for
micro-based FX research (at faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/lyons, and at faculty.georgetown.edu/evans). The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Martin D.D. Evans and Richard K. Lyons. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Do Currency Markets Absorb News Quickly?
Martin D.D. Evans and Richard K. Lyons
NBER Working Paper No. 11041
January 2005
JEL No. F3, F4, G1
ABSTRACT
This paper addresses whether macro news arrivals affect currency markets over time. The null from
macro exchange-rate theory is that they do not: macro news is impounded in ex-change rates
instantaneously. We test this by examining the effects of news on subsequent trades by end-user
participants (such as hedge funds, mutual funds, and non-financial corpo-rations). News arrivals
induce subsequent changes in trading in all of the major end-user segments. These induced changes
remain significant for days. Induced trades also have per-sistent effects on prices. Currency markets
are not responding to news instantaneously.
Martin D. D. Evans
Georgetown University
Department of Economics
Washington DC 20057
and NBER
evansm1@georgetown.edu
Richard K. Lyons
U.C. Berkeley
Haas School of Business
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
lyons@haas.berkeley.edu

Do Currency Markets Absorb News Quickly?
This paper addresses an important null hypothesis within exchange-rate theory: that
macro news is impounded in exchange rates instantaneously. This is typically understood to mean
a matter of seconds, or perhaps minutes (e.g., 5 to 10), but certainly contained within the day of
news arrival. We test this by examining the effects of news on subsequent currency trades by end-
user participants (such as hedge funds, mutual funds, and non-financial corporations). We find
that news arrivals induce subsequent changes in trading behavior in all of these major end-user
segments. These induced changes in trading remain significant for days. Induced trades also have
persistent effects on prices. These findings provide strong evidence that currency markets are not
responding to news instantaneously.
Our basis for pursuing whether induced trades might prolong the absorption of news
comes from recent empirical work demonstrating a tight link between signed transaction volume
(order flow) and signed exchange rate changes.1 This link is not predicted by macro exchange rate
theory, but it is predicted by an alternative modeling framework from microstructure finance. In
this micro-based framework, transactions play a central, causal role in price determination (see,
e.g., Glosten and Milgrom 1985, Kyle 1985). The causal role arises because transactions convey
information that is not common knowledge. In this paper, we address whether the tight link
between price adjustment and order flow that exists in general might also be playing a role in how
currency markets absorb news.
Most of the existing literature linking exchange rates to news is event-study based, and
does not address how transaction quantities respond to news (i.e., it addresses the link between
news and price in isolation). This literature has two branches. The first addresses the direction of
exchange-rate changes (first moments) and the second, later branch addresses exchange-rate
volatility (second moments). A common finding of the first branch is that, at least at the daily
frequency, directional effects from scheduled macro announcements are difficult to detect
because they are swamped by other factors affecting price. Intraday event studies do find
statistically significant effects, particularly for employment and money-supply announcements
1 This evidence is from both micro (i.e., single marketmaker) and macro (marketwide) studies. On the micro side, see,
e.g., Lyons (1995) and Bjonnes and Rime (2004). On the macro side, see, e.g., Evans and Lyons (2002a,b), Payne
(2003), Osler (2004), and Bjonnes, Rime, and Solheim (2004). Order flow is the cumulation over time of signed trades,
where trades are signed according to whether the initiating side is buying or selling. (The marketmaker posting the
quote is the non-initiating side.)
1

(Andersen et al. 2003).2 The second, later branch of this literature—which focuses on news
effects on volatility—is partly a response to early difficulty in finding news effects on first
moments.3 This work finds that arrival of scheduled announcements does indeed produce the
largest exchange-rate changes. Nevertheless, the ability of these fundamentals to account for
overall volatility changes is lower than that of less fundamental factors such as time-of-day
effects and ARCH (Andersen and Bollerslev 1998).
A more recent literature has emerged that addresses the currency market’s response to
news as a joint quantity/price response (Carlson 2002, Danielsson et al. 2003, Evans and Lyons
2003). Carlson (2002), for example, takes a case-study approach and analyzes a single macro
announcement arrival. He finds that market characteristics were affected for hours following the
arrival. (For example, liquidity remained significantly below normal—and below its ex ante
state—for about 2 hours.) The case-study approach leaves open the question of how systematic
these prolonged market effects are, and whether they might extend beyond the day of news
arrival. The work of Danielsson et al. (2003) and Evans and Lyons (2003) provides less intraday
resolution than Carlson, but these papers do examine multiple news arrivals over periods of
months, and thereby do provide and sense for whether quantity responses to news are systematic.
(Both papers find, for example, that roughly half of the transmission of news to prices actually
operates through induced order flows.) Nevertheless, given sample sizes measured only in
months, both of these papers have to aggregate across arrivals of very different news types. The
limited sample sizes also restrict them to examining only induced transaction effects intraday—
neither paper addresses whether the absorption of news is prolonged over more extended periods.
Our paper departs from earlier work in three main ways. First, our analysis is based on
the induced trades of currency-market end users. All three of the papers noted in the previous
paragraph use quantity data that reflects trades between marketmakers only (i.e., interbank
trades).4 This is relevant for the question that we address because, relative to end users, market-
maker reactions to news are unlikely to be as protracted. Second, our data span over 6 years, a
much longer sample than is used in existing work on the joint quantity/price response to news.
This allows us to treat individual announcement types separately, without aggregating them into
2 See also, for example, Cornell (1982), Engel and Frankel (1984), Hakkio and Pearce (1985), Ito and Roley (1987),
Hardouvelis (1988), Klein (1991), and Ederington and Lee (1995).
3 See, for example, Goodhart et al. (1993), DeGennaro and Shrieves (1997), and Andersen and Bollerslev (1998). See
also the work on bond prices and announcements, e.g., Fleming and Remolona (1999), Balduzzi et al. (2001), Fleming
(2002), and Green (2002). The latter two papers are especially relevant in that they use direct measures of order flow in
fixed income markets. Green (2002), for example, finds evidence that asymmetric information increases following
public macro announcements.
2