NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO FIRMS GO PUBLIC TO RAISE CAPITAL?
Woojin Kim
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 11197
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11197
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2005
Woojin Kim is a doctoral student at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and Michael S. Weisbach
is the Stanley C. and Joan J. Golder Distinguished Chair in Finance at the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign and a Research Associate of the National Bureau of Economic Research. We would like to thank
Bo Becker, Brian Henderson, Alexander Ljungqvist, Marco Pagano, Josh Pollet, and seminar participants
at the University of Illinois for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Woojin Kim and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Do Firms Go Public to Raise Capital?
Woojin Kim and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 11197
March 2005
JEL No. G3, F3
ABSTRACT
This paper considers the question of whether raising capital is an important reason why firms go
public. Using a sample of 16,958 initial public offerings from 38 countries between 1990 and 2003,
we consider differences between firms that sell new, primary shares to the public, and existing
secondary shares that previously belonged to insiders. Our results suggest that the sale of primary
shares is correlated with a number of factors associated with the firm's demand for capital. In
particular, issuance of primary shares is correlated with higher increases of investment, higher
repayment of debt and increases in cash, and more subsequent capital-raising through seasoned
equity offers. Since 79% of all capital raised through IPOs in our sample is from the sale of primary
shares, we conclude that capital-raising is an important motive in the going-public decision.
Woojin Kim
340 Wohlers Hall
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Champaign, IL 61820
wkim5@uiuc.edu
Michael S. Weisbach
340 Wohlers Hall
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
wesibach@uiuc.edu

An initial public offering (IPO) is generally perceived as one of the most important milestones in
a firm’s lifecycle. It allows the firm to access the public equity markets for additional capital necessary to
fund future growth, while simultaneously providing a venue for the initial shareholders to sell their
ownership stake. From investors’ perspective, an IPO provides a popular choice for investors, although
the wisdom of investing in them has been challenged by academic evidence (see Ritter (1991)). It is no
wonder that IPOs, especially the large ones, draw so much attention from the press.
Reflecting the importance of the going public decision, the academic literature on IPOs has been
voluminous. Yet, perhaps surprisingly, the vast majority of empirical literature has ignored the
underlying reasons why firms go public. Instead, it has focused on the underpricing, the long-run
performance, and the time-clustering of IPOs (see Jenkinson and Ljungqvist (2001) or Ritter (2003) for
surveys). Of the recent theoretical papers on the going-public decision, Chemmanur and Fulghieri (1999)
focus on the capital-raising aspect of an IPO while Zingales (1995) and Mello and Parsons (1998)
emphasize the sale of executives’ shares and eventual change of control. The extent to which these
various explanations explain actual firms’ reasons for going public is largely unexplored.
The likely reason why there has been so little empirical work addressing the reasons for going
public is that the most straightforward way to study the issue would be to compare the characteristics of
firms that chose to go public with the firms that remained private. However, such a study would require
extensive data on private firms, which generally are not available. One paper that is able to use this
approach is Pagano, Panetta, and Zingales (1998) (PPZ), which utilizes a database containing information
on 69 Italian firms that went public between 1982 and 1992, as well as a number of private Italian firms
that did not go public but met the listing requirements of the public exchanges during the same time
period. These authors conclude firms in their sample choose to go public not to finance future
investments and growth, but rather to rebalance their leverage and to allow the managers to liquidate their
positions.
1

Although these findings may hold for the sample considered by PPZ, it is not obvious that their
results automatically extend to other countries and periods. For example, Mikkelson et al. (1997)
document that US IPOs are generally followed by a large growth in assets. While Mikkelson et al.
contains no explicit linkage between the firms’ growth to the capital raising involved with the IPO, this
finding is at least suggestive of the view that firms go public so that they can raise public equity capital to
finance growth. To understand the motivations behind going public, one must consider a larger sample
than that used by PPZ, preferably from a number of different countries. Unfortunately, the kind of data
on private companies that PPZ have access to is not readily available for most countries. Therefore, one
must use an alternative approach.
One such approach is to consider cross-sectional patterns in a sample of IPOs. IPOs differ along
many dimensions; a particularly useful one for this purpose is the identity of the shares being offered to
the public for sale. Some IPOs involve primary offerings of new shares, while others consist of the
secondary sale of shares already held by insiders. A third group is made up of a combination of primary
and secondary offerings. It seems plausible that differences between primary and secondary offerings
could reflect differences in the underlying motivation of the IPO. In particular, IPOs that involve
secondary offerings are likely to be driven by a desire for liquidity by the firm’s executives, while
primary offerings are more likely to reflect a demand for capital.1 Of course these explanations are not
mutually exclusive. Any IPO, even one in which the primary motive is to raise capital, nonetheless
provides liquidity for executives and an IPO done as a secondary offering also allows the firm to raise
equity capital from public markets subsequently.
This paper attempts to provide some insights into the underlying motives for IPOs by considering
differences between the primary, secondary and combined offerings. We test the hypothesis that primary
offerings are related to factors associated with the demand for capital, such as subsequent investment and
1 Existing theoretical models do not seem to incorporate these differential motives simultaneously. For example,
Chemmanur and Fulghieri(1999)’s model considers sale of primary shares to fund a new investment project, while
Zingales(1995) and Mello and Parsons(1998) focus on the sale of secondary shares and does not model new
investment and production activity.
2