NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SPECIAL PURPOSE VEHICLES AND SECURITIZATION
Gary Gorton
Nicholas S. Souleles
Working Paper 11190
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11190
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2005
Thanks to Moody’s Investors Service, Sunita Ganapati of Lehman Brothers, and Andrew Silver of Moody’s
for assistance with data. Thanks to Charles Calomiris, Richard Cantor, Darrell Duffie, Loretta Mester, Mitch
Petersen, Jeremy Stein, Peter Tufano, and seminar participants at the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank,
Moody’s Investors Service, and the NBER Conference on the Risks of Financial Institutions for comments
and suggestions. Souleles acknowledges financial support from the Rodney L. White Center for Financial
Research and a NYSE Fellowship through the Rodney L. White Center. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Gary Gorton and Nicholas S. Souleles. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Special Purpose Vehicles and Securitization
Gary Gorton and Nicholas S. Souleles
NBER Working Paper No. 11190
March 2005
JEL No. G3, G2, E51, K2
ABSTRACT
Firms can finance themselves on- or off-balance sheet. Off-balance sheet financing involves
transferring assets to "special purpose vehicles" (SPVs), following accounting and regulatory rules
that circumscribe relations between the sponsoring firm and the SPVs. SPVs are carefully designed
to avoid bankruptcy. If the firm's bankruptcy costs are high, off-balance sheet financing can be
advantageous, especially for sponsoring firms that are risky. In a repeated SPV game, firms can
"commit" to subsidize or "bail out" their SPVs when the SPV would otherwise not honor its debt
commitments. Investors in SPVs know that, despite legal and accounting restrictions to the contrary,
SPV sponsors can bail out their SPVs if there is the need. We find evidence consistent with these
predictions using data on credit card securitizations.
Gary Gorton
Department of Finance
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
gorton@wharton.upenn.edu
Nicholas Souleles
Finance Department
The Wharton School
2300 SH-DH
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
souleles@wharton.upenn.edu

1
I. Introduction
The use of special purposes vehicles (SPVs) in corporate finance seems to be pervasive.1 What is
the source of value to organizing corporate activity using SPVs? In this paper we argue that
SPVs exist to avoid bankruptcy costs.
By financing the firm in pieces, some on-balance sheet and some off-balance sheet, control rights
to the business decisions are separated from the financing decisions. The SPV sponsoring firm
maintains control over the business decisions while the financing is done in SPVs that are
passive; they cannot make business decisions. Furthermore, the SPVs are not subject to
bankruptcy costs because they cannot go bankrupt, as a matter of design. Bankruptcy is a process
of transferring control rights over corporate assets. Securitization reduces the amount of assets
that are subject to this expensive and lengthy process. We argue that the existence of SPVs
depends on implicit contractual arrangements that avoid accounting and regulatory impediments
to reducing bankruptcy costs. We develop a model of off-balance sheet financing and test the
implications of the model.
An SPV, or a special purpose entity (SPE), is a legal entity created by a firm (known as the
sponsor or originator) by transferring assets to the SPV, to carry out some specific purpose, or
circumscribed activity, or a series of such transactions. SPVs have no purpose other than the
transaction(s) for which they were created, and they can make no substantive decisions; the rules
governing them are set down in advance and carefully circumscribe their activities. Indeed, no
one works at an SPV and it has no physical location.
The legal form for an SPV may be a limited partnership, a limited liability company, a trust, or a
corporation.2 Typically, off-balance sheet SPVs have the following characteristics:
(cid:131) They are thinly capitalized;
(cid:131) They have no independent management or employees;
1 Below we present the evidence on use of special purpose vehicles in the cases where such data exist. As
explained below, these are “qualified” special purpose vehicles. Data on other types of SPVs are not
systematically collected.
2 There are also a number of vehicles that owe their existence to special legislation. These include
REMICs, FASITs, RICs, and REITs. In particular, their tax status is subject to specific tax code
provisions. See Kramer (2003).

2
(cid:131) Their administrative functions are performed by a trustee who follows prespecified
rules with regard to the receipt and distribution of cash; there are no other decisions;
(cid:131) Assets held by the SPV are serviced via a servicing arrangement;
(cid:131) They are structured so that they cannot become bankrupt, as a practical matter.
In short, SPVs are essentially robot firms that have no employees, make no substantive economic
decisions, have no physical location, and cannot go bankrupt. Off-balance sheet financing
arrangements can take the form of research and development limited partnerships, leasing
transactions, or asset securitizations, to name the most prominent.3 And less visible are tax
arbitrage-related transactions. In this paper we address the question of why SPVs exist.
The existence of SPVs raises important issues for the theory of the firm: What is a firm and what
are its boundaries? Does a “firm” include the SPVs sponsored by the firm? (From an accounting
or tax point of view, this is the issue of consolidation.) What is the relationship between a
sponsoring firm and its SPV? In what sense does the sponsor “control” the SPV? Are investors
indifferent between investing in SPV securities and the sponsor’s securities? To make headway
on these questions we first theoretically investigate the question of the existence of SPVs. Then
we test some implications of the theory using unique data on credit card securitizations.
One argument for why SPVs are used is that sponsors may benefit from a lower cost of capital
because sponsors can remove debt from the balance sheet, so balance sheet leverage is reduced.
Enron, which created over 3,000 off-balance sheet SPVs, is the leading example of this (see Klee
and Butler (2002)). But Enron was able to (apparently fraudulently) keep their off-balance sheet
debt from being observed by investors, and so obtained a lower cost of capital. If market
participants are aware of the off-balance sheet vehicles, and assuming that the off-balance sheet
vehicles truly satisfy the legal and accounting requirements to be off-balance sheet, then it is not
immediately obvious how this lowers the cost of capital for the sponsor. In the context of
operating leases Lim, Mann, and Mihov (2003) find that bond yields reflect off-balance sheet
debt.4
3 On research and development limited partnerships see, e.g., Shevlin (1987) and Beatty, Berger, and
Magliolo (1995); on leasing see, e.g., Hodge (1996, 1998), and Weidner (2000). Securitization is discussed
in detail below.
4 There are other accounting motivations for setting up off-balance sheet SPVs. Shakespeare (2001, 2003)
argues, in the context of securitization, that managers use the gains from securitization to meet earnings
targets and analysts’ earnings forecasts. This is based on the discretionary element of how the “gain on