NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IMPLICATION OF ALTERNATIVE OPERATIONAL
RISK MODELING TECHNIQUES
Patrick de Fontnouvelle
John Jordan
Eric Rosengren
Working Paper 11103
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11103
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2005
This paper was prepared for the NBER Project on the Risks of Financial Institutions. It was substantially
completed while John Jordan was with the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. We thank our colleagues in the
Federal Reserve System and in the Risk Management Group of the Basel Committee for the many fruitful
interactions that have contributed to this work. However, the views expressed in this paper do not necessarily
reflect their views, those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, or those of the Federal Reserve System.
Address for correspondence: Patrick de Fontnouvelle, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Mail Stop T-10, 600
Atlantic Avenue, P.O. Box 2076, Boston, MA 02106-2076, tel: 617-973-3659, fax: 617-973-3219, email:
patrick.defontnouvelle@bos.frb.org. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Patrick de Fontnouvelle, John Jordan, and Eric Rosengren. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Implications of Alternative Operational Risk Modeling Techniques
Patrick de Fontnouvelle, John Jordan, and Eric Rosengren
NBER Working Paper No. 11103
February 2005
JEL No. G2
ABSTRACT
Quantification of operational risk has received increased attention with the inclusion of an explicit
capital charge for operational risk under the new Basle proposal. The proposal provides significant
flexibility for banks to use internal models to estimate their operational risk, and the associated
capital needed for unexpected losses. Most banks have used variants of value at risk models that
estimate frequency, severity, and loss distributions. This paper examines the empirical regularities
in operational loss data. Using loss data from six large internationally active banking institutions,
we find that loss data by event types are quite similar across institutions. Furthermore, our results
are consistent with economic capital numbers disclosed by some large banks, and also with the
results of studies modeling losses using publicly available "external" loss data.
Patrick de Fontnouvelle
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
Supervision, Regulation, and Credit Department
600 Atlantic Avenue
Boston, MA 02106
patrick.defontnouvelle@bos.frb.org
John Jordan
FitchRisk
17 State Street
New York, NY 10004
john.jordan@fitchrisk.com
Eric Rosengren
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
Supervision, Regulation, and Credit Department
600 Atlantic Avenue
Boston, MA 02106
eric.rosengren@bos.frb.org

1. Introduction
Large operational losses as a result of accounting scandals, insider fraud, and rogue
trading, to name just a few, have received increasing attention from the press, the public, and
from policymakers. The frequency of severe losses, with more than 100 instances of losses at
financial institutions exceeding $100 million, has caused many financial institutions to try to
explicitly model operational risk to determine their own economic capital. As financial
institutions have begun to comprehensively collect loss data and use it to manage operational
risk, bank regulators have increased their expectations for measuring and modeling operational
risk. Under the current US rules proposal for implementing the Basle Accord, large
internationally active banks will be expected to use internal models to estimate capital for
unexpected operational losses. A criticism of this proposal has been that the tools for modeling
operational risk are in their infancy, making estimating capital problematic.
This paper uses data supplied by six large internationally active banks to determine if the
regularities in the loss data will make consistent modeling of operational losses possible. We
find that there are similarities in the results of models of operational loss across institutions, and
that our results are consistent with publicly reported operational risk capital estimates produced
by banks’ internal economic capital models.
We begin the analysis by considering tail plots of each bank’s loss data by business line
and event type. Three findings clearly emerge from this descriptive analysis. First, loss data for
most business lines and event types may be well modeled by a Pareto-type distribution, as most
of the tail plots are linear when viewed on a log-log scale. Second, the severity ranking of event
types is consistent across institutions. Clients, Products and Business Practices is the highest
severity event type, while External Fraud and Employment Practices are the lowest severity
2

event types. Third, the tail plots suggest that losses for certain business lines and event types are
very heavy-tailed. This last finding highlights that while basic measurement approaches such as
the tail plot are easy to implement and intuitively appealing, overly simplistic approaches may
yield implausible estimates of economic capital. A main contribution of this paper is to show
how quantitative modeling can result in more reasonable conclusions regarding tail thickness and
economic capital.
We next attempt to model the distribution of loss amounts using a “full-data” approach,
whereby one fits all of the available loss data with a parametric severity distribution. We
consider nine commonly-used distributions, four of which are light-tailed and five of which are
heavy-tailed. We fit each of these distributions by business line and event type at each of the six
institutions considered. The heavy-tailed distributions provide consistently good fits to the loss
data, which confirms our findings based on visual inspection of the tail plots. The light-tailed
distributions do not generally provide good fits. However, we find that some parameter
estimates for the heavy-tailed distributions can have implausible implications for both tail
thickness and economic capital.
Extreme Value Theory (EVT) is an alternative to the full-data approach that is
increasingly being explored by researchers, by financial institutions, and by their regulators.
However, it is well-known that EVT techniques yield upward-biased tail estimates in small
samples. Huisman, Koedijk, Kool and Palm (2001) have proposed a regression-based EVT
technique that corrects for small-sample bias in the tail parameter estimate. Applying their
technique (hereafter HKKP) to the six banks in our sample, we obtain estimates that are both
reasonable and consistent with earlier estimates using purely external data (de Fontnouvelle et.
al., 2003).
3