NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PRIVATE BENEFITS OF CONTROL, OWNERSHIP,
AND THE CROSS-LISTING DECISION
Craig Doidge
G. Andrew Karolyi
Karl V. Lins
Darius P. Miller
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 11162
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11162
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2005
We thank Stijn Claessens, Simeon Djankov, Mara Faccio, and Larry Lang for access to their ownership data;
William Megginson, as well as seminar participants at the University of Oklahoma for helpful comments;
and, Ivalina Kalcheva for excellent research assistance. Karolyi is grateful to the Dice Center for Financial
Economics for financial support. This research is supported by the NSF under Grant No. NSF-0215754. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Craig Doidge, G. Andrew Karolyi, Karl V. Lins, Darius P. Miller, and René M. Stulz. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Private Benefits of Control, Ownership, and the Cross-Listing Decision
Craig Doidge, G. Andrew Karolyi, Karl V. Lins, Darius P. Miller, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 11162
March 2005
JEL No. G15, G34, K00, P51
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates how a foreign firm’s decision to cross-list its shares in the U.S. is related to
the concentration of the ownership of its cash flow rights and of its control rights. Theory has
proposed that when private benefits are high, controlling shareholders are less likely to choose to list
their firm’s shares in the U.S. because the higher standards for transparency and disclosure, as well
as the increased monitoring associated with such listings, limit their ability to extract private
benefits. We offer evidence that confirms this hypothesis using data on more than 4,000 firms from
31 countries. Using logistic regression analysis, we show that the control rights held by controlling
shareholders, as well as the difference between their control rights and their cash flow rights are
significantly and negatively related to the existence of a U.S. listing. In addition, we employ duration
analysis using a Cox proportional-hazard model to show that the probability of listing in a given year
from 1995 to 2001, conditional on not yet having listed, is significantly lower for firms whose
managers have high levels of control and for firms whose controlling shareholder owns more control
rights than cash flow rights.
Craig Doidge René M. Stulz
University of Toronto Fisher College of Business
craig.doidge@rotman.utoronto.ca The Ohio State University
806A Fisher Hall
G. Andrew Karolyi 2100 Neil Avenue
The Ohio State University Columbus, OH 43210-1144
karolyi@cob.osu.edu stulz@cob.osu.edu
Karl V. Lins
University of Utah
finkvl@business.utah.edu
Darius P. Miller
Indiana University
damiller@indiana.edu

1. Introduction.
Academics and practitioners have developed extensive lists of reasons why foreign firms
choose to list in the U.S. Benefits of access to U.S. markets that have been discussed include the
increased ability to raise equity, growth of the firm’s shareholder base, increased liquidity, lower
cost of capital, and greater visibility and prestige.1 Recently, however, much attention has been paid
to the corporate governance implications of U.S. cross-listings.
Controlling shareholders of foreign firms listed in the U.S. face more constraints and have more
obligations than controlling shareholders of firms not listed in the U.S.2 For instance, a U.S. cross-
listing typically improves transparency by imposing disclosure requirements on firms that are
stronger than the disclosure requirements they face in their home country. Additionally, by
choosing to list in the U.S., controlling shareholders accept the consequence of being subject to an
additional layer of monitoring by a variety of U.S. market intermediaries. For example, the cross-
listing subjects them to enforcement actions initiated by the U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) and to scrutiny from U.S. analysts and journalists. Further, if they raise funds in
the U.S., these firms are subjected to monitoring by underwriters. This commitment to improve
governance through greater transparency and monitoring is consistent with the existing evidence
that firms experience positive abnormal returns when they announce their intention to list in the
U.S. (Foerster and Karolyi, 1999; Miller, 1999), that they subsequently raise more capital after
listing (Reese and Weisbach, 2002; Lins, Strickland, and Zenner, 2005), that their cost of capital is
lower (Hail and Leuz, 2004), that estimates of private benefits of control are lower (Doidge, 2004a),
1 Surveys by Karolyi (1998, 2004), Claessens, Klingebiel, and Schmukler (2002), and Benos and Weisbach
(2004) evaluate over 150 different published studies that examine the decision to cross-list shares on foreign
markets. Some new studies focus on the importance of geographic proximity (Sarkissian and Schill, 2004)
and product market linkages (Pagano, Roell, and Zechner, 2002) as factors in firms’ decisions about where
and when to cross-list shares.
2 Non-U.S. firms are typically controlled by large shareholders (see La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer,
1999). We therefore use the term controlling shareholders to denote the group which controls the firm (which
can include managers and/or large blockholders).
1

and that foreign firms listed in the U.S. are valued more highly than firms that do not list in the U.S.
(Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz, 2004).
To the extent that control of a firm is valuable because it enables those who have it to extract
private benefits from the firm, we would expect firms in which controlling shareholders have
greater ownership of voting rights, and, therefore, tighter control of the firm, to be less likely to
choose to list in the U.S. (see Coffee, 2002, for related arguments). We investigate this proposition
using comprehensive ownership and control data on more than 4,000 firms from 31 countries in
Asia, Europe, Latin America, and elsewhere. The data include the control rights for controlling
shareholders, such as top managers and their family members, governments, other corporations, and
financial institutions. Using logistic regression analysis, we find strong evidence that when
controlling shareholders have high levels of control, their firms are less likely to be listed in the
U.S. Similarly, we find that firms controlled by their top managers and their families are less likely
to be listed in the U.S. We also employ duration analysis using a Cox proportional-hazard model to
show that the probability of listing in a given year over the 1995 to 2001 period, conditional on not
yet having listed, is significantly lower when controlling shareholders have high levels of control
and when firms are controlled by their top managers.
The corporate governance literature makes an important distinction between ownership of
voting rights and ownership of cash flow rights. If controlling shareholders have a majority of
voting rights but own negligible cash flow rights, they have little incentive to take steps to increase
the value of the firm’s equity. However, as controlling shareholders’ ownership of cash flow rights
increases, any action they take to benefit themselves at the expense of other equity holders has a
cost in that it decreases the value of the shares controlling shareholders own. If controlling
shareholders own almost all of the cash flow rights, it makes little sense for them to expend
resources to extract private benefits at the expense of minority shareholders. This reasoning
suggests that, for a given level of cash flow rights, controlling shareholders are less likely to seek a
2