NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE IMF IN A WORLD OF PRIVATE CAPITAL MARKETS
Barry Eichengreen
Kenneth Kletzer
Ashoka Mody
Working Paper 11198
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11198
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2005
The authors are with the University of California, Berkeley; the University of California, Santa Cruz; and
the International Monetary Fund, respectively. The views expressed are those of the authors and should not
be attributed to the IMF or any other organization. We are grateful to Enrica Detragiache, Raghuram Rajan,
and an anonymous referee for helpful comments and to Adrian de la Garza for carefully assembling a
complex data set. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Barry Eichengreen, Kenneth Kletzer, and Ashoka Mody. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The IMF in a World of Private Capital Markets
Barry Eichengreen, Kenneth Kletzer, and Ashoka Mody
NBER Working Paper No. 11198
March 2005
JEL No. F0, F2
ABSTRACT
The IMF attempts to stabilize private capital flows to emerging markets by providing public
monitoring and emergency finance. In analyzing its role we contrast cases where banks and
bondholders do the lending. Banks have a natural advantage in monitoring and creditor
coordination, while bonds have superior risk sharing characteristics. Consistent with this
assumption, banks reduce spreads as they obtain more information through repeat transactions
with borrowers. By comparison, repeat borrowing has little influence in bond markets, where
publicly-available information dominates. But spreads on bonds are lower when they are issued
in conjunction with IMF-supported programs, as if the existence of a program conveyed positive
information to bondholders. The influence of IMF monitoring in bond markets is especially
pronounced for countries vulnerable to liquidity crises.
Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California
549 Evans Hall 3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
eichengr@econ.berkeley.edu
Kenneth Kletzer
Department of Economics
University of California
Santa Cruz, CA
kkletzer@cats.ucsc.edu
Ashoka Mody
International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC 20433
amody@imf.org

1. Introduction
Catalyzing private capital flows to emerging markets has been an objective of the
International Monetary Fund since at least the 1990s.2 The Fund provides public
monitoring services and negotiates programs that enable borrowers to reveal their
commitment to sound macroeconomic policies. In addition, its own lending may stabilize
capital flows by providing bridge finance for creditworthy countries experiencing
liquidity crises, the resolution of which may be difficult to coordinate for atomistic
lenders.
In this paper we seek to better understand the roles of IMF monitoring and
lending and provide new evidence of their effects. We analyze the impact of IMF-
supported programs on market access and the cost of funds, building on three insights.
• First, if banks engage in monitoring as part of their normal operation, then IMF
monitoring should have a relatively limited impact when bank syndicates do the
lending.
• Second, private capital flows should be particularly sensitive to the magnitude of
IMF financial commitments when the likelihood of debt restructuring is high.
• Third, precautionary programs are a mechanism through which governments can
use their relationship with the IMF to signal their commitment to strong policies.
Differences in the impact of precautionary and regular IMF programs should
therefore be useful for distinguishing between the Fund’s monitoring and lending
roles.
2 See for example IMF (1999).

2
Our analysis is based on more than 6,700 loan transactions between emerging
market borrowers and international bank syndicates and some 3,500 new bond issues
placed between 1991 and 2002. We analyze the frequency of transactions and the spreads
charged. Among the explanatory variables are (a) a measure of repeat borrowing that
proxies for creditor learning about borrower characteristics and (b) the existence and size
of IMF programs. Because we analyze individual transactions rather than aggregate
capital flows or other macroeconomic conditions, our findings are less susceptible to
causality running from the outcome to the decision to initiate an IMF program.3
Important differences between bank loans and bond issues have been documented
in the domestic context.4 Banks act as delegated monitors on behalf of investors who
cannot easily observe and discipline borrowers (Diamond 1984). The information they
acquire can be used to limit the use of funds and in pricing loans. In contrast, individual
bondholders lack the incentive to incur the costs of securing expensive private
information about borrowers. Instead, public information—for example, the information
assembled by credit rating agencies—dominates the market for debt securities.
Securitized debt instruments, on the other hand, have superior risk-sharing
characteristics. Credit risk can be diversified away, in part, by spreading individual loans
across investors and enabling them to hold diversified portfolios. Banks cannot engage in
this practice to the same extent without eroding their incentive to invest in dedicated
3 High-frequency data also allow us to capture the timing of programs more precisely than
is possible in aggregate studies using annual data to analyze the influence of IMF
programs.
4 This difference between bank and capital markets has been well documented in the
domestic US context (see, for example, Fama 1985 and James 1987).