NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PROFITABLE INVESTMENTS OR DISSIPATED CASH?
EVIDENCE ON THE INVESTMENT-CASH FLOW RELATIONSHIP
FROM OIL AND GAS LEASE BIDDING
Marianne Bertrand
Sendhil Mullainathan
Working Paper 11126
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11126
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2005
We are grateful to Jeremy Stein, as well as to seminar participants at the University of Chicago Graduate
School of Business, Harvard Business School, Harvard University, University of Michigan, University of
British Columbia, Wharton, Yale Law School, Stanford University, University of Illinois, Georgia Tech and
the NBER Organizational Economics conference, for many helpful comments. Nahid Rahman provided
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Marianne Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Profitable Investments or Dissipated Cash? Evidence on the Investment-Cash Flow Relationship
From Oil and Gas Lease Bidding
Marianne Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan
NBER Working Paper No. 11126
February 2005
JEL No. G3
ABSTRACT
The strong positive relationship between corporate cash flow and investment has been interpreted
through the lens of both agency- and non-agency-based models. In this paper, we distinguish
between these two interpretations using project-level data in the oil and gas industry. The specific
projects we consider are auctioned-off leases that give mineral exploration rights to tracts of federal
land. We find the standard positive relationship between investment and cash flow in this data, in
that positive shocks to residual cash flow (netting out firm and time effects) are associated with
higher spending on these leases. Interestingly, the increased investment comes from an increase in
the price paid per tract with little to no change in the total number of tracts or total acreage of land
bought. The positive association between price and cash flow holds even after controlling for a set
of tract and firm characteristics that might be ex-ante related to expected return on a given tract. This
data is most useful, however, because we can directly observe the eventual productivity of each of
these projects. We find that the increase in price induced by higher cash flow is associated with
lower average productivity. In fact, the total number of productive tracts does not increase with cash
flow. In other words, while higher cash flow is associated with higher spending on these projects,
higher cash flow does not lead to higher revenues from these projects. Combining this finding with
the lack of a quantity response, we conclude that our results are best described by an agency model
where managers use cash flow to simplify their job (or live a ``quiet life'') rather than ``empire-
build.''
Marianne Bertrand Sendhil Mullainathan
Graduate School of Business Department of Economics
University of Chicago Littauer 208
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue Harvard University
Chicago, IL 60637 Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER and NBER
marianne.bertrand@chicagogsb.edu mullain@fas.harvard.edu

1 Introduction
In a variety of data sets, firm cash flow has been found to predict capital expenditures often much better
than standard measures of investment opportunities or cost of capital (Caballero 1999, Stein 2003). What
can explain this finding? Three main interpretations have been proposed. The first, a mis-measurement
(or omitted variable) interpretation, argues that cash flow proxies for investment opportunities. Under
this interpretation, greater cash flow is simply correlated with the availability of profitable investment
projects (Poterba 1988). The second, a financing constraint interpretation, argues that added cash flow
gives firms the resources to undertake profitable projects that they otherwise could not (Fazarri, Hubbard
andPetersen, 1988). Thethird, anagency-basedinterpretation, arguesthatmanagersmaydissipate“free”
cash flow on wasteful investments for private gain (Jensen 1986).
Much of the theoretical and empirical debate surrounding this question has focused on the mis-
measurement interpretation, reaching rather mixed conclusions so far. Several papers have shown that
Tobin’s Q may indeed be a poor proxy for the true fundamental determinants of a firm’s investment op-
portunities and that cash flow may contain valuable information about such opportunities (see for example
Erickson and Whited 2000 or Alti 2003). Yet, other papers have shown that capital expenditures are
also significantly affected by increases in cash flow that are plausibly exogenous to changes in investment
opportunities (Lamont 1997, Shin and Stultz 1998, Rauh 2004), thereby seriously undermining a pure
mis-measurement interpretation.
Assumingthereisindeedsomecausallinkbetweencashflowandinvestment, itisstillanopenquestion
as to whether the additional capital expenditures generated by greater cash flow are profitable (financing
constraint interpretation) or wasteful (agency interpretation).1 Data constraints have so far prevented
researchers from directly tackling this question. Indeed, most of the prior research relies on balance-sheet
data, which does not include information on the specific projects undertaken when firms experience a
positive shock to their cash flow, much less on the outcome of these projects.
In this paper, we re-examine the investment-cash flow relationship in a data set where both individual
investment projects and the outcome of these projects can be evaluated. The specific investment projects
wefocusonaremineralexplorationleases. Thefederalgovernmentroutinelyauctionsoffexplorationrights
to offshore tracts. Firms bid on these tracts in order to have exclusive rights to explore them and, in the
case oil, gas or other minerals are found, extract resources from them. The data set details for each tract
1Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen (1988) tested the financing constraint interpretation by comparing investment-cash flow
sensitivitiesacrossgroupsoffirmsthattheydefineasexantemoreorlessfinanciallyconstrained. KaplanandZingales(1997)
startedalongdebateintheliteratureonthetheoreticalandempiricalvalidityofthisexercise. Rauh(2004)findsmorerobust
support for a financing constraint interpretation when relying on exogenous shock to cash flow.
2

the amount bid by all bidding firms (both winners and losers), the identity of these bidding firms, the
exact timing of the bid (month and year), and numerous tract-level characteristics that may be predictive
of the tract’s eventual productivity. Most importantly, we also observe for each tract whether or not it
was eventually found productive and, for a subset of the productive tracts, the exact quantity of minerals
extracted. The structure of the data therefore allows us to identify the marginal project undertaken when
cash flow increases, as well as to track eventual return on this marginal project.
We first establish that the standard investment-cash flow relationship holds in this data set. In a
panel regression that includes both firm and year fixed effects, we show that higher cash flow is associated
with higher total spending on oil and gas leases. 2 Interestingly, this positive relationship between total
expenditures and cash flow is not driven by a quantity response. Positive shocks to cash flow are not
associated with firms buying more tracts or more acreage of land. Instead, the relationship between total
expenditures and cash flow is driven by a price response. Firms bid more for each acre of land as their
cash flow increases. The bid price-cash flow relationship is robust to controlling for a set of physical tract
characteristics that are observable by all bidding firms prior to the auction. More tellingly, the bid price-
cash flow relationship estimated on the set of winning bids is also robust to controlling for the second
highest bid in the auction.
We then study the productivity of the tracts that are bought when residual cash flow is greater. Our
basic measure of productivity is whether or not a tract is declared productive before the lease expiration
date, i.e. whether or not minerals are found in the tract. While previous papers have documented that a
higherbidpricepositivelypredictswhetheragiventractwilleventuallybefoundproductive(seeHendricks
andPorter1996),wefindthatcashflow-inducedincreasesinbidpriceare,ifanything,negativelyrelatedto
eventual productivity. More importantly, in a simple panel regression that controls for firm and year fixed
effects, we find that the overall number of productive tracts does not increase with a firm’s cash flow in the
year these tracts were bought. In other words, while we establish that higher cash flow is associated with
higher spending on these projects, higher cash flow is not associated with a larger number of productive
projects. We also show that this result is not an artifact of focusing on the probability of success as a
return measure. Focusing on a subset of productive tracts for which we have detailed information on the
amount of resources extracted, we find no evidence that productive tracts bought when cash flow is high
systematicallygeneratemoreresources. Thesefindingscontradictaprofitmaximization-basedexplanation
2The inclusion of year fixed effects means that we are not simply picking up on an industry wide phenomenon, such as all
firms bidding more when the price of oil increases. The inclusion of firm fixed effects means that we are not simply picking
up on other time-invariant firm characteristics that are systematically correlated with average differences in cash flow across
firms.
3