NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCIAL MARKETS AND THE REAL ECONOMY
John H. Cochrane
Working Paper 11193
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11193
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2005
This review will introduce a volume by the same title in the Edward Elgar series “The International Library
of Critical Writings in Financial Economics” edited by Richard Roll. I encourage comments. Please write
promptly so I can include your comments in the final version. I gratefully acknowledge research support from
the NSF in a grant administered by the NBER and from the CRSP. I thank Monika Piazzesi and Motohiro
Yogo for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by John H. Cochrane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Markets and the Real Economy
John H. Cochrane
NBER Working Paper No. 11193
March 2005, Revised September 2006
JEL No. G1, E3
ABSTRACT
I survey work on the intersection between macroeconomics and finance. The challenge is to find the
right measure of "bad times," rises in the marginal value of wealth, so that we can understand high
average returns or low prices as compensation for assets' tendency to pay off poorly in "bad times."
I survey the literature, covering the time-series and cross-sectional facts, the equity premium,
consumption-based models, general equilibrium models, and labor income/idiosyncratic risk
approaches.
John H. Cochrane
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
john.cochrane@gsb.uchicago.edu

1 Introduction
Risk premia
Some assets offer higher average returns than other assets, or, equivalently, they attract
lower prices. These “risk premiums” should reflect aggregate, macroeconomic risks; they
should reflect the tendency of assets to do badly in bad economic times. I survey research
on the central question: what is the nature of macroeconomic risk that drives risk premia in
asset markets?
The central idea of modern finance is that prices are generated by expected discounted
payoffs,
pi = E (m xi ) (1)
t t t+1 t+1
where xi is a random payoff of a specific asset i, and m is a stochastic discount factor.
t+1 t+1
Using the definition of covariance and the real riskfree rate Rf = 1/E(m), we can write the
price as
E (xi )
pi = t t+1 +cov (m ,xi ). (2)
t Rf t t+1 t+1
t
The first term is the risk-neutral present value. The second term is the crucial discount for
risk — a large negative covariance generates a low or “discounted” price. Applied to excess
returns Rei (short or borrow one asset, invest in another), this statement becomes1
E (Rei ) = cov (Rei ,m ). (3)
t t+1
−
t t+1 t+1
The expected excess return or “risk premium” is higher for assets that have a large negative
covariance with the discount factor.
The discount factor m is equal to growth in the marginal value of wealth,
t+1
V (t+1)
W
m = .
t+1
V (t)
W
1From (1), we have for gross returns R,
1=E(mR)
and for a zero-cost excess return Re =Ri Rj.
−
0=E(mRe).
Using the definition of covariance, and 1=E(m)Rf for a real risk-free rate,
0=E(m)E(Re)+cov(m,Re)
E(Re)= Rfcov(m,Re)
−
For small time intervals Rf 1 so we have
≈
E(Re)= cov(m,Re).
−
This equation holds exactly in continuous time.
1

This is a simple statement of an investor’s first order conditions. The marginal value of
wealth V answers the question “how much happier would you be if you found a dollar on
W
the street?” It measures “hunger” — marginal utility, not total utility. The discount factor
is high at t+1 if you desperately want more wealth at t+1 — and would be willing to give
up a lot of wealth in other dates or states to get it.
Equation(3)thussaysthattheriskpremiumE(Rei)isdrivenbythecovarianceofreturns
with the marginal value of wealth.2 Given that an asset must do well sometimes and do
badly at other times, investors would rather it did well when they are otherwise desperate
for a little bit of extra wealth, and that it did badly when they do not particularly value
extra wealth. Thus, investors want assets whose payoffs have a positive covariance with
hunger, and they will avoid assets with a negative covariance. Investors will drive up the
prices and drive down the average returns of assets that covary positively with hunger, and
vice versa, generating the observed risk premia.
These predictions are surprising to newcomers for what they do not say. More volatile
assets do not necessarily generate a higher risk premium. The variance of the return Rei or
payoff xi is irrelevant per se and does not measure risk or generate a risk premium. Only
the covariance of the return with “hunger” matters.
Also,manypeopledonotrecognizethatequations(2)and(3)characterizeanequilibrium.
They describe a market after everyone has settled on their optimal portfolios. They do not
generate portfolio advice. Deviations from (2) and (3), if you can find them, can give
portfolio advice. It’s natural to think that high expected return assets are “good” and one
should buy more of them. But the logic goes the other way: “Good” assets pay off well in
bad times when investors are hungry. Since investors all want them, those assets get lower
average returns and command higher prices in equilibrium. High average return assets are
forced to pay those returns, or equivalently to suffer low prices, because they are so “bad” —
because they pay off badly precisely when investors are most hungry. In the end, there is
no “good” or “bad.” Equations (2) and (3) describe an equilibrium in which the quality of
the asset and its price are exactly balanced.
To make these ideas operational, we need some procedure to measure the growth in
the marginal value of wealth or “hunger” m . The traditional theories of finance, CAPM,
t+1
ICAPM,andAPT,measurehungerbythebehavioroflargeportfoliosofassets. Forexample,
in the CAPM a high average return is balanced by a large tendency of an asset to fall just
when the market as a whole falls — a high “beta.” In equations,
E (Rei ) = cov (Rei ,Rm ) γ
t t+1 t t+1 t+1 ×
where γ is a constant of proportionality equal to the average investor’s risk aversion. Mul-
tifactor models such as the popular Fama-French (1996) three-factor model use returns on
multiple portfolios to measure the marginal value of wealth.
2m really measures the growth in marginal utility or “hunger.” However, from the perspective of time
t+1
t, V (t) is fixed, so what counts is how the realization of the return covaries with the realization of time
W
t+1 marginal value of wealth V (t+1).
W
2