NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ORDER FLOW AND THE FORMATION OF DEALER BIDS:
INFORMATION FLOWS AND STRATEGIC BEHAVIOR
IN THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA SECURITIES AUCTIONS
Ali Hortacsu
Samita Sareen
Working Paper 11116
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11116
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2005
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and not those of the Bank of Canada. We thank
Bruno Biais, Kjell Nyborg, Robert Porter, Rafael Romeu, Leonardo Rezende, Christian Upper, S.
Viswanathan and participants at the IIOC 2004, AMD 2004 and MTS 2004 conferences for their valuable
comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Ali Hortacsu and Samita Sareen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Order Flow and the Formation of Dealer Bids: Information Flows and Strategic Behavior in the
Government of Canada Securities Auctions
Ali Hortacsu and Samita Sareen
NBER Working Paper No. 11116
February 2005
JEL No. G1, L1
ABSTRACT
Is order-flow an important component of private information possessed by traders in government
securities markets? Utilizing a detailed data set on Government of Canada securities auctions, we
argue that the answer is yes. Direct participation in these auctions is limited to government securities
dealers. However, non-dealer customers can also submit bids through dealers. We document patterns
of strategic behavior by both sides of the market, dealers and customers, that support the hypothesis
that customer bids provide valuable order-flow information to dealers. Dealer bids respond to
privately observed customer bids, and dealers observing customer bid can predict the auction cutoff
price better. Customers also respond strategically to dealers' use of the information contained in their
bids.
Ali Hortacsu
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
hortacsu@uchicago.edu
Samita Sareen
Department of Economics
Duke University
ssareen@econ.duke.edu

A large theoretical literature in financial economics studies the question of how asset market
equilibrium will be attained when agents possess private information regarding asset values and
make strategic use of this information.1 However, the institutional sources of private information
in some asset markets, especially in the vast markets for government securities, are not easy
to determine. After all, it is difficult to argue that many participants in government securities
markets are privy to insider information regarding the economic fundamentals underlying the
valuation of a particular Treasury bill or bond. Most, if not all, larger players in these markets
use the same computer screens showing the same financial and political data and news. Hence,
aside from possessing heterogeneous priors due to exogenous reasons, the forecasts they will make
will differ from each other only to the extent that their forecasting technologies are different.
Thereis,however,onesourceoftrulyprivateinformation,identifiedbythemarketmicrostruc-
ture literature as “order flow.” Most large players in government securities markets are intermedi-
arieswhobuyandsellsecuritiestoprofitfromthebid-askspread. Asourceofprivateinformation
for securities dealers is their interactions with customers. Since each dealer interacts with a differ-
ent set of customers, each, in effect, sees different portions of market demand and supply curves,
leading to differing inferences regarding where the equilibrium market price might lie.
In this paper, we will investigate whether and how “order-flow” information matters in the
Government of Canada securities auction market. In these auctions, securities dealers authorized
by the Bank of Canada place bids on debt issues of the Government of Canada (GoC henceforth).
These securities dealers bid for their own accounts, but they also submit bids on behalf of a set
of qualified bidders (called “customers”) who can not place bids directly on the GoC’s computer
system, but have to route their bids through a dealer. Hence, “order flow” in this context can be
defined as the customer bids that a particular dealer sees, but others do not.
The possibility that customer bids provide private information to dealers bidding in Treasury
auctions was first suggested by the influential paper of Nyborg and Sundaresan (1996, page 68).
Our paper provides direct evidence for this observation through a very detailed bidder-level data
set. Similar to other treasury auction data sets used in previous studies, we have access to the
entire set of bids submitted for a set of securities offerings.2 The unique aspect of our data set
is that we are able to observe which bids are submitted by the dealers for themselves and which
bids are submitted on behalf of their customers. Another unique aspect of our data is that, along
with the final set of bids, we are also able to track how dealers and customers modify their bids
1See O’Hara (1995) and Brunnermeier (2001) provide comprehensive surveys of this theoretical literature.
2ExamplesofempiricalstudiesonTreasuryauctionsthatalsohaveaccesstobidder-leveldataareUmlauf(1993),
Gordy(1994),Nyborg,RydqvistandSundaresan(2002),Horta¸csu(2002),Fevrier,PreguetandVisser(2002),and
Keloharju, Rydqvist, Nyborg (2004).
2

on the Bank of Canada’s bid submission database over time.
Given this extremely rich data source, we address the following questions:
1. What is the nature of information flows in this market? Specifically, do dealers respond to
the information contained in their customers’ bids? Do dealers benefit from this informa-
tion?
2. One may expect that customers know that they are revealing valuable information to their
dealers, and will react accordingly. Is there any evidence for strategic behavior on the part
of the customers?
To begin answering these questions, we first describe a feature of the bidding process that
indicates that information flows are important in determining market outcomes. In Section 2.A
we document that a vast majority of bid submissions are concentrated within the last 10 minutes
preceding the bid submission deadline. Since this is a sealed-bid auction, where bidders can
not see each others’ bids, there is no strategic benefit to waiting until the last minute, unless
the bidders are waiting for payoff-relevant information to arrive. Moreover, reminiscent of the
information aggregation process noted by Biais, Hillion and Spatt (1999), we find that bids that
come in later are less dispersed and much more concentrated around the eventual cut-off (market
clearing) price of the auction, indicating that later bids are much more informative about the
auction outcome than earlier bids. Throughout, we also note that all of the temporal patterns
we have discovered are much more pronounced in bond auctions compared to T-bill auctions.
This finding is consistent with the intuition that the valuation of long-term securities is subject
to much more uncertainty, and hence the value of waiting for new pieces of information to arrive
is larger.
Next,insection2.B,wedocumentthatdealerssubmittheirownbidssecondsaftertheysubmit
their customers’ bids. This suggests that an important piece of information that the dealers are
“waiting” for is the information contained in their customers’ bids. Consistent with the previous
finding, the “waiting” behavior of dealers is much more apparent in bond auctions as opposed
to Treasury bill auctions. This once again points out that the value of information provided
by customer orders may be much more important in bond auctions as opposed to Treasury bill
auctions.
An alternative explanation for the “waiting” behavior of dealers is that both customer and
dealer bids reflect responses to releases of public information that are not observable to us. Thus,
in Section 3.A, we investigate the cross-sectional variation in dealers’ bids within a given auc-
tion. We find that customer bids privately observed by a dealer is an important component of
3