NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXPLAINING RETURNS WITH CASH-FLOW PROXIES
Peter Hecht
Tuomo Vuolteenaho
Working Paper 11169
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11169
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2005
Earlier drafts of this paper were circulated under the titles “Stock return variation and expected dividends:
a reinterpretation” and “Stock return variation and expected dividends: a comment.” Corresponding author:
Peter Hecht, (617) 495 6171, phecht@hbs.edu. We are indebted to John Cochrane, Eugene Fama, S.P.
Kothari, Jay Shanken, and many anonymous referees for their suggestions. We would also like to thank Tom
Berglund, Randy Cohen, George Constantinides, Campbell Harvey, J. B. Heaton, Jussi Keppo, Owen
Lamont, Eva Liljeblom, Christopher Polk, William Schwert, Vesa Puttonen, Richard Thaler, and the seminar
participants at the Swedish School of Economics and University of Chicago for helpful comments.
Vuolteenaho wishes to thank the Foundation for Economic Education, the Emil Aaltonen Foundation, and
the Oscar Mayer Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Peter Hecht and Tuomo Vuolteenaho. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Explaining Returns with Cash-Flow Proxies
Peter Hecht and Tuomo Vuolteenaho
NBER Working Paper No. 11169
March 2005
JEL No. E440, G100, G120, G140, G350
ABSTRACT
Stock returns are correlated with contemporaneous earnings growth, dividend growth, future real
activity, and other cash-flow proxies. The correlation between cash-flow proxies and stock returns
may arise from association of cash-flow proxies with one-period expected returns, cash-flow news,
and/or expected-return news. We use Campbell's (1991) return decomposition to measure the relative
importance of these three effects in regressions of returns on cash-flow proxies. In some of the
popular specifications, variables that are motivated as proxies for cash-flow news also track a
nontrivial proportion of one-period expected returns and expected-return news. As a result, the R2
from a regression of returns on cash-flow proxies may overstate or understate the importance of
cash-flow news as a source of return variance.
Peter Hecht
Harvard Business School
Cambridge, MA 02163
phecht@hbs.edu
Tuomo Vuolteenaho
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
t-vuolteenaho@harvard.edu

Most valuation theories identify time-varying one-period expected returns, news about cash flows,
and news about future expected returns as the three possible sources of return variation. Barring the
existence of infinitely-lived bubbles in asset prices, if an asset’s return is high, its current one-period
expected return must have been high, expected cash flows must have increased (i.e., cash-flow news must
have been positive), and/or future expected returns decreased (i.e., expected-return news must have been
negative.)
Fama (1990), Schwert (1990), Kothari and Shanken (1992), Liew (1995) and others regress aggregate
stock returns on cash-flow proxies and find that cash-flow proxies explain returns well. The typical
interpretation of these regressions is that cash-flow news are an important source of observed return
variation. For example, Kothari and Shanken (p. 178) state, “In this paper, we find that proxies for the
market’s expectations of future dividends explain a substantial fraction of return variation.” Some also
interpret the high explanatory power of these types of regressions more generally as evidence of market
rationality.
Using firm-level data, an extensive accounting literature focuses on the contemporaneous correlation
of stock returns and earnings. Despite the statistically reliable positive association between stock returns and
earnings, Ball and Brown (1968), Beaver, Clarke, and Wright (1979), Beaver, Lambert, and Morse (1980),
Easton and Harris (1991), Collins, Kothari, Shanken, and Sloan (1994), and others find that the explained
fraction of stock return variation is significantly less than one (typically under 10 percent). Lev (1989) and
others suggest that the relatively low explanatory power stems from earnings’ lack of timeliness and/or
value-irrelevant noise in earnings.
Irrespective of motivation, however, the explanatory power of cash-flow proxies may arise from the
correlation of cash-flow proxies with one-period expected returns, cash-flow news, and/or expected-return
news. If expected-return variation is responsible for the high explanatory power of the aggregate
regressions, these R2s should not be interpreted as evidence of cash-flow news driving the returns. Similarly,
if expected-return news is highly variable and positively correlated with cash-flow news, the low R2s in
regressions of firm-level returns on earnings do not necessarily imply that earnings are a noisy or delayed
measure of the cash-flow-generating ability of the firm. Even if earnings are a clean signal of cash-flow
news, expected-return effects (due to variation in risk-adjusted discount rates and/or mispricing) can garble
the earnings-returns relation.

The idea that correlation between a cash-flow proxy and stock return may be due to any of the three
components is not novel. Fama (1990), Schwert (1990), Kothari and Shanken (1992), Campbell and Ammer
(1993), and others recognize that when stock returns are regressed on cash-flow proxies, any of the three
effects may be driving the regression coefficients. They do not, however, clearly quantify the relative
importance of these three effects. Thus, in the end, it is still unclear why cash-flow proxies are or are not
related to stock returns.
We measure the significance of the above three effects on various regressions of stock returns on
cash-flow proxies. We empirically reinterpret the regression results by Beaver, Clarke, and Wright (1979),
Fama (1990), Schwert (1990), Easton and Harris (1991), Kothari and Shanken (1992), Collins, Kothari,
Shanken, and Sloan (1994) who regress aggregate or firm-level stock returns on cash-flow proxies. Using
Campbell’s (1991) return decomposition, a regression of returns on cash-flow proxies can be decomposed
into three separate regressions, each corresponding to one component of return. Our procedure first assumes
and estimates a simple return-generating process. This return-generating process then implies realized
values for one-period expected returns, cash-flow news, and expected-return news. Once the three return
components are extracted, we regress them individually on the cash-flow proxies. These three regressions
expose what drives the regression coefficients in the original returns-on-cash-flow-proxies specification.
Our empirical results show that many of the variables in Fama’s (1990) and Schwert’s (1990)
regressions generally proxy the return components in both an intended and unintended way. The default and
term yield spread positively track one-period expected returns. However, the default spread is negatively
related to cash-flow news, making the positive link between stock returns and the default spread
insignificant. While shocks to the default and term yield spread positively track revisions in future expected
returns, i.e., expected-return news, shocks to the term spread are also positively correlated with cash-flow
news, producing an insignificant positive relationship between stock returns and the term spread shocks.
Between the current and future dividend growth rates, only the current dividend growth is significantly
positively correlated with cash-flow news. Since the current dividend growth is also strongly negatively
correlated with expected-return news, the positive relationship between stock returns and the current
dividend growth is much larger in magnitude.
Similar to Fama (1990) and Schwert (1990), many of the variables in Kothari and Shanken (1992)
also proxy the return components in an intended and unintended way. For Kothari and Shanken’s returns-
2