NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE LABOR MARKET EFFECTS
OF RISING HEALTH INSURANCE PREMIUMS
Katherine Baicker
Amitabh Chandra
Working Paper 11160
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11160
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2005
This paper was prepared for Program Evaluation, Human Capital, and Labor Market Public Policy: A
Research Conference in Honor of Mark C. Berger in Lexington, Kentucky on October 7-8th 2004. Mark was
an extraordinary advisor, friend and mentor, and we will miss his advice, generosity, and insights. We are
grateful to Mark Berger, Jon Gruber, Ellen Meara, Derek Neal, Douglas Staiger, conference participants at
the Research Conference and the annual meetings of the American Economic Association, and especially
Aaron Yelowitz for very insightful comments. We received funding from NIA-P01 AG19783-02. The
opinions in this paper are those of the authors and should not be attributed to the NIA or NBER. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Katherine Baicker and Amitabh Chandra. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Labor Market Effects of Rising Health Insurance Premiums
Katherine Baicker and Amitabh Chandra
NBER Working Paper No. 11160
February 2005
JEL No. I1, J0, J3
ABSTRACT
Since 2000, premiums for employer-provided health insurance have increased by 59 percent with
little corresponding increase in the generosity of coverage. The effect of this increase in costs on
wages and employment will depend on workers' valuation of the benefit, the elasticities of labor
supply and demand, and institutional constraints on employers' ability to lower wages. Measuring
these effects is difficult, however, without a source of exogenous variation in the cost of benefits.
We use variation in medical malpractice payments driven by the recent "medical malpractice crisis"
to identify the causal effect of rising health insurance premiums on wages, employment, and health
insurance coverage. We estimate that a 10 percent increase in health insurance premiums reduces
the aggregate probability of being employed by 1.6 percent and hours worked by 1 percent, and
increases the likelihood that a worker is employed only part-time by 1.9 percent. For workers
covered by employer provided health insurance, this increase in premiums results in an offsetting
decrease in wages of 2.3 percent. Thus, rising health insurance premiums may both increase the
ranks of the unemployed and place an increasing burden on workers through decreased wages for
workers with employer health insurance and decreased hours for workers moved from full time jobs
with benefits to part time jobs without.
Katherine Baicker
Department of Economics
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
kbaicker@dartmouth.edu
Amitabh Chandra
Department of Economics
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
achandra@dartmouth.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
In the United States, two-thirds of the non-elderly population is covered by employer-
provided health insurance (EHI), either directly or as a dependent through a family member’s
coverage.1 According to a national survey conducted by the Kaiser Family Foundation, the cost
of EHI has increased by over 59 percent since 2000 with no accompanying increase in the scale
or scope of benefits; between 2003 and 2004 the price of premiums increased 11.2 percent, a
nine percentage point increase over the 2.3 percent increase in workers’ hourly earnings.2
Increases in health insurance premiums may have significant effects on labor markets, including
changes in the number of jobs, hours worked per employee, wages, and compensation packages.
Indeed, it is possible that a significant portion of the increase in the uninsured population may be
a consequence of employers shedding this benefit as health-insurance premiums rise (Porter,
2004). Simple correlations are consistent with this mechanism: despite strong economic growth
in the 1990s, the number of non-elderly uninsured grew by 3 percentage points to 15.7 percent of
the population, while the price of health-insurance premiums grew by 34 percent.
Understanding how labor market characteristics affect adjustments to increased health
insurance costs is of growing policy importance. Proposals to cover the uninsured often rely on
“employer mandates” that would require employers to cover eligible workers.3 For example,
California’s Senate Bill 2 (also known as Proposition 72, narrowly defeated in November, 2004)
would have required all employers with more than 20 employees to provide health insurance to
their workers (who work more than 100 hours per month. Other policy proposals include the
provision of tax credits for the purchase of non-group health insurance, differentially changing
1 These tabulations are from the Annual Demographic Files of the Current Population Survey (CPS) for
1988-2003. We define the non-elderly population as those under the age of 65.
2 These figures are obtained from Kaiser Family Foundation (2003). In Figure 1 we use these data to
illustrate the growth of premiums since 1996 for family and single-person policies.
3 Yelowitz (2004) provides a thorough discussion of this legislation and estimates its economic impact.
1

eligible employees’ valuation of benefits provided by their employer versus wages.
The magnitude of the effects of increases in benefit costs on employment, wages, and
health insurance coverage will be driven by the elasticities of labor supply and demand,
institutional constraints on wages and compensation packages, and how much workers value the
increase in health insurance costs. Since employers currently provide such coverage voluntarily,
if workers fully value these benefits then they will bear the cost of the increase in reduced wages,
with no accompanying change in employment, employment costs, or employee utility.4 In a
world where workers value benefits at their cost and are able to sort between firms based on their
preferences, and without other institutional constraints, increases in the costs of benefits should
be fully offset by decreases in wages.
There are many reasons to believe that firms are limited in their ability to offset increases
in the price of health insurance premiums through lower compensation. Institutional constraints
(such as the minimum wage or IRS non-discriminatory provisions that limit the extent to which
employers can offer differential benefits to their employees) limit a firm’s ability to reduce
compensation. For these reasons, increases in the cost of providing health insurance may not be
neutral in terms of their effects on employment and the structure of work. However, identifying
the magnitude of these effects is difficult. Data on premiums and wages are usually not jointly
available at the individual level. Additionally, most micro-datasets (such as the SIPP and CPS)
do not allow the researcher to control adequately for worker characteristics, such as ability, that
might simultaneously influence the outcome under study. In this paper we uncover the causal
4 This view is explicitly studied in the literature estimating the wage-fringe tradeoff. A $1 increase in the
value of fringes may offset by a $1 reduction in fringe benefits – or, in the case of most tax-favored
benefits, a $1/(1-t) reduction, where t is the tax rate. For example, Gruber (1994) demonstrates that the
passage of the Pregnancy Discrimination Act in 1978 (that mandated that pregnancies no longer be
treated as a “comparable illness”) resulted in employers shifting the entire cost of the mandate onto
employees.
2