NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY IS LONG-HORIZON LESS RISKY?
A DURATION-BASED EXPLANATION OF THE VALUE PREMIUM
Martin Lettau
Jessica Wachter
Working Paper 11144
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11144
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2005
We thank Andy Abel, John Campbell, John Cochrane, Leonid Kogan, Sydney Ludvigson, Anthony Lynch,
Stijn Van Niewerburgh, and seminar participants at the 2004 NBER Summer Institute, Duke University, New
York University, the University of Pennsylvania, and Yale University for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Martin Lettau and Jessica Wachter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Why is Long-Horizon Equity Less Risky? A Duration-Based Explanation of the Value Premium
Martin Lettau and Jessica Wachter
NBER Working Paper No. 11144
February 2005
JEL No. G1
ABSTRACT
This paper proposes a dynamic risk-based model that captures the high expected returns on value
stocks relative to growth stocks, and the failure of the capital asset pricing model to explain these
expected returns. To model the difference between value and growth stocks, we introduce a cross-
section of long-lived firms distinguished by the timing of their cash flows. Firms with cash flows
weighted more to the future have high price ratios, while firms with cash flows weighted more to
the present have low price ratios. We model how investors perceive the risks of these cash flows by
specifying a stochastic discount factor for the economy. The stochastic discount factor implies that
shocks to aggregate dividends are priced, but that shocks to the time-varying price of risk are not.
As long-horizon equity, growth stocks covary more with this time-varying price of risk than value
stocks, which covary more with shocks to cash flows. When the model is calibrated to explain
aggregate stock market behavior, we find that it can also account for the observed value premium,
the high Sharpe ratios on value stocks relative to growth stocks, and the outperformance of value
(and underperformance of growth) relative to the CAPM.
Martin Lettau Jessica Wachter
Department of Finance, Suite 9-190 Department of Finance
Stern School of Business 2300 SH-DH
New York University The Wharton School
44 West 4th Street University of Pennsylvania
New York, NY 10012 3620 Locust Walk
and NBER Philadelphia, PA 19104
mlettau@stern.nyu.edu and NBER
jwachter@wharton.upenn.edu

1 Introduction
This paper proposes a dynamic risk-based model that captures the high expected returns
on value stocks relative to growth stocks, and the failure of the capital asset pricing model
to explain these expected returns. The value premium, flrst noted by Graham and Dodd
(1934), is the flnding that assets with high ratios of price to fundamentals (growth stocks)
have low expected returns relative to assets with low ratios of price to fundamentals (value
stocks). This flnding by itself is not necessarily surprising, as it is possible that the premium
on value stocks represents a compensation for bearing systematic risk. However, Fama and
French (1992) show that the capital asset pricing model (CAPM) of Sharpe (1964) and
Lintner (1965) cannot account for the value premium. The CAPM predicts that expected
returns should rise with the beta on the market portfolio; however, value stocks have higher
expected returns yet do not appear to have higher betas than growth stocks.
To model the difierence between value and growth stocks, we introduce a cross-section
of long-lived flrms distinguished by the timing of their cash (cid:176)ows. Firms with cash (cid:176)ows
weighted more to the future have high price ratios, while flrms with cash (cid:176)ows weighted
more to the present have low price ratios. Drawing an analogy to bonds, we can say that
growth flrms are high-duration assets while value flrms are low-duration assets.
We model how investors perceive the risks of these cash (cid:176)ows by specifying a stochastic
discount factor for the economy, or equivalently, an intertemporal marginal rate of substitu-
tion for the representative agent. Our model for the stochastic discount factor shares some
of the features of the external habit formation model of Campbell and Cochrane (1999). As
in the model of Campbell and Cochrane (1999), the riskfree rate is constant. Moreover, we
allow the price of risk to vary, implying that at certain times, investors require a greater re-
turn per unit of risk to hold equities than at others. A key difierence is the relation between
the price of risk and the aggregate dividend. In the model of Campbell and Cochrane (1999)
they are tightly linked: a shock to the aggregate dividend moves agents closer to their habit
level and raises the return they require for bearing risk.1 In our model the return investors
require for bearing risk moves independently of the aggregate dividend. We show that the
1In the benchmark case of Campbell and Cochrane (1999), aggregate dividends and aggregate consump-
tion are the same. Campbell and Cochrane also examine a case where dividends are correlated with con-
sumption. Because of this correlation, there is still a link between dividends and the price of risk.
1

correlation between the aggregate dividend and the price of risk determines, in large part,
the ability of the model to flt the cross-section.
We require our model to explain not only the cross-section of assets based on price ratios,
but also aggregate stock market behavior. Firms are distinguished by their cash (cid:176)ows which
are deflned in terms of shares of the aggregate dividend. We specify share processes that are
stationary, and explore the robustness of our results to difierent models of the share process.
This modeling strategy, also employed by Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2004) and Santos
andVeronesi(2004), ensuresthattheeconomyisstationary, andthatallfuturedividendsare
marketed. We assume that log dividend growth is normally distributed with a time-varying
mean. We calibrate the dividend process to match conditional and unconditional moments
of the aggregate dividend process in the data. Stochastic discount factor parameters are
chosen to flt the time series of aggregate stock market returns. Expected excess returns on
equity are time-varying in the model, implying excess volatility and return predictability.
We flnd that the model can match unconditional moments of the aggregate stock market
and produce predictability of dividends and returns close to that found in the data.
To test whether our model can capture the value premium, we sort flrms into portfolios in
simulated data. We flnd that risk premia, risk-adjusted returns, and Sharpe ratios increase
as portfolios move from growth to value. The value premium (the return on a strategy
that is long the extreme value portfolio and short the extreme growth portfolio) is between
3.4% and 5.2% (depending on the share process) compared with a value premium of 4.9%
in the data when portfolios are formed on the basis of book-to-market. The CAPM alpha
on the value-minus-growth strategy is between 4.7% and 6.2%, compared with 5.6% in the
data. These results do not arise because value stocks are more risky according to traditional
measures; standarddeviationsandmarketbetasincreaseslightlyandthendecrease,implying
that the extreme value portfolio has a lower standard deviation and beta than the extreme
growth portfolio. Our model therefore matches the magnitude of the value premium, and
the outperformance of value portfolios relative to the CAPM, that is found in the data.
Our paper builds on previous literature that uses the concept of duration to better un-
derstand the cross-section of stock returns. Using the decomposition of returns into cash
(cid:176)ow and discount rate components proposed by Campbell and Mei (1993), Cornell (1999)
shows that growth companies, such as Amgen, whose cash (cid:176)ows are mainly idiosyncratic,
may have high betas because of the duration of these cash (cid:176)ows, and the induced sensitivity
2