NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INVESTMENT TIMING, AGENCY, AND INFORMATION
Steven R. Grenadier
Neng Wang
Working Paper 11148
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11148
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2005
We thank Tony Bernardo, Peter DeMarzo, Harrison Hong, John Long, Erwan Morellec, Mike Raith, David
Scharfstein, Bill Schwert, Cliff Smith, Jeff Zwiebel, seminar participants at the 2004 American Finance
Association Meetings in San Diego, Columbia University and the University of Rochester, and especially
Mike Barclay, René Stulz (the editor), and an anonymous referee for helpful comments. Part of this work
was done when Wang was at Simon School of Business at University of Rochester. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2005 by Steven R. Grenadier and Neng Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Investment Timing, Agency, and Information
Steven R. Grenadier and Neng Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 11148
February 2005
JEL No. E31, E32, E5
ABSTRACT
This paper provides a model of investment timing by managers in a decentralized firm in the
presence of agency conflicts and information asymmetries. When investment decisions are delegated
to managers, contracts must be designed to provide incentives for managers to both extend effort and
truthfully reveal private information. Using a real options approach, we show that an underlying
option to invest can be decomposed into two components: a manager's option and an owner's option.
The implied investment behavior differs significantly from that of the first-best no-agency solution.
In particular, greater inertia occurs in investment, as the model predicts that the manager will have
a more valuable option to wait than the owner.
Steven R. Grenadier
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
sgren@stanford.edu
Neng Wang
Columbia Business School
Uris Hall 812
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
nw2128@columbia.edu

1. Introduction
One of the most important topics in corporate finance is the formulation of the optimal
investment strategies of firms. The investment decision has two components: how much to
invest and when to invest. The first is the capital allocation decision, and the second is the
investment timing decision. The standard textbook prescription for the capital allocation
decision is that firms should invest in projects only if their net present values (NPVs) are
positive. Similarly,astandardframeworkfortheinvestmenttimingdecisionistherealoptions
approach. The real options approach posits that the opportunity to invest in a project is
analogoustoanAmericancall optionontheinvestment project, andthetimingofinvestment
is economically equivalent to the optimal exercise decision for an option. The real options
approach is well summarized in Dixit and Pindyck (1994) and Trigeorgis (1996).1
However, both the simple NPV rule and the standard real options approach fail to ac-
count for the presence of agency conflicts and information asymmetries. In most modern
corporations, shareholders delegate the investment decision to managers, taking advantage
of managers’ special skills and expertise. In such decentralized settings, there are likely to
be both information asymmetries (e.g., managers are better informed than owners about
projected cash flows) and agency issues (e.g., unobserved managerial effort, perquisite con-
sumption, empire building). A number of papers in the corporate finance literature provide
models of capital budgeting under asymmetric information and agency. (See Stein, 2001,
for a useful summary.) The focus of this literature is on the first element of the investment
decision: the amount of capital allocated to managers for investment. Thus, this literature
providespredictionsonwhetherfirmsover- orunderinvestrelative to thefirst-bestno-agency
benchmark. The focus of this paper is on the second element of the investment decision: the
timing of investment. We extend the real options framework to account for the issues of
information and agency in a decentralized firm. Analogous to the notions of over- or under-
investment, our paper provides results on hurried or delayed investment.
No agency conflicts arise in the standard real options paradigm, as it is assumed that the
1Theapplicationoftherealoptionsapproachtoinvestmentisbroad. BrennanandSchwartz(1985)usean
option pricing approach to analyze investmentin natural resources. McDonald and Siegel (1986) provide the
standardcontinuous-timeframeworkforanalysisofafirm’sinvestmentinasingleproject. MajdandPindyck
(1987)enrichtheanalysiswithatime-to-buildfeature. Dixit(1989)usestherealoptionapproachtoexamine
entryandexitfromaproductiveactivity. TriantisandHodder(1990) analyzemanufacturingflexibilityasan
option. Titman(1985)andWilliams(1991)usetherealoptionsapproachtoanalyzerealestatedevelopment.
1

option’s owner makes the exercise decision.2 However, in this paper, an owner delegates the
option exercise decision to a manager. Thus, the timing of investment is determined by the
manager. The owner’s problem is to design an optimal contract under both hidden action
and hidden information. The true quality of the underlying project can be high or low. The
hidden action problem is that the manager can influence the likelihood that the quality of
the project is high. An optimal contract will have the property that the manager will be
induced to provide costly (but unverifiable) effort. The hidden information problem is that
the underlying project’s future value contains a component that is only privately observed
by the manager. Absent any mechanism that induces the manager to reveal his private
information voluntarily, the manager could have an incentive to lie about the true quality
of the project and divert value for his private interests. For example, the manager could
divert privately observed project value by consuming excessive perquisites, building empires,
or working less hard. An optimal contract induces the manager to deliver to the owner the
true value of the privately observed component of project value, and thus no actual value
diversion takes place in equilibrium.
We show that the underlying option can be decomposed into two components: a man-
ager’s option and an owner’s option. The manager’s option has a payout upon exercise that
is a function of the contingent compensation contract. Based on this contractual payout,
the manager determines the exercise time. The owner’s option has a payout, received at the
manager’s chosen exercise time, equal to the payoff from the underlying option minus the
manager’s compensation. The model provides the solution for the optimal contract that
comes as close as possible to the first-best no-agency solution.
Themodelimpliesinvestmentbehaviorthatdifferssubstantiallyfromthatofthestandard
real options approach with no agency problems. Ingeneral, managers display greater inertia
in their investment behavior, in that they invest later than implied by the first-best solution.
In essence, this is a result of the manager (even in an optimal contract) not having a full
ownership stake in the option payoff. This less than full ownership interest implies that the
manager has a more valuable option to wait than the owner.
An important aspect of the model is the interaction of hidden action and hidden infor-
2While our paper focuses on the agency issues that arise from the divergence of interests between owners
andshareholders,similarissuesexistbetweenstockholdersandbondholders. MelloandParsons(1992),Mauer
and Triantis (1994), Leland (1998), Mauer and Ott(2000), and Morellec (2001, 2003) examine the impact of
agency conflicts on firm value using the real options approach.
2