NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CONSTRAINING MANAGERS WITHOUT OWNERS:
GOVERNANCE OF THE NOT-FOR-PROFIT ENTERPRISE
Mihir A. Desai
Robert J. Yetman
Working Paper 11140
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11140
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2005
We thank Marion Fremont-Smith, Allan Grossman, Doug Guthrie, Karen Horn, Andrew Metrick, Rosalie
Wolf and participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s conference on the Governance of Not-for-
Profit Organizations for helpful discussions and comments. Desai thanks the Division of Research at Harvard
Business School for generous financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Mihir A. Desai and Robert J. Yetman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Constraining Managers without Owners: Governance of the Not-for-Profit Enterprise
Mihir A. Desai and Robert J. Yetman
NBER Working Paper No. 11140
February 2005
JEL No. L30, G30, H40, K20
ABSTRACT
In the absence of owners, how effective are the constraints imposed by the state in promoting
effective firm governance? This paper develops state-level indices of the legal and reporting rules
facing not-for-profits and examines the effects of these rules on not-for-profit behavior. Stronger
non-distribution constraints are associated with greater charitable expenditures and foundation
payouts while more stringent reporting requirements are associated with lower insider compensation.
The paper also examines how governance influences an alternative metric of not-for-profit
(cid:1)
performance the provision of social insurance. Stronger governance measures are associated with
intertemporal smoothing of resources and greater activity in response to negative economic shocks.
Mihir A. Desai
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mdesai@hbs.edu
Robert J. Yetman
Graduate School of Management
University of California, Davis
AOB iV
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
rjyetman@ucdavis.edu

1. Introduction
In the absence of owners, how effective are the constraints imposed by the state on
insiders in providing for effective governance of firms? Ownership patterns may well substitute
for legal protections complicating direct inferences on the efficacy of legal and reporting
requirements. The not-for-profit sector is characterized by the absence of owners but the
presence of legal and reporting rules. Indeed, the differentiating characteristic of not-for-profits
is the legal constraint on the non-distribution of earnings to insiders. Additionally, reporting of
various kinds – mandated by the government rather than the owners – is also required. The
strength of these legal and reporting rules vary by state within the U.S. creating the opportunity
to analyze the efficacy of legal and reporting rules in a setting without owners and without the
complicating features of cross-country studies.
This paper analyzes the influence of state-varying legal and reporting rules on the
behavior of public charities and private foundations from 1987 to 2000. If these entities are
motivated purely by altruistic motives or if the rules themselves are ineffective, these governance
constraints may have no effect on not-for-profit outcomes. Alternatively, some aspects of these
governance constraints might constrain not-for-profit managers from exploiting the latitude
afforded by the absence of owners and thereby improve firm performance. In order to consider
these alternatives, we calculate a state-level index of the legal and reporting constraints facing
not-for-profits. For legal constraints, we create an index of legal rules facing not-for-profits that
is further subdivided into indices measuring explicit rules that strengthen the non-distribution
constraint and more general, alternative enforcement mechanisms. For reporting rules, we create
an index of reporting requirements allowing us to consider the role of both legal rules and
reporting requirements in influencing not-for-profit behavior.
In order to assess the relevance of the governance environment to not-for-profit firms,
these indices are related to measures of operating performance and insider compensation for
public charities. The paper also analyzes the degree to which payouts by nonoperating
foundations also vary with these governance metrics. Finally, the paper provides an alternative
test of not-for-profit performance – the degree to which not-for-profits provide social insurance
by building stocks of reserves and responding to local negative income shocks – and examines
the effect of governance on firm performance through this test. Much as the efficiency of private
2

firms is measured by their responsiveness to investment opportunities, this test capitalizes on the
idea that not-for-profits should expand activity at times when their activity is most warranted –
that is, do they help when helping helps the most.
We find that the governance environment of not-for-profits is associated with differential
performance by public charities and private foundations on several different margins. For public
charities, the analysis demonstrates that stronger non-distribution constraints and reporting rules
are associated with a greater fraction of expenditures devoted to charitable activities and a lower
probability of undertaking inefficient fundraising activity. In addition to these effects on public
charity behavior, stronger legal and reporting rules are also associated with lower insider
compensation. With respect to private foundations, stronger non-distribution constraints and
reporting rules are associated with larger payouts and a lower probability of delaying required
payouts. As with public charities, stronger legal and reporting rules are associated with lower
officer compensation relative to total expenses as well as to the pay of other employees for
private foundations.
Finally, not-for-profits in states with stronger legal and reporting rules also
intertemporally smooth resources more by attenuating the link between the raising of resources
and charitable expenditures. This intertemporal smoothing appears to fulfill a social insurance
objective as not-for-profits in states with stronger legal and reporting rules also respond to
negative income shocks with greater activity. These results suggest that not-for-profits in states
with stricter governance environments fulfill a social insurance objective more effectively.
In general, governance laws related to the non-distribution constraint and state level
reporting requirements have the most influence on not-for-profit behaviors while more
ambiguous legal rules associated with enforcement appear to have little effect. More
specifically, disclosure and reporting rules are most effective in deterring excessive insider
compensation while the non-distribution constraint is most effective in focusing activities toward
charitable purposes. As hypothesized in the literature, these results suggest that the strength of
the non-distribution constraint specifically is a critical factor in regulating the behavior of not-
for-profit organizations and that disclosure requirements can also deter opportunistic insiders. In
sum, stronger non-distribution constraints and reporting rules increase the fraction of overall
3