NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION IN HIERARCHIES
Suzanne Scotchmer
Working Paper 11213
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11213
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2005
I thank Eddie Dekel, Catherine Eckel, Dino Falaschetti, Anthony Marino (at the 2001 Econometric Society
meetings), David Neumark and Stephen Maurer for discussion. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by Suzanne Scotchmer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Affirmative Action in Hierarchies
Suzanne Scotchmer
NBER Working Paper No. 11213
March 2005
JEL No. J7
ABSTRACT
If promotion in a hierarchy is based on a random signal of ability, rates of promotion will be affected
by risk-taking. Further, the numbers and abilities of risk-takers and non-risk-takers will be different
at each stage of the hierarchy, and the ratio will be changing. I show that, under mild conditions,
more risk-takers than non-risk-takers will survive at early stages, but they will have lower ability.
At later stages, this will be reversed: Fewer risk-takers than non-risk-takers survive, but they will
have higher ability. I give several interpretations for how these theorems relate to affirmative action,
in light of considerable evidence that males are more risk-taking than females.
Suzanne Scotchmer
Department of Economics and GSPP
2607 Hearst Avenue
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
and NBER
scotch@berkeley.edu

1. Introduction
This paper studies the effect of risk-taking in hierarchies, where promotion at each
stage depends on a signal of ability. The motivation for the paper comes from a
substantial body of evidence that males are more risk-taking than females, and from
the continuing controversy about why males and females have different patterns of
success in labor markets. Granting the premise that the genders differ in risk-taking,
the question is whether it has explanatory power for labor markets. The answer is
mixed.
The theorems proved below compare promotions drawn from two subpopula-
tions, one of which generates accurate signals of ability and the other of which gener-
ates noisy signals of ability. The premise is that true abilities (which may be defined
differently in different hierarchies) have the same distribution in both populations, but
that agents in one population give a noisy signal to the decision maker. This is a
reduced-form hypothesis which might follow from preferences and optimizing behav-
ior, or might reflect behavior that is hard-wired. This distinction does not matter for
the theorems that I prove, although it may matter for the interpretation.
The main point of the paper is to understand how promotion plays out for the
two populations in a hierarchy with a large (infinite) number of stages. The main
conclusion is that what happens at the beginning of the hierarchy is inverted at the
end. Risk-taking will boost the number of survivors in the first round of elimination,
relative to the non-risk-takers, at least under plausible conditions. But although the
risk-takers will be overrepresented at stage 2, they will have lower ability on average
than the underrepresented survivors who did not take risks.
Moving up the hierarchy, the distributions of abilities and promotion rates are
both changing. At stage 2, the mean ability of risk-takers is lower than of non-risk-
takers, but this eventually switches back. At the end of the (infinite) hierarchy, the
mean ability of risk-takers is higher than the mean ability of non-risk-takers, but they
will be underrepresented. The reason for the switch is that, at every stage, every
surviving risk-taker has another opportunity to throw himself randomly out of the
pool. As the hierarchy progresses, the cumulative effect is that only the very, very
1

able risk-takers survive. There are not very many of them, relative to non-risk-takers.
Thetheoremsthatunderlietheseassertionsareproveninsection3, whereIalso
draw out the contradictions among the three promotion objectives of (a) promoting
according to equal standards, (b) promoting equal numbers, and (c) promoting to
ensure equal average abilities. Before getting to the main content, section 2 says
more about the literature on risk-taking that motivates this inquiry.
2. Risk-Taking and Promotion in a Hierarchy
There is considerable evidence that males are more risk-taking than females. In
particular, see Eckel and Grossman (2005a). Their own experiments (2002) show that
males and females have different gambling behavior. In other experiments (2005b)
they show not only that females are more risk averse, but that other agents (not just
researchers on gender) perceive this to be true. Eckel and Grossman (2005a) argue
that the evidence on a discrepancy in risk-taking is especially strong in “field studies”
(natural experiments such as observing behavior in placing bets), but less conclusive
in “contextual environmental” experiments such as experiments involving insurance
choices. One of the most interesting risk-taking contexts is investment. In a study
that used measures of risk tolerance reported in the Wall Street Journal, and measures
of personality traits developed by psychologists, Stanford and Vellenga (2002) found
that males have much higher risk tolerance than females. Jianakoplos and Bernasek
(1998) came to the same conclusion by observing investment portfolios. Much of the
experimental evidence comes from disciplines other than economics. For example,
psychologists Ginsburg et al (2002) observed children at a zoo in contexts where the
children could choose to engage in a risky activity or not. They concluded strongly
that young boys were much more inclined to put themselves at risk than young girls.
Many scholars have suggested evolutionary arguments for the discrepancy in
risk-taking behavior. For example, DekelandScotchmer(1999) postulatedthatmales
play “winner-take-all” games, and explored a precise sense in which such games do
(or do not) lead to riskier behavior. The premise in that paper, which is also the
easiest interpretation of the model below, is that such behavior is genetically coded.
2