NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CORPORATE TAX AVOIDANCE AND FIRM VALUE
Mihir A. Desai
Dhammika Dharmapala
Working Paper 11241
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11241
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2005
We would like to thank Alan Auerbach, Amy Dunbar, Sanjay Gupta, Mark Lang, Lillian Mills, John Phillips,
Joel Slemrod and John Wald for helpful discussions and comments. Desai acknowledges the financial
support of the Division of Research of Harvard Business School and Dharmapala acknowledges the financial
support of the University of Connecticut Research Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Mihir A Desai and Dhammika Dharmapala. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Corporate Tax Avoidance and Firm Values
Mihir A Desai and Dhammika Dharmapala
NBER Working Paper No. 11241
March 2005
JEL No. G32, H25, H26, K34
ABSTRACT
How do investors value managerial actions designed solely to minimize corporate tax obligations?
Using a framework in which managers' tax sheltering decisions are related to their ability to divert
value, this paper predicts that the effect of tax avoidance on firm value should vary systematically
with the strength of firm governance institutions. The empirical results indicate that the average
effect of tax avoidance on firm value is not significantly different from zero; however, the effect is
positive for well-governed firms as predicted. Coefficient estimates are consistent with an expected
life of five years for the devices that generate these tax savings for well-governed firms. Alternative
explanations for the dependence of the valuation of the tax avoidance measure on firm governance
do not appear to be consistent with the empirical results. The findings indicate that the simple view
of corporate tax avoidance as a transfer of resources from the state to shareholders is incomplete,
given the agency problems characterizing shareholder-manager relations.
Mihir A. Desai
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mdesai@hbs.edu
Dhammika Dharmapala
University of Connecticut
dhammika.dhamapala@uconn.edu

1. Introduction
While tax consequences are a motivating factor in many corporate decisions, managerial
actions designed solely to minimize corporate tax obligations are thought to be an increasingly
important feature of U.S. corporate activity.1 How do investors value such corporate tax
avoidance actions? The answer to this question is trivial if avoidance activities are costless to
investors. Traditionally, corporate tax avoidance has been viewed merely as a transfer of value
from the state to shareholders.
In fact, corporate tax avoidance activity is costly on several margins. Aside from the
direct costs of engaging in such activities, managers typically have to ensure that these actions
are obscured from tax authorities. In the process, such machinations may afford managers
increased latitude to pursue self-serving objectives, and lead investors to doubt their value. Can
the latter effect be significant enough to change the simple answer that investors fully capture the
value of corporate tax avoidance activity?
Two smaller sample studies indicate that the valuation of tax avoidance activities may not
conform to this simple story. First, corporate expatriations - transactions where U.S. firms invert
their corporate structure so that a subsidiary in a tax haven becomes the parent entity - provide
significant corporate tax savings with limited, if any, operational changes. While such
transactions should be viewed as value-enhancing, markets do not react in a strongly positive
fashion – and often react negatively – to U.S. firms announcing such moves. Second, an event
study of an episode of increased tax enforcement in Russia indicates that these enforcement
actions are associated with positive market reactions.2 Such evidence contradicts the simple view
of corporate tax avoidance as a transfer from the state to shareholders.
The apparent proliferation of corporate tax avoidance activity more generally in the U.S.
suggests that a broader investigation of the value consequences of corporate tax avoidance is
warranted. The extensive literature on the effects of taxes on financing and investment decisions
(as surveyed in Auerbach (2002) and Graham (2003)) does not typically incorporate how agency
problems may complicate the valuation of, and response to, tax avoidance opportunities. Much
1 See, for example, US Department of the Treasury (1999), Bankman (2004) and Slemrod (2004).
2 See Desai and Hines (2002) and Cloyd, Mills and Weaver (2004) for evidence on expatriations and Desai, Dyck
and Zingales (2004) for evidence on market reactions to the Putin tax enforcement actions.
1

of the work on corporate tax avoidance emphasizes the legal distinctions and accounting
consequences of tax avoidance, without considering the basic finance question of how investors
value these actions.3
This paper provides a conceptual framework for analyzing the conditions under which
corporate tax avoidance activity should be valued fully by the market and investigates the degree
to which such activity is valued by investors in a large sample of U.S. firms. A model that
incorporates a link between the technologies of managerial diversion and corporate tax
avoidance demonstrates that firm governance should be an important determinant of the
valuation of purported corporate tax savings. While the direct effect of tax avoidance is to
increase the after-tax value of the firm (regardless of its governance structure), these effects are
potentially offset in poorly-governed firms by the increased opportunities for rent diversion. In
contrast, managers of well-governed firms face more limited opportunities to engage in rent
diversion, so this offsetting indirect effect should be less pronounced among such firms. Thus,
the net effect on firm value should be greater for firms with stronger governance institutions.
This hypothesis is tested using data from Standard and Poor’s Compustat and Execucomp
databases, merged with the index of governance institutions developed by Gompers, Ishii and
Metrick (2003). The sample consists of a large panel of firms over the 1993-2001 period. Firm
value is measured using Tobin’s q. Tax avoidance is measured by analyzing the difference
between income reported to capital markets and tax authorities – the book-tax gap – and
stripping accruals and other measures of earnings management from this gap. Firms’ taxable
incomes and book-tax gaps are inferred using the methodology of Manzon and Plesko (2002). In
addition, controls for changes in the structure of executive compensation, firm size, and the
volatility of the firm’s share price are employed.
For the full sample, relying only on within-firm variation over time, the overall effect of
the tax avoidance measure on q is not significantly different from zero. This suggests that
corporate tax avoidance does not raise firm value on average. Consistent with the paper’s
hypothesis, the effect is significantly positive only for the subsample of well-governed firms and
3 There is an extensive literature on tax avoidance and evasion by individuals (as surveyed in Slemrod and Yitzhaki
(2002)). In contrast, despite the differences between the individual and corporate contexts stressed by Slemrod
(2004), there has been relatively little theoretical modeling of tax compliance decisions by corporations, although
some recent papers (Chen and Chu, 2005; Crocker and Slemrod, 2005) analyze the nature of the optimal incentive
contract when managers can engage in tax evasion on behalf of the firm.
2