NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHEN LABOR HAS A VOICE IN CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Olubunmi Faleye
Vikas Mehrotra
Randall Morck
Working Paper 11254
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11254
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2005
We are grateful for comments and suggestions from Andrei Shleifer, and from participants in the University
of Alberta Finance Seminar; and to John Poole for providing initial seed money for this project, and the
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council and University of Alberta for additional funding. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Olubunmi Faleye, Vikas Mehrotra, and Randall Morck. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

When Labor Has a Voice in Corporate Governance
Olubunmi Faleye, Vikas Mehrotra, and Randall Morck
NBER Working Paper No. 11254
March 2005
JEL No. G3, J0
ABSTRACT
Equity ownership gives labor both a fractional stake in the firm's residual cash flows and a voice in
corporate governance. Relative to other firms, labor-controlled publicly-traded firms deviate more
from value maximization, invest less in long-term assets, take fewer risks, grow more slowly, create
fewer new jobs, and exhibit lower labor and total factor productivity. We therefore propose that labor
uses its corporate governance voice to maximize the combined value of its contractual and residual
claims, and that this often pushes corporate policies away from, rather than towards, shareholder
value maximization.
Olubunmi Faleye
Northeastern University
o.faleye@neu.edu
Vikas Mehrotra
University of Alberta
vmehrotr@ualberta.ca
Randall Morck
Faculty of Business
University of Alberta
Edmonton, CANADA T6G 2R6
and NBER
randall.morck@ualberta.ca

When Labor Has a Voice in Corporate Governance
I. Introduction
On July 12, 1994, as shareholders approved the recapitalization that rendered United the
largest majority employee-owned company in the world, UAL stock closed at $99.25. On
December 9, 2002, UAL became a penny stock as, unable to sustain the industry’s highest labor
costs, it filed for bankruptcy protection. Other airlines vehemently opposed aid to UAL, arguing
that it had brought on a crisis in the industry by relentlessly driving labor costs up. Robert Roach,
Jr., the General Vice President for Transportation at the International Association of Machinists
and Aerospace Workers, United's largest union, responded, "Everybody is shocked and
concerned that the federal government would not be there for American workers as they are for
rebuilding Afghanistan.”1 Sam Buttrick, an airline analyst at PaineWebber summarized that “At
the root of the problem is the simple fact that labor has excessive structural leverage”.2
Employee-owned equity blocks are surprisingly commonplace in the United States.
According to the National Center for Employee Ownership, as of 2002, employees owned
several hundred billion dollars worth of their employers’ stock. This includes 11,000 Employee
Stock Ownership Plans (ESOPs), stock bonus plans, and profit sharing plans through which 8.8
million workers have over $400 billion primarily invested in their employers’ stocks – an
average investment of about $45,000 per employee. In addition, some 11 million employees hold
over $160 billion of their employers’ stocks through some 2,200 401(k) plans – about $14,000
per employee. In the past decade, the biggest growth in employee stock ownership has been
1 Quoted in “Unions Vow to Press Fight for Aid Reconsideration”, by Matt Richtel and Steven Greenhouse, New
York Times, December 5, 2002.

(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3) (cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:7)(cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:2)
through broad based stock option plans and employee stock purchase plans. Some ten to 25
million employees own several hundred million dollars worth of their employers’ stock through
some 8,000 of these plans.
These figures translate into a significant tier of employee-owned stock in many large,
publicly traded companies. Although employee ownership of public companies through ESOPs
and 401(k) plans seldom exceeds ten percent, and that through broad based option and purchase
plans seldom exceeds 30%, these stakes are nonetheless substantial enough blocks to matter at
shareholder meetings. Since most ESOPs pass voting rights through to employees, and 401(k)
plans, broad based stock option plans, and stock purchase plans usually give employees full
voting rights, these stakes give employees a substantial voice in the corporate governance of
many large publicly traded US firms.
Proponents of employee equity ownership hold that these developments are desirable.
Vanek (1965), Drucker (1978), and Aoki (1984) argue that employee equity ownership leads to a
convergence of employees’ interests with those of shareholders, empowers employees, and
lengthens workers’ time horizons. They propose that these effects lead to better overall corporate
performance. Another argument in favor of employee stock ownership is that labor markets, like
capital markets, are imperfect; and that these imperfections might induce managers to make
suboptimal decisions. Giving labor a role in corporate governance might mitigate labor market
imperfections and improve overall economic welfare. Garvey and Swan (1994), echoing a
similar argument, contend that labor ownership may motivate enhanced efficiency given costly
and imperfect contracting. Their main premise is that employees, as well as shareholders, are
2 The September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks on New York and Washington devastated the US airline industry.
However most airlines analysts recognize that they accelerated an already looming industry financial crisis. See
“Righting United Airlines: Nine Flight Plans”, by Julie Edelson Halpert, New York Times, September 10, 2000.