NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FROM THE WEBBS TO THE WEB:
THE CONTRIBUTION OF THE INTERNET
TO REVIVING UNION FORTUNES
Richard B. Freeman
Working Paper 11298
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11298
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2005
This paper has benefited from joint work with Marit Rehavi and from consultation with John Wood and Paul
Nowak of the TUC. Jason Abaluck and Rishi Patel provided valuable research assistance. This paper has
been supported by ESRC e-society grant. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Richard B. Freeman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

From the Webbs to the Web: The Contribution of the Internet to Reviving Union Fortunes
Richard B. Freeman
NBER Working Paper No. 11298
April 2005
JEL No. J0
ABSTRACT
This paper shows that in the 2000s unions in the UK and US made innovative use of the Internet
to deliver union services and move toward open source unions better suited for the modern world
than traditional union structures. In contrast to analysts who see unions as being on an inexorable
path of decline, I argue that these innovations are changing unions from institutions of the Webbs
to institutions of the Web, which will improve their effectiveness and revive their role as the key
worker organization in capitalism.
Richard B. Freeman
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
freeman@nber.org

0
Can the Internet produce more effective and successful unions and help resuscitate the
labour movement in the UK and US?
Some labour experts in the UK and US claim that the Internet will fundamentally alter
employee representation and the way unions operate (Shostak,1996; Diamond and Freeman,
2002, Darlington, 2000, Lee, 1996). Freeman and Rogers (2002a, 2002b), in particular, have
outlined the elements of a new “open source” union form designed to deliver union services and
connect activists over the Internet at low cost, regardless of management recognition. Some
readers will undoubtedly be sceptical about these claims or forecasts, and not only because they
originate with pointy headed intellectuals. A substantial minority of persons in both countries do
not use the Internet. In 2004 37% of US citizens and 44% of UK citizens were non-users and
many had no intention of going on-line.1 Internet hype fuelled the dot.com bubble of the late
1990s and led some to foresee rapid development of a referendum-style democracy. The
collapse of the bubble and gradual growth of e-democracy and e-government2 are reminders that
economic and social patterns change more gradually than innovations in computer speed and the
growth of Internet hosts.
Still, it would be foolhardy to reject visionary claims out of hand. The e-economy has
grown steadily post the dot.com bust.3 The Internet propelled an obscure ex-governor of
Vermont to be Democratic party front runner in early 2004. Activists have created powerful
political sites independent of the standard political parties. And http://www.moveon.organ
1 Surveys show that during the first part of 2004 56% of adults in the UK used the Internet(
www.statistics.gov.uk/cci/nugget.asp?id=8) while in the US, 63% of adults were regular Internet
users in 2004 (www.mediamark.com/mri/TheSource/sorc2004_06.htm)
2 Accenture, E-Government Leadership: High Performance Maximum Value (May 2004) finds
the growth of the Internet in providing government services was tailing off in 22 countries,
including the UK (www.accenture.com/xdoc/en/industries/government/gove_egov_value.pdf).

1
increasing proportion of citizens in the UK and US use the Web to obtain government services.4
Whether the Internet will have similar transforming effects on union activities is an empirical
question.
To see how far unions have come in using Internet technologies to improve their services
to members and to reach unorganized workers, this essay examines the content of union web
sites in the UK and US and reviews eight significant union innovations in applying the new
technologies. The evidence shows that while visionary ideas of open source unions have yet to
be fulfilled, union progress using the Internet and related technologies has been sufficiently rapid
to suggest that unions are indeed in the process of morphing from institutions of the Webbs to
institutions of the Web (per my title). While by itself this may not resuscitate the labour
movement in the UK and US, it will greatly increase the chances of such a change in fortunes.
I. Union Presence in Cyberspace
From the mid-1990s to the mid-2000s, unions in the UK, and in the rest of the advanced
world, developed a web presence. In 1995 the only UK union with a web site was UNISON. In
2001 there were 373 union web sites in the UK (Diamond and Freeman, 2002), based largely on
3See http://www.esa.doc.gov/DigitalEconomy2003.cfm
4 The most notable political site in the US is www.moveon.org. UK government services on the
Internet are given at http://www.direct.gov.uk/Homepage/fs/en. For US use of the Internet for
government services see http://207.21.232.103/pdfs/PIP_E_Gov_Report_0504.pdf