NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY DO PUBLIC FIRMS ISSUE PRIVATE AND PUBLIC SECURITIES?
Armando Gomes
Gordon Phillips
Working Paper 11294
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11294
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2005
We thank the financial support provided by the Rodney White Center for financial research. We also thank
John Graham for data on marginal tax rates and Murillo Campello, Mark Chen, Gerry Hoberg, Craig
MacKinlay, Matthew Spiegel, Catherine Schrand as well as from seminar participants at Arizona, Boston
University, Cornell, George Washington, Harvard, Illinois, Tulane, Minnesota, Penn State, Rochester,
Rutgers, UBC, UCLA, Utah, Texas-Austin, Washington University, Wharton, and the NYU Five Star
Conference for helpful comments. We alone are responsible for the conclusions and analysis in this paper.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Armando Gomes and Gordon Phillips. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Why Do Public Firms Issue Private and Public Securities?
Armando Gomes and Gordon Phillips
NBER Working Paper No. 11294
April 2005
JEL No. G0, G2, G3
ABSTRACT
We examine a comprehensive set of private and public security issuance decisions by publicly traded
companies. We study private and public issues of debt, convertibles and common equity securities -
a total of 6 different security-market choices. The market for public firms issuing private securities
is large. Of the over 13,000 issues we examine, more than half are in the private market. We find that
asymmetric information and moral hazard problems play a large role in the public versus private
market choice and the security type choice. Our findings show that asymmetric information impacts
security choice in a particular pattern: Conditional on issuing in the public market we find a pecking
order of security issuance holds, firms with higher measures of asymmetric information are less
likely to issue equity. We find a reversal of this pecking order in the private market, firms with
higher measures of asymmetric information are more likely to issue equity and convertibles. Second,
we find risk and investment opportunities are important in determining which security type a firm
issues. Firms with high risk, low profitability and good investment opportunities are more likely to
choose equity and convertibles and to issue privately. The results support models of security issuance
where private securities give investors more incentives to produce information and monitor the firm.
Armando Gomes
University of Pennsylvania
The Wharton School
Finance Department
2300 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104
gomes@wharton.upenn.edu
Gordon Phillips
University of Maryland
Robert H. Smith School of Business
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
gphillips@rhsmith.umd.edu

Why Do Public Firms Issue Private and Public Securities?
1 Introduction
This study is a comprehensive examination of why public firms issue different security types and why they
issue these securities in private versus public security markets. We study both private and public issues of
debt, convertibles and common equity - a total of 6 different security-market choices. Our comprehensive
databaseallowsustoassessthefactorsthatimpactbothsecuritytypeandmarketchoice. Privatesecurity
marketsareofincreasingimportanceforpublicfirms. Oftheover13,000issuesbypublicfirmsweexamine,
more than half are in the private market, comprising issuances of equity, debt and convertible bonds and
convertible preferred stock (henceforth convertibles). Among these issues, private equity and convertibles
issued by public firms comprise 58 percent of the equity and convertibles issues.
Weexploretwomajordeterminantsofthemarketinwhichfirmssellsecuritiesandthetypeofsecurities
that firms issue. First, the existence of asymmetric information may induce firms to sell securities to
private parties who may more efficiently produce information, thus mitigating adverse selection problems.
Second, firm risk and investment opportunities may influence which security a firm issues to mitigate
agency problems.
Whilepreviousstudieshaveexaminedtheimportanceofasymmetricinformationandagencyproblems,
our study examines these determinants using security issuance decisions of multiple types and in different
markets, andusesnovelproxiesforthesedeterminants. Ourstudylinksthreedifferentdatabases, aprivate
equity and convertible database, a private debt database and the SDC new issue database, to Compustat
and CRSP in order to examine issuance decisions. We also link these databases to IBES to use analyst
earningsforecastdatato constructmeasuresofasymmetricinformationanduseinformation onthequality
of corporate governance from both existing and hand-collected sources from firms’ charters and bylaws.
Our results on the major determinants of security type and public versus private security issuance are
as follows:
(1.) Asymmetric information:
Our results show that measures of asymmetric information are major determinants of the decision to
use the private versus public securities markets. We have several central results on the importance of
asymmetric information. First, firms with the higher analyst earnings forecast error and dispersion (our
1

measures of asymmetric information) are more likely to issue private securities and in particular, private
equity and private convertibles. Second, our results for the specific type of security issued show that
conditional upon issuing in the public market, firms with higher analyst forecast error and dispersion are
less likely to issue public equity and are more likely to issue public debt. Third, we find that conditional
upon issuing in the private market, private equity and convertibles are more likely to be issued by firms
with high levels of asymmetric information. We call these results the pecking order of security issuance.
While we do not examine capital structure directly, our overall results on security issuance do not
provide support for Myers and Majluf (1984) traditional pecking order theory of capital structure. Our
results for security issuance conditional on issuing in the public markets do provide support for a pecking
order of security issuance, with public equity being less likely to be issued by firms with high measures
of asymmetric information. However, our study does not overall support a traditional pecking order as
we find a reversal of the pecking order for private markets - with private convertibles and equity being
the most likely to be issued by firms with high measures of asymmetric information.2 These results are
broadly consistent with Fulghieri and Lukin (2001) who argue that incentives for information production
by private investors are higher the more information-sensitive the securities being issued are, and predict
private equity securities are more likely to be issued by firms with asymmetric information when private
offerings are attractive.3
Our findings on the abnormal returns around equity issues in the private and public markets also
support the view that these two markets are noticeably distinct. Similarly to other studies, abnormal
returns are negative (positive) for public (private) equity issues. In addition, these returns are negatively
(positively) related with the degree of information asymmetry for public (private) equity offerings. This
evidence also indicates that public equity investors believe that private equity investors produce or obtain
valuable information, and learning about private equity investments is more valuable when there is more
uncertainty surrounding firm value.
Our results on the importance of asymmetric information to multiple security issuance decisions are
in contrast to mixed evidence in previous studies. Previous studies examining debt and equity issuance
2Shyam-Sunder and Myers (1999) find support for the pecking order. Frank and Goyal (2003) and Leary and Roberts
(2004b)donot,anddocumentthatmanysmallfirmsissueequityfrequently. LemmonandZender(2002)findsupportforthe
pecking order when adding a firm’s debt capacity anddesire for financial slack.
3Note the securities disclosure laws, including Regulation FD, exempt communications by the firm from the disclosure
restrictions when those communications are to investors who “ have expressly agreed to maintain the communication in
confidencepursuanttoaconfidentialityagreement.” AnarticlebyHoustonandLaitin(2000)atthelawfirmRobins,Kaplan,
Miller and Ciresi L.L.P., states: “As a result, companies should require confidentiality agreements prior to disseminating
diligence materials or offering memoranda that contain material non-public information to securities market professionals or
shareholderswho are likely to trade on theinformation.”
2