NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXPECTED RETURNS, YIELD SPREADS,
AND ASSET PRICING TESTS
Murillo Campello
Long Chen
Lu Zhang
Working Paper 11323
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11323
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2005
We thank Mike Barclay, Dan Bernhardt, Lawrence Booth, Cam Harvey (the editor), Raymond Kan, Jason
Karceski, Naveen Khana, Mark Schroder, Jay Shanken (the AFA discussant), Jerry Warner, Jason Wei, Jim
Wiggins, Tong Yao, Guofu Zhou, seminar participants at University of Notre Dame and at the AFA meetings
in 2005, and especially an anonymous referee for helpful comments and suggestions. The usual disclaimer
applies. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Murillo Campello, Long Chen, and Lu Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Expected Returns, Yield Spreads, and Asset Pricing Tests
Murillo Campello, Long Chen, and Lu Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 11323
May 2005
JEL No. G12, E44
ABSTRACT
We use yield spreads to construct ex-ante returns on corporate securities, and then use the ex-ante
returns in asset pricing assets. Differently from the standard approach, our tests do not use ex-post
average returns as a proxy for expected returns. We find that the market beta plays a much more
important role in the cross-section of expected returns than previously reported. The expected value
premium is significantly positive and countercyclical. We find no evidence of ex-ante positive
momentum profits.
Murillo Campello
Department of Finance
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
340 Wohlers Hall, MC 706
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
campbello@uiuc.edu
Long Chen
Department of Finance
Michigan State University
327 Eppley Center
East Lansing, MI 48823
chen@bus.msu.edu
Lu Zhang
Simon School
University of Rochester
Carol Simon Hall 3-160B
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
zhanglu@simon.rochester.edu

1 Introduction
The standard asset pricing theory argues that investors should demand an ex-ante premium
for acquiring risky securities (e.g., Sharpe (1964), Lintner (1965), and Merton (1973)). In
practice, because the ex-ante risk premium is not readily observable, empirical asset pricing
studies often use ex-post, average realized equity returns as a proxy for expected equity
returns. This commonplace strategy is justi(cid:12)ed on grounds that for su(cid:14)ciently long horizons
the average return will \catch up and match" the expected return on equity securities |
ex-post average excess equity returns provide for an easy-to-implement, seemingly unbiased
estimate of expected equity risk premium.
Despite its popularity, the above strategy has potentially serious limitations.1 In partic-
ular, the average realized return might not converge to the expected risk premium in (cid:12)nite
samples.2 This, in e(cid:11)ect, conditions any inferences based on ex-post returns on the proper-
ties of the particular data under examination. In his AFA presidential address, Elton (1999)
observes that there are periods longer than ten years during which stock market realized
returns are on average lower than the risk-free rate (1973 to 1984), and periods longer than
50 years in which risky bonds on average underperform the risk-free rate (1927 to 1981).
Based on this \counter-intuitive" evidence on risk and return, Elton proposes:
\[D]eveloping better measures of expected return and alternative ways of testing
asset pricing theories that do not require using realized returns have a much
higher payo(cid:11) than any additional development of statistical tests that continue
to rely on realized returns as a proxy for expected returns." (p.1200)
As most (cid:12)ndings in the empirical asset pricing literature were established (and are revisited)
with the use of realized returns, it is natural to ask whether extant inferences about risk{
expected return trade-o(cid:11) hold under an alternative, direct measure of expected return.
In this paper, we construct an ex-ante measure of risk premium based on data from
bond yield spreads and investigate whether well-known equity factors, such as market, size,
1Earlier studies have discussed in some detail the noisy nature of average realized returns in a number of
di(cid:11)erent contexts (see, e.g., Blume and Friend (1973), Sharpe (1978), and Miller and Scholes (1982)).
2Complexity in learning about asset pricing formation might also cause ex-post returns to deviate from
their expectations (see Lewellen and Shanken (2002) and Brav and Heaton (2002)).

book-to-market, and momentum, can explain the cross-sectional variation of expected (as
opposed to average realized) stock returns. Our basic approach builds on the observation
that debt and equity are (cid:12)nancial claims written on the same set of real assets and hence
must share common risk factors. In particular, our analysis explores this insight to show
how one can use corporate bond data to glean information about investors’ required equity
risk premium. In what follows, we derive an analytical formula that links ex-ante equity risk
premia and bond risk premia after adjusting bond yields for default risk, rating transition
risk, and the tax spreads between the corporate and the Treasury bonds.
Why use bond data? While relevant information regarding a (cid:12)rm’s systematic risk is
incorporated both into its stocks and bonds, the latter reveal key insights about investors’
return expectations. The (cid:12)rst thing to notice is that bond yields are calculated in the spirit
of forward-looking internal rates of return. To wit, bond yield is the expected return if the
bond does not default and the yield does not change in the subsequent period. Importantly,
current bond prices impound the probability of future default, and yield spreads contain the
expected risk premium for taking default risk. Controlling for default risk, (cid:12)rms with higher
systematic risk will have higher yield spreads; a relationship that holds period by period,
cross-sectionally. This contrasts sharply with what one can learn from equity securities,
whose prices reveal little conditional information about expected cash (cid:13)ows and discount
rates | one has to rely on a long time series to \back out" the expected return.3
Secondly, notice that the time-variation of expected returns in the equity markets often
works against the convergence of average realized returns to the expected return. Consider,
for example, that investors require a higher equity risk premium from cyclical (cid:12)rms during
economic downturns. To re(cid:13)ect this, those (cid:12)rms’ equity prices should fall and their discount
rates rise during recessions. Cyclical (cid:12)rms’ equity values indeed fall during economic
downturns, re(cid:13)ecting value losses in those (cid:12)rms’ underlying assets. However, by averaging
ex-post a cyclical (cid:12)rm’s returns over the course of a recession, one might wrongfully conclude
that the cyclical (cid:12)rm is less risky because of its lower \expected" return. Bond yield spreads,
3As pointed out by Sharpe (1978), the CAPM only holds conditionally and expected return might have
nothing to do with future realized returns. Risk premia recovered from bond yields, in contrast, will re(cid:13)ect
conditional information.
2