NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IS CASH NEGATIVE DEBT?
A HEDGING PERSPECTIVE ON CORPORATE FINANCIAL POLICIES
Viral V. Acharya
Heitor Almeida
Murillo Campello
Working Paper 11391
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11391
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005
We thank Yakov Amihud, Patrick Bolton, Julian Franks, Mitch Petersen, and Henri Servaes for their
comments and suggestions. We also received valuable comments from seminar participants at Columbia
University, Duke University, London Business School, New York University, Northwestern University, and
the University of Washington at St. Louis. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Philip J. Cook and Jens Ludwig. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Is Cash Negative Debt? A Hedging Perspective on Corporate Financial Policies
Viral V. Acharya, Heitor Almeida, and Murillo Campello
NBER Working Paper No. 11391
June 2005
JEL No. G31
ABSTRACT
We model the interplay between cash and debt policies in the presence of financial constraints.
While saving cash allows financially constrained firms to hedge against future income shortfalls,
reducing debt - "saving borrowing capacity" - is a more effective way of securing future investment
in high cash flow states. This trade-off implies that constrained firms will allocate excess cash flows
into cash holdings if their hedging needs are high (i.e., if the correlation between operating cash
flows and investment opportunities is low). However, constrained firms will use excess cash flows
to reduce current debt if their hedging needs are low. The empirical examination of cash and debt
policies of a large sample of constrained and unconstrained firms reveals evidence that is consistent
with our theory. In particular, our evidence shows that financially constrained firms with high
hedging needs have a strong propensity to save cash out of cash flows, while showing no propensity
to reduce outstanding debt. In contrast, constrained firms with low hedging needs systematically
channel free cash flows towards debt reduction, as opposed to cash savings. Our analysis points to
an important hedging motive behind standard financial policies such as cash and debt management.
It suggests that cash should not be viewed as negative debt.
Viral V. Acharya Heitor Almeida Murillo Campello
London Business School NYU Stern School of Business University of Illinois
vacharya@london.edu Department of Finance campbello@uiuc.edu
44 West 4th Street, Room 9-85
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
halmeida@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
Standard valuation models subtract the amount of cash in the firm’s balance sheet from the value
of outstanding debt to compute the firm’s financial leverage. This practice reflects the view of cash
as the “negative” of debt: because cash balances can be readily used to redeem debt (a senior
claim), only net leverage should matter in gauging shareholders’ (residual) wealth. The traditional
valuation approach can also be understood under an “indifference” argument: since financial assets
and liabilities are largely unrelated to the real business activities of nonfinancial firms, shareholders
should be indifferent between one extra dollar of cash and one less dollar of debt in the balance
sheet. In one way or another, the standard valuation approach does not assign much of a relevant,
independent role for cash stocks in the presence of debt.
In contrast to this view, a number of recent studies argue that cash holdings are an important
component of the firm’s optimal financial structure. Among other results, these studies show that
cash policies are empirically associated with firm value, growth opportunities, business risk, and
performance. They also show that cash holdings relate to issues ranging from firms’ access to the
capital markets to the quality of laws protecting minority investors.1 One interpretation of the
findings in this literature is that cash should not be seen as negative debt for a large fraction of
firms: cash stocks seem to play a relevant economic role. However, as Opler, Pinkowitz, Stulz,
and Williamson (1999) point out, most of the variables that are empirically associated with high
cash levels are also known to be associated with low leverage. The findings that cash holdings are
systematically related to variables such as growth opportunities and risk – although relevant in
their own right – may therefore not fully identify firms’ policies toward cash and debt balances. In
effect, those findings cannot rule out the argument that firms do regard cash and negative debt as
substitutes. In the words of Opler et al. (p.44), “...it is important to figure out, both theoretically
and empirically, to what extent cash holdings and debt are two sides of the same coin.”
Thispaperproposesatestabletheoryofcash—debtsubstitutabilityintheoptimalfinancialpolicy
ofthefirm. Ourstartingpointistheobservationthat, whilestandardvaluationmodelsassumethat
financing is frictionless, most real-world managers argue that raising funds in the capital markets
is often “too costly” (e.g., Graham and Harvey (2001)). Arguably, contracting and information
frictions indeed entail high additional costs to external financing activities. Exposure to those costs
can significantly affect the way firms conduct their financial and investment policies (Almeida et
al. (2004) and Faulkender and Petersen (2004)), giving rise to a “hedging motive” (cf. Froot,
1An incomplete list of papers in this literature includes Kim, Mauer, and Sherman (1998), Harford (1999), Opler,
Pinkowitz,Stulz,andWilliamson(1999),Dittmar,Mahrt-Smith,andServaes(2003),Harford,Mikkelson,andPartch
(2003), Mikkelson and Partch (2003), Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (2003), Pinkowitz and Williamson (2003),
Almeida, Campello, and Weisbach (2004), Faulkender and Wang (2005), Harford, Mansi, and Maxwell (2005), and
Hartzell, Titman, and Twite (2005).
1

Scharfstein, and Stein (1993)). Building on this argument, we develop a theoretical framework in
which cash and debt policies are jointly determined within the firm’s investment problem, explicitly
identifying when cash is not the same as negative debt. By contrasting these conditions with a
benchmarkcaseinwhichfinancingisfrictionless(and,hence,thereisnohedgingmotive),weareable
toassesshowfirmsoptimally carryoutboth theircashand debt policiesunderfinancial constraints.
It is easy to summarize our argument. In the absence of financing frictions, firms’ future invest-
ment levels are independent of their current cash policies. Firms need not save internally to finance
futureprofitableopportunitiessinceallsuchopportunitieswillfindfinancinginthecapitalmarkets.
Because of this independence, and in the absence of other costs/benefits of carrying cash and debt,
for financially unconstrained firms it is a matter of indifference as to whether they use their excess
cashflowstoincreaseinternalsavingsortoreducedebt. Thispolicychoicehasnovalueimplications.
In sharp contrast, constrained firms’ financial policies can be value-enhancing. Both higher cash
stocks and lower debt levels today increase a constrained firm’s future funding capacity and, thus,
its ability to undertake new investment opportunities. We show, however, that a trade-off guides
constrained firms’ choice between higher cash and lower debt. On the one hand, internal savings
are useful for investment optimization when financially constrained firms experience income short-
falls. In particular, in low cash flow states, the effect of cash on investment will be higher than the
corresponding effect of lower debt(i.e., greater borrowing capacity). On the other hand, in states in
which cash flows are high, higher cash balances will have a lower effect on financing capacity than
a corresponding reduction in outstanding debt. These key differential effects of cash and debt on
future financing capacity arise from the riskiness (or the state-contingency) of the debt obligation.
To wit, note that the current market value of risky debt is largely supported by future states of the
world in which cash flows are high. Accordingly, reducing the amount of outstanding debt by one
dollar today increases future debt capacity in good states by more than one dollar. By the same
token, reducing outstanding debt by one dollar today increases future debt capacity in bad states
by less than one dollar. In contrast, the marginal effect of cash on investment is invariant across
states of the world: saving one additional dollar of cash today increases future financing capacity
in all future states by exactly one dollar.
Our model shows that while cash holdings have a significant effect on financing capacity and
investment spending in poor states of the world (low cash flow states), debt reductions are a partic-
ularly effective way of boosting investment in high cash flow states. We use this trade-off to derive
testable predictions for how firms allocate free cash flows across their cash and debt accounts. In
particular, we predict that a constrained firm will prefer saving cash (as opposed to reducing debt)
outofcurrentcashflowsurplusesifthecorrelationbetweencashflowsandinvestmentopportunities
is low, that is, if the constrained firm has “high hedging needs.” In contrast, if that correlation is
2