NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE VALUE SPREAD AS A PREDICTOR OF RETURNS
Naiping Liu
Lu Zhang
Working Paper 11326
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11326
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2005
We acknowledge helpful comments from Mike Barclay, John Long, Cliff Smith, Tuomo Vuolteenaho, Jerry
Warner, and other seminar participants at University of Rochester and Wharton. Previous versions of this
paper were circulated under the title “The value/growth spreads as predictors of returns”. The usual
disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Naiping Liu and Lu Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Value Spread as a Predictor of Returns
Naiping Liu and Lu Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 11326
May 2005
JEL No. G12, E44, M41
ABSTRACT
Recent studies have used the value spread to predict aggregate stock returns to construct cash-flow
betas that appear to explain the size and value anomalies. We show that two related variables, the
book-to-market spread (the book-to-market of value stocks minus that of growth stocks) and the
market-to-book spread (the market-to-book of growth stocks minus that of value stocks) predict
returns in different directions and exhibit opposite cyclical variations. Most important, the value
spread mixes information on the book-to-market and market-to-book spreads, and appears much less
useful in predicting returns.
Naiping Liu
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
nliu@wharton.upenn.edu
Lu Zhang
Simon School
University of Rochester
Carol Simon Hall 3-160B
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
zhanglu@simon.rochester.edu

1 Introduction
We ask whether the value spread, the log book-to-market of value stocks minus that of
growth stocks, can predict aggregate stock returns. We also study time series predictability
associated with two related variables, the book-to-market spread, the book-to-market of
value stocks minus the book-to-market of growth stocks, and the market-to-book spread,
the market-to-book of growth stocks minus the market-to-book of value stocks.
Our main (cid:12)nding is that the book-to-market spread tends to be countercyclical and
predicts returns with a positive sign, and the market-to-book spread tends to be procyclical
and predicts returns with a negative sign. More important, because the value spread mixes
information on the book-to-market spread and the market-to-book spread, it appears largely
acyclic and exhibits only weak predictive power of aggregate stock returns.
Although somewhat focused, our economic question is important. In an in(cid:13)uential recent
contribution, CampbellandVuolteenaho(2004)explainthesizeandvalueanomaliesinstock
returns using an economically motivated two-beta model. They break the market beta of a
stock into two components, one re(cid:13)ecting news about the market’s future cash (cid:13)ows, called
the cash-(cid:13)ow beta, and another re(cid:13)ecting news about the market’s discount rates, called the
discount-rate beta. ICAPM suggests that cash-(cid:13)ow betas should have a higher price of risk.
Empirically, the authors (cid:12)nd that value stocks and small stocks have much higher cash-(cid:13)ow
betas than growth stocks and large stocks. And this pattern can explain empirically the
higher average returns of value and small stocks.1
Althoughtheeconomic logic of theCampbell-Vuolteenaho modelis elegant, theempirical
success of their model in explaining the size and value anomalies depends critically on their
1Bansal,Dittmar,andLundblad(2004)andHansen,Heaton,andLi(2004)aretworelatedcontributions.
2

use of the small-stock value spread to predict aggregate stock returns. Since the small-stock
value spread is not one of the traditional conditioning variables, it is natural to ask why this
variable should be used to predict returns. This issue is particularly important because time
series regressions of aggregate stock returns on arbitrary predictive variables might produce
economically less meaningful, data-mined results. Furthermore, the ICAPM itself provides
at best vague guidance as for the identities of underlying state variables driving returns.
We argue that, because the value spread can be expressed as the log market-to-book of
growth stocks minus the log market-to-book of value stocks, the value spread is as much the
book-to-marketspreadinlogsasthemarket-to-bookspreadinlogs. Butbecausethebook-to-
market and market-to-book spreads have opposite cyclical properties and predict aggregate
stock returns with opposite signs, the value spread appears essentially acyclic and much
less useful in predicting returns. In all, we cast some doubt on the empirical results of the
Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004) model in explaining the size and value anomalies because
of the lack of economic motivation regarding the use of the value spread to predict returns.
Our work also contributes to time series predictability. Two related papers are Kothari
and Shanken (1997) and Ponti(cid:11) and Schall (1998), who (cid:12)nd that the aggregate book-to-
market predicts positively future market excess returns and small (cid:12)rm excess returns, al-
though the predictive relations are much weaker in the post-1960 period. Our analysis di(cid:11)ers
because we use the spreads in book-to-market and in market-to-book to predict aggregate
stock returns. Although these spreads and the aggregate book-to-market are correlated,
we (cid:12)nd that they do contain di(cid:11)erent information on future returns. The aggregate book-
to-market is a stronger predictor of market excess returns, but the book-to-market spread
is a stronger predictor of small (cid:12)rm excess returns. Further, while the aggregate book-to-
market dominates the market-to-book spread in predicting returns in the long sample, the
3