NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE INTERNATIONAL EXPOSURE OF U.S. BANKS
Linda S. Goldberg
Working Paper 11365
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11365
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2005
The views expressed in this paper are those of the individual authors and do not necessarily reflect the
position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. This paper benefited from
the comments of Matias Braun, Kenneth Lamar, Leon Taub and participants in the NBER conference on
International Capital Flows, December 2004. Address correspondences to Linda S. Goldberg, Federal
Reserve Bank of NY, Research Department, 33 Liberty St, New York, N.Y. 10045. email:
Linda.Goldberg@ny.frb.org. Eleanor Dillon provided diligent research support. Richard Molloy and Alex
Santana provided valuable data assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Linda S. Goldberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The International Exposure of U.S. Banks
Linda S. Goldberg
NBER Working Paper No. 11365
May 2005
JEL No. F3, G2
ABSTRACT
This paper documents the changing international exposures of U.S. bank balance sheets since the
mid-1980s. U.S. banks have foreign positions heavily concentrated in Europe, with more volatile
flows to other regions of the world. In recent years some cross-border claims on Latin American
countries have declined, while claims extended locally by the branches and subsidiaries of U.S.
banks have grown. The foreign exposures of larger U.S. banks tend to be less volatile than claims
of smaller banks, and locally-issued claims tend to be more stable than cross-border flows. Business
cycle variables have mixed influence on U.S. bank cross-border and local claims. The cross-border
claims of U.S. banks on European customers tend to be procyclical. By contrast, locally generated
and cross border claims on Latin American customers of U.S. banks are not robustly related to either
U.S. or country-specific business cycle variables. U.S. banks do not appear to be strong conduits for
transmitting U.S. cycles to these smaller markets, and may instead serve a positive role in stabilizing
the amplitude of foreign country cycles.
Linda S. Goldberg
Research Department, 3rd Floor
Federal Reserve Bank-New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER
linda.goldberg@ny.frb.org

I. Introduction
U.S. bank claims on industrialized and emerging markets can alter the extent of
financial sector depth in markets, expand opportunities for international risk sharing and
consumption smoothing in response to idiosyncratic country shocks, lead to altered
international transmission of disturbances, and alter the institutions in the source and
destination markets. Supporters see the foreign banks as key sources of otherwise scarce
capital, with broader positive spillovers on the stability and efficiency of local financial
markets. Critics of industrialized country banks participating in foreign markets
sometimes argue that these banks are unstable lenders who undermine local financial
markets. The debate on whether foreign lenders are fickle continues to rage (Galindo,
Micco and Powell 2004), and underscores the importance of fact-finding and
communications on the international lending practices of industrialized country banks.
This paper explores patterns in U.S. bank claims on foreign partners. We contrast
the determinants and trends in U.S. claims on European and Latin American
counterparties. As in Goldberg (2002), we primarily draw on data from a time-series panel
of individual U.S. banks that report exposures to foreign markets. These reports are filed
quarterly by each U.S. bank (or bank holding company) to support the bank supervisory
process of the Federal Reserve, Federal Depository Insurance Corporation, and Office of
Comptroller of the Currency. The banks report the country-by-country distribution of their
foreign exposures,1 the form of these exposures (cross border claims and local claims, i.e.
claims extended by the affiliates of U.S. banks located in foreign markets), valuations of
derivative positions held, some maturity composition details, and broad categories of
recipients of U.S. claims by destination market.
Four interesting findings arise in our current examination of data which spans mid
2004. First, claims extended by larger U.S. reporting banks tend to be less volatile than
claims by smaller U.S. banks. Second, while there have been some declines in cross-
border flows to Latin American counterparties, larger U.S. banks have had robust trend
growth in local claims on Latin America. Third, local claims tend to be more stable than
cross border claims. Finally, there is at best mixed evidence in support of the idea that
U.S. international claims are cyclically driven, where cyclical forces are proxied by GDP
1 The use of the term “U.S. banks” in this paper generally includes U.S. owned banks, bank holding
companies and U.S. subsidiaries of foreign banks. The reported data also are combined with similar data
from other countries to form the consolidated data on international bank lending reported by the Bank for
International Settlements.
1

growth rates and interest rates. While U.S. bank cross-border claims on European
counterparties tend to expand with European growth performance, these sensitivities are
not robust and the explanatory power of these forces is low. We do not observe stable
transmission of U.S. or destination market cycles into either Latin American or European
partners, either in cross-border or local claims.2
These findings build on Goldberg (2002), wherein it was observed that the U.S.
banks engaged in international lending had become more diverse since the 1980s, with
fewer banks overall, and the remaining banks increasingly polarized in terms of size and
portfolio allocations. By the late 1990s, while a substantial share of the U.S. banks
reporting foreign exposures were smaller banks, the vast majority of these exposures were
nonetheless attributable to a few large banks. Lending by the larger banks also is less
volatile than lending by the smaller banks.
Our findings of weak and variable cyclical transmission from the United States
banks contrast with stronger results by Peek and Rosengren (1997, 2000a) on Japanese
business cycle transmission to the United States. Our results also contrast with Van
Ricjkeghem and Weder (2001), who find more transmission when banks have a presence
across multiple markets.3 U.S. banks do not appear as particularly fickle in emerging
markets, in contrast to some of the conclusions on international banks of Galindo, Micco,
and Powell (2004). Indeed, while our results support the view that foreign banks can
transmit international business cycles into host country financial markets, this result is
neither strong or robust. U.S. banks also may reduce the extent to which locally-sourced
real shocks and interest rates, i.e. local business cycles, are amplified by banking
intermediaries. Consequently, the U.S. banks engaged in this type of credit extension
abroad may reduce the highly procyclical credit cycles in some foreign markets.4
Section II of this paper discusses the U.S. bank foreign exposure data and provides
background on the extensive changes that have occurred since 1986 in U.S. bank lending
abroad and in the form and scale of their exposures. Data on the relative importance of
U.S. bank and other foreign bank claims relative to GDP across European and Latin
2 BIS (2004) provides a thoughtful overview of issues from the perspective of source and host countries of
financial sector FDI. Goldberg (2004) surveys the host country implications of financial sector foreign direct
investment, and draws parallels between the effects of FS-FDI and FDI in manufacturing and extractive
resource industries.
3 See also Goldberg (2002), Dages, Goldberg, and Kinney (2000), and Peek and Rosengren (2000b).
4 Galindo, Micco, and Powell (2004) argue that foreign banks may make be fickle lenders in times of local
crises, sharply reducing credit extension to local markets. We do not find general support for this argument
in U.S. bank data.
2