NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MEASURING AND INTERPRETING
EXPECTATIONS OF EQUITY RETURNS
Jeff Dominitz
Charles F. Manski
Working Paper 11313
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11313
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2005
This research was supported in part by NSF Grant SES-0314312. Maria Salgado provided excellent research
assistance. We are grateful to the University of Michigan Survey Research Center’s Committee for Research
Initiatives in the Monthly Survey, which approved placement of the “percent chance” questions on the
Survey of Consumers. We are also grateful to Richard Curtin, Principal Investigator of the Survey of
Consumers, for his cooperation in this endeavor. Early findings from this research were presented at the 2005
Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, in the session on Subjective Probability
Distributions; we thank Susann Rohwedder for comments. We have subsequently benefitted from the
opportunity to present this work in seminars at University College London and Northwestern University.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Jeff Dominitz and Charles F. Manski. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Measuring and Interpreting Expectations of Equity Returns
Jeff Dominitz and Charles F. Manski
NBER Working Paper No. 11313
May 2005
JEL No. G1, D8
ABSTRACT
We analyze probabilistic expectations of equity returns elicited in the Survey of Economic
(cid:1) (cid:1)
Expectations in 1999 2001 and in the Michigan Survey of Consumers in 2002 2004. Our
empirical findings suggest that individuals use interpersonally variable but intrapersonally stable
processes to form their expectations. We therefore propose to think of the population as a mixture
of expectations types, each forming expectations in a stable but different way. We use our
expectations data to learn about the prevalence of several specific types suggested by research in
conventional and behavioral finance, but conclude that these types do not adequately explain the
diverse expectations held by the population.
Jeff Dominitz
H. John Heinz School of Public Policy and Management
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
dominitz@andrew.cmu.edu
Charles F. Manski
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
cfmanski@northwestern.edu

1. Introduction
Expectations of equity returns are widely thought to be central determinants of investment in equities
and other assets. However, researchers studying asset markets have only recently begun to measure the
expectations that potential investors hold. In the absence of data, basic questions about the nature of
expectations have remained open.
There has been particular disagreement about the extent and nature of heterogeneity in beliefs about
returns. Much of the finance literature has regarded heterogeneity in beliefs as either non-existent or
unimportant. The original formulation of the capital asset price model assumed that all persons hold the
same expectations for asset returns (Sharpe, 1964; Lintner, 1965) and subsequent discussions asserted that
heterogeneity in expectations would not affect the basic conclusions of that model (Lintner, 1969; Sharpe,
1970). Adherents of the efficient markets hypothesis have contended that prices reveal all privately held
information and have concluded that expectations must be homogeneous ex post, even if they are
heterogeneous ex ante (Fama, 1970).
Other researchers have argued that heterogeneity in expectations is critical to the functioning of asset
markets. This was true of Keynes (1937) and Williams (1938) almost seventy years ago and of Miller (1977)
and Mayshar (1983) over twenty years ago. These authors, as well as Harris and Raviv (1993), Kandel and
Pearson (1995), and Morris (1995) explicitly reject the core tenet of the efficient market hypothesis that
persons begin with common prior beliefs and develop heterogeneous beliefs only because they receive
private signals. Instead, they stress that persons may hold divergent opinions even when all information is
public, the reason being that they process this information differently. Heterogeneity in the processing of
information is also a central theme of recent research in behavioral finance; Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Teoh
(2002) review this literature.
To provide an empirical foundation for study of expectations, we have undertaken survey research
measuring in probabilistic terms the beliefs that Americans hold about equity returns in the year ahead. Since

2
the early 1990s, economists engaged in survey research have increasingly asked respondents to report
probabilistic expectations of significant personal events. Manski (2004) reviews the development and current
state of the literature.
We originally posed a series of questions on our Survey of Economic Expectations (SEE) in July
1999–March 2001 and later placed one of these on the Michigan Survey of Consumers beginning in June
2002. The question posed in both surveys asks respondents to state the percent chance that a diversified
mutual fund will have a positive nominal return in the year ahead. The wording in the Michigan survey is
as follows:
Positive NominalReturn (PNR): The next question is about investing in the stock market. Please think about
the type of mutual fund known as a diversified stock fund. This type of mutual fund holds stock in many
different companies engaged in a wide variety of business activities. Suppose that tomorrow someone were
to invest one thousand dollars in such a mutual fund. Please think about how much money this investment
would be worth one year from now. What do you think is the percent chance that this one thousand dollar
investment will increase in value in the year ahead, so that it is worth more than one thousand dollars one
year from now?
The SEE instrument posed this question within a sequence of questions asking for the percent chance that
the mutual fund will increase or decrease in value by specified amounts. From June 2003 through August
2004, the Michigan survey contained an additional question asking for the percent chance that the mutual
fund would have a positive real return.
Dominitz and Manski (2003, 2004) described the responses to the Michigan survey in June 2002-
May 2003. We reported that expectations of a positive nominal equity return varied substantially across
persons and systematically with sex, age, and schooling. We also reported that individual beliefs exhibited
considerable stability over time. The latter finding emerged from the longitudinal feature of the Michigan
survey, which provides two interviews for most respondents, spaced six months apart.