NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EMPLOYMENT-CONTINGENT HEALTH INSURANCE, ILLNESS,
AND LABOR SUPPLY OF WOMEN:
EVIDENCE FROM MARRIED WOMEN WITH BREAST CANCER
Cathy J. Bradley
David Neumark
Zhehui Luo
Heather L. Bednarek
Working Paper 11304
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11304
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2005
Bradley is Professor, Department of Health Administration, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond,
VA. Phone: (804) 828-5217 Fax: (804) 828-1894 email: cjbradley@vcu.edu. Neumark is Senior Fellow,
Public Policy Institute of California, San Francisco, CA, Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Research Fellow, IZA, and Visiting Scholar, Institute of Business and Economic Research,
UC-Berkeley. Phone: (415) 291-4476 Fax: (415) 291-4428 email: neumark@ppic.org. Luo is Research
Associate, Department of Epidemiology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI. Phone: (517)
432-2227 Fax: (517) 432-9471 email: zluo@epi.msu.edu. Bednarek is Assistant Professor, Department of
Economics, St. Louis University, St. Louis, MO. Phone: (314) 977-3847 Fax: (314) 977-1478 email:
bednarhl@slu.edu. Bradley, Neumark, and Luo’s research was supported by an NCI grant,
R01-CA86045-01A1. The views expressed are not those of the Public Policy Institute of California. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Cathy J. Bradley, David Neumark, Zhehui Luo, and Heather L. Bednarek. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Employment-Contingent Health Insurance, Illness, and Labor Supply of Women: Evidence from
Married Women with Breast Cancer
Cathy J. Bradley, David Neumark, Zhehui Luo, and Heather L. Bednarek
NBER Working Paper No. 11304
April 2005
JEL No. I12, J22
ABSTRACT
We examine the effects of employment-contingent health insurance on married women’s labor
supply following a health shock. First, we develop a theoretical model that examines the effects of
employment-contingent health insurance on the labor supply response to a health shock, to clarify
under what conditions employment-contingent health insurance is likely to dampen the labor supply
response. Second, we empirically evaluate this relationship using primary data. The results from our
analysis find that – as the model suggests is likely – health shocks decrease labor supply to a greater
extent among women insured by their spouse’s policy than among women with health insurance
through their own employer. Employment-contingent health insurance appears to create incentives
to remain working and to work at a greater intensity when faced with a serious illness.
Cathy J. Bradley
Virginia Commonwealth University
cjbradley@vcu.edu
David Neumark
Public Policy Institute of California
500 Washington Street, Suite 800
San Francisco, CA 94111
and NBER
neumark@ppic.org
Zhehui Luo
Michigan State University
zluo@epi.msu.edu
Heather L. Bednarek
St. Louis University
bednarhl@slu.edu

1. Introduction
For the majority of non-elderly Americans, health insurance is either contingent upon their own
employment or dependent upon the employment of a family member such as a spouse or parent (Kaiser
Family Foundation, 2004). Past research has examined the labor supply behavior of individuals who have
employment-contingent health insurance (Cooper and Monheit, 1993; Gruber and Madrian, 1994; Kapur,
1998; Adams, 2004) and of individuals dependent upon another’s policy (Wellington and Cobb-Clark,
2000; Buchmueller and Valletta, 1999; Chou and Staiger, 2001). The effects of health on labor supply
have also been studied (examples include Bradley et al., 2005; Stern, 1989; Ettner et al., 1997; Vijan et
al., 2004). Absent from this literature, however, is an assessment of how the two—health and
employment-contingent health insurance—interact to alter labor supply after an adverse health shock is
experienced by an otherwise healthy employed individual.1 Such information would help policy makers
understand some of the incentives and possible pitfalls of employment-contingent health insurance that
influence the trade-offs between work and recovery following illness.
An adverse health shock creates a need for convalescence, but with employment-contingent
health insurance an individual may need to continue working in order to preserve the insurance to cover
current medical expenses, and to minimize risk for financial loss in the future—risk likely perceived as
greater because of the health shock. Because many women obtain insurance through their spouse’s
employment, while many others obtain it through their own employment, the labor supply response of
women to illness—and how that response depends on the source of the health insurance—provides a
natural context for studying this question. We collected data with which to compare the effects of a
health shock, namely breast cancer, on the labor supply of married women 6, 12, and 18 months
following diagnosis, relative to their labor supply prior to diagnosis, depending on whether health
insurance comes through the spouse’s employment or the woman’s employment.
1 One study (Coile, 2004) approaches the analysis of health, health insurance, and labor supply by including access
to one’s own or a spouse’s retiree health benefits, and interactions with health shocks, as independent variables in an
equation predicting labor supply response following a health shock. She does not find that access to these health
benefits increases the labor supply response to a health shock. However, employed older workers with access to
retiree health benefits—possibly from another job—may be an unusual group from which results do not generalize
to the rest of the population.
1

Breast cancer is an important health condition to study for three main reasons: its occurrence is
nearly random and women are treated with similar regimens of surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation
based on cancer stage at diagnosis; it is a prevalent disease affecting working age women; and there is a
concerted national effort dedicated to reducing breast cancer’s burden. An estimated 55,700 in situ breast
cancer cases were detected in 2003, with approximately 75% of these cases detected in women under age
65; and approximately 65% of all invasive breast cancer cases (nearly 137,345 cases) were detected in
women under age 65 in 2003 (American Cancer Society, 2003). The National Cancer Institute, along
with other clinical guideline-setting bodies, has recommended that women age 40 and over receive an
annual mammogram (National Cancer Institute, 2005; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, 2005). Thus,
early detection has become the mantra of many health professionals. Nevertheless, the economic
context—which can potentially thwart or enhance early detection and treatment efforts—requires further
attention. An examination of how affected employed women change their labor supply and whether this
change is dependent on their source of health insurance lends insight into both the disease burden and the
policy context in which early detection and treatment efforts are implemented.
This paper is organized as follows: first, we formulate a theoretical model of how a health shock
might alter labor supply, and how this response varies when health insurance is contingent upon
employment; second, we describe the samples used for the empirical investigation; third, we present our
methods for the empirical analysis; fourth, we show our results; and finally, we discuss potential policy
implications of our findings.
2. Health, health insurance, and labor supply
Our research addresses how health and employment-contingent health insurance interact to alter
labor supply after an adverse health shock is experienced by an otherwise healthy, employed individual.
Intuitively, poor health, in the absence of health insurance or concerns for future financial loss, reduces
labor supply (Coile, 2004; Bradley et al., 2005; Stern, 1989; Ettner et al., 1997; Vijan et al., 2004). This
issue has been explored in some depth with research showing that individuals’ job type (e.g., skill level),
access to disability pensions, workplace resources (e.g., flexible work schedules, generous sick leave),
2