NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GROWTH OR GLAMOUR?
FUNDAMENTALS AND SYSTEMATIC RISK IN STOCK RETURNS
John Y. Campbell
Christopher Polk
Tuomo Vuolteenaho
Working Paper 11389
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11389
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 0214061
to Campbell. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by John Y. Campbell, Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Growth or Glamour? Fundamentals and Systematic Risk in Stock Returns
John Y. Campbell, Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho
NBER Working Paper No. 11389
June 2005
JEL No. G12, G14, N22
ABSTRACT
The cash flows of growth stocks are particularly sensitive to temporary movements in aggregate
stock prices (driven by movements in the equity risk premium), while the cash flows of value stocks
are particularly sensitive to permanent movements in aggregate stock prices (driven by market-wide
shocks to cash flows.) Thus the high betas of growth stocks with the market's discount-rate shocks,
and of value stocks with the market's cash-flow shocks, are determined by the cash-flow
fundamentals of growth and value companies. Growth stocks are not merely "glamour stocks" whose
systematic risks are purely driven by investor sentiment. More generally, accounting measures of
firm-level risk have predictive power for firms' betas with market-wide cash flows, and this
predictive power arises from the behavior of firms' cash flows. The systematic risks of stocks with
similar accounting characteristics are primarily driven by the systematic risks of their fundamentals.
John Y. Campbell Tuomo Vuolteenaho
Department of Economics Harvard University
Littauer Center 213 Department of Economics
Cambridge, MA 02138 Littauer Center
and NBER Cambridge, MA 02139
john_campbell@harvard.edu and NBER
tvuolteenaho@arrowstreetcapital.com
Christopher Polk
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
c-polk@kellogg.northwestern.edu

1 Introduction
Why do stock prices move together? If stocks are priced by discounting their cash
ßows at a rate which is constant over time, although possibly varying across stocks,
then movements in stock prices are driven by news about cash ßows. In this case
common variation in prices must be attributable to common variation in cash ßows.
If discount rates vary over time, however, then groups of stocks can move together
because of common shocks to discount rates rather than fundamentals. For example,
a change in the market discount rate will have a particularly large effect on the
prices of stocks whose cash ßows occur in the distant future (Cornell 1999, Dechow,
Sloan, and Soliman 2004). In the extreme, irrational investor sentiment can cause
common variation in stock prices that is entirely unrelated to the characteristics of
cashßows; Barberis, Shleifer, andWurgler(2005)andGreenwood(2005)suggestthat
this explains the common movement of stocks that are included in the S&P 500 and
Nikkei indexes.
Commonvariationinstockpricesisparticularlyimportantwhenitaffectsthemea-
sures of systematic risk that rational investors use to evaluate stocks. In the Capital
Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), the risk of each stock is measured by its beta with the
market portfolio, and it is natural to ask whether betas are determined by shocks to
cash ßows or discount rates (Campbell and Mei 1993). Recently, Campbell (1993,
1996) and Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004) have proposed a version of Merton’s
(1973) Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model (ICAPM), in which investors care
more about permanent cash-ßow-driven movements than about temporary discount-
rate-driven movements in the aggregate stock market. In their two-beta model, the
required return on a stock is determined not by its overall beta with the market, but
by its “bad beta” with market cash-ßow shocks that earns a high premium and its
“good beta” with market discount rates that earns a low premium. Campbell and
Vuolteenaho (2004) Þnd empirically that value stocks have relatively high bad betas
while growth stocks have relatively high good betas. The high average return on
value stocks, which is anomalous in the CAPM (Ball 1978, Basu 1977, 1983, Rosen-
berg, Reid, and Lanstein 1985, Fama and French 1992), is predicted by the two-beta
model.
This paper asks whether stocks’ bad betas and good betas are determined by
the characteristics of their cash ßows, or whether instead they arise from the discount
rates, possibly driven by sentiment, that investors apply to those cash ßows. We Þrst
1

study the common variation of growth and value stocks, and then we examine other
common movements in stock returns that can be predicted using Þrm-level equity
market and accounting data.
At least since the inßuential work of Fama and French (1993), it has been under-
stood that value stocks and growth stocks tend to move together, so that an investor
who holds them(and/or shorts growth stocks) takes on a common source of risk. An
open question is what drives these common movements. One view is that value and
growth stocks are exposed to different cash-ßow risks. Fama and French (1996), for
example, argue that value stocks are companies that are in Þnancial distress and vul-
nerabletobankruptcy. CampbellandVuolteenaho(2004)suggestthatgrowthstocks
might have speculative investment opportunities that will be proÞtable only if equity
Þnancing is available on sufficiently good terms; thus they are equity-dependent com-
panies of the sort modeled by Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003). According to this
fundamentals view, growth stocks move together with other growth stocks and value
stockswithothervaluestocksbecauseofthefundamental characteristicsoftheircash
ßows, as would be implied by a simple model of stock valuation in which discount
rates are constant.
The empirical literature contains some tantalizing evidence in support of the fun-
damentals view. Fama and French (1995) document common variation in the prof-
itability of value and growth stocks, Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2004) Þnd that
value stocks’ proÞtability covaries more strongly with market-wide proÞtability than
does growth stocks’ proÞtability, and Liew and Vassalou (2000) show that value-
minus-growth returns covary with future macroeconomic fundamentals. Bansal,
Dittmar, and Lundblad (2003, 2005) and Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2004) use econo-
metric methods similar to those in this paper to show that value stocks’ cash ßows
have a higher long-run sensitivity to aggregate consumption growth than do growth
stocks’ cash ßows.
An alternative view is that the stock market simply prices value and growth
stocks differently at different times. Cornell (1999), for example, argues that growth
stock proÞts accrue further in the future than value stock proÞts, so growth stocks
are longer-duration assets whose values are more sensitive to changes in the market
discountrate. BarberisandShleifer(2003)andBarberis,Shleifer,andWurgler(2005)
argue that value stocks lack common fundamentals but are merely those stocks that
are currently out of favor with investors, while growth stocks are merely “glamour
stocks” that are currently favored by investors. According to this view, changes in
2