NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTMENT CYCLES:
THE IMPACT OF PUBLIC MARKETS
Paul Gompers
Anna Kovner
Josh Lerner
David Scharfstein
Working Paper 11385
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11385
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2005
We thank for their research assistance Vanessa Broussard, Daniel Goodman, Leif Holtzman, Alex Lee,
Miriam Tawil, and Chenling Zhang. We thank Raffi Amit, Bob Gibbons, Ed Rock, and seminar participants
at Harvard University, the National Bureau of Economic Research, the University of Chicago, and the
University of Pennsylvania for helpful comments. Harvard Business School’s Division of Research and the
National Science Foundation provided financial assistance. All errors and omissions are our own.The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2005 by Paul Gompers, Anna Kovner, Josh Lerner, and David Scharfstein. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Venture Capital Investment Cycles: The Impact of Public Markets
Paul Gompers, Anna Kovner, Josh Lerner, and David Scharfstein
NBER Working Paper No. 11385
May 2005
JEL No. G2
ABSTRACT
It is well documented that the venture capital industry is highly volatile and that much of this
volatility is associated with shifting valuations and activity in public equity markets. This paper
examines how changes in public market signals affected venture capital investing between 1975 and
1998. We find that venture capitalists with the most industry experience increase their investments
the most when public market signals become more favorable. Their reaction to an increase is greater
than the reaction of venture capital organizations with relatively little industry experience and those
with considerable experience but in other industries. The increase in investment rates does not affect
the success of these transactions adversely to a significant extent. These findings are consistent with
the view that venture capitalists rationally respond to attractive investment opportunities signaled
by public market shifts.
Paul Gompers Josh Lerner
Morgan Hall Rock Center for Entrepreneurship
Graduate School of Business Administration Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University Harvard University
Boston, MA 02163 Boston, MA 02163
and NBER and NBER
pgompers@hbs.edu josh@hbs.edu
Anna Kovner David Scharfstein
Morgan Hall Morgan Hall
Graduate School of Business Administration Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University Harvard University
Boston, MA 02163 Boston, MA 02163
akovner@hbs.edu and NBER
dscharfstein@hbs.edu

1. Introduction
The high volatility of the venture capital industry is well documented. This
volatility manifests itself in a number of ways: the funds flowing to venture capital firms,
the investments firms make in portfolio companies, and the financial performance of
portfolio companies and venture capital firms. (Gompers and Lerner, 2004). Much of
this volatility appears to be tied to valuations in public equity markets. An increase in
IPO valuations leads venture capital firms to raise more funds (Gompers and Lerner,
1998; Jeng and Wells, 2000), an effect that is particularly strong among younger venture
capital firms (Kaplan and Schoar, 2005). Moreover, returns of venture capital funds
appear to be highly correlated with the returns on the market as a whole (Cochrane, 2005;
Kaplan and Schoar, 2005; Ljundqvist and Richardson, 2003).
Many industry observers (see, for instance, Gupta, 2000) argue that the volatility
of the venture capital industry is a symptom of overreaction by venture capitalists and
entrepreneurs to perceived investment opportunities. These swings result in periods in
which too many competing companies are funded, followed by ones in which not enough
companies have access to capital. The boom of 1998-2000 provides an extreme
illustration of these problems. Funding during these years grew dramatically—in real
terms, the financing level in 2000 was more than 30 times the level in 1991—and was
concentrated in two areas: Internet and telecommunication investments, which accounted
for 39% and 17% of all venture disbursements in 1999. Considerable sums were devoted
to supporting very similar firms—e.g., the nine dueling Internet pet food suppliers and
the many companies that undertook the extremely capital-intensive process of building
second cable networks in residential communities. Meanwhile, many apparently

promising areas such as advanced materials, energy technologies, and micro
manufacturing languished unfunded as venture capitalists raced to focus on the most
visible and popular investment areas.
This alleged overreaction may have its roots in the behavioral biases of venture
capitalists who irrationally associate past investment successes with future investment
opportunities. Or it may stem from venture capitalists who feel compelled to follow the
herd out of concern for the reputation consequences of being contrarians (Scharfstein and
Stein, 1990) Indeed, in 1999, even private equity firms with investment mandates to
invest in leveraged buyouts felt compelled to back Internet startups.
A contrasting view is that the volatility of the venture capital industry stems not
from overreaction, but from the inherent volatility of fundamentals. In this view,
fluctuation in venture capital investment activity is simply a response to changes in
investment opportunities. There may be shocks to the investment opportunities of
existing entrepreneurial firms, or entry by new entrepreneurs, both of which increase the
demand for capital.
This paper takes a step towards distinguishing between the “overreaction view”
and the “fundamentals view” by examining the responses of different classes of venture
investors. We start with the observation (and empirically document) that the most
experienced venture capital firms generally have the best performance (Sorensen, 2004).
We then examine how these most successful investors respond to public market signals
of investment opportunities. Are they more prone to increase their investments when the
market heats ups? And, how well do they do on these investments relative to less
experienced venture capitalists? If we find that the most experienced investors are more
2