NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REAL-TIME PRICE DISCOVERY IN STOCK,
BOND AND FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS
Torben G. Andersen
Tim Bollerslev
Francis X. Diebold
Clara Vega
Working Paper 11312
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11312
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2005
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation, the Guggenheim Foundation, and the BSI
Gamma Foundation. For useful comments we thank seminar participants at the Bank for International
Settlements, the 2003 BSI Gamma Conference, the 2004 Symposium of the European Central Bank / Center
for Financial Studies Research Network, the October 2004 meeting of the NBER International Finance and
Macroeconomics program, and the 2005 American Economic Association Annual Meeting, as well as Rui
Albuquerque, Annika Alexius, Boragan Aruoba, Anirvan Banerji, Ben Bernanke, Robert Connolly, Jeffrey
Frankel, Lingfeng Li, Richard Lyons, Marco Pagano, Paolo Pasquariello, and Neng Wang. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2005 by Torben G. Andersen, Tim Bollerslev, Francis X. Diebold, and Clara Vega. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Real-Time Price Discovery in Stock, Bond and Foreign Exchange Markets
Torben G. Andersen, Tim Bollerslev, Francis X. Diebold, and Clara Vega
NBER Working Paper No. 11312
May 2005
JEL No. F3, F4, G1, C5
ABSTRACT
We characterize the response of U.S., German and British stock, bond and foreign exchange markets
to real-time U.S. macroeconomic news. Our analysis is based on a unique data set of high-frequency
futures returns for each of the markets. We find that news surprises produce conditional mean jumps;
hence high-frequency stock, bond and exchange rate dynamics are linked to fundamentals. The
details of the linkages are particularly intriguing as regards equity markets. We show that equity
markets react differently to the same news depending on the state of the U.S. economy, with bad
news having a positive impact during expansions and the traditionally-expected negative impact
during recessions. We rationalize this by temporal variation in the competing "cash flow" and
"discount rate" effects for equity valuation. This finding also helps explain the apparent time-varying
correlation between stock and bond returns, and the relatively small equity market news
announcement effect when averaged across expansions and recessions. Hence, while our results
confirm previous unconditional rankings suggesting that bond markets almost uniformly react most
strongly to macroeconomic news, followed by foreign exchange and then equity markets, importantly
when conditioning on the state of the economy the foreign exchange and equity markets appear
equally responsive. Lastly, relying on the pronounced heteroskedasticity in the new high-frequency
data, we also document important contemporaneous linkages across all markets and countries over-
and-above the direct news announcement effects.
Torben G. Andersen Francis X. Diebold
Kellogg School of Management Department of Economics
Northwestern University University of Pennsylvania
2001 Sheridan Road 3718 Locust Walk
Evanston, IL 60208 Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER and NBER
t-andersen@kellogg.nwu.edu fdiebold@sas.upenn.edu
Tim Bollerslev Clara Vega
Department of Economics Department of Finance
Duke University University of Rochester
Box 90097 Rochester, NY 14627
Durham, NC 27708-0097 vega@simon.rochester.edu
and NBER
boller@econ.duke.edu

1. Introduction
How do markets arrive at prices? There is perhaps no question more central to economics. This
paper focuses on price formation in financial markets, where the question looms especially large: How, if
at all, is news about macroeconomic fundamentals incorporated into stock prices, bond prices and foreign
exchange rates?
Unfortunately the process of price discovery in financial markets remains poorly understood.
Traditional “efficient markets” thinking suggests that asset prices should completely and instantaneously
reflect movements in underlying fundamentals. Conversely, several prominent authors have recently
gone so far as to assert that asset prices and fundamentals may be largely and routinely disconnected.
Experiences such as the late 1990s U.S. technology-driven market bubble would seem to support that
view, yet simultaneously it seems clear that financial market participants pay a great deal of attention to
data on underlying economic fundamentals. The notable difficulty of empirically mapping the links
between economic fundamentals and asset prices is indeed striking.
The central price-discovery question has many dimensions and nuances, including but not limited
to the following. How quickly, and with what patterns, do adjustments to news occur? Does
announcement timing matter? Are the magnitudes of effects similar for “good news” and “bad news,” or,
for example, do markets react more vigorously to bad news than to good news? Quite apart from the
direct effect of news on assets prices, what is its effect on financial market volatility? Do the effects of
news on prices and volatility vary across assets and countries, and what are the links? Are there readily
identifiable herd behavior and/or contagion effects? Do news effects vary over the business cycle?
Just as the central question of price discovery has many dimensions and nuances, so too does a
full answer. In this paper we progress by characterizing the simultaneous response of foreign exchange
markets as well as the domestic and foreign stock and bond markets to real-time U.S. macroeconomic
news. More precisely, we seek to better understand the links between asset prices and fundamentals by
simultaneously combining: (1) high-quality and ultra-high frequency asset price data across markets and
countries, which allows us to study price movements in (near) continuous time; (2) synchronized survey
data on market participants’ expectations, which allow us to infer “surprises” or “innovations” when news
is announced; and (3) advances in statistical modeling of volatility, which facilitate efficient inference.
By so doing, we can probe the workings of the marketplace in new and powerful ways, focusing on
episodes where the source of price movements is well identified, leading to a high signal-to-noise ratio.
We proceed as follows. In Section 2 we provide background by situating our paper in the
existing literature. In Section 3 we describe our data, and in Section 4 we present our new empirical
-1-

findings. We conclude in section 5. In the Appendix we sketch a stylized multi-country monetary model
that provides a simple theoretical benchmark and useful guidance for interpreting our empirical results.
2. Background and Related Literature
Our work speaks to three related but distinct literatures. The first examines the links between
asset prices and macroeconomic fundamentals as embodied in news announcement effects, the second
examines the links among domestic asset markets, and the third examines the link among various
domestic and foreign asset markets. We set the stage by discussing selected aspects of each.
Asset Prices and Macroeconomic Announcement Effects
The literature contains many empirical studies seeking to link the effects of macroeconomic
announcements to movements in stock, bond and foreign exchange returns. While the first generation
studies relied on daily, or even weekly or monthly data, the more recent literature has moved toward the
use of more finely-sampled intraday data.1 Typically, however, each market is examined in isolation.
Recent examples include Fleming and Remolona (1997, 1999), Balduzzi, Elton and Green (2001),
Bollerslev, Cai and Song (2000), Green (2004), Hautsch and Hess (2002), Kuttner (2001), Li and Engle
(1998) who study bond markets; Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) and Kuttner (2004), Bomfim (2003),
Boyd, Jagannathan and Hu (2005), Goto and Valkanov (2002), and Flannery and Protopapadakis (2002)
who study equity markets; and Andersen and Bollerslev (1998), Andersen, Bollerselev, Diebold and Vega
(henceforth ABDV, 2003), Almeida, Goodhart and Payne (1998), Chaboud, Chernenko, Howorka, Iyer,
Liu and Wright (2004), and Galati and Ho (2003) who study foreign exchange markets.2
Most theories predict an unambiguous link between macroeconomic fundamentals and the bond
market, with unexpected increases in real activity and inflation raising bond yields (lowering prices).
1 The first generation of exchange rate “news” studies focused primarily on money supply announcements. For
example, Engel and Frankel (1984), Cornell (1983), Frankel and Hardouvelis (1985) and Tandon and Urich (1987)
all associate positive U.S. money surprises with appreciations of the dollar and increases in nominal interest rates.
Also, Ito and Roley (1987) find that across a set of U.S. and Japanese macroeconomic announcements, U.S. money
announcements have the greatest impact. For a fine survey of this literature, see Frankel and Rose (1995).
Similarly, the first generation of bond market “news” studies was primarily concerned with money supply
announcements; e.g., Grossman (1981), Urich and Wachtel (1981), and Roley and Walsh (1985). The first
generation of equity market “news” studies, as exemplified by Schwert (1981), Pearce and Roley (1985),
Hardouvelis (1987), and Cutler, Poterba and Summers (1989), also report that with the possible exception of money
supply figures, macroeconomic news announcements generally do not affect stock prices.
2 Two recent notable exceptions to this single market approach are Fair (2003) who examines the joint movements
in stock, bond and foreign exchange markets around big market moves, typically associated with macroeconomic
announcements, and Faust, Rogers, Wang and Wright (2003) who estimate the response of different maturity interest
rates, exchange rates, and deviations from uncovered interest rate parity (UIP) to macroeconomic news.
-2-