NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHAT REMAINS FROM THE VOLCKER EXPERIMENT?
Benjamin M. Friedman
Working Paper 11346
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11346
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2005
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Benjamin M. Friedman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

What Remains from the Volcker Experiment?
Benjamin M. Friedman
NBER Working Paper No. 11346
May 2005
JEL No. E52
ABSTRACT
Under conventional representations of economic policymaking, any innovation is either (1)
a change in the objectives that policymakers are seeking to achieve, (2) a change in the choice of
policy instrument, or (3) a change in the way auxiliary aspects of economic activity are used to steer
policy in the context of time lags.
Most public discussion of the 1979 Volcker experiment at the time, and likewise most of the
subsequent academic literature, emphasized either the role of quantitative targets for money growth
(3) or the use of an open market operating procedure based on a reserves quantity rather than a short-
term interest rate (2). With time, however, neither has survived as part of U.S. monetary
policymaking.
What remains is the question of whether 1979 brought a new, greater weight on the Federal
Reserve’s objective of price stability vis-a-vis its objective of output growth and high employment
(1). That is certainly one interpretation of the historical record. But the historical evidence is also
consistent with the view that the 1970s were exceptional, rather than that the experience since 1979
has differed from what went before as a whole.
Benjamin M. Friedman
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 127
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bfriedman@harvard.edu

WHAT REMAINS FROM THE VOLCKER EXPERIMENT?1
Benjamin M. Friedman
William Joseph Maier Professor of Political Economy
Harvard University
Assessing the lasting impact of any experiment in economic policymaking requires, first
of all, understanding in what key respects that experiment represented a departure from prior
established practice. The new policymaking framework that the Federal Reserve System began
to employ in October 1979 is no exception. Specific quantitative targets for growth of the money
stock, or for either borrowed or nonborrowed reserves in the banking system, have long since
disappeared from the Federal Reserve’s approach to formulating and implementing monetary
policy. Yet there remains a widespread sense that the world of monetary policymaking in the
United States has been somehow different since 1979. What exactly is different, and in what
respects those differences stem from the innovations introduced in 1979, are questions well
worth addressing.
The conventional representation of economic policymaking, applicable to monetary
policy no less (and maybe far more readily) than to other familiar contexts, posits a policymaker
deploying whatever instruments may be available so as best to achieve a finite set of typically
1This paper was prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis conference on
“Reflections on Monetary Policy 25 Years After October 1979,” St. Louis, October 7-8, 2004.

-2-
conflicting objectives, subject to the constraints presented by existing institutional arrangements
and technology and by the behavior of the relevant actors in the economy’s private sector. In the
specific case of monetary policy, the policy problem is simplified because the central bank
normally has only one genuine instrument at its disposal – namely, its provision of reserves to the
economy’s banking system.2 The problem is also more complex, however, because the central
bank is free to specify its provision of reserves in terms of either the quantity of reserves or their
price (in other words, the relevant interest rate).3 Yet a further complexity arises from the fact
that the central bank’s provision of reserves (or setting of the interest rate) affects the aspects of
economic activity policymakers are seeking to influence only over time. As a result, under some
circumstances it may be helpful to formalize ways of exploiting information about what is
happening in the meanwhile by focusing policy on still other observable aspects of economic
activity – in this instance the most obvious example is the money stock – that of course differ
from the genuine objectives being pursued but may provide some indication of the extent to
which those objectives are being achieved.
Thinking about monetary policy in this familiar way provides a structured framework for
asking what was, or is, new about any specific innovation: (1) Is it a change in the objectives that
policymakers are seeking to achieve? (2) Is it a change in the choice of policy instrument – in the
2As a technical matter, the central bank can also typically adjust the amount of reserves (if
any) that banks are required to maintain in relation to their outstanding deposits. But under most
circumstances changes in reserve requirements and changes in the provision of reserves are
equivalent for purposes relating to the broad macroeconomic objectives of monetary policy.
3It is also possible to specify the central bank’s provision of reserves in terms of some
combination of quantity and price (that is, a reserve supply function with positive but finite
elasticity).