NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SPECULATIVE TRADING AND STOCK PRICES:
EVIDENCE FROM CHINESE A-B SHARE PREMIA
Jianping Mei
Jose Scheinkman
Wei Xiong
Working Paper 11362
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11362
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2005
Mei is at New York University, Scheinkman and Xiong are at Princeton University and affiliated with the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Scheinkman thanks the National Science Foundation and the Blaise
Pascal Research Chair for research support. We thank Yakov Amihud, Cheol Eun, Ed Glaeser, Galina Hale,
Lin Peng, Li Wei and participants at several seminars and conferences for valuable comments and
suggestions. We are grateful to Chunhui Miao and Aureo de Paula for able research assistance, and to Ming
Cai, Kent Hargis, Shenzhen GTA Information Technology Inc. and Boshi Fund Management Company for
providing us with the Chinese market data. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Jianping Mei, Jose Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Speculative Trading and Stock Prices: Evidence from Chinese A-B Share Premia
Jianping Mei, Jose Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 11362
May 2005
JEL No. G0, G1, F3
ABSTRACT
The market dynamics of technology stocks in the late nineties has stimulated a growing body of
theories that analyze the joint effects of short-sales constraints and heterogeneous beliefs on stock
prices and trading volume. This paper examines implications of these theories using a unique data
sample from China, a market with stringent short-sales constraints and perfectly segmented dual-
class shares. The identical rights of the dual-class shares allow us to control for stock fundamentals.
We find that trading caused by investors' speculative motive can help explain a significant fraction
of the price difference between the dual-class shares.
Jianping Mei
New York University
jmei@stern.nyu.edu
Jose Scheinkman
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
Wei Xiong
Princeton University
Bendheim Center for Finance
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08450

1 Introduction
The market dynamics of technology stocks during the late nineties indicates a connection
between trading volume and stock price overvaluation. In the case of Palm and 3Com
analyzedbyLamontandThaler(2003),themarketvaluationofPalmsurpasseditsparent
company 3Com by over 20 billion dollars in March 2000. At the same time, the available
shares of Palm changed hands every week. This pattern was not unique to Palm-3Com,
OfekandRichardson(2003)andCochrane(2003)documenttheassociationbetweenhigh
prices and trading volume in the technology sector.
Althoughtradingvolumedoesnotplayaroleintheclassicassetpricingtheory,several
recent papers have articulated theories that establish a connection between overvaluation
and trading volume. Following the basic insights of Miller (1977), Harrison and Kreps
(1978) and Chen, Hong and Stein (2002), Scheinkman and Xiong (2003), and Hong,
Scheinkman, and Xiong (2004) emphasize the joint effects of short-sales constraints and
heterogeneous beliefs on stock prices. When there are limits to the ability of arbitrageurs
to short overvalued shares, the marginal buyer of shares tends to be an optimist. This
introduces a speculative motive among investors. An asset owner has the option to resell
his shares to other more optimistic investors in the future for a profit, and equilibrium
pricesreflectthisoption. Typically, asthevolatilityofthedifferenceininvestors’opinions
increases, investors trade more often and the value of the resale option also increases.
This results in a positive association between trading volume and prices.1
It is complicated to directly test overvaluation with data from the Nasdaq stocks
because of the difficulty in measuring fundamental values of these stocks. In this paper,
we use a unique data set from Chinese stock markets to investigate the joint effects of
short-sales constraints and heterogeneous beliefs on trading volume and stock prices.
Chinese stock markets are well suited for such an analysis for several reasons. First,
1Duffie, Garleanu and Pedersen (2002) provide a model that endogenously determines costs of selling short,
and links overvaluation to short interest and securities’ lending fees.
1

short-sales of stocks are prohibited by law, and equity derivatives markets were not yet
developed during the sample period we use. Second, equity issuance and buy-backs, a
common practice that firms use to “arbitrage” the miss-valuation of their own stocks, are
severely constrained by the restrictive rules imposed by the government. Third, Chinese
stock markets were only re-opened in early 1990s after being closed for nearly half a
century. Thus, the stock trading was new to most domestic investors and had created
much excitement among them, just like internet stocks were to U.S. investors in the late
nineties. More importantly, during the period 1993-2000, several dozen firms offered two
classes of shares, class A and class B, with identical rights. Until 2001, domestic investors
could only buy A shares while foreign investors could only hold B shares. Despite their
identical payoffs and voting rights, class A shares traded on average for 420% more than
the corresponding B shares. In addition, A shares turned over at a much higher rate -
500% versus 100% per year for B shares. The high price and heavy share turnover of A
shares echo observations on the Nasdaq bubble.
The main hypothesis of our empirical analysis is that the speculative motive of A-
share (domestic) investors generated a speculative component in A-share prices, and this
componentispositivelyrelatedtoA-shareturnoverrate. Theidenticalpayoffstructureof
A and B shares allows us to control for stock fundamentals. Thus, we focus on the cross-
sectional relation between the A-B share premia and the turnover rates. The stringent
short-sales constraints avoid potential complications of estimating stocks’ short-selling
cost. The relatively large panel (75 stocks) also permits us to control for cross-sectional
differences in risk and liquidity, as well as the time variation of interest rates and risk
premium.
We find that A-share turnover has a significant and positive correlation with the A-B
share premia in the period of 1993-2000, and explains, on average, 20% of the monthly
cross sectional variation of this premium.
We also perform several robustness exercises. We control for the effect of liquidity
2