NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
VOLATILITY AND GROWTH:
CREDIT CONSTRAINTS AND
PRODUCTIVITY-ENHANCING INVESTMENT
Philippe Aghion
George-Marios Angeletos
Abhijit Banerjee
Kalina Manova
Working Paper 11349
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11349
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2005
For helpful comments and discussions, we thank Daron Acemoglu, Philippe Bacchetta, Robert Barro, Olivier
Blanchard, V.V. Chari, Bronwyn Hall, Peter Howitt, Olivier Jeanne, Patrick Kehoe, Ellen McGrattan, Pierre
Yared, Klaus Walde, Iván Werning, and seminar participants in Amsterdam, UC Berkeley, ECFIN, Harvard,
IMF, MIT, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. Special thanks to Do Quoc-Anh for excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Philippe Aghion, George-Marios Angeletos, Abhijit Banerjee, and Kalina Manova. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Volatility and Growth: Credit Constraints and Productivity-Enhancing Investment
Philippe Aghion, George-Marios Angeletos, Abhijit Banerjee, and Kalina Manova
NBER Working Paper No. 11349
May 2005
JEL No. E22, E32, O16, O30, O41, O57
ABSTRACT
We examine how credit constraints affect the cyclical behavior of productivity-enhancing investment
and thereby volatility and growth. We first develop a simple growth model where firms engage in
two types of investment: a short-term one and a long-term productivity-enhancing one. Because it
takes longer to complete, long-term investment has a relatively less procyclical return but also a
higher liquidity risk. Under complete financial markets, long-term investment is countercyclical, thus
mitigating volatility. But when firms face tight credit constraints, long-term investment turns
procyclical, thus amplifying volatility. Tighter credit therefore leads to both higher aggregate
volatility and lower mean growth for a given total investment rate. We next confront the model with
a panel of countries over the period 1960-2000 and find that a lower degree of financial development
predicts a higher sensitivity of both the composition of investment and mean growth to exogenous
shocks, as well as a stronger negative effect of volatility on growth.
Philippe Aghion Abhijit Banerjee
Department of Economics MIT
University College London banerjee@mit.edu
Gower Street
London, WC1 6BT Kalina Manova
and NBER Harvard University
p_aghion@harvard.edu manova@fas.harvard.edu
George-Marios Angeletos
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive, E51-251
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
angelet@mit.edu

1 Introduction
The modern theory of business cycles gives a central position to productivity shocks and the role of
financial markets in the propagation of these shocks; but it takes the entire productivity process as
exogenous. Themoderntheoryofgrowth, ontheotherhand,givesacentralpositiontoendogenous
productivitygrowthandtheroleoffinancialmarketsinthegrowthprocess; butitfocusesontrends,
largely ignoring shocks and cycles.1
The goal of this paper is to build a bridge between the two approaches; to propose and, in
a limited way, test a theory of endogenous productivity growth that gives a central position to
uncertainty. At the heart of our theory is a propagation mechanism — how exogenous shocks
generate endogenous productivity movements — and its interaction with financial markets.
The first part of the paper develops a model that focuses on the cyclical behavior of the com-
position of investment as the main propagation channel; this choice is motivated by facts discussed
later. Entrepreneurs engage in two types of investment activity: short-term investment takes rel-
atively little time to build and generates output relatively fast; long-term investment takes more
time to complete but contributes more to productivity growth.
With perfect credit markets, investment choices are dictated merely by an opportunity-cost
effect. As long as short-termreturns aremore cyclical than long-termreturns, theopportunity cost
of long-term investment is lower in recessions than in booms.2 The fraction of savings allocated to
long-term investment is therefore countercyclical and, by implication, the endogenous component
of productivity grows faster when coming out of a recession than otherwise.
But with sufficiently imperfect credit markets, long-term investment becomes procyclical and
the business cycle is now amplified. This is not so much because borrowing constraints limit the
ability to invest; in our model the interest rate adjusts in general equilibrium so that neither type
of investment is constrained ex ante. It is rather because tighter constraints imply a higher risk
that long-term investment will be interrupted by some (idiosyncratic) liquidity shock ex post. This
risk in turn reduces the entrepreneurs’ willingness to engage in long-term investment ex ante — and
the more so in recessions, when liquidity is expected to be scarce. Aggregate shocks therefore have
a more pronounced effect on productivity growth when credit markets are less effective.
The second part of the paper confronts the implications of the model with the data. We first
examine whether there is evidence of amplification per se. For that purpose, we look at a panel
of about 60 countries over the 1960-1995 period and use export-weighted commodity price shocks
as our measures of exogenous shocks to the economy. We find the negative growth impact of an
adverse price shock, especially at two lags, to be stronger in countries with tighter credit.
1Though the idea that there is a close connection between productivity growth and the business cycle goes back
at least to Schumpeter, Hicks, and Kaldor in the 1940s-1950s.
2An opportunity-cost effect of this kind has emphasized by Aghion and Saint-Paul (1998) and more recently by
Barlevy (2004).
1

Financial development in these regressions does not appear to be capturing the role of other
policies or institutions. The interaction between shocks and private credit remains significant
once we control for the interaction between shocks and intellectual property rights, government
expenditures, inflation, and the black-market premium.
We next examine the transmission channel by looking at the response of the rate and the com-
positionofinvestmenttoshocks. Forthatpurpose,weproxythefractionoflong-termproductivity-
enhancing investments by the ratio of R&D to total investment. Data availability then limits the
analysis to a panel of 14 OECD countries over the 1973-1999 period. Consistent with the predic-
tions of our model, we find that the composition of investment is more sensitive to shocks when the
level of private credit is lower. On the other hand, and in contrast to the standard credit-multiplier
paradigm (e.g., Bernanke and Gertler, 1989), we find no evidence that the total rate of investment
is more responsive to shocks when private credit lower.
While we areprobably the first to look at the effects of shocks on the composition of investment
and thereby on growth in the presence of financial constraints, there is a literature that looks at
the related but distinct question of how volatility affects growth. Most notably, Ramey and Ramey
(1995) find a negative relation between the two in cross-country data; this relation is robust to
various controls, perhaps suggesting a negative causal effect of volatility on growth.3
Such a causal effect of volatility on growth would be consistent with the neoclassical growth
paradigm if volatility discourages the demand for investment more than it encourages the pre-
cautionary supply of savings. In an AK economy, for example, the general-equilibrium impact
of aggregate risk on savings and thereby on growth is negative if the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution is higher than one (Jones, Manuelli and Stacchetti, 2000).4
It is however unclear that this is the right explanation for the observed correlation. First, the
impact of volatility persists even after we control for the aggregate investment rate. This is shown
in columns 1-4 of Table 1, which repeat some of Ramey and Ramey’s (1995) basic specifications in
our data set. For example, in the specification that includes initial income, education, and policy
anddemographicsvariablesasinLevineetal. (2000), thepointestimateofthevolatilitycoefficient
falls from 0.26 to 0.22 when the investment rate is included in the controls. Prima facie, this
− −
finding suggests that the main channel through which volatility affects growth is not the overall
propensity to save — one reason why we chose to focus on the composition of investment.
[insert Table 1 here]
3Similar evidence is provided by Blattman, Hwang and Williamson (2004), Koren and Tenreyro (2004), and our
ownresultsinSection5.4. ChatterjeeandShukayev(2005),however,arguethatthisrelationisnotalwaysrobustto
different regression specifications or country samples.
4TheresultsinAngeletos(2004)suggestthattherelevantthresholdfortheelasticityofintertemporalsubstitution
may be quite lower in a neoclassical economy where, unlike in an AK economy, capital is not the only source of
income.
2