NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PATENTS, PRICE CONTROLS AND ACCESS TO NEW DRUGS:
HOW POLICY AFFECTS GLOBAL MARKET ENTRY
Jean O. Lanjouw
Working Paper 11321
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11321
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2005
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Jean O. Lanjouw. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Patents, Price Controls and Access to New Drugs: How Policy Affects Global Market Entry
NBER Working Paper No. 11321
May 2005
JEL No. L1, I1
ABSTRACT
Efforts to strengthen the global patent system for pharmaceuticals continue to be controversial, and
what will likely be a similarly fraught international debate over price controls has begun. The
outcome of international negotiations and the resulting policy decisions made by each country will
have many ramifications – influencing the size of future investment in medical research, the
availability of the resulting therapies, how the financial burdens are distributed across countries, and
finally the health of consumers. This paper considers how legal and regulatory policies affect
whether new drugs are marketed in a country, and how quickly. Less than one-half of the new
pharmaceutical molecules that are marketed worldwide are sold in any given country, and those that
are sold are often available to consumers in one country only six or seven years after those in
another. Both price regulation and intellectual property rights influence these outcomes. The
analysis covers a large sample of 68 countries at all income levels and includes all drug launches
over the period 1982-2002. It uses newly compiled information on legal and regulatory policy, and
is the first systematic analysis of the determinants of drug launch in poor countries.
Jean O. Lanjouw
Brookings Institution
1775 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
and NBER
lanjouw@are.berkeley.edu

Introduction
The pharmaceutical industry faces a rapidly evolving legal and regulatory environment.
Governments, drug companies and advocacy groups continue to engage in a decade-long battle
over the type of patent rights that will be available to industry, particularly in poor countries.
Particular criticism has focused on the intellectual property standards required of members of the
World Trade Organization—standards known as Trade-Related aspects of Intellectual Property,
or TRIPS, rules. International drug pricing is also coming under the spotlight. Americans have
accused the Europeans and Canadians of using their price control systems to free-ride on U.S.
consumers, and the United States is starting to push for regulatory changes in bilateral trade
negotiations.2 These pressures may well generate future reforms on a broad scale.
The choices made by each country about its patent system and price regulation will have
many ramifications – influencing the size of future investment in medical research, the
availability of the resulting therapies, how the financial burdens are distributed across countries,
and finally the health of consumers. We focus here on how policy choices affect whether new
drugs are marketed in a country, and how quickly. Because there are fixed costs associated with
launching new products, it would seem intuitive that both weaker price regulation and stronger
intellectual property would facilitate entry by virtue of increasing firm profit.3 However, what
makes this an interesting economic problem is that intellectual property can have a second
2 See, for example, the speech by Mark McClellen, then Commissioner of the U.S. FDA, before the First
International Colloquium on Generic Medicine. September 25, 2003, Cancun, Mexico. Available at
http://www.fda.gov/oc/speeches/2003/genericdrug0925.html (accessed 12/28/03). Most recently, the U.S.
insisted that reforms to Australia’s domestic price and reimbursement system be a part of the AUS Free
Trade Agreement (see www.aph.gov.au/Senate/committee/freetrade_ctte for details and discussion.
Accessed 1/24/05). Suggesting a future agenda, see “Ten Questions,” Pfizer Annual Review 2004: “We
believe Americans carry an unfair share of the global cost of biomedical research. We think that’s a
serious issue that should be near the top of the global trade agenda.”

important effect. While patents indeed make local markets more attractive, they also convey
control over launch decisions to multinational firms with global interests.4 Multinationals may
delay or even avoid launching drugs in lower-priced countries because they are concerned about
the implications for pricing in other markets. If they hesitate, and patent rights block otherwise
willing local entrants, then strong patent rights may actually reduce product entry.
Although the pricing of patented pharmaceuticals has attracted a great deal of attention
recently, the question of whether new drugs are marketed at all, remarkably, has not.5 This is
significant given that less than one-half of the new pharmaceutical molecules marketed
worldwide are sold in any given country – whether rich or poor. Even those drugs that are
eventually marketed in one country frequently appear on pharmacy shelves only six or seven
years after becoming available to consumers elsewhere.6 Both price regulation and intellectual
property rights influence these outcomes. The CEO of Pfizer, Hank McKinnell, frankly
acknowledged this point some years ago when he threatened that the company would withhold
new treatments from France unless the government allowed higher drug prices (Financial Times,
December 10, 2001).
When considering the effect of patent rights it is important to distinguish two main types:
those that protect of methods of manufacture (“process patents”) and those that protect
3 Local fixed costs include obtaining marketing approval from the country regulatory authority and
educating doctors and patient groups about the drug’s benefits. These costs can be sizeable, particularly for
the first entrant.
4 While in principle smaller local firms could develop new drugs, in fact multinationals hold almost all
product patents. Some 86% of the applications for product patents in India in 1995 were submitted by
inventors with a non-Indian address (CDRI, 1996) and in most developing countries the share is far
higher. As firms based in developing countries also begin to invest in the development and patenting of
new products they will have the same global marketing incentives and constraints faced by the current
multinationals.
5 Although when Gilead Sciences recently offered to expand to 95 the number of countries eligible to
receive its key anti-retroviral drug “at cost”, the offer was called “disingenuous” by the NGO Doctors
without Borders because the firm has been supplying only 22 of the original 68 eligible countries. San
Francisco Chronicle, March 18, 2005.
2