NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
URBAN COLOSSUS:
WHY IS NEW YORK AMERICA’S LARGEST CITY?
Edward L. Glaeser
Working Paper 11398
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11398
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005
Glaeser thanks the Taubman Center for State and Local Government. Joshua Samuelson provided excellent
research assistance. Stanley Engerman provided guidance on sugar. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Edward L. Glaeser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Urban Colossus: Why is New York America’s Largest City?
Edward L. Glaeser
NBER Working Paper No. 11398
June 2005
JEL No. N0
ABSTRACT
New York has been remarkably successful relative to any other large city outside of the sunbelt and
it remains the nation's premier metropolis. What accounts for New York's rise and continuing
success? The rise of New York in the early nineteenth century is the result of technological changes
that moved ocean shipping from a point-to-point system to a hub and spoke system; New York's
geography made it the natural hub of this system. Manufacturing then centered in New York because
the hub of a transport system is, in many cases, the ideal place to transform raw materials into
finished goods. This initial dominance was entrenched by New York's role as the hub for
immigration. In the late 20th century, New York's survival is based almost entirely on finance and
business services, which are also legacies of the port. In this period, New York's role as a hub still
matters, but it is far less important than the edge that density and agglomeration give to the
acquisition of knowledge.
Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

I. Introduction
For 200 years, New York City has been the largest city in the nation, and it continues to
outperform most cities that were once its competitors. In the 1990s, the city’s population
grew by 9 percent and finally passed the eight million mark. New York is the only one of
the 16 largest cities in the northeastern or mid-western United States with a higher
population today than it had 50 years ago. New York’s economy remains robust.
Payroll per employee is more than $80,000 per year in Manhattan’s largest industry and
almost $200,000 per year in Manhattan’s second largest industry.
All cities, even New York, go through periods of crisis and seeming rebirth, and New
York certainly went through a real crisis in the 1970s. But while the dark periods for
Boston, Chicago or Washington D.C. lasted for thirty or fifty years, New York’s worst
period lasted for less than a decade. While Boston’s history is one of ongoing crises and
reinvention (Glaeser, 2005), New York’s history is one of almost unbroken triumph. The
remarkable thing about New York is its ability to thrive despite the massive technological
changes that challenged every other dense city that was built around public
transportation.
What explains New York’s ongoing ability to dominate America’s urban landscape? In
this essay, I explore the economic history of the city and argue that there are really three
themes that emerge. First, New York’s emergence as the nation’s premier port was not
the result of happenstance followed by lemming-like agglomeration. While there are
limits to geographic determinism, the clear superiority of New York’s port both in its
initial depth, the Hudson River and its location, and then the additional superiority added
by the water-borne connection to the Great Lakes ensured that this would be America’s
port. In this case, geography really was destiny and the significance of trade and
immigration to the early republic ensured that New York would dominate.
2

The second lesson from New York’s history is the importance of simple transportation
cost and scale economies. The rise of New York’s three great manufacturing industries
in the 19th century, sugar refining, publishing and the garment trade, depended on New
York’s place at the center of a transport hub. In all three cases, manufacturing
transformed products from outside of the U.S. into finished goods that would be sold
within the country. Since New York was a hub and products were dispersed throughout
the country and the world after entry into that hub, it made perfect sense to do the
manufacturing in the city.
The tendency of people to attract more people is the central idea of urban economics, and
nowhere is that more obvious than in the case of America’s largest city. An initial
advantage as a port then attracted manufacturing and services to cater to the mercantile
firms and to take advantage of their low shipping costs. The traditional model of this
phenomenon (Krugman, 1991) emphasizes that scale matters because it allows
manufacturers to save on costs in supplying goods to residents of the city. But the story
of New York suggests that this was less important than the advantage of producing in a
central location for export elsewhere. Obviously, scale economies were also important
because otherwise, there would be no incentive to centralize manufacturing
New York’s growth in the early 19th century was driven by the rise of manufacturing in
the city which itself depended on the city’s primacy as a port. New York’s growth in the
late 19th century owed at least as much to its role as the entryway for immigrants into the
U.S. Indeed, the basic industrial structure of New York remained remarkably consistent
between 1860 and 1910 while the scale increased enormously. Immigrants stayed in
New York in port for “consumption” reasons. Ethnic neighborhoods made the transition
to the new world easier and New York as a city acquired over time a remarkable capacity
to cater to immigrant needs. However, the immigrants also stayed because the traditional
New York industries (especially the garment industry) were able to increase in scale to
accommodate extra labor without a huge drop in wages.
3