NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TAXATION AND THE EVOLUTION OF AGGREGATE
CORPORATE OWNERSHIP CONCENTRATION
Mihir A. Desai
Dhammika Dharmapala
Winnie Fung
Working Paper 11469
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11469
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005
We would like to thank Alan Auerbach, Steve Bond, Bill Gale, Bill Gentry, Jim Hines, Emmanuel Saez,
Richard Sansing, Gautam Tripathi, our discussants (Jeff Brown and Jeff Strand) and participants at the
OTPR/Burch Center conference on “Taxing Corporate Income in the 21st Century” for valuable comments
and suggestions on an earlier draft of this paper. Desai acknowledges the financial support of the Division
of Research of Harvard Business School. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Mihir A. Desai, Dhammika Dharmapala, and Winnie Fung. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Taxation and the Evolution of Aggregate Corporate Ownership Concentration
Mihir A. Desai, Dhammika Dharmapala, and Winnie Fung
NBER Working Paper No. 11469
June 2005
JEL No. G30, H24
ABSTRACT
Legal rules, politics and behavioral factors have all been emphasized as explanatory factors in
analyses of the determinants of the concentration of corporate ownership and stock market
participation. An extension of standard tax clientele arguments demonstrates that changes in the
progressivity of taxes can also significantly influence patterns of equity ownership. A novel index
of the concentration of corporate ownership over the twentieth century in the U.S. provides the
opportunity to quantitatively test for the role of taxes in shaping ownership concentration. The index
of ownership concentration is characterized by considerable time series variation, with significant
diffusion of ownership in the post WWII era and reconcentration in the late 1990s. Analysis of this
index indicates that the progressivity of taxation significantly influences corporate ownership
concentration and equity market participation as predicted by the model. This evidence supports the
intuition of Berle and Means (1932) that taxation can significantly influence patterns of equity
ownership .
Mihir A. Desai Winnie Fung
Graduate School of Business Administration Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University Harvard University
Soldiers Field 79 JFK Street
Boston, MA 02163 Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER fung@fas.harvard.edu
mdesai@hbs.edu
Dhammika Dharmapala
University of Connecticut
Department of Economics
341 Mansfield Road, Unit 1063
Storrs, CT 06269-1063
dhammika.dharmapala@uconn.edu

1. Introduction
The extent to which corporate ownership is widely dispersed is an important dimension
of an economy’s corporate governance environment. The mechanisms by which diffuse owners
police managers and the reasons why much of the world does not feature diffuse corporate
ownership are major themes in the corporate governance literature. The comparative strand of
this literature emphasizes legal origins as a critical determinant of the investor rights that
facilitate ownership diffusion (e.g. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny, 1998).
However, subsequent efforts to trace the time-series patterns of governance and ownership
concentration (e.g. Rajan and Zingales, 2003; Franks, Mayer and Rossi, 2003) have questioned
the singular role of legal investor protections, given the diffusion of ownership in the absence of
legal protections at various times in the twentieth century.1 The dispersion of corporate
ownership across households is also closely related to questions surrounding stock market
participation that have attracted considerable interest in the recent literature (e.g. Vissing-
Jorgensen, 2002; Griffin, Nardari and Stulz, 2004). As a result, the question of what facilitates
and propels ownership diffusion remains a central research question in corporate finance and
asset pricing.
The role of taxes in retarding or promoting ownership diffusion has largely gone
unexplored. This oversight is particularly surprising, as the seminal contribution that identified
the issue of the separation of ownership and control (Berle and Means, 1932) was motivated by
the observation that high tax rates during World War I marked a major turning point in this
separation in the U.S. Specifically, Warshow (1924) and Means (1930) analyze how these
highly progressive taxes were associated with a sharp increase in the diffusion of ownership.
This paper extends that line of reasoning to analyze how personal taxes have shaped the level of
ownership concentration over the rest of the twentieth century.
The precise mechanism by which individual income taxation might facilitate ownership
diffusion, as suggested originally in Means (1930), is illustrated with a simple extension to the
Miller (1977) model of financial equilibrium. In Miller’s model, firms endogenously issue both
equity and bonds, with the corporate tax preference for debt financing being offset by a personal
1 Roe (2002) also notes that ownership is not diffuse in countries (such as Sweden and Finland) where corporate law
and investor protections appear to be strong. He attributes this to the possibility that political forces would demand
anti-shareholder actions in the absence of large blockholders.
1

tax preference for equity among some investors. In equilibrium, each firm is indifferent about its
debt-equity ratio and investors sort into tax clienteles for stock and bonds. An extension of this
model shows that an increase in the progressivity of the tax schedule leads to an increase in the
fraction of investors holding equity, and thus to a decrease in the concentration of stock
ownership across investors. In essence, increased progressivity leads to a greater relative tax
penalty on corporate bonds. Firms respond with increased equity issuance, and the identity of the
marginal investor shifts to a lower income level, thereby generating a greater diffusion of equity
ownership.
To analyze this hypothesis empirically, this paper develops an index of corporate
ownership concentration at the economy-wide level, following the methodology used to track
income distribution pioneered by Kuznets (1953) and revived by Piketty and Saez (2003). Tax
return data is used to construct a Herfindahl index that summarizes the degree of concentration
of stock ownership across households over the twentieth century. This index is characterized by
significant time-series variation that undercuts the static view of the American example as one
where ownership has long been diffuse due to legal protections or political factors. It differs from
measures used in existing studies of corporate governance (which typically track the ownership
concentration of some sample of large public corporations across countries or through time) and
is especially suited to time-series analysis within countries and for understanding the
determinants of stock market participation across income groups. The advantages and
disadvantages of such an economy-wide measure relative to the firm-specific approach typically
employed are discussed in more detail below.
Time-series analysis of the determinants of this index reveals that increases in the
progressivity of individual income tax rates are associated with statistically significant and
economically meaningful increases in the diffusion of corporate ownership. Controlling for a
variety of factors, a one standard deviation change in the top statutory rate is associated with
close to a one standard deviation shift in the Herfindahl index. Analysis of the patterns of
corporate equity ownership by each quintile of the income distribution confirms the impact of tax
rates. This analysis can also be viewed as providing a new perspective on the determinants of
equity market participation, suggesting that the progressivity of the tax code may be a
contributing factor in stock market participation at lower income levels. This time series analysis
finds only weak evidence for the role of valuation levels on equity market participation.
2