NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EMPIRICAL RISK-RETURN RELATION:
A FACTOR ANALYSIS APPROACH
Syndey C. Ludvigson
Serena Ng
Working Paper 11477
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11477
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005
Ludvigson: Department of Economics, New York University, 269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor, New York, NY
10003; Email: sydney.ludvigson@nyu.edu; Tel: (212) 998-8927; Fax: (212) 995-4186;
http://www.econ.nyu.edu/user/ludvigsons. Ng: Department of Economics, University of Michigan, 317
Lorch Hall, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; Email: serena.ng@umich.edu; Tel: (734) 763-3496; Fax: (734) 764-2769.
Ludvigson acknowledges financial support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and the CV Starr Center at
NYU. Ng acknowledges financial support from the National Science Foundation (SES-0345237). We thank
Kenneth French for providing the portfolio data and Massimiliano Croce for excellent research assistance.
Any erros or omissions are the responsibility of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Syndey C. Ludvigson and Serena Ng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Empirical Risk-Return Relation: A Factor Analysis Approach
Sydney C. Ludvigson and Serena Ng
NBER Working Paper No. 11477
July 2005
JEL No. G12, G10
ABSTRACT
A key criticism of the existing empirical literature on the risk-return relation relates to the relatively
small amount of conditioning information used to model the conditional mean and conditional
volatility ox excess stock market returns. To the extent that financial market participants have
information not reflected in the chosen conditioning variables, measures of conditional mean and
conditional volatility - and ultimately the risk-return relation itself - will be misspecified and
possibly highly misleading. We consider one remedy to these problems using the methodology of
dynamic factor analysis for large datasets, whereby a large amount of economic information can b
summarized by a few estimated factors. We find that three new factors, a “volatility”, “risk
premium”, and “real” factor, contain important information about one-quarter ahead excess returns
and volatility that is not contained on commonly used predictor variables. Moreover, the factor-
augmented specifications we examine predict and unusual 16-20 percent of the one-quarter ahead
variation in excess stock market returns, and exhibit remarkably stable and strongly statistically
significant out-of-sample forecasting power. Finally, in contrast to several pre-existing studies that
rely on a small number of conditioning variables, we find a positive conditional correlation between
risk and return that is strongly statistically significant, whereas the unconditional correlation is
weakly negative and statistically insignificant.
Sydney C. Ludvigson Serena Ng
Department of Economics Department of Economics
New York University University of Michigan
269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor 371 Lorch Hall
New York, NY 10003 Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER serena.ng@umich.edu
sydney.ludvigson@nyu.edu

1 Introduction
Financial economists have long been interested in the empirical relation between the condi-
tional mean and conditional volatility of excess stock market returns, often referred to as the
risk-return relation. The risk-return relation is an important ingredient in optimal portfolio
choice, and is central to the development of theoretical models aimed at explaining observed
patterns of stock market predictability and volatility. Among those theoretical models that
have become standard-bearers in …nance, a positive risk-return relation is the benchmark
prediction, so that times of predictably higher risk coincide with times of predictably higher
excess returns, and vice versa. Unfortunately, the body of empirical evidence on the risk-
return relation is mixed and inconclusive. Some evidence supports the theoretical prediction
of a positive risk-return tradeo¤, but other evidence suggests a strong negative relation. Yet
a third strand of the literature …nds that the relation is unstable and varies substantially
through time. (We summarize the existing evidence below.)
Several criticisms of the existing empirical literature relate to the relatively small amount
of conditioning information used to model the conditional mean and conditional volatility of
excess stock market returns. First, the conditional expectations underlying the conditional
mean and conditional volatility are typically measured as projections onto predetermined
conditioning variables; but, as Harvey (2001) points out, the decision of which predeter-
mined conditioning variables to use in the econometric analysis can in‡uence the estimated
risk-return relation. In practice, researchers are forced to choose among a few conditioning
variables because conventional statistical analyses are quickly overwhelmed by degrees-of-
freedom problems as the number rises. Such practical constraints introduce an element
of arbitrariness into the econometric modeling of expectations and may lead to omitted-
information estimation bias, since a small number of conditioning variables is unlikely to
span the information sets of …nancial market participants. If investors have information
not re‡ected in the chosen conditioning variables used to model market expectations, mea-
sures of conditional mean and conditional volatility will be misspeci…ed and possibly highly
misleading.1
A second and related criticism of the existing empirical literature is that the estimated
relation between the conditional mean and conditional volatility of excess returns often de-
pendsontheparametricmodelofvolatility, e.g., GARCH,EGARCH,stochasticvolatility, or
kernel density estimation (Harvey (2001)). Such procedures may impose potentially restric-
tive parametric assumptions and they often su¤er from a curse-of-dimensionality problem
that constrains their ability to entertain large datasets of conditioning information.
1This point was made forcibly by Hansen and Richard (1987) in the context of estimating and testing
dynamic asset pricing models.
1

Finally, therelianceonasmallnumberofconditioningvariablesexposesexistinganalyses
to problems of temporal instability in the underlying forecasting relations being modeled.
For example, it is commonplace to model market expectations of future stock returns using
the …tted values from a forecasting regression of returns on to a measure of the market-
wide dividend-price ratio. A di¢ culty with this approach is that the predictive power of
the dividend-price ratio for excess stock market returns is unstable and exhibits statistical
evidence of a structural break in the mid-1990s (Lettau, Ludvigson, and Wachter (2004)).
Inthispaperweconsideroneremedytotheseproblemsusingthemethodologyofdynamic
factor analysis for large datasets. Recent research on dynamic factor models …nds that the
information in a large number of economic time series can be e¤ectively summarized by a
relatively small number of estimated factors, a¤ording the opportunity to exploit a much
richerinformationbasethanwhathasbeenpossibleinpriorempiricalstudyoftherisk-return
relation. In this methodology, “a large number”can mean hundreds or, perhaps, even more
than one thousand economic time series. By summarizing the information from a large
number of series in a few estimated factors, we eliminate the arbitrary reliance on a small
number of exogenous predictors to estimate the conditional mean and conditional volatility
of stock returns, and make feasible the use of a vast set of economic variables that are more
likelytospantheunobservableinformationsetsof…nancialmarketparticipants. Inthewords
of Stock and Watson (2004), dynamic factor analysis permits us to turn dimensionality from
a curse into a blessing.
Dynamic factor analysis allows us to escape the limitations of existing empirical analyses
discussed above, on several fronts. First, if a large amount of information can be e¤ectively
summarized by a relatively few common factors, then a natural remedy to the omitted in-
formation problem is to augment …tted conditional moments with estimated factors. We
do so here by including estimated factors in the construction of …tted mean and volatility.
Second, by combining dynamic factor analysis with a nonparametric approach to modeling
volatility—an approach referred to hereafter as realized volatility—we avoid relying on po-
tentially restrictive parametric structures while at the same time insuring that our measure
of conditional volatility e¤ectively summarizes a large amount of information that may be
important for predicting the variance of the stock market. Third, there is some evidence
(discussed below) that dynamic factor analysis provides robustness against the temporal
instability that often plagues low-dimensional forecasting regressions. Indeed, our applica-
tion appears supportive of this evidence, since the factor-augmented predictive relations we
employ are remarkably stable over time, despite the observed temporal instability of many
commonly used predictor variables over the sample period we study.
An important question of our study is the degree to which estimated common factors add
informationabouttheconditionalmeanandconditionalvolatilityofstockreturnsthatisnot
2