NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE GROWTH OF EXECUTIVE PAY
Lucian Bebchuk
Yaniv Grinstein
Working Paper 11443
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11443
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Lucian Bebchuk and Yaniv Grinstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

The Growth of Executive Pay
Lucian Bebchuk and Yaniv Grinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 11443
June 2005
JEL No. D23, G32, G38, J33, J44, K22, M14
ABSTRACT
This paper examines both empirically and theoretically the growth of U.S. executive pay during the
period 1993-2003. During this period, pay has grown much beyond the increase that could be
explained by changes in firm size, performance and industry classification. Had the relationship of
compensation to size, performance and industry classification remained the same in 2003 as it was
in 1993, mean compensation in 2003 would have been only about half of its actual size. During the
1993-2003 period, equity-based compensation has increased considerably in both new economy and
old economy firms, but this growth has not been accompanied by a substitution effect, i.e., a
reduction in non-equity compensation. The aggregate compensation paid by public companies to
their top-five executives during the considered period added up to about $350 billion, and the ratio
of this aggregate top-five compensation to the aggregate earnings of these firms increased from 5%
in 1993-1995 to about 10% in 2001-2003. After presenting evidence about the growth of pay, we
discuss alternative explanations for it. We examine how this growth could be explained under either
the arm's length bargaining model of executive compensation or the managerial power model.
Among other things, we discuss the relevance of the parallel rise in market capitalizations and in the
use of equity-based compensation.
Lucian Bebchuk Yaniv Grinstein
Harvard Law School Cornell University
1557 Massachusetts Avenue Johnson Graduate School of Management
Cambridge, MA 02138 371 Sage Hall
and NBER Ithaca, NY 14853-6201
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu yg33@cornell.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
The growth in executive pay over the past decade has increased the attention given to the
subject of executive compensation. There is now a heated debate about the quality of the pay
setting process in publicly traded companies and the compensation arrangements that it produces
(see, e.g., Bebchuk and Fried (2003, 2004), Hall and Murphy (2003), Jensen, Murphy, and
Wruck (2004)). This paper seeks to contribute to the ongoing assessment of the executive pay
landscape by examining, both empirically and theoretically, the growth of pay during the period
1993-2003.
Section II begins by describing the growth in pay during the considered period and then
proceeds to examine the extent to which the pay growth can be explained by changes in firm
size, performance and industry mix. We find that compensation has grown by far more than
could be explained by such changes. Had the relation of compensation to these attributes
remained the same, mean compensation in 2003 would have been only about half of its actual
size. During the period under investigation, the relation between pay and firm size and
performance has changed, with pay at the end of the period being considerably higher for
companies of a given size, performance and industry classification.
Section III examines the growth of equity-based compensation during 1993-2003. The
fraction of equity-based compensation has grown across the board—in large firms, mid-size
firms and small firms, as well as in both new economy and old economy firms. Although the
fraction of non-equity (cash) compensation to total compensation has declined during this period,
the amounts spent on cash compensation have not declined but rather increased. Furthermore,
cash compensation has grown somewhat more than could be explained by the changes in size,
performance and industry mix during the considered period.
Section IV examines the changes in the economic significance of executive pay. We find
that executive pay has been economically meaningful. The aggregate compensation paid by
public firms to top-five executives during the period 1993-2003 added up to about $350 billion.
This aggregate top-five compensation accounted for 6.6% of the aggregate earnings (net income)
of these firms during the period under consideration. Furthermore, the economic significance of
executive pay has increased during this period. The aggregate compensation paid by public
firms to their top-five executives was 9.8% of the aggregate earnings of these firms during 2001-
2003, up from 5% during 1993-1995.
1

Section V discusses how the growth of executive pay could be explained. We discuss
this question both from the perspective of the arm’s length bargaining model of executive
compensation and from the perspective of the managerial power model. We discuss and evaluate
alternative explanations. We do not find that, by itself, the increase in executive pay levels can
resolve the debate on the extent to which executive pay is shaped by managers’ influence on
boards. Our findings, however, highlight the importance of this debate.
II. THE GROWTH OF PAY
A. The Large Increase in Pay Levels
We use compensation information from the standard ExecuComp database, which includes
information about executive compensation in public U.S. companies from 1993 onwards. The
dataset includes all the S&P 500, Mid-Cap 400 and Small-Cap 600 companies. Together, these
firms (also known as the S&P 1500) constitute more than 80% of the total market capitalization
of U.S. public firms. We report below findings on the period 1993-2003, because 2003 was the
last year for which there was compensation information about the lion’s share of companies in
the dataset.
Throughout our analysis, we define as annual compensation the (grant-date) value of the
compensation package in the year in which it was given. In particular, following a standard
definition of the total grant-date value of annual compensation reported in the ExecuComp
database, we define an executive’s total compensation in a given year as the sum of the
executive’s salary, bonuses, long-term incentive plans, the grant-date value of restricted stock
awards and the (grant-date) Black-Scholes value of granted options. To adjust for inflation, we
translate all monetary figures to 2002 dollars.
It is worth noting that the ExecuComp database does not include information about the value
of executives’ pension plans because firms are not required to place and disclose a dollar value
for these plans. As a result, research on executive pay has largely ignored the value of such
plans (and the annual increase in their value). There is evidence, however, that the value of
pension plans commonly comprises a major component of executives’ compensation (Bebchuk
and Jackson, 2005). Thus, like much of the literature, the annual compensation figures we use
do not include a significant source of additional compensation for many executives.
2