NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FILMING IMAGES OR FILMING REALITY:
THE LIFE CYCLES OF MOVIE DIRECTORS
FROM D.W. GRIFFITH TO FEDERICO FELLINI
David W. Galenson
Joshua Kotin
Working Paper 11486
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11486
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by David W. Galenson and Joshua Kotin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Filming Images or Filming Reality: The Life Cycles of Movie Directors from D.W. Griffith to
Federico Fellini
David W. Galenson and Joshua Kotin
NBER Working Paper No. 11486
July 2005
JEL No.
ABSTRACT
Why have some movie directors made classic early films, but subsequently failed to match their
initial successes, whereas other directors have begun much more modestly, but have made great
movies late in their lives? This study demonstrates that the answer lies in the directors’ motivations,
and in the nature of their films. Conceptual directors, who use their films to express their ideas or
emotions, mature early; thus such great conceptual innovators as D. W. Griffith, Sergei Eisenstein,
and Orson Welles made their major contributions early in their careers, and declined thereafter. In
contrast experimental directors, whose films present convincing characters in realistic
circumstances, improve their techniques with experience, so that such great experimental innovators
as John Ford, Alfred Hitchcock, and Akira Kurosawa made their greatest films late in their lives.
Understanding these contrasting life cycles can be part of a more systematic understanding of the
development of film, and can resolve previously elusive questions about the creative life cycles of
individual filmmakers.
David W. Galenson
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
galenson@uchicago.edu
Joshua Kotin
Chicago Review
5801 S Kenwood Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
jkotin@uchicago.edu

3
Introduction
In an essay written 50 years ago, the eminent film critic André Bazin declared that it was
useful to “distinguish, in the cinema between 1920 and 1940, between two broad and opposing
trends: those directors who put their faith in the image and those who put their faith in reality.”
Bazin explained that for the purposes of this distinction, he defined “image” very broadly, as
“everything that the representation on the screen adds to the object there represented,”
comprising a variety of means that could be used to allow the cinema “to impose its
interpretation of an event on the spectator.”1 Bazin’s insight was a striking one, that under other
circumstances might have served as the basis for an analytical framework for subsequent studies
of the history of the development of film. In the event, it has received little attention, in part
perhaps because of Brazin’s diffidence in stating and applying his analysis. For the validity of
Bazin’s distinction is not bounded by the time limits he suggested, and its implications are far
broader than he claimed in his essay. In this paper we will develop Bazin’s distinction, and
pursue in some detail what we consider one of its key implications. We believe that doing this
can yield a deeper understanding not only of the development of film, but also of the careers of
the important filmmakers of the past, present and future.
Two Kinds of Innovators
Important and influential film directors are either conceptual or experimental innovators.
These two categories -conceptual and experimental- describe two distinct career paths and two
opposing sets of concerns, styles, methods, and values. Conceptual innovators tend to produce
their most important work early in their careers, creating art based on ideas. Experimental

4
innovators, in contrast, tend to produce their most important work late in their careers, creating
art based on experience, particularly visual experience. These two categories, which correspond
to Bazin’s distinction, apply to all the arts (and most likely to all creative endeavors) and in film
entail specific characteristics that account for specific innovations and contributions. They also
account for various phenomena related to artistic careers, such as the one-hit wonder, the
sophomore jinx, and the wise, old master.
The ideas that motivate conceptual filmmakers are usually one of three kinds: moral,
philosophical, or psychological. Films based on moral ideas tend to be allegorical or didactic (or
both). In these films, cinematic elements serve to promote a certain worldview. Filmmakers often
employ typological, well-defined characters and elaborate special effects to influence audiences.
Their films are often extremely entertaining and moving: audiences lose medium awareness (that
is, forget they are watching a movie) and get caught up in the story. Epic battles between good
and evil symbolize everyday moral problems and contemporary political debates. The films often
appeal to and attract large audiences, allowing filmmakers to bring their messages to the
multitudes. Othertimes, however, films based on moral ideas are self-reflexive (calling attention
to the fact they are movies) and programmatic, aiming to convince viewers through inflammatory
images and the rhetorical use of artifice (for example, spotlighting and close-ups). These films
are usually less absorbing and more blatantly didactic, relying on argument or accusation rather
than symbolism to convey their filmmakers’ ideas. These films are often targeted to specialized
audiences with specific interests and concerns.
Films by conceptual directors based on philosophical ideas share many techniques with
these self-reflexive morality tales. Their filmmakers tend to foreground artifice and seldom allow