NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GLOBAL BUSINESS CYCLES AND CREDIT RISK
M. Hashem Pesaran
Til Schuermann
Björn-Jakob Treutler
Working Paper 11493
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11493
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005
This is a substantial revision of the paper “The Role of Industry, Geography and Firm Heterogeneity in
Credit Risk Diversification,” presented at the NBER Conference on Risk of Financial Institutions, October
2004. We would like to thank those conference participants, the editors Mark Carey and René Stulz, and our
discussant Richard Cantor for helpful and insightful comments. We would also like to thank Yue Chen and
Sam Hanson for their excellent research assistance. Any views expressed represent those of the authors only
and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. Any
views expressed represent those of the authors only and not necessarily those of Mercer Oliver Wyman. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Guillermo A. Calvo, Alejandro Izquierdo and Rudy Loo-Kung. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Global Business Cycles and Credit Risk
M. Hashem Pesaran, Til Schuermann and Björn-Jakob Treutler
NBER Working Paper No. 11493
July 2005
JEL No. C32, E17, G20
ABSTRACT
The potential for portfolio diversification is driven broadly by two characteristics: the degree to
which systematic risk factors are correlated with each other and the degree of dependence individual
firms have to the different types of risk factors. Using a global vector autoregressive macroeconomic
model accounting for about 80% of world output, we propose a model for exploring credit risk
diversification across industry sectors and across different countries or regions. We find that full
firm-level parameter heterogeneity along with credit rating information matters a great deal for
capturing differences in simulated credit loss distributions. These differences become more
pronounced in the presence of systematic risk factor shocks: increased parameter heterogeneity
reduces shock sensitivity. Allowing for regional parameter heterogeneity seems to better
approximate the loss distributions generated by the fully heterogenous model than allowing just for
industry heterogeneity. The regional model also exhibits less shock sensitivity.
M. Hashem Pesaran Björn-Jakob Treutler
University of Cambridge Mercer Oliver Wyman
Faculty of Economics 1 Neal Street
Sidgwick Avenue Covent Garden
Cambridge, CB3 9DD London, WC2H 9QL
UNITED KINGDOM UNITED KINGDOM
mhp1@econ.cam.ac.uk btreutler@mow.com
Til Schuermann
Banking Studies Function
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
til.schuermann@ny.frb.org

1 Introduction
In theory the potential for credit risk diversification for banks can be considerable. Insofar as dif-
ferent industries or sectors are more or less pro-cyclical, banks can alter their lending policy and
capital allocation across those sectors. Similarly, internationally active banks are able to apply
analogous changes across countries. In addition to such passive credit portfolio management, fi-
nancialengineering, usinginstrumentssuchascreditderivatives, enablesbanks(andotherfinancial
institutions) to engage in active credit portfolio management by buying and selling credit risk (or
credit protection) across sectors and countries. Credit exposure to the U.S. chemical industry, say,
can be traded for credit exposure to the Korean steel sector. One may, therefore, think of a global
market for credit exposures where credit risk can be exported and imported.
Within such a global context, default probabilities are driven primarily by how firms are tied
to fundamental risk factors, both domestic and foreign, and how those factors are linked across
countries. In order to implement such a global approach in the analysis of credit risk, we have
developed in Pesaran, Schuermann and Weiner (2004), hereafter PSW, a global vector autoregres-
sive macroeconometric model (GVAR) for a set of 25 countries accounting for about 80% of world
output. Importantly, the foreign variables in the GVAR are tailored to match the international
trade pattern of the country under consideration.
Pesaran, Schuermann, Treutler and Weiner (2005), hereafter PSTW, relate asset returns for
a portfolio of 119 firms to the global macroeconometric model, thus isolating macro effects from
idiosyncratic shocks as they relate to default (and hence loss). The GVAR effectively serves as the
macroeconomicenginecapturingtheeconomicenvironmentfacedbyaninternationallyactiveglobal
bank. Domestic and foreign macroeconomic variables are allowed to impact each firm differently.
In this way we are able to account for firm-specific heterogeneity in an explicitly interdependent
global context. Developing such a conditional modeling framework is particularly important for
the analysis of the effects of different types of shock scenarios on credit risk, an important feature
we exploit here.
In this paper we extend the analysis of PSTW along four dimensions. First, we provide some
analytical results on the limits of credit risk diversification. Second, we illustrate the impact of two
differentidentificationrestrictionsregardingthedefaultconditionontheresultinglossdistributions.
Third, we use this framework to understand the degree of diversification with five models which
differ in their degree of parameter heterogeneity, from fully homogeneous to allowing for industry
andregionalheterogeneitybuthomogeneousfactorsensitivities. Fourth,wehavemorethandoubled
the number of firms in the portfolio from 119 to 243 firms providing for more robust results and
allowing us to explore the importance of exposure granularity. We go on to explore the impact
of shocks to real equity prices, interest rates and real output on the resulting loss distribution as
implied by the different model specifications.
2

Such conditional analysis using shock scenarios from observable risk factors is not possible
in the most commonly used model in the credit risk literature, namely the Vasicek (1987, 1991,
2002) adaptation of the Merton (1974) default model. In addition to being driven by a single and
unobserved risk factor, this model also assumes that risk factor sensitivities, analogous to CAPM-
style betas, are the same across all firms in all regions and industries, yielding a fully homogeneous
model. This single factor model also underlies the risk-based capital standards in the New Basel
Accord (BCBS 2004), as shown in Gordy (2003).
We find that firm-level parameter heterogeneity and information about credit ratings matter a
great deal for capturing differences in the loss distributions. In line with theoretical and empirical
results in Hanson, Pesaran and Schuermann (2005, HPS), we show that neglected heterogeneity
leads to underestimation of expected losses, and once those are controlled for, to overestimation of
unexpected losses. Wrongly imposing homogeneity results in excessively skewed and fat-tailed loss
distributions. In the process of allowing for firm heterogeneity, credit rating information turns out
to be particularly important since default correlation and credit ratings are closely related even if
return correlations across firms are kept constant. These differences become more pronounced in
the presence of systematic risk factor shocks: increased parameter heterogeneity greatly reduces
shock sensitivity. For example, an adverse 2.33σ shock to U.S. equity prices increases loss volatility
by about 31% for the fully heterogeneous model, but by 73% for the homogeneous pooled model.
These differences become even more pronounced as shocks become more extreme: for an adverse
5σ shock to U.S. equity prices, loss volatility increases by about 85% for the heterogeneous model,
but by more than 240% for the restricted model.
We further find that symmetric shocks result in asymmetric and nonproportional loss out-
comes due to the nonlinearity of the default model. Loss increases arising from adverse shocks are
larger than corresponding loss decreases from benign (but equiprobable) shocks. Here too there
are important differences in the loss distributions depending on the degree of underlying model
heterogeneity. While all models exhibit this asymmetry for expected losses and loss volatility, only
the fully heterogeneous model exhibits this particular asymmetric response in the tail of the loss
distribution. For the restricted models the opposite is true: the reduction in tail risk arising from
the benign shock is larger than the corresponding increase due to the adverse shock. By imposing
homogeneity, not only are the relative loss responses exaggerated (most of the percentage increases
and all of the decreases are larger for the restricted than for the unrestricted model), but perceived
reduction of risk in the tail of the loss distribution tends to be overly optimistic. Failing to properly
account for parameter heterogeneity could therefore result in too much implied risk capital.
Both the baseline and shock-conditional loss distributions seem to change noticeably with the
addition of heterogeneous factor loadings. Allowing for regional heterogeneity appears to be more
importantthanallowingforindustryorsectorheterogeneity. However, thebiggestmarginalchange
arises when allowing for full heterogeneity.
3