NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECTS OF TAXES ON MARKET RESPONSES TO
DIVIDEND ANNOUNCEMENTS AND PAYMENTS:
WHAT CAN WE LEARN FROM THE
2003 DIVIDEND TAX CUT?
Raj Chetty
Joseph Rosenberg
Emmanuel Saez
Working Paper 11452
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11452
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005
Raj Chetty, chetty@econ.berkeley.edu, Joe Rosenberg, jwr@econ.berkeley.edu, Emmanuel Saez,
saez@econ.berkeley.edu, University of California, Department of Economics, 549 Evans Hall, #3880,
Berkeley, CA 94720. We thank Alan Auerbach, Douglas Bernheim, Gustavo Grullon, Francisco Perez-
Gonzalez, James Poterba, Douglas Skinner, and Joel Slemrod for helpful comments and discussions.
Financial support from NSF Grant SAES-0134946 and the Sloan Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Raj Chetty, Joseph Rosenberg, and Emmanuel Saez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Effects of Taxes on Market Responses to Dividend Announcements and Payments: What
Can We Learn from the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut?
Raj Chetty, Joseph Rosenberg, and Emmanuel Saez
NBER Working Paper No. 11452
June 2005
JEL No. G1, H3
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the effects of capital gains and dividend taxes on excess returns around
announcements of dividend increases and ex-dividend days for U.S. corporations. Consistent with
standard no-arbitrage conditions, we find that the ex-dividend day premium increased from 2002
to 2004 when the dividend tax rate was cut. Consistent with the signalling theory of dividends, we
also find that the excess return for dividend increase announcements went down from 2002 to 2004.
However, these findings are very sensitive to the years chosen for the pre-reform control period.
Semi-parametric graphical analysis using data since 1962 shows that the relationship between tax
rates and ex-day and announcement day premia is very fragile and sensitive to sample period
choices. Strong year-to-year fluctuations in the ex-day and announcement day premia greatly reduce
statistical power, making it impossible to credibly detect responses even around large tax reforms.
The important non-tax factors affecting these premia must therefore be understood before progress
can be made in evaluating the role of taxation in market responses.
Raj Chetty Joseph Rosenberg Emmanuel Saez
Department of Economics Department of Economics University of California
UC Berkeley UC Berkeley 549 Evans Hall #3880
521 Evans Hall #3880 521 Evans Hall #3880 Berkeley, CA 94720
Berkeley, CA 94720 Berkeley, CA 94720 and NBER
and NBER jwr@econ.berkeley.edu saez@econ.berkeley.edu
chetty@econ.berkeley.edu

1 Introduction
There is a long-standing debate in the finance and public economics literatures about the role
of taxation in corporate dividend payout policies. Starting with Elton and Gruber (1970),
researchers have investigated whether the tax-favored treatment of capital gains relative to
dividends affects excess returns on ex-dividend and announcement dates.1 The answers to
thesequestionscanpotentiallyshedlightontheefficiencyconsequencesofdividendtaxationas
wellasthereasonswhycorporationspaydividendsdespitetheirtaxdisadvantage,asexplained
in greater detail below.2 Despite substantial research, the empirical literature on this topic
remains controversial (see Allen and Michaely, 2003 for a recent survey).
This paper proposes to use the 2003 dividend tax cut in the United States to cast light on
these issues. The 2003 tax cut, part of the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of
2003, eliminated most of the tax disadvantage of dividends relative to capital gains. Blouin
et al. (2004) and Chetty and Saez (2005) have shown that the reform indeed raised dividend
payments significantly, and in particular induced many firms to initiate dividend payments.
Here, we aim to investigate whether this reform had a significant effect on the ex-day and
announcement day price behavior as well. Consistent with the no-arbitrage conditions in
standard models, we find that the ex-dividend day premium increased from 2002 to 2004
when the dividend tax rate was cut. Consistent with the signalling theory of dividends (and in
contradictionwiththeagencymodelsofdividends), wefindthattheexcessreturnfordividend
increase announcements went down from 2002 to 2004.
In order to have a broader perspective and assess with greater confidence whether there
was a sharp change after 2003, we construct a time series of ex-day price changes and excess
returns around dividend increase announcements at an annual level since 1962 (the first year
daily price data becomes available) for all companies in the Center for Research in Security
Prices (CRSP) data. To the best of our knowledge, despite the large number of studies on
these issues, such a time series had not been constructed and examined in prior work. A
number of useful findings emerge from this long-run analysis.
First, we find that there is substantial year to year volatility in the annual time series of
1The ex-day is the date at which the dividend leaves the share.
2Note, however, that ex-dividend day price behavior does not allow us to distinguish the old view from the
new view of dividend payout policies (see Auerbach, 1983).
1

excessreturnsaroundboththeex-dayandannouncementdaythatisunrelatedtotaxchanges.
The annual variation in the time series is not simply due to idiosyncratic firm level noise, since
thisvariationshouldbeaveragedoutgiventheverylargesamplesweareusing. Powerfulyear
effects (aggregate shocks) unrelated to taxes are responsible for this pattern. Unfortunately,
the time series pattern is non-monotonic and therefore is unlikely to be explained by a single
change (such as the elimination of discrete pricing in the U.S. stock market) or by a gradual
trend (such as the rise of the share of corporate stocks owned by pension funds). Moreover,
we are unable to find a set of covariates that had much explanatory power in smoothing the
aggregate fluctuations. A simple power analysis shows that even the effects of large tax
reforms would be difficult to detect given the aggregate volatility of the series. We conclude
that one should be careful when comparing individual years (e.g. around a reform) to detect
a tax effect. The 2003 tax change illustrates this point well. As mentioned above, the ex-day
premium pattern suggests a strong tax effect if one compares 2002 to 2004, but a placebo test
comparing 2002 to 2000 would produce a false positive.
Second, the long run time pattern of the ex-day price behavior does not follow the long
run reduction in the disadvantage of capital gains versus dividends. Overall, it is therefore
difficult to detect any robust pattern that one could attribute with confidence to a tax effect
along the lines that Elton and Gruber (1970) originally proposed. More work is needed to
test the various theories of ex-day price changes using the full time series evidence rather than
a focus on particular years, as has been the tradition in the literature.
Third,consistentwiththeempiricalresultsoftheinfluentialstudybyBernheimandWantz
(1995),wefindthattheoveralleffectofdividendincreaseannouncementsonpriceshasdeclined
over time while the tax disadvantage of dividends has fallen. This finding supports the
signallingtheoryofdividendpayments,whicharguesthatfirmspaydividendsdespitetheirtax
disadvantage in order to send a signal to the market about their profitability. However, again
because of the large year to year variation in the time series of price effects, it is impossible
to detect systematic effects around the major tax reforms in the United States since 1962,
including the 2003 dividend tax cut. Therefore, the conclusion supporting the signalling
theory rests on the strong assumption that no other long term trend has driven the price
effects down. It is, however, quite plausible that factors other than tax changes (such as the
increased availability of information about corporate activities) could have caused the secular
2