NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAUGHT ON TAPE: INSTITUTIONAL ORDER FLOW
AND STOCK RETURNS
John Y. Campbell
Tarun Ramadorai
Tuomo O. Vuolteenaho
Working Paper 11439
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11439
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005
We thank Peter Hawthorne, Jakub Jurek, Sung Seo, and especially Allie Schwartz for excellent research
assistance; Boris Kovtunenko and Nathan Sosner for their assistance with the Spectrum dataset; Pablo Casas-
Arce, Soren Hvidkjaer, Pete Kyle, David Myatt, Narayan Naik, Venkatesh Panchapagesan, Kevin Sheppard,
Joshua White, Pradeep Yadav, and seminar participants at conferences for useful discussions. This material
is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 0214061 to Campbell,
and by Morgan Stanley and Co. under its Microstructure Research Program. John Campbell: Harvard
University and NBER, email john_campbell@harvard.edu; Tarun Ramadorai: University of Oxford and
CEPR, email tarun.ramadorai@sbs.ox.ac.uk; Tuomo Vuolteenaho: Arrowstreet Capital, LP, email
tvuolteenaho@arrowstreetcapital.com. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by John Y. Campbell, Tarun Ramadorai, and Tuomo O. Vuolteenaho. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Caught On Tape: Institutional Order Flow and Stock Returns
John Y. Campbell, Tarun Ramadorai, Tuomo O. Vuolteenaho
NBER Working Paper No. 11439
June 2005
JEL No. G1
ABSTRACT
Many questions about institutional trading can only be answered if one can track high-frequency
changes in institutional ownership. In the US, however, institutions are only required to report their
ownership quarterly in 13-F filings. We infer daily institutional trading behavior from the "tape", the
Transactions and Quotes database of the New York Stock Exchange, using both a naive approach
and a sophisticated method that best matches quarterly 13-F data. Increases in our measures of
institutional flows negatively predict returns, particularly when institutions are selling. We interpret
this as evidence that 13-F institutions compensate more patient investors for the service of providing
liquidity. We also find that both very large and very small trades signal institutional activity, while
medium size trades signal activity by the rest of the market.
John Y. Campbell
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 213
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
john_campbell@harvard.edu
Tarun Ramadorai
Saïd Business School
University of Oxford
Park End Street
Oxford OX1 1HP
United Kingdom
tarun.ramadorai@sbs.ox.ac.uk
Tuomo O. Vuolteenaho
Arrowstreet Capital, LP
44 Brattle St., 5th floor
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
tvuolteenaho@arrowstreetcapital.com

1. Introduction
Thispapercombineshigh-frequencyinformationonequitytransactionsofdifferentsizeswith
quarterly information on institutional equity holdings to infer daily movements in institu-
tional equity ownership. Using these inferred daily changes in institutional ownership, or
institutional ßows, we provide new evidence on the short-term covariances between institu-
tional ßows and stock returns for a broad cross-section of stocks over the period 1995-2000.
Institutional equity holdings have interested Þnance economists ever since the efficient
markets hypothesis was Þrst formulated. One straightforward way to test the hypothesis is
to inspect the portfolio returns of investors that are presumed to be sophisticated, such as
mutual fund managers, to see if they earn more than a “fair” compensation for risk. Jensen
(1968)pioneeredthisliterature,Þndinglittleevidencetosupportthepropositionthatmutual
fund managers earn abnormal returns. Many subsequent studies have examined the returns
of mutual funds (e.g. Hendricks, Patel, and Zeckhauser (1993) and Carhart (1997)) or the
returns on the portfolios that they report quarterly (e.g. Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and
Wermers (1997), Wermers (2000)).
In recent years the literature on institutional holdings has moved in several new direc-
tions. First, other institutions besides mutual funds have been included in the investigation.
Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1992) examined the behavior of pension funds, Nofsinger
and Sias (1999) looked at institutional equity owners as deÞned by Standard and Poors, and
many recent papers have looked at all institutions that are required to make quarterly 13-F
Þlings to the Securities and Exchange Commission. Second, the literature has examined the
characteristics of stocks that institutional investors hold and not just their subsequent re-
turns. Gompers and Metrick (2001) and Bennett, Sias, and Starks (2003), for example, run
cross-sectionalregressionsofinstitutionalownershipontocharacteristicsofindividualstocks,
documentinginstitutionalpreferencesforlarge,liquidstocksandchangesinthosepreferences
over time. Third, there has been increased interest in the changes in institutional positions,
their ßows rather than their holdings. Quarterly institutional ßows appear to be correlated
withlaggedquarterlystockreturns (Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1995), Badrinath and
2

Wahal (2002), Cai and Zheng (2004)), contemporaneous quarterly stock returns (Bennett,
Sias, and Starks (2003)), and future quarterly stock returns (Wermers (1999) and Chen,
Jegadeesh, and Wermers (2000) for mutual funds, and Bennett, Sias, and Starks (2003) for
a broader set of institutions). Nofsinger and Sias (1999) Þnd similar results at the annual
frequency.
The literature on institutional ßows is severely handicapped by the low frequency of the
available data. While some countries, such as Finland (Grinblatt and Keloharju (2000a,b))
and Korea (Choe, Kho, and Stulz (1999)), do record institutional ownership almost contin-
uously, in the United States institutional positions are reported only quarterly. This makes
it hard to say whether institutions are reacting to stock price movements or causing price
movements, as there is no resolution on the intra-quarter covariances of institutional ßows
and returns.
There has been some recent progress on measuring these intra-quarter covariances. Sias,
Starks, and Titman (2001) point out that monthly return data can be combined with quar-
terly ownership data to make at least some inferences about monthly lead-lag relations
between ßows and returns. Boyer and Zheng (2004) apply this methodology to equity own-
ership data fromthe Flowof Funds accounts. The Sias-Starks-Titman approach ingeniously
extracts additional information from quarterly data, but can only put bounds on monthly
leads and lags, and has very little to say about lead-lag relations at higher frequencies than
monthly.
A number of other papers have used proprietary datasets to measure high-frequency
institutionalbehavior. Froot, O’ConnellandSeasholes(2001), FrootandRamadorai(2001),
and Froot and Teo (2004) employ custodial data from State Street corporation, and Þnd
evidence of bidirectional positive Granger causality between weekly institutional ßows and
returns on equity portfolios in a variety of countries. Lee and Radhakrishna (2000) study
the TORQ data set, a sample of trades with complete identiÞcation of market participants.
Jones and Lipson (2003) and Kaniel, Saar and Titman (2004) employ Audit Trail data from
the NYSE. The latter paper focuses on the behaviour of individual investors’ trades, and
3