NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RELATIVE PRICE VOLATILITY UNDER SUDDEN STOPS:
THE RELEVANCE OF BALANCE SHEET EFFECTS
Guillermo A. Calvo
Alejandro Izquierdo
Rudy Loo-Kung
Working Paper 11492
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11492
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005
We would like to thank Michael Devereaux and anonymous referees for very useful comments and
suggestions, and Omar Zambrano for research assistance. The usual caveats apply. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2005 by Guillermo A. Calvo, Alejandro Izquierdo and Rudy Loo-Kung. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Relative Price Volatility Under Sudden Stops: The Relevance of Balance Sheet Effects
Guillermo A. Calvo, Alejandro Izquierdo and Rudy Loo-Kung
NBER Working Paper No. 11492
July 2005
JEL No. F31, F32, F34, F41
ABSTRACT
Sudden Stops are associated with increased volatility in relative prices. We introduce a model based
on information acquisition to rationalize this increased volatility. An empirical analysis of the
conditional variance of the wholesale price to consumer price ratio using panel ARCH techniques
confirms the relevance of Sudden Stops and potential balance-sheet effects as key determinants of
relative-price volatility, where balance-sheet effects are captured by the interaction of a proxy for
potential changes in the real exchange rate (linked to the degree of external leverage of the
absorption of tradable goods) and a measure of domestic liability dollarization.
Guillermo A. Calvo
Inter-American Development Bank
1300 New York Ave.
Washington, DC 20577
and NBER
gcalvo@iadb.org
Alejandro Izquierdo
Inter-American Development Bank
1300 New York Ave.
Washington, DC 20577
alejandroi@iadb.org
Rudy Loo-Kung
Inter-American Development Bank
1300 New York Ave.
Washington, DC 20577
rudyk@contractual.iadb.org

I. Introduction
The succession of financial crises in Emerging Market economies (EMs) that
materialized throughout the second half of the 1990s,1 affecting a wide range of countries
in terms of standard fundamentals in a relatively short time span, suggests that systemic
financial market forces, coupled with specific country vulnerabilities to capital account
shocks, lie at the heart of these developments.
The vast literature on contagion in capital markets that emerged following these
events acknowledges the existence of systemic effects (or “excess” volatility in spreads
and asset prices), and it attempts to identify underlying characteristics that work as
coordination factors. For example, contagion between two countries could be due to the
fact that they belong to a particular asset class (Rigobón (2001)), borrow from the same
banks (van Rijckeghen and Weder (2000)), or share a set of overexposed mutual funds
(Broner and Gelos (2003)). Inspired by the Russian crisis of 1998, Calvo (1999) provides
a model for contagion based on liquidity shocks to international investors, triggered by
developments in a particular country that spread to other countries as international
investors sell other assets in their portfolio to restore liquidity.
As a result of contagion, EMs have been subject to large and unexpected falls in
capital inflows, or Sudden Stops. Although the origins of Sudden Stops (or “incipient”
Sudden Stops) typically reflect systemic shocks to capital markets, the probability that a
particular country will experience a full-fledged Sudden Stop with large capital flow
reversals could still depend on domestic factors representing vulnerabilities to this
external shock. That is, the probability of experiencing a full-fledged Sudden Stop,
1 Starting with the Mexican crisis of 1994-95 and the subsequent crises in East Asia (1997),
Russia (1998), and Latin America (1999-2001).
2

conditional on the materialization of an “incipient” Sudden Stop could be a function of
domestic factors.
As established in Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejía (2004), potential balance-sheet
effects are key domestic drivers of the probability of experiencing a Sudden Stop. This is
mainly due to the fact that Sudden Stops may entail a dramatic change in the level of the
real exchange rate (RER). Abstracting from supply-side effects, this is simply the
corollary of a cut in current account financing that forces a fall in aggregate demand,
which, in turn, induces a drop in the price of non-tradable goods relative to that of
tradable goods,2 so that the RER (defined as the inverse of this relative price) will rise.
This change-in-level effect in the RER becomes larger the less open a country is (i.e., the
smaller the supply of tradable goods,3 and given supply elasticities), as less tradable
resources will be available to cushion the impact of the cut in foreign financing (see
Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi (2003) for details). EMs may find RER fluctuations quite
challenging to deal with when their financial systems are dollarized, especially if
domestic banks lend to non-tradable sectors in foreign currency.4 Thus, this phenomenon
that we will refer to as Domestic Liability Dollarization (DLD) is particularly treacherous
because Sudden Stops and subsequent RER swings could trigger major uncertainty about
the solvency of the banking system as loans become non-performing, sometimes leading
to bank runs, which almost inevitably affect the payments system and cause disruption in
transactions and output. Thus, the combination of large potential RER fluctuations and
2 Taking the foreign exchange price of tradable goods as given (the standard assumption for a
small open economy), all the effect goes through the foreign exchange price of non-tradables.
3 Relative to the absorption of tradable goods.
4 See Schmukler and de la Torre (2004) for a discussion on why banks may have a preference for
default risk over exchange rate risk.
3