NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE RISKS OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
Mark Carey
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 11442
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11442
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005
Respectively, Federal Reserve Board, and the Ohio State University and NBER. This paper is the
introduction to the NBER book of the same title to be published by the University of Chicago Press. This
introduction, and the book, represents the authors’ opinions, not necessarily those of the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System or the NBER. We thank Frank Diebold, Jan Krahnen, and especially Jim
O’Brien for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Mark Carey and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Risks of Financial Institutions
Mark Carey and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 11442
June 2005
JEL No.G2, G21, G22, G28, G10, D81
ABSTRACT
Over the last twenty years, the consensus view of systemic risk in the financial system that emerged
in response to the banking crises of the 1930s and before has lost much of its relevance. This view
held that the main systemic problem is runs on solvent banks leading to bank panics. But financial
crises of the last two decades have not fit the mold. A new consensus has yet to emerge, but financial
institutions and regulators have considerably broadened their assessment of the risks facing financial
institutions. The dramatic rise of modern risk management has changed how the risks of financial
institutions are measured and how these institutions are managed. However, modern risk
management is not without weaknesses that will have to be addressed.
Mark Carey
Federal Reserve Board
International Banking and Finance Section
Division of International Finance
20th Street and Constitution Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20551
mark.carey@frb.gov
René M. Stulz
Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu

About twenty years ago, the intellectual and practical dynamics of understanding and
managing risks of financial system distress began to change. The consensus view, which was that
runs on solvent banks were at the heart of banking panics and that panics were the main problem,
ironically began to unravel around the time Diamond and Dybvig (1983) published their theory of
runs. The consensus was challenged by a series of events, including the emerging-market debt
crisis of the early 1980s, the 1987 and 1989 stock market crashes, waves of failures of U.S. S&Ls
and banks in the late 1980s and early 1990s, the junk bond and U.S. municipal bond meltdowns
of the early 1990s, the LTCM crisis, and a new wave of emerging-market crises. Bank runs
played a negligible role in most of these events. While new financial instruments (such as
derivatives), new participants (e.g., hedge funds), and new technologies (like electronic trading),
typically have improved the informational efficiency of markets and have facilitated the matching
of savings with investment opportunities, they also changed the speed with which new
information is incorporated into prices, often giving little time to institutions to adjust to new
information before they see their financial soundness imperiled by new balance sheet weaknesses.
The traditional public policy prescription also became less satisfactory. The prescription
was that financial system distress can be prevented or managed by a combination of banking
supervision and regulation (to preserve bank solvency and to permit central banks to identify
solvent banks in a panic), lender-of-last-resort advances (to solvent banks experiencing liquidity
problems during a panic), and deposit insurance. But none of the new crises fit the old mold.1
Some of the new events featured sharp movements in asset prices and sharp contractions in
market liquidity. Others featured massive credit losses due to concentrations of poorly
underwritten loans or failure to appreciate credit risk concentrations. Moreover, numerous
emerging-market countries experienced banking crises, but deposit insurance does not seem to
1 Of course, runs on solvent banks might have occurred had authorities been less vigilant or credible, and
insolvency rates might have been worse without bank supervision and regulation. Our argument is that the
traditional intellectual foundations do not seem to predict many of the problems that have occurred and the
policies these foundations imply may no longer be appropriate.
3

have reduced the probability of banking crises and perhaps even contributed to them (see
Demirgüç-Kunt and Detragiache (2001)).2 Facing events at variance with the prevailing
intellectual framework, policymakers were forced to feel their way toward crisis solutions and
toward new preventive measures.
Developments in capital markets, especially the growth in derivatives markets, increased
the tools available to firms to take on and manage risks.3 These developments also made
traditional accounting numbers that regulators used to assess financial institutions and that
executives used to manage such institutions much less relevant to measurement of exposures to
various risks. Through trading of derivatives, for instance, a bank can take large risks that are
nearly invisible when investors look at its balance sheet. For instance, banks would traditionally
take interest rate exposures by taking deposits or making loans and buying bonds. However, with
derivatives, a bank can use a swap to take the same interest rate risk as if it bought a bond, but the
acquisition of the swap, in contrast to the acquisition of the bond, is not recorded on the balance
sheet at inception because the value of a swap at inception is zero. After inception of the swap,
mark-to-market accounting requires the bank to record the market value of the swap, but that
market value provides little information about the bank’s interest rate exposure. Moreover, bank
managers discovered that they could boost traditional accounting performance measures through
trading, which requires little funding capital. A traditional measure of performance such as return
on equity would improve through trading revenue or revenue from fees because such activities
typically required little incremental equity.4 However, such activities can increase the risks taken
by the institution sharply, and broker-dealers and investment banks traditionally backed such
activities with substantial capital. These developments forced both bank regulators and market
2 Banks experiencing runs in Demirgüç-Kunt and Detragiache’s (2001) sample of crises were often
insolvent at the time of the runs and thus such crises, while very important, did not fit the Diamond and
Dybvig paradigm of runs on solvent banks.
3 See Stulz (2004) for a review of the growth of derivatives markets.
4 See Merton and Perold (1993) for an early discussion of this issue and an analysis of the role of risk
capital in financial firms.
4