NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAN RANKING HOSPITALS ON THE BASIS OF
PATIENTS’ TRAVEL DISTANCES
IMPROVE QUALITY OF CARE?
Daniel P. Kessler
Working Paper 11419
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11419
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005
I would like to thank David Becker for exceptional research assistance, Mark Satterthwaite for several very
helpful conversations, and Daniel Hosken, Paul Pautler, and two anonymous referees for helpful comments.
Funding from the U.S. National Institutes on Aging and the Federal Trade Commission is greatly appreciated.
The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily represent those of any agency of the U.S. Government
or of the author’s institutions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Daniel P. Kessler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Can Ranking Hospitals on the Basis of Patients’ Travel Distances Improve Quality of Care?
Daniel P. Kessler
NBER Working Paper No. 11419
June 2005
JEL No. I1
ABSTRACT
Conventional outcomes report cards n public disclosure of information about the patient-
background-adjusted health outcomes of individual hospitals and physicians -- may help improve
quality, but they may also encourage providers to ““game”” the system by avoiding sick and/or
seeking healthy patients. In this paper, I propose an alternative approach: ranking hospitals on the
basis of the travel distances of their Medicare patients. At least in theory, a distance report card
could dominate conventional outcomes report cards: a distance report card might measure quality
of care at least as well but suffer less from selection problems. I use data on elderly Medicare
beneficiaries with heart attack and stroke from 1994 and 1999 to show that a distance report card
would be both valid n that is, correlated with true quality n and able to distinguish confidently
among hospitals n that is, able to reject at conventional significance levels the hypothesis that the
true quality of a low-ranked hospital was the same as the quality of the average hospital. The
hypothetical distance report card I propose compares favorably to (although does not necessarily
dominate) the California AMI outcomes report card.
Daniel P. Kessler
Graduate School of Business
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
fkessler@stanford.edu

Introduction
In the past few years, policy makers and researchers have given considerable
attention to outcomes report cards in health care – public disclosure of information about
the patient-background-adjusted health outcomes of individual hospitals and physicians.
The health policy community disagrees on the merits of report cards. Supporters of
report cards argue that they enable patients to identify the best physicians and hospitals,
while simultaneously giving providers powerful incentives to improve quality. Skeptics
argue that report cards may encourage providers to “game” the system by avoiding sick
and/or seeking healthy patients in the following way. One medically appropriate factor in
a provider’s decision how to treat a patient is that patient’s health status at the time of the
onset of illness. At least for report cards on surgical treatments (such as cardiac bypass
surgery, or CABG) or nonemergent conditions, this gives providers the opportunity to
decline to treat more difficult or complicated patients for valid medical reasons. Even
though outcomes report cards generally adjust reported health outcomes for differences in
patients’ characteristics (for otherwise providers who treat the most serious cases would
necessarily appear to have low quality), developers of report cards can only adjust for
characteristics that they can observe. Because of the complexity of patient care,
providers are likely to have better information on patients’ conditions than even the most
clinically detailed database. Providers therefore may be able to improve their outcomes
report card by selecting patients on the basis of characteristics that are unobservable to
the analysts but predictive of good outcomes. Furthermore, report cards may encourage
gaming even if providers do not have superior information on patients’ conditions (for
example, if providers are risk-averse; see Dranove et al. 2003 for an explanation).
3

Previous empirical research suggests that the debate over outcomes report cards is
of more than academic importance. On one hand, Hannan et al. (1994) report that the
CABG report card adopted by New York in 1989 played a significant role in the
observed decline in that state’s in-hospital CABG mortality rate. On the other hand,
Dranove et al. (2003) show that the CABG report cards adopted by New York and
Pennsylvania in the early 1990s led to higher levels of resource use and to worse health
outcomes, particularly for sicker patients. In particular, they find that patients from New
York and Pennsylvania admitted to the hospital with a heart attack (AMI) experienced
greater growth in rates of hospital expenditures, greater growth in rates of readmission to
the hospital with heart failure and recurrent AMI, and (in some specifications) greater
growth in mortality, as compared to demographically-similar patients from other states
that did not adopt report cards.
Despite the importance of this debate in health care and related contexts like
education, little work has sought to investigate whether report cards could be more
constructive if designed in a way that reduced the incentives for and the social costs of
provider selection behavior. Some report cards have already altered their design to
eliminate the feature that is most likely responsible for the provider selection in the New
York and Pennsylvania programs – the requirement to report on all patients receiving an
elective operative procedure. California, for example, now publishes AMI outcome
reports, which because of the emergent nature of a significant fraction of AMIs, are likely
to be more difficult to game than their procedure-based counterparts (California OSHPD
2002). Yet, because a significant fraction of AMIs are nonemergent (Ho et al. 1989),
4