NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE SENSITIVITY OF HOMEOWNER
LEVERAGE TO THE DEDUCTIBILITY
OF HOME MORTGAGE INTEREST
Patric H. Hendershott
Gwilym Pryce
Working Paper 11489
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11489
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005
We thank Todd Sinai for his extensive comments on an earlier version of this paper. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2005 by Patric H. Hendershott and Gwilym Pryce. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

The Sensitivity of Homeowner Leverage to the Deductibility of Home Mortgage Interest
Patric H. Hendershott and Gwilym Pryce
NBER Working Paper No. 11489
July 2005
JEL No. H2, H3
ABSTRACT
Mortgage interest tax deductibility is needed to treat debt and equity financing of homes equally.
Countries that limit deductibility create a debt tax penalty that presumably leads households to shift
from debt toward equity financing. The greater the shift, the less is the tax revenue raised by the
limitation and smaller is its negative impact on housing demand. Measuring the financing response
to a legislative change is complicated by the fact that lenders restrict mortgage debt to the value of
the house (or slightly less) being financed. Taking this restriction into account reduces the estimated
financing response by 20 percent (a 32 percent decline in debt vs a 40 percent decline). The
estimation is based on 86,000 newly originated UK loans from the late 1990s.
Patric H. Hendershott
University of Aberdeen, Business School
Kings College
Aberdeen, AB24 3QY
UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER
phh3939@arvig.net
Gwilym Pryce
Department of Urban Studies
University of Glasgow
Glasgow G12 8RS
UNITED KINGDOM
g.pryce@socsci.gla.ac.uk

2
The Sensitivity of Household Leverage to the Deductibility of Home
Mortgage Interest
In many economies debt financing of housing is penalized relative to equity financing, i.e., interest
payments are not fully tax deductible. In the Commonwealth countries – Australia, Canada, New Zealand,
and the UK (since 1999) – interest is not deductible; in most European countries (the UK in the quarter
century prior to 1999) interest is only partially deductible, being limited by a ceiling on the deductible
amount, application of a lower tax rate to the deduction, or both. As a result, the Modigliani-Miller (1958)
debt neutrality theorem does not hold; the user cost of capital for owner-occupied housing (through the
weighted average cost of capital) is not independent of LTV choice.1 Knowing how LTVs respond to
deductibility limits is thus crucial to understanding how housing choices will be affected by changes in
such limits.
There are two fundamental problems in explaining LTV behavior. First, the tax penalty on debt
usage depends on intricate tax law provisions and the level of debt usage itself. For example, in the UK
during the decade 1983-92, there was a penalty only for loan amounts above £30,000, and between 1993
and 1999 for some households there was also a penalty for loans below £30,000. In the U.S., a penalty
exists for some low-income households, households with low mortgage debt living in states with low house
prices and low taxation, and quite high-income households. Thus estimating the penalty for individual
households is complicated. Second, it is almost a universal law that LTVs on newly-originated loans are
bounded between (are truncated/censored at) zero and one (debt is bounded between zero and house value).
Moreover, initial LTVs of first-time home buyers are highly skewed toward the highest lender-permitted
LTV (Hendershott, Pryce and White, 2003), while as many as half of older homeowners have zero LTVs
(Ling and McGill, 1998). The upper bound of unity or the lender-permitted maximum constitutes credit
rationing. Because the economic response to a debt penalty is to reduce debt, the more a borrower is
rationed, the less his response to a given penalty will be. The combined effect of LTVs suffering from both
truncation and a highly skewed distribution creates substantial modeling problems.
1 See Hendershott and Slemrod (1983) and Woodward and Weicher (1989).
2

3
This paper addresses these complications and modeling problems. We incorporate the simultaneity
of the decision to borrow more or less than the £30,000 threshold by using a “two stage least squares” type
approach, running a probit regression to estimate the probability of being above the ceiling and then using
the predicted probabilities of paying penalties above and below the ceiling in an instrumental variables
approach to estimate the effect of the tax penalty on LTV. The fundamental truncation/censoring of
observed LTVs is addressed by employing truncated regression (Maddala, 1992, 342-44) and censored
regression (Amemiya 1973) to model the unrationed response to a tax penalty. These results are then
contrasted with responses estimated in credit rationing regime where the LTV is bounded by zero and one.
We arrive at the constrained rersponses by utilizing Papke and Wooldridge’s (1996) “Fractional Response”
estimation.
We employ the UK data set of Hendershott, Pryce and White (2003). These data are especially
useful because they are a random sample of all house purchasers who made a deliberate leverage decision.
Thus we do not need to be concerned with lagged responses of existing mortgagees to changes in the debt
penalty and other variables. We illustrate how different estimation methodologies affect estimates of the
sensitivity of LTV choice to a debt tax penalty. We then simulate mortgage demand with full deductibility
and with zero deductibility and compute the impact of shifting from full to zero deductibility.
The paper is divided into seven sections. We begin with a discussion of the debt tax penalty and
some earlier LTV research. Section 2 contains our econometric model. Section 3 discusses estimation
alternatives to ordinary least squares. Section 4 presents the data, and section 5 reports the results. Section
6 uses simulation analysis to compute the percentage decrease in debt usage in response to removal of
mortgage interest deductibility, and section 7 concludes.
3