NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DETERMINANTS OF VERTICAL INTEGRATION:
FINANCE, CONTRACTS, AND REGULATION
Daron Acemoglu
Simon Johnson
Todd Mitton
Working Paper 11424
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11424
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005
Corresponding author: Simon Johnson, Research Department, 10-700, IMF, 700 19th Street, N.W.,
Washington, DC 20431; (202)623-8720 phone, (202)589-8720 fax, sjohnson@imf.org. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2005 by Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, and Todd Mitton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Determinants of Vertical Integration: Finance, Contracts, and Regulation
Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, and Todd Mitton
NBER Working Paper No. 11424
June 2005
JEL No. G30, G34, L22, L23
ABSTRACT
We study the determinants of vertical integration in a new dataset of over 750,000 firms from 93
countries. Existing evidence suggests the presence of large cross-country differences in the
organization of firms, which may be related to differences in financial development, contracting
costs or regulation. We find cross-country correlations between vertical integration on the one hand
and financial development, contracting costs, and entry barriers on the other that are consistent with
these "priors". Nevertheless, we also show that these correlations are almost entirely driven by
industrial composition; countries with more limited financial development, higher contracting costs
or greater entry barriers are concentrated in industries with a high propensity for vertical integration.
Once we control for differences in industrial composition, none of these factors are correlated with
average vertical integration. However, we also find a relatively robust differential effect of financial
development across industries; countries with less-developed financial markets are significantly
more integrated in industries that are more human capital or technology intensive.
Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-380B
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
daron@mit.edu
Simon Johnson
Sloan School of Management
MIT, E52
50Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
sjohnson@mit.edu
Todd Mitton
BYU
todd.mitton@byu.edu

1 Introduction
Casual empiricism suggests the presence of signi…cant di¤erences in the organization of pro-
ductionacrosscountries. Forexample,…rmsareoftenthoughttobelargerandmorevertically
integratedinlessdevelopedcountries. KhannaandPalepu(1997,2000)provideevidencecon-
sistent with this view and suggest that this is because market and contractual relationships
are more costly in less-developed countries. Nevertheless, there has not been a systematic
analysis of cross-country di¤erences in vertical integration and their causes. Our primary
aim in this paper is to make a …rst attempt at such a systematic analysis and to investigate
the relationship between various institutional characteristics and vertical integration across
countries.
Three well-established theories o¤er predictions on how di¤erences in (speci…c) institu-
tional characteristics of countries should a¤ect vertical integration. First, according to the
highly in‡uential Transaction Cost Economics (TCE) theory pioneered by Williamson (1975,
1985), the internal organization of a …rm is designed to improve incentives and limit agency
costs. Vertical integration is perhaps the best known application of this theory. Vertical
integration encourages speci…c investments and reduces holdup problems when markets are
imperfect.1 According to TCE, vertical integration should therefore be more prevalent when
it is harder to write long-term contracts between upstream and downstream …rms.
A second body of work emphasizes the importance of contracts and other relationships
between …rms and …nancial intermediaries. In this view, credit market imperfections a¤ect
the organization of the …rm. Monitoring and contract enforcement are costly, so entrepre-
neurs need collateral in order to obtain …nancing (Banerjee and Newman, 1993, Legros and
Newman, 1996), and they may need to rely on bank …nancing (Diamond and Rajan, 2005,
Diamond, 2004). When credit markets have greater imperfections and when a lack of …nan-
cial development limits the pool of potential entrepreneurs, there should be less entry and,
most likely, larger …rms in a country (Rajan and Zingales, 1998, Kumar, Rajan and Zingales,
1999). Larger …rms are more likely to produce some of their own inputs or market some of
their own outputs, so the …nancial view suggests that better …nancial institutions and credit
markets may be associated with less vertical integration.
Third, recent work by Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2002) and the
1SeethesurveysbyHolmstromandTirole(1989),Joskow(2005),andWhinston(2001). Seealsotherelated
but di¤erent approach to vertical integration in the property rights theory developed by Grossman and Hart
(1986) and Hart and Moore (1990), which points out both the bene…ts and the costs of vertical integration
on incentives to undertake relationship-speci…c investments. Otherimportanttheoreticalcontributions in the
areaofverticalintegrationincludeKlein,CrawfordandAlchian(1978),BoltonandWhinston(1992),Aghion
and Tirole (1997), Baker, Gibbons, and Murphy (2002), and Legros and Newman (2003).
1

WorldBank(2005)stressestheimportanceofregulatorybarrierstoentry. Easeofentryisalso
found to be related to …rm size across countries (Klapper, Laeven, and Rajan, 2004). If there
is less entry, presumably this makes vertically integrated …rms more likely. Consequently, the
regulation view suggests a relationship between entry regulations and vertical integration.
Toinvestigatethecross-countrydeterminantsofverticalintegrationandtheroleofspeci…c
institutionalfeaturesemphasizedbythesethreetheories,weuseanewdatasetofover750,000
…rms from 93 countries. Our methodology follows the …nance literature in taking the United
States as a benchmark (Rajan and Zingales, 1998), and we combine our …rm-level data
with the U.S. input-output tables (which is assumed to accurately describe the technological
possibilities in other parts of the world). While there are some limitations to our data, it
nonetheless provides a new opportunity to understand how the organization of production
di¤ers across countries. We have three sets of results.
First, we …nd cross-country correlations between measures of speci…c institutions empha-
sized by the theories and vertical integration. In particular, there is more vertical integration
in countries with greater contracting costs between …rms, as measured by indices of contract
enforcement costs. Vertical integration is also higher in countries with less credit or greater
credit market imperfections, as indicated by a lower level of credit market development (al-
though this result is stronger in …rm-level data than in country-level data). Finally, vertical
integration is also higher in countries with greater barriers to entry, as measured by indices
of the regulation of entry.
Second, however, we …nd that these cross-country di¤erences in vertical integration are
almost entirely accounted for by di¤erences in industrial composition across countries. Once
we control for di¤erences in industrial composition, contracting costs, credit market develop-
ment,andentryregulationhavelittleexplanatorypowerfordi¤erencesinverticalintegration.
Thus, it is not the case that countries with greater contracting costs, credit market imper-
fections, or entry regulations tend to be more vertically integrated in a given sector. Rather,
such countries tend to be concentrated in sectors that are naturally vertically integrated
wherever they are in the world. We document that this lack of a relationship between these
speci…c institutional features and vertical integration is highly robust.
To further explore this phenomenon, we create an index of the "vertical integration
propensity" of each country based on its industrial composition and the natural tendency
of each industry to vertically integrate (proxied by the vertical integration of that industry
in the United States). Contracting costs, …nancial development, and entry regulation are all
signi…cantly correlated with a country’s vertical integration propensity, and this di¤erence in
industrial composition explains the correlation between these measures and vertical integra-
tion in regressions that do not control for industrial composition. However, because countries
with higher contracting costs, weaker …nancial development, and greater entry regulation are
2