NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
NOTES FOR A CONTINGENT CLAIMS
THEORY OF LIMIT ORDER MARKETS
Bruce N. Lehmann
Working Paper 11533
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11533
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2005
This research is part of the NBER’s program on Asset Pricing and was supported in part by a Morgan Stanley
Equity Microstructure Research Grant for which I am quite grateful. The views expressed herin are solely
my own and not those of any other person or entity including Morgan Stanley and the National Bureau of
Economic Research. It has also benefitted from the comments of participants at the conferences in Honor
of David K. Whitcomb at Rutgers University (where participants found a dreadful blunder), on the
Econometrics of the Microstructure of Financial Markets at Tilburg University, on the Analysis of High-
Frequency Financial Data and Market Microstructure at Academia Sinica, and on the Workshop on
Microstructure of Financial Markets at the Bolsa Madrid. All errors that remain are my own responsibility.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Bruce N. Lehmann. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Notes for a Contingent Claims Theory of Limit Order Markets
Bruce N. Lehmann
NBER Working Paper No. 11533
July 2005
JEL No. G10, G13, G19
ABSTRACT
This paper provides a road map for building a contingent claims theory of limit order markets
grounded in a simple observation: limit orders are equivalent to a portfolio of cash-or-nothing and
asset-or-nothing digital options on market order flow. However, limit orders are not conventional
derivative securities: order flow is an endogenous, non-price state variable; the underlying asset
value is a construct, the value of the security in different order flow states; and arbitrage trading or
hedging of limit orders is not feasible. Fortunately, none of these problems is fatal since options on
order flow can be conceptualized as bets implicit in limit orders, arbitrage trading can be replaced
by limit order substitution, and plausible assumptions can be made about the endogeneity of order
flow states and their associated asset values. The analysis yields two main results: Arrow-Debreu
prices for order flow ‘‘states’’ are proportional to the slope of the limit order book and the limit order
book at one time proves to be identical to that at an earlier time adjusted for the net order flow since
that time when all information arrives via trades.
Bruce Lehmann
University of California, San Diego
IR/PS
1415 Robinson Building Complex
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
and NBER
blehmann@ucsd.edu

1. Introduction
A dozen or so years ago, I visited David Whitcomb in his New York apartment to view
his limit order trading system. He invited me to do so under the misapprehension that I might be
able to help him find a buyer, a notion of which he was rapidly disabused.1 I came away
remembering one detail of the system: limit orders were always canceled if they were not
executed within two minutes because the specialist’s commission – a number on the order of a
mil at the time as I recall – was only paid on orders that resided on the book more than two
minutes. The idea that stuck with me is that one could learn a great deal about optimal trading
strategies by paying close attention to the minutiae of the microstructure of a market. Anyone
who feels the need to verify the claim that I see value in paying attention to such minutiae should
examine the description of the Tokyo Stock Exchange in Lehmann and Modest (1995).
The research reported here marries this observation with a simple idea: the apparatus of
state pricing can be applied profitably in microstructure. Just as Hicks (1939) noted that
conventional microeconomic theory could be applied to economic dynamics by treating the same
goods on different dates as different commodities and Arrow (1964) and Debreu (1959) showed
that dynamics under uncertainty could be analyzed similarly by treating the same good on
different dates in different states of nature as different commodities, it has long seemed to me
that one could exploit this strategy in microstructure by defining states in terms of trade prices,
quotes, and quantities. Limit order markets are a natural environment within which to apply this
idea precisely because the mechanical nature of the order execution process makes for a clear
definition of order flow states.
The idea of using contingent claims analysis in a microstructure setting is hardly new:
since at least Copeland and Galai (1983), it has been commonplace to view quotes or limit orders

2
as free options given by limit order traders or market makers to market order traders who may
possess superior information regarding asset values. On this view, a limit buy (sell) order is a
call (put) option with a strike price equal to the limit price with an implicit option premium —
actually a contingent premium since it is not paid unless the option is exercised — given by the
spread between the limit price and the midpoint of the bid-ask spread, albeit one with an
uncertain expiration date since limit orders are typically good until cancelled. This spread
reflects the by now classic balance between losses to informed investors and profits from
uninformed liquidity traders along with traders who falsely believe they possess value-relevant
private information.
Examining this implicit option from the perspective of limit order traders sheds quite
different light on the sources of value in limit orders. A limit buy (sell) order for X shares
t
involves the receipt (expenditure) of PX dollars in exchange for (delivery of) X shares. In the
t t t
language of exotic options markets, the first payoff is that of X cash-or-nothing digital call
t
options struck at P and the second is the same as that on X asset-or-nothing digital call options
t t
struck at P as well. Since limit order markets only result in transactions at a given price P(q)
t t
when a market order of size Q is large enough to hit the limit orders posted at the price (i.e.,
t
when Q ≥ q), one can view these implicit derivative securities as options on order flow.
t
The chapter is laid out as follows. The next section describes both my assumptions about
limit order markets and the digital options implicit in limit orders. The third section is devoted
primarily to the identification of the Arrow-Debreu prices for order flow ‘states’ based on the
implicit options embedded in the limit order book. Care is needed since these implicit digital
options differ in important ways from their analogues in conventional derivative asset markets
since the nature of the underlying asset, the definition of states of nature, and the notion of
1 As I recall, the asking price was $10 million and the proposed commission was 10 per cent.