NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF CORPORATE
AND PERSONAL BANKRUPTCY LAW
Michelle J. White
Working Paper 11536
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11536
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2005
This paper will be published as “Bankruptcy Law” in Handbook of Law and Economics, edited by A.M.
Polinsky and Steven Shavell. I am very grateful to Lucian Bebchuk for comments and to the National
Science Foundation for research support under grant 0212444. Portions of the surveys were presented at
Harvard Law School, University of Southern California Law Center, and the 2005 ALEA Conference in New
York and I benefitted from comments by participants at these talks. Because the bankruptcy literature is
huge, the survey is necessarily selective – perhaps unintentionally so. I apologize in advance for any
omissions or errors. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Michelle J. White. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Economic Analysis of Corporate and Personal Bankruptcy and Law
Michelle J. White
NBER Working Paper No. 11536
August 2005
JEL No. K2, G3
ABSTRACT
This paper surveys research on the economics of corporate and personal bankruptcy law. Since the
literatures on the two types of bankruptcy have developed in isolation of each other, a goal of the
survey is to draw out parallels between them. Both theoretical and empirical research are discussed.
Michelle J. White
Department of Economics
UCSD
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
miwhite@ucsd.edu

Economic Analysis of Corporate and Personal Bankruptcy Law1
Bankruptcy is the process by which financially distressed firms, individuals, and
occasionally governments resolve their debts. The bankruptcy process for firms plays a
central role in economics, because competition drives the most inefficient firms out of
business, thereby raising the average efficiency level of those remaining. Consumers
benefit because the remaining firms produce goods and services at lower costs and sell
them at lower prices. The legal mechanism through which most financially distressed
firms resolve their debts and exit the market is bankruptcy. Bankruptcy is also the
process by which individuals and married couples in financial distress resolve their debts,
although financially distressed individuals--unlike firms--do not shut down or exit.
Governments sometimes also use bankruptcy to resolve their debts. Like individuals but
unlike firms in financial distress, they do not shut down.
This chapter discusses the economics of bankruptcy law. Since the literatures on
corporate and personal bankruptcy have developed in isolation of each other, a goal of
this chapter is to draw out parallels between them. It is useful to start by defining terms.
Corporate bankruptcy refers to the bankruptcy of large- and medium-sized businesses,
which for convenience I assume to be organized as corporations. Personal bankruptcy
refers to the bankruptcies of individual households and small businesses. Small business
bankruptcy is treated as part of personal bankruptcy, since small businesses are owned by
individuals or partners who are legally responsible for their businesses’ debts. When
their businesses fail, owners often file for bankruptcy so that their businesses’ debts will
be discharged. Even when small businesses are incorporated, owners often guarantee the
debts of their businesses, so that personal bankruptcy law applies at least in part.
1 This paper will be published as, “Bankruptcy Law,” in Handbook of Law and Economics, edited by A.M.
Polinsky and Steven Shavell. I am very grateful to Lucian Bebchuk for comments and to the National
Science Foundation for research support under grant number 0212444. Portions of the survey were
presented at Harvard Law School, University of Southern California Law Center, and the 2005 ALEA
Conference in New York and I benefited from comments by participants at these talks. Because the
bankruptcy literature is huge, the survey is necessarily selective—perhaps unintentionally so. I apologize
in advance for any omissions or errors.
1

Regardless of whether the debtor is a business or an individual, bankruptcy law
provides a collective framework for simultaneously resolving all debts when debtors’
assets are less than their liabilities. This includes both rules for determining how much of
the debtor’s assets must be used to repay debt and rules for determining how those assets
are divided among creditors. Thus bankruptcy is concerned with both the size of the
pie—the total amount paid to creditors--and how the pie is divided.
For corporations in financial distress, both the size of the pie and its division depend
on whether the corporation liquidates versus reorganizes in bankruptcy and corporate
bankruptcy law includes rules for deciding whether reorganization or liquidation will
occur. When corporations liquidate, the size of the pie is all of the firm’s assets. The
size of the pie reflects the doctrine of limited liability, which exempts corporate
shareholders from liability for the corporation’s debts beyond loss of their shares. The
proceeds of liquidating the corporation’s assets are used to repay creditors. The division
of the pie follows the absolute priority rule (APR), which carries into bankruptcy the non-
bankruptcy rule that all creditors must be paid in full before equityholders receive
anything. The APR also determines the division of the pie among creditors and requires
that higher-priority creditors be repaid in full before lower-ranking creditors receive
anything. Thus under the APR, each class of creditors either receives full payment of its
claims or nothing at all (except that the lowest-ranking class of creditors to be repaid
receives partial payment).
When corporations reorganize rather than liquidate in bankruptcy, the reorganized
corporation retains most or all of its assets and continues to operate. The funds to repay
creditors then come from the reorganized firm’s future earnings rather than from sale of
its assets. The rules for dividing the pie in reorganization also differ from those in
liquidation. Instead of dividing the assets so that creditors receive either full payment or
nothing, most creditors receive partial payment and pre-bankruptcy equityholders receive
some of the reorganized firm’s new shares. Bankruptcy law again provides a procedure
for determining both the size and division of the pie, but the procedure involves a
negotiation process rather than a formula.
For individuals in financial distress, bankruptcy also provides a framework for
resolving all of the individual’s debts. Again the procedure includes both rules for
2