NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY DO FIRMS BECOME WIDELY HELD?
AN ANALYSIS OF THE DYNAMICS OF
CORPORATE OWNERSHIP
Jean Helwege
Christo Pirinsky
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 11505
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11505
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005
Stulz: Associate Professor, University of Arizona; Assistant Professor, Texas A&M University; Reese Chair
of Banking and Monetary Economics, Ohio State University, NBER and ECGI. We thank Bilal Ertruk and
Carrie Pan for research assistance. We are grateful for comments from Rudi Fahlenbrach, Bernadette
Minton, Ingrid Werner, Karen Wruck, and seminar participants at Ohio State. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2005 by Jean Helwege, Christo Pirinsky and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Why Do Firms Become Widely Held? An Analysis of the Dynamics of Corporate Ownership
Jean Helwege, Christo Pirinsky and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 11505
July 2005
JEL No. G30, G32, D0
ABSTRACT
We consider IPO firms from 1970 to 2001 and examine the evolution of their insider ownership over
time to understand better why and how U.S. firms that become widely held do so. In our sample, a
majority of firms has insider ownership below 20% after ten years. We find that a firm's stock market
performance and trading play an extremely important role in its insider ownership dynamics. Firms
that experience large decreases in insider ownership and/or become widely held are firms with high
valuations, good recent stock market performance, and liquid markets for their stocks. In contrast
and surprisingly, variables suggested by agency theory have limited success in explaining the
evolution of insider ownership.
Jean Helwege René M. Stulz
Eller College of Management Fisher College of Business
The University of Arizona Ohio State University
1130 E. Helen Street 806A Fisher Hall
P.O. Box 210108 2100 Neil Avenue
Tucson, AZ 85721-0108 Columbus, OH 43210-1144
helwege@eller.arizona.edu and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu
Christo Pirinsky
Department of Finance
306 H Wehner Bldg.
4218 Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
cpirisnky@mays.tamu.edu

1. Introduction
Most firms start their life with concentrated ownership. Yet, the typical large established U.S. firm
has fairly dispersed ownership. How do firms evolve so that many of them end up with dispersed
ownership? Why does that evolution take place? There has been much recent research on the
determinants of insider or managerial ownership.1 However, this research focuses on understanding why,
at a point in time, insiders or managers own a larger fraction of shares in some firms than in others. The
evolution of ownership as firms mature has not been the object of much study in the U.S.2 As a result, we
know little about the dynamics of insider ownership following a firm’s IPO. In this paper, we attempt to
understand these dynamics better.
The stylized fact that large U.S. corporations are much more likely to have dispersed ownership than
comparable corporations in most other countries (see La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 1999,
LLS) plays a central role in much of modern corporate finance. In the U.S., observers since Berle and
Means (1932) have been concerned that diffuse ownership facilitates entrenchment by managers and
these concerns have led to a large literature on agency costs and governance. An intense controversy has
evolved over the issue of whether firms in which managers own more shares perform better and have
higher valuations (see Himmelberg, Hubbard, and Palia, 1999, Demsetz and Villalonga, 2001, and
McConnell, Servaes, and Lins, 2005). Cross-country comparisons of corporate ownership raise the
question of what it is that makes the U.S. and a few other countries unique in having dispersed ownership.
Is it differences in politics, as argued by Roe (2003)? Or is it because of better legal protection of
investors, as argued by LLS? A recent paper by Becht and de Long (2005) concludes with the statement:
“We wish that we knew.” Investigating the dynamics of ownership following a firm’s IPO in the U.S.
should help us understand better these issues.
1 See, for instance, Demsetz and Villalonga (2001) and Himmelberg, Hubbard, and Palia (1999) for recent papers
that make ownership structure endogenous.
2 One paper that follows ownership beyond the years immediately following the IPO is Mikkelson, Partch, and Shah
(1997). Their focus differs from ours. Though they document the evolution of insider ownership for firms with IPOs
from 1980 through 1983 for the ten years following the IPO, they are mostly concerned about how ownership
explains performance.
1

We follow a large sample of firms over time to understand why and how their ownership becomes
more dispersed following their IPO. Our database includes all firms that have an IPO from 1970 to 2001.
We are able to follow the ownership of these firms from 1986 through 2001. LLS consider two
definitions of widely held firms. With their first definition, a firm is widely held if there is no controlling
blockholder who owns more than 20% of the votes. Rather than focusing on the largest blockholder, we
consider the holdings of the officers and directors of the firm, whom we call insiders as is common
practice, so that a firm meets the 20% standard when its insiders own less than 20% of the shares. We find
with our dataset that insiders control less than 20% of the cash flow rights in half the firms ten years after
their IPO. With this measure, therefore, the road to diffuse ownership is quick for the typical firm. The
more restrictive definition of diffuse ownership used by LLS is that there is no controlling blockholder
who owns more than 10% of the votes. Strikingly, insiders own less than 10% of the shares in roughly a
quarter of the firms five years after their IPO. However, the 10% standard is one that is not met by the
typical firm in our sample in any year within thirty years of its IPO. Because our sample drops in size
over time, so that by thirty years, less than 3% of the IPO firms are still in the sample, it is difficult for us
to evaluate when half the firms eventually meet this stricter standard.
Insider ownership is defined as the ratio of shares held by insiders over the total number of shares the
firm has outstanding. Insider ownership can therefore fall because the numerator of the ratio falls or the
denominator increases. Increases in the denominator take place when the firm issues shares to raise cash,
to pay for acquisitions, to deliver shares upon exercise of stock options and warrants, and conversion of
convertible debt. As long as the participation of insiders in equity issues is less than their proportional
holdings of shares, their proportional ownership drops when new shares are issued.
In a study for the U.K., Franks, Mayer, and Rossi (2004) find that increases in the number of shares
due to mergers play a central role in ownership dilution in the U.K. We find that the evolution of
ownership in our sample is different: sales of shares by insiders are as important, on average, in
explaining the decrease in insider ownership as issuance of new shares by the firm. Further, share issues
2