NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE ECONOMICS OF FRAUDULENT ACCOUNTING
Simi Kedia
Thomas Philippon
Working Paper 11573
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11573
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2005
We are grateful to Franklin Allen, Chris Hennessy and Yishay Yafeh for their discussions, and to Darren
Roulstone for his detailled comments. We also thank Natasha Burns, Greg Mankiw and the seminar
participants at NYU, USC, UCLA, Chicago GSB, and NBER CF and EFG. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Simi Kedia and Thomas Philippon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Economics of Fraudulent Accounting
Simi Kedia and Thomas Philippon
NBER Working Paper No. 11573
August 2005, Revised February 2006
JEL No. E0, G3
ABSTRACT
We argue that earnings management and fraudulent accounting have important economic
consequences. In a model where the costs of earnings management are endogenous, we show that
in equilibrium, bad managers hire and invest too much in order to pool with the good managers. This
behavior distorts the allocation of economic resources among firms. We test the predictions of the
model using new historical and firm-level data. First, we show that periods of high stock market
valuations are systematically followed by large increases in reported frauds. We then show that
during periods of suspicious accounting, firms hire and invest excessively, while insiders exercise
options and sell stocks. When the misreporting is detected, firms shed labor and capital and
productivity improves. In the aggregate, our model seems able to account for periods of jobless and
investment-less growth.
Simi Kedia
Department of Finance and Economics
Rutgers Business School
111 Washington Street
Newark, NJ 07102
skedia@rbsmail.rutgers.edu
Thomas Philippon
New York University
Stern School of Business
Department of Finance
44 W 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
tphilipp@stern.nyu.edu

Introduction
Fraudulent accounting by management is costly for shareholders. The market adjusted
return over the three-days surrounding the announcement of a restatement to financial
statements is associated with an average return of —10% (see GAO (2002)). Though the
losses to shareholders are large and apparent, the impact of fraudulent accounting on the
wider economy is not well understood. It is not known, for instance, whether earnings
management lowers economic efficiency, or whether it simply redistributes income from
shareholderstoinsiders. Inthispaper, weexaminetheeconomicconsequencesoffraudulent
accounting, with a particular focus on the dynamics of employment and investment.
The dramatic case of Enron’s restatement illustrates our point. On November 8, 2001,
Enron announced that it would restate its earnings for the period 1997 through 2001. This
restatement recorded a $1.2 billion reduction to shareholders equity. The stock price of
Enrondeclinedfrommorethan$30tolessthan$1betweenOctober16,2001andNovember
28, 2001. The period of misreporting was characterized by substantial stock sales by Enron
insiders (see Figure 1). Less well known, but equally important, is the fact that during
this same period Enron grew faster than any other firm in its industry. The book value of
Enron’s assets nearly tripled, from $23.5 billion in 1997 to $65.5 billion in 2000. Tobin’s
Q increased from 1.32 to 1.8. At its peak, Enron employed more than 20,000 employees
worldwide. AfteritsrestatementEnronshrankrapidly. Today, about500employeesremain
and Enron’s creditors expect to receive about one-fifth of the estimated $63 billion they are
owed.
In this paper, we report that Enron is a typical — if somewhat extreme — example of
fraudulent accounting in periods of high financial valuations. We also show that the joint
dynamics of misreporting, insiders’ trades, employment and investment can be explained
by a simple model of multi-dimensional signalling.
We study the problem of a manager whose productivity is private information, and
who makes observable hiring and investment decisions. Bad managers who want to hide
their poor quality must not only manage their earnings, but also hire and invest like good
managers. It is not sufficient to merely misreport performance. In equilibrium, the bad
managers hire and invest excessively, distorting the allocation of resources among firms.
2

Prior and concurrent theoretical work has not emphasized these implications.1 In our
model, realcostsofmanipulationariseendogenouslybecauseearningsmanagementdistorts
the hiring and investment decisions of the firms.
Our main contribution is then to test the predictions of the model using two newly
collected data sets. The first prediction is that the incidence of fraudulent accounting will
be higher when price-earnings ratios are high.2 We use historical data on actions by the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), from 1936 to 2003, to capture the incidence
of fraudulent accounting. We find that periods with high price-earnings ratios are associ-
ated with significant increases in the number of civil injunctive actions and administrative
proceedings by the SEC.
Testing the second set of predictions requires firm level data, and we use a sample
of firms that have restated their earnings between January 1997 and June 2002. In the
model, earnings management boosts stock prices, allowing managers to make profitable
trades, and managers with larger stock and option holdings are more likely to engage in
earnings management. Recently, Beneish and Vargus (2002), Bergstresser and Philippon
(2002), Burns and Kedia (2004), Bartov and Mohanram (2004) and Roulstone (2005) have
confirmedthesepredictions. Similarly,ourdatashowsthat,duringthemisreportedperiods,
CEOs exercise a significantly higher fraction of their exercisable options than the CEOs of
comparable firms.
Wethenfocusonthedynamicsofemploymentandinvestment. Wefindthat,duringthe
periods where they misreport, firms hire and invest more than comparable firms matched
on age, industry and initial size. Hiring and investment are significantly lower after the
restated period. There is no counter-factual experiment that would allow us to learn what
would have happened if these companies had not been able to misreport their earnings, but
our theory suggests that the firms managed their earnings during this period in order to
produce the profit numbers consistent with their rapid growth. Our theory also explains
why these firms shrank quickly after the restatements were announced.
Other explanations cannot account for the joint dynamics of firm value, hiring, invest-
1SeeNarayanan(1985),Stein(1989),Guttman,Kadan,andKandel(2004),GoldmanandSlezak(2003),
Povel, Singh, and Winton (2004), Bolton, Scheinkman, and Xiong (2003), Friebel and Guriev (2005).
2This prediction depends on which parameter drives the variation of P/E. We will argue that the pre-
diction is likely to hold in historical time series, and we discuss why it may not hold in a cross section of
countries or firms.
3