NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW MUCH DO BANKS USE CREDIT
DERIVATIVES TO REDUCE RISK?
Bernadette A. Minton
René Stulz
Rohan Williamson
Working Paper 11579
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11579
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2005
Respectively, Associate Professor, The Ohio State University; Everett D. Reese Chair of Banking and
Monetary Economics, The Ohio State University and NBER; and Associate Professor, Georgetown
University. We are grateful to Jim O’Brien and Mark Carey for discussions. Minton acknowledges the Dice
Center of Financial Research and Fisher College of Business for financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2005 by Bernadette A. Minton, René Stulz and Rohan Williamson. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

How Much Do Banks Use Credit Derivatives to Reduce Risk?
Bernadette A. Minton, René Stulz and Rohan Williamson
NBER Working Paper No. 11579
August 2005
JEL No. G10, G20, G21, D82
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the use of credit derivatives by US bank holding companies from 1999 to 2003
with assets in excess of one billion dollars. Using the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Bank
Holding Company Database, we find that in 2003 only 19 large banks out of 345 use credit
derivatives. Though few banks use credit derivatives, the assets of these banks represent on average
two thirds of the assets of bank holding companies with assets in excess of $1 billion. Few banks are
net buyers of credit protection and disclose using credit derivatives to hedge loans. Banks are more
likely to be net protection buyers if they engage in asset securitization, originate foreign loans, and
have lower capital ratios. The likelihood of a bank being a net protection buyer is positively related
to the percentage of commercial and industrial loans in a bank's loan portfolio and negatively or not
related to other types of bank loans. The use of credit derivatives by banks is limited because adverse
selection and moral hazard problems make the market for credit derivatives illiquid for the typical
credit exposures of banks.
Bernadette A. Minton René M. Stulz
Fisher College of Business Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University Ohio State University
834 Fisher Hall 806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue 2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144 Columbus, OH 43210-1144
minton_15@cob.osu.edu and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu
Rohan Williamson
Georgetown University
Department of Finance
3700 O Street, NW
Washington, DC 20057
williarg@georgetown.edu

1. Introduction
Credit derivatives are bilateral financial contracts with payoffs linked to a credit related event such as
a default, credit downgrade or bankruptcy. A bank can use a credit derivative to transfer some or all of the
credit risk of a loan to another party or to take additional risks. In principle, credit derivatives are tools
that enable banks to manage their portfolio of credit risks more efficiently. The promise of these
instruments has not escaped regulators and policymakers. In various speeches, Alan Greenspan concludes
that credit derivatives and other complex financial instruments have contributed “to the development of a
far more flexible, efficient, and hence resilient financial system than existed just a quarter-century ago.”
(Greenspan, 2004). He further states in the same speech that “The new instruments of risk dispersion
have enabled the largest and most sophisticated banks in their credit-granting role to divest themselves of
much credit risk by passing it to institutions with far less leverage.”
Statistics from the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) show that the market for credit
derivatives has grown dramatically in recent years. The notional amount of credit derivatives increased
from $698 billion at the end of June 2001 to $4,664 billion by the end of June 2004, an annual growth rate
of 88% (see BIS, 2004). Despite the growth of the credit derivatives market, we know little about how
banks use credit derivatives to change their credit exposures. In particular, we know of no published
academic research which investigates whether banks systematically use credit derivatives to reduce their
overall credit risk. In this paper, we examine the use of credit derivatives by U.S. bank holding companies
with total assets greater than one billion dollars for the period from 1999 to 2003.
The use of credit derivatives is not widespread among banks. In our sample, roughly 6% of banks use
credit derivatives. In 2003, we have 345 banks in our sample and only 19 of these banks, or 5.51%, report
the use of credit derivatives. With the available data, the best proxy for whether a bank uses credit
derivatives to reduce its credit risk exposure is whether it is a net buyer of credit protection. In 2003, the
last year in our sample, only 4.93% of the banks in our sample are net buyers of credit protection. The
total net notional amount of credit protection bought by these banks amounts to $51 billion, or 1.38% of
all bank loans and 2.73% of the loans of banks that are net buyers of credit protection. In our data, there is
2

no evidence of an upward trend in the net notional amount of credit protection bought, but there is a clear
increase over time in the total notional amounts of credit protection bought and sold.
After documenting that the use of credit derivatives is limited to a small number of banks and that the
net transfer of credit risk from the banking system using credit derivatives is small, we investigate why
this is so. We first compare banks that are net buyers of protection to the other banks in our sample.
Consistent with existing empirical research on derivatives use by financial and non-financial firms, net
buyers of protection are larger firms.1 While the two groups of banks are not different with respect to the
average ratio of total loans to total assets, they differ with respect to the composition of their loan
portfolios. Net buyers of protection have larger fractions of commercial and industrial (C&I) loans and
foreign loans than non-users and a lower fraction of loans secured by real estate than non-users. In
general, net buyers of protection have higher levels of risk than other banks: they have lower capital
ratios, lower balances of liquid assets, a higher ratio of risk-based assets to total assets, and a higher
fraction of non-performing assets than the non-users of credit derivatives. Finally, a larger percentage of
banks that are net buyers of protection also use interest-rate, foreign exchange, equity, and commodity
derivatives.
We investigate the extent to which the use of credit derivatives to hedge can be predicted using
existing theories about why firms hedge. Hedging theories typically predict that firms with a greater
probability of costly distress are more likely to hedge.2 If higher profitability is associated with a lower
probability of financial distress, then the likelihood of using credit derivatives to hedge should be lower
for more profitable firms. Using probit regression analysis, we show that the likelihood of using credit
derivatives is negatively related to a bank’s equity capital, tier I risk capital, net income, net interest
margin, and liquid assets. Consistent with existing research on banks’ and non-financial firms’ use of
interest-rate, foreign exchange, and commodity derivatives use, we find that an increase in bank size is
positively and significantly associated with the likelihood of hedging with credit derivatives. From these
1 See, for example, Nance, Smith, and Smithson (1993), Géczy, Minton, and Schrand (1997), Mian (1996) and
Graham and Rogers, (2002), among others.
2 See Stulz (2003) for a review of hedging theories.
3