NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ANTITRUST IN INNOVATIVE INDUSTRIES
Ilya Segal
Michael Whinston
Working Paper 11525
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11525
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2005
We thank Shane Greenstein, Ken Hendricks, Volker Nocke, Richard Schmalensee, Scott Stern, and
participants in seminars at the FTC, Harvard, Northwestern, Penn, UT-Austin, the 2003 NBER Summer
Institute meeting on Innovation Policy, the 2003 International Industrial Organization Conference, and the
2004 Duke-Northwestern-Texas IO Theory Conference for helpful discussions and comments. We also thank
the NSF (SES-0318438) and the Searle Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Ilya Segal and Michael Whinston. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Antitrust in Innovative Industries
Ilya Segal and Michael Whinston
NBER Working Paper No. 11525
July 2005
JEL No. L40, O31
ABSTRACT
We study the effects of antitrust policy in industries with continual innovation. A more protective
antitrust policy may have conflicting effects on innovation incentives, raising the profits of new
entrants, but lowering those of continuing incumbents. We show that the direction of the net effect
can be determined by analyzing shifts in innovation benefit and supply holding the innovation rate
fixed. We apply this framework to analyze several specific antitrust policies. We show that in some
cases, holding the innovation rate fixed, as suggested by our comparative statics results, the tension
does not arise and a more protective policy necessarily raises the rate of innovation.
Ilya Segal
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Landau Economics Building Room 242
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
ilya.segal@stanford.edu
Michael D. Whinston
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60202
and NBER
mwhinston@northwestern.edu

1. Introduction
Thispaperisconcernedwiththeeffectsofantitrustpolicyinmarketsinwhichinnovation
is important. Traditionally, antitrust analyses have largely ignored issues of innovation,
focusing instead on the price/output effects of contested practices.1 Yet, over the last
two decades, intellectual property and innovation have become central to competition
in a large share of the economy. In the wake of these changes, and sparked by the
recentMicrosoft case,anumberofcommentatorshaveexpressedconcernsthattraditional
antitrust analysis might be poorly suited to maximizing welfare in such industries. As
Evans and Schmalensee [2002] put it, in these industries
“...firms engage in dynamic competition for the market – usually through
research-and development (R&D) to develop the ‘killer’ product, service, or
feature that will confer market leadership and thus diminish or eliminate
actual or potential rivals. Static price/output competition on the margin in
the market is less important.”
The effects of antitrust policy on innovation are poorly understood. In the Microsoft
case, for example, the most significant issue arising from Microsoft’s allegedly exclusion-
ary practices was almost surely their effect on innovation. Microsoft argued that while a
technological leader like Microsoft may possess a good deal of static market power, this
is merely the fuel for stimulating dynamic R&D competition, a process that it argued
works well in the software industry. Antitrust intervention in this process would run the
risk of reducing the rate of innovation and welfare. The government, in contrast, argued
thatMicrosoft’spracticespreventedentryofnewfirmsandproducts, andthereforewould
both raise prices and retard innovation.2 How to reconcile these two views, however, was
never clear in the discussion surrounding the case.
On closer inspection, these two conflicting views reveal a fundamental tension in the
effects of antitrust policy on innovation. Policies that protect new entrants from incum-
bents raise a successful innovator’s initial profits and may thereby encourage innovation,
as the government argued. But new entants hope to become the next Microsoft, and will
1Issues of innovation have been considered when discussing “innovation markets” in some horizontal
merger cases in which there was a concern that a merger might reduce R&D competition. See, e.g.,
Gilbert and Sunshine [1995].
2For further discussion, see e.g., Evans and Schmalensee [2002], Fisher and Rubinfeld [2000], Gilbert
and Katz [2001], and Whinston [2001].
1

want to engage in the same sorts of entry-disadvantaging behaviors should they succeed.
Thus, by lowering the profits of incumbency, protective policies may actually retard in-
novation, as Microsoft alleged. Disentangling these two effects is the central focus of this
paper.
We study the effects of antitrust policy in innovative industries using models in which
innovation is a continual process, with new innovators replacing current incumbents, and
holding dominant market positions until they are themselves replaced. Although a great
deal of formal modeling of R&D races has occurred in the industrial organization litera-
ture (beginning with the work of Loury [1979] and Lee and Wilde [1980]; see Reinganum
[1989]forasurvey), thisworkhastypicallyanalyzedasingle, oratmostafinitesequence,
of innovative races.3 Instead, our models are closer to those that have received atten-
tion in the recent literature on growth (e.g., Grossman and Helpman [1991], Aghion and
Howitt [1992], Aghion et. al [2001]). The primary distinction between our analysis and
the analysis in this growth literature lies in our explicit focus on how antitrust policies
affect equilibrium in such industries.4
The paper is organized as follows. In Sections 2 and 3, we introduce and analyze
a simple stylized model of antitrust in an innovative industry. Our aim is to develop a
model that yields some general insights into the effect of antitrust policies on the rate
of innovation, and that we can apply to a number of different antitrust policies in the
remainder of the paper. In Section 2, we study the simplest version of this stylized
model, in which in each period a single potential entrant conducts R&D. The model
captures antitrust policy in a reduced form way, by assuming that it alters the profit
flows that an incumbent and a new entrant can earn in competition with each other,
as well as the profits of an uncontested incumbent. In the model, a more protective
antitrust policy – one that protects entrants at the expense of incumbents – increases
a new entrant’s profits, but also affects the profitability of continuing incumbents. Since
3ThreeexceptionsareO’Donohueetal. [1998]andHunt[2004],whousecontinuinginnovationmodels
toexamineoptimalpatent,andFudenbergandTirole[2000]whostudydynamiclimitpricinginmarkets
with network externalities using a model of continuing innovation.
4The growth literature often considers how changes in various parameters will affect the rate of
innovation, sometimes even calling such parameters measures of the degree of “antitrust policy” (e.g.,
Aghion et al. [2001] refer to the elasticity of substitution as such a measure). Here we are much more
explicit than is the growth literature about what antitrust policies toward specific practices do. This
is not a minor difference, as our results differ substantially from those that might be inferred from the
parameter changes considered in the growth literature. As one example, one would get exactly the
wrongconclusionif oneextrapolated resultsshowingthat moreinelasticdemandfunctionslead tomore
R&D(e.g.,AghionandHowitt[1992])tomeanthatallowinganincumbenttoenhanceitsmarketpower
through long-term contracts leads to more R&D.
2