NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LAW, ENDOWMENTS, AND PROPERTY RIGHTS
Ross Levine
Working Paper 11502
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11502
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005
Harrison S. Kravis University Professor, Department of Economics, Brown Unviersity, Providence, RI
02912; and the National Bureau of Economic Research. I thank Daron Acemoglu, Thorsten Beck, Maria
Carkovic, Bill Easterly, James Hines, Luc Laeven, Kenneth Sokoloff, Andrei Shleifer, Timothy Taylor, and
Michael Waldman for very helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Law, Endowments, and Property Rights
Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 11502
July 2005
JEL No. N01, K4, O00
ABSTRACT
While scholars have hypothesized about the sources of variation in property rights for over 2500
years, it is only very recently that researchers have begun to test these theories empirically. This
paper reviews both the theory and empirical evidence supporting and refuting the law and
endowment views of property rights. The law view holds that historically determined differences in
national legal traditions continue to shape cross-country differences in property rights. The
endowment view argues that during European colonization, differences in climate, crops, the
indigenous population, and the disease environment influenced long-run property rights.
Ross Levine
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
rlevine@csom.umn.edu
(From August 1, 2005)

Private property rights are crucial for personal welfare and economic development. Adam
Smith (1776) stressed that private contracting is a critical prerequisite for the voluntary, mutually
beneficial exchanges that foster specialization, innovation, and economic growth. Hayek (1960,
p. 140) argued that protecting private property rights is vital for preventing coercion, securing
liberty, and enhancing personal welfare. More recently, a growing body of empirical work
demonstrates a strong positive association between the degree to which countries protect private
property and economic development (Knack and Keefer, 1995; Hall and Jones, 1999). 1
The security of property rights, however, is not a natural occurrence; rather, it is an
outcome of policy choices and social institutions. Any government strong enough to define and
enforce property rights is also strong enough to abrogate those rights (North and Weingast,
1989). Thus, protection of property rights requires finding a balance between: 1) an active
government that enforces property rights, facilitates private contracting, and applies the law
fairly to all, and 2) a government sufficiently constrained that it cannot engage in coercion and
expropriation. Besides the explicit codes and formal enforcement organizations associated with
defining, defending, and interpreting private property rights and contracts, property rights are
also shaped by the “moral and ethical” norms governing human interactions.2 Thus, in this
paper, the term “property rights” refers to the degree to which a broad set of policies, legal and
political systems, and informal norms define and protect private property, apply the law equally
to all, and limit government interference in private contracting.
1 For views that critique the beneficial effects of private property, see Muller (2002). For example, Hegel feared that
private property and the market could create an unhealthy desire for accumulation and foster want-creating firms in
an unsatisfying cycle of consumption and product creation. Karl Marx saw private property and the market as forces
for manipulating behavior and exploiting people, at the expense of true personal liberty.
2 North (1981, p.201-202) notes: “Institutions are a set of rules, compliance procedures, and moral and ethical
behavioral norms designed to constrain the behavior of individuals … .”
1

This paper describes two views of what leads a society to greater or lesser protection of
property rights. The law view stresses that differences in legal traditions formed centuries ago in
Europe and spread via conquest, colonization and imitation around the world continue to account
for cross-country differences in property rights. The endowment view argues that differences in
natural resources, climate, the indigenous population, and the disease environment affected the
construction of institutions and these self-sustaining institutions continue to shape property rights
today. These views are not mutually exclusive, nor do they exhaust the possible explanations of
cross-country differences in property rights. Although I mention alternative views, I focus
mainly on the law and endowment views.
I focus on property rights and avoid detailed discussions of the structure of political
systems.3 While democracy may help in the formation and maintenance of the rule of law, it
may also lead to discriminatory, coercive behavior by the majority. In contrast, an authoritarian
government may adopt equality before the law as a guiding principle. In describing the law and
endowment views of the formation of national approaches to property rights, this paper discusses
political economy factors, but I do not compare and contrast specific political systems.
Law and Property Rights
The law, property rights and contracting are inseparable. Statutes define property rights.
At a broader level, legal systems consist of the entire apparatus of courts, procedures, and
institutions associated with enforcing property rights. Court systems differ in their ability and
3 Plato (360 BC [1992]), for example, draws a sharp contrast between democracy and equality before the law, which
he defines as equal laws for elites and the public.
2