NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE HIGHEST PRICE EVER: THE GREAT
NYSE SEAT SALE OF 1928-1929
AND CAPACITY CONSTRAINTS
Lance E. Davis
Larry Neal
Eugene N. White
Working Paper 11556
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11556
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2005
We thank seminar participants at the Columbia Macro Lunch, the NBER Summer Institute, the New York
Stock Exchange and Universidad Carlos III. We owe particular thanks to Marc Weidenmier and Kim
Oosterlinck for their extensive comments. We gratefully acknowledge support from the National Science
Foundation (34-3262-00-0-79-151) and the Rutgers University Research Council. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2005 by Lance E. Davis, Larry Neal and Eugene N. White. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?
Lance E. Davis, Larry Neal and Eugene N. White
NBER Working Paper No. 11556
August 2005
JEL No. N2, G2
ABSTRACT
A surge in orders during the stock market boom of the late 1920s collided against the constraint
created by the fixed number of brokers on the New York Stock Exchange. Estimates of the
determinants of individual stock bid-ask spreads from panel data reveal that spreads jumped when
volume spiked, confirming contemporary observers complaints that there were insufficient
counterparties. When the position of the NYSE as the dominant exchange became threatened, the
management of the exchange proposed a 25 percent increase in the number of seats in February 1929
by issuing a quarter-seat dividend to all members. While such a "stock split" would be expected to
leave the aggregate value of the NYSE unchanged, an event study reveals that its value rose in
anticipation of increased efficiency. These expectations were justified as bid-ask spreads became less
sensitive to peak volume days after the increase in seats.
Lance E. Davis Eugene N. White
Humanities and Social Sciences Department of Economics
California Institute of Technology Rutgers University
1200 East California Boulevard MC 228-77 New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
Pasadena, CA 91125 and NBER
and NBER white@economics.rutgers.edu
led@hss.caltech.edu
Larry D. Neal
328A David Kinley Hall
1407 W. Gregory Drive
University of Illinois
Urbana, IL 61801
and NBER
lneal@uiuc.edu

In February 1929, the New York Stock Exchange decided to increase its
membership, fixed at 1,100 since 1879, by 25 percent. This expansion occurred when
business was booming and the real price of a seat on the exchange was the highest it has
ever been. But in this exuberant era, the NYSE was under extraordinary pressure.
Members found it increasingly difficult to handle the rising flow of orders. At peak
times, there was a scramble on the floor to find counterparties and process trades; and
some observers claimed that bid-ask spreads widened. These problems contributed to the
slow erosion of the NYSE’s share of the national equity market. While the membership
had rejected previous recommendations by the NYSE’s leadership, this time they listened
and voted to accept a quarter-seat dividend to expand capacity and ensure that the
exchange maintained its dominant position.
Drawing upon newspaper accounts and archival materials from the NYSE, we
chronicle its internal struggle over how to meet the soaring demand for its services. The
management’s proposed solution to issue a quarter-seat dividend to each member
convinced a majority of brokers that was the best way to expand the exchange’s capacity.
These dividends were then traded to create new seats that raised the total membership
from 1,100 to 1,375. We conduct event studies of the failed effort to expand the
exchange in 1925 and the successful one in 1928-1929. When the news of a possible
seat dividend reached the membership in late 1928, seat prices rose. We estimate that
there was approximately a 20 percent abnormal return, implying that the increased
number of seats was anticipated to make the exchange more efficient, thereby
augmenting its aggregate value, rather than leaving it constant.
The effects of order surges on NYSE-listed stocks’ bid-ask spreads are then
examined, using a panel of individual stocks drawn from high and low volume days, both
before and after the increase in the number of seats. In 1928, when volume climbed and
the exchange was at capacity, the bid-ask spread became very sensitive to the total
number of shares traded on the floor and the dispersion of orders at the posts across the
floor. After the increase in the number of seats, these effects were muted and customers’
costs did not jump. The brokers thus correctly anticipated the increased attractiveness to
customers of the exchange from the seat-dividend, although the expansion only partially
addressed the growing competition from other equity markets.
2

The Value of a Seat
Seats on an exchange are capital assets whose prices reflect stockbrokers'
expected future profits from the special access offered to them by a seat on the exchange.
In contrast to many European exchanges, a distinctive feature of the NYSE has been the
fixed number of seats and the vesting of the ownership of the exchange with the owners
of the seats. The member-owners determine the number of seats; and before the advent
of the New Deal legislation governing the securities exchanges, they had complete
control over the rules. The value of their seats is affected by the volume of activity on
the exchange and the degree of competition among traders on the exchange and between
the exchange and the rest of the market. Thus, seat prices are influenced by the volume
and level of stock prices, technology, and the rules that govern trading on the exchange.
The supply of stock exchange seats has been relatively constant over time. They are
traded in an anonymous auction market operated by the Secretary of the NYSE,
characterized by relatively small transactions costs. When a new bid or ask price is
made, all members are informed; and current bid and ask prices for seats are posted on
the floor of the exchange.
Seat prices provide insight into the efficiency of the exchange under different
technology, rules, and regulations. Schwert (1977a) examined the efficiency of the
market for seats, using end-of-month seat prices for 1926-1972. In similar studies, Jarrell
(1984) and Golbe (1984, 1986) used end-of-month postwar data to examine the effects of
deregulation on the exchanges. More recently, Keim and Madhavan (1997) employed all
bids, offers and sale prices of NYSE seats for 1973-1994 to study the determinants of
pricing and the ability of seat prices to predict future activity on the exchange; and Keim
and Madhavan (2000) used additional annual data to look at the predictive power of seat
prices for future stock market returns.
3