NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DUMB MONEY: MUTUAL FUND FLOWS AND
THE CROSS-SECTION OF STOCK RETURNS
Andrea Frazzini
Owen A. Lamont
Working Paper 11526
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11526
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2005
We thank Nicholas Barberis, Judith Chevalier, David Musto, Stefan Nagel, and seminar participants at
Goldman Sachs, the NBER and Yale for helpful comments. We thank Breno Schmidt for research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Andrea Frazzini and Owen A. Lamont. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Dumb Money: Mutual Fund Flows and the Cross-Section of Stock Returns
Andrea Frazzini and Owen A. Lamont
NBER Working Paper No. 11526
July 2005
JEL No. G14, G23, G32
ABSTRACT
We use mutual fund flows as a measure for individual investor sentiment for different stocks, and
find that high sentiment predicts low future returns at long horizons. Fund flows are dumb money
(cid:1)
by reallocating across different mutual funds, retail investors reduce their wealth in the long run.
This dumb money effect is strongly related to the value effect. High sentiment also is associated high
corporate issuance, interpretable as companies increasing the supply of shares in response to investor
demand.
Andrea Frazzini
The University of Chicago
Graduate School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
andrea.frazzini@chicagogsb.edu
Owen A. Lamont
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
PO Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
owen.lamont@yale.edu

Individual retail investors actively reallocate their money across different mutual funds.
Individuals tend to transfer money from funds with low recent returns to funds with high recent
returns. In addition to looking at past returns of funds, individuals also may consider economic
themes or investment styles in reallocating funds. Collectively, one can measure individual
sentiment by looking at which funds have inflows and which have outflows, and can relate this
sentiment to different stocks by examining the holdings of mutual funds. This paper tests
whether sentiment affects stock prices, and specifically whether one can predict future stock
returns using a flow-based measure of sentiment. If sentiment pushes stock prices above
fundamental value, high sentiment stocks should have low future returns.
For example, using our data we calculate that in 1999 investors sent $37 billion to Janus
funds but only $16 billion to Fidelity funds, despite the fact that Fidelity had three times the
assets under management at the beginning of the year. Thus in 1999 retail investors as a group
made an active allocation decision to give greater weight to Janus funds, and in doing so they
increased their portfolio weight in tech stocks held by Janus. By 2001, investors had changed
their minds about their allocations, and pulled about $12 billion out of Janus while adding $31
billion to Fidelity. In this instance, the reallocation caused wealth destruction to mutual fund
investors as Janus and tech stocks performed horribly after 1999.
According to the “smart money” hypothesis of Gruber (1996) and Zheng (1999), some
fund managers have skill and some individual investors can detect that skill, and send their
money to skilled managers. Thus (in contrast to the Janus example) flows should be positively
correlated with future returns. Gruber (1996) and Zheng (1999) show that the short term
performance of funds that experience inflows (in the last three months) is significantly better
than those that experience outflows, suggesting that mutual fund investors have selection ability.
Dumb money – Page 1

Our focus is on stocks, not on funds. We are interested in how investor sentiment affects
stocks prices, and see fund flows as a convenient (and economically important) measure of
sentiment. To test whether investor sentiment causes mispricing, one must test whether high
sentiment today predicts low return in the future, and we focus on cross-sectional stock return
predictability over periods of months and years. We ask the question of whether, over the long-
term, investors are earning higher returns as a result of their reallocation across funds.
For each stock, we calculate the mutual fund ownership of the stock that is due to
reallocation decisions reflected in fund flows. For example, in December 1999, 18% of the
shares outstanding of Cisco were owned by the mutual fund sector (using our sample of funds),
of which 3% was attributable to disproportionately high inflows over the previous 3 years. That
is, under certain assumptions, if flows had occurred proportionately to asset value (instead of
disproportionately to funds like Janus), the level of mutual fund ownership would have been only
15%. This 3% difference is our measure of investor sentiment. We then test whether this
measure predicts differential returns on stocks.
Our main results are as follows. First, as suggested the example of Janus and Cisco in
1999, on average from 1980 to 2003, retail investors direct their money to funds which invest in
stocks that have low future returns. To achieve high returns, it is best to do the opposite of these
investors. We calculate that mutual fund investors experience total returns that are significantly
lower due to their reallocations. Therefore, mutual fund investors are dumb in the sense that
their reallocations reduce their wealth on average. We call this predictability the “dumb money”
effect. This dumb money effect poses a challenge to rational theories of fund flows.
Second, the dumb money effect is related to the value effect. Money flows into mutual
funds that own growth stocks, and flows out of mutual funds that own value stocks. The value
Dumb money – Page 2