NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INFORMATION AND CONSUMER CHOICE:
THE VALUE OF PUBLICIZED HEALTH PLAN RATINGS
Ginger Zhe Jin
Alan T. Sorensen
Working Paper 11514
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11514
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2005
Special thanks to Sarah Shih, Sarah Scholle, Greg Pawlson and James Bost at NCQA for providing assistance
with the quality information reported to NCQA; to Bill Anderson, James Quayle, Agnes Kalland, Ralph
Pierce, Ron Gresch, Leroy McKnight, and Ebbie Block in OPM for providing us individual records of
FEHBP beneficiaries; and to the University of Maryland for financing the data cost. We are grateful to the
editor and two anonymous referees for several helpful suggestions. Participants at the 2004 FTC Conference
on Health Care also provided useful comments. Any errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Ginger Zhe Jin and Alan T. Sorensen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Information and Consumer Choice: The Value of Publicized Health Plan Ratings
Ginger Zhe Jin and Alan T. Sorensen
NBER Working Paper No. 11514
July 2005
JEL No. I11, L15
ABSTRACT
We use data on the enrollment decisions of federal annuitants to estimate the influence of publicized
ratings on health plan choice. We focus on the impact of ratings disseminated by the National
Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA), and use our estimates to calculate the value of the
information. Our approach exploits a novel feature of the data—the availability of nonpublic plan
ratings—to correct for a source of bias that is inherent in studies of consumer responsiveness to
information on product quality: since publicized ratings are correlated with other quality signals
known to consumers (but unobserved by researchers), the estimated influence of ratings is likely to
be overstated. We control for this bias by comparing the estimated impact of publicized ratings to
the estimated impact of ratings that were never disclosed. The results indicate that NCQA’s plan
ratings had a meaningful influence on individuals’ choices, particularly for individuals choosing a
plan for the first time. Although we estimate that a very small fraction of individual decisions were
materially affected by the information, for those that were affected the implied utility gains are
substantial.
Ginger Zhe Jin Alan Sorensen
University of Maryland Graduate School of Business
Department of Economics Stanford University
3105 Tydings Hall 518 Memorial Way
College Park, MD 20742-7211 Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER and NBER
jin@econ.umd.edu asorensen@stanford.edu

Information and Consumer Choice:
∗
The Value of Publicized Health Plan Ratings
Ginger Zhe Jin Alan T. Sorensen
University of Maryland and NBER Stanford University and NBER
jin@econ.umd.edu asorensen@stanford.edu
June 2005
Abstract
We use data on the enrollment decisions of federal annuitants to estimate the influence of
publicized ratings on health plan choice. We focus on the impact of ratings disseminated by
theNationalCommitteeforQualityAssurance(NCQA),anduseourestimatestocalculatethe
valueoftheinformation. Ourapproachexploitsanovelfeatureofthedata—theavailability of
nonpublic plan ratings—to correct for a source of bias that is inherent in studies of consumer
responsiveness to information on product quality: since publicized ratings are correlated with
otherqualitysignalsknowntoconsumers(butunobservedbyresearchers), theestimatedinflu-
ence of ratings is likely to be overstated. We control for this bias by comparing the estimated
impact of publicized ratings to the estimated impact of ratings that were never disclosed. The
results indicate that NCQA’splan ratings had a meaningful influence on individuals’ choices,
particularly forindividuals choosing aplanforthefirsttime. Althoughweestimatethatavery
small fraction of individual decisions were materially affected by the information, for those
thatwereaffected theimplied utility gainsaresubstantial.
1 Introduction
Consumers often choose between products whose qualities or characteristics are ex ante uncer-
tain. The reliability of a car, for example, cannot be fully known at the time of purchase, and the
∗Special thanks to Sarah Shih, Sarah Scholle, Greg Pawlson and James Bost at NCQA for providingassistance
withthequalityinformationreportedtoNCQA;toBillAnderson,JamesQuayle,AgnesKalland,RalphPierce,Ron
Gresch,LeroyMcKnight,andEbbieBlockinOPMforprovidingusindividualrecordsofFEHBPbeneficiaries;and
totheUniversityofMarylandforfinancingthedatacost.Wearegratefultotheeditorandtwoanonymousrefereesfor
severalhelpfulsuggestions.Participantsatthe2004FTCConferenceonHealthCarealsoprovidedusefulcomments.
Anyerrorsareours.
1

quality of a restaurant isn’t known until after one has dined there. For some products, the pres-
ence of such uncertainty has given rise to markets for information: for example, companies like
Edmunds and Consumer Reports publish automobile ratings, and publications like Zagat provide
restaurantreviews. The profitabilityofsuchinformationenterprises indicatesthatthe information
is valuable—but exactly how valuable is it? In some cases, government or nonprofit consumer-
interest agencies have assumed the role of information provider. Does the information benefit
consumersenoughtowarrantthecostsofitsacquisitionanddissemination?
In this paper we attempt to answer these questions in the context of employee health plan de-
cisions. Foremployeeschoosingfromamenuofhealthplanoptions,howvaluableare publicized
planratings inmakingthedecision? The NationalCommitteefor QualityAssurance (NCQA), an
independent nonprofit agency that serves as a “watchdog for the managed care industry,” collects
and actively disseminates information about health insurance plans. The ratings and statistics are
usedbylargeemployerstoinformtheiremployeesaboutplans,andforaperiodoftimeinthelate
1990’ssummaries of the ratings were publishedin a major nationalnews magazine, U.S.News &
World Report. Using enrollment data for a large sample of U.S. government annuitants, we mea-
suretheimpactofthehealthplanratingsonindividuals’choices,anduseourestimatestocalculate
thevalue(toconsumers)oftheinformation.
This study is not the first to analyze consumer reponses to health plan quality information.
Wedig and Tai-Seale (2002) examine data on federal employees in 1995 and 1996, when health
planreportcardswerefirstprovided,andreportevidencethatplanratingssignificantlyinfluenced
individuals’ decisions. Beaulieu (2002) examined the health plan choices of Harvard University
employees and found that the provisionof qualityinformationin 1997 had a small but significant
effect. Scanlonetal(2002)useemployeedatafromGeneralMotorstostudyhealthplandecisions;
they find that employees respond to overall quality indices but not to specific quality measures.
Using the same dataset, Chernew et al (2004) estimate the parameters of a Bayesian learning
model, in which reported plan ratings cause individuals to update their prior beliefs about plan
quality. Theirfindingsconfirmthepositivevalueofinformation,butalsosuggestthatmuchofthe
informationinreportedratingswasalreadyknown.
2