NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHAT ARE FIRMS? EVOLUTION FROM
BIRTH TO PUBLIC COMPANIES
Steven N. Kaplan
Berk A. Sensoy
Per Strömberg
Working Paper 11581
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11581
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2005
Kaplan: University of Chicago Graduate School of Business and NBER, Sensoy: University of Chicago
Graduate School of Business, and Strömberg: SIFR. This research has been supported by the Kauffman
Foundation, by the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation and the Olin Foundation through grants to the
Center for the Study of the Economy and the State, and by the Center for Research in Security Prices. We
thank the venture capital partnerships for providing data. We thank Andres Almazan, Ulf Axelson, George
Baker, Ola Bengtsson, Effi Benmelech, Patrick Bolton, Zsuzsanna Fluck, Oliver Hart, Thomas Hellman,
Bengt Holmstrom, Josh Lerner, Jeremy Stein, Krishnamurthy Subramanian, Lucy White, Luigi Zingales, and
seminar participants at the CEPR Summer Symposium at Gerzensee, Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
Harvard University, NBER Entrepreneurship Group, Stockholm School of Economics, and the University
of Chicago for helpful comments. Address correspondence to Steven Kaplan, University of Chicago
Graduate School of Business, 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637 or e-mail at
skaplan@uhicago.edu.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Steven N. Kaplan, Berk A. Sensoy and Per Strömberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

What Are Firms? Evolution from Birth to Public Companies
Steven N. Kaplan, Berk A. Sensoy and Per Strömberg
NBER Working Paper No. 11581
August 2005
JEL No. L2, G3
ABSTRACT
We study how firm characteristics evolve from early business plan to initial public offering to public
company for 49 venture capital financed companies. The average time elapsed is almost 6 years.
We describe the financial performance, business idea, point(s) of differentiation, non-human capital
assets, growth strategy, customers, competitors, alliances, top management, ownership structure, and
the board of directors. Our analysis focuses on the nature and stability of those firm attributes. Firm
business lines remain remarkably stable from business plan through public company. Within those
business lines, non-human capital aspects of the businesses appear more stable than human capital
aspects. In the cross-section, firms with more alienable assets have substantially more human capital
turnover.
Steven Kaplan Per Stromberg
Graduate School of Business Swedish Institute for Financial Research
The University of Chicago Saltmätargatan 19A
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue SE-113 59 Stockholm
Chicago, IL 60637 SWEDEN
and NBER and NBER
skaplan@gsb.uchicago.edu per.stromberg@cifr.org
Berk Sensoy
Graduate School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
bsensoy@gsb.uchicago.edu

Introduction
Since Coase (1937), economists have attempted to understand why firms exist and what constitutes
firms.1 Despite the long history of theory and empirical work, there is little systematic or non-case evidence
concerning what constitutes a firm at birth and how a firm evolves from birth to mature company. In this
paper, we provide such evidence by studying 49 venture capital-financed firms from early business plan to
initial public offering (IPO) to public company (three years after the IPO).
This exercise has two goals. First, we provide a systematic description of the early life and evolution
of an important sample of firms. Second, we consider how our findings can be interpreted in relation to
existing theories of the firm and what new theories might try to explain.
Our analysis begins with the identification and classification of firm characteristics when the firms
are very young (at the time of an early business plan). Fewer than half the sample firms have revenues at
that time. For each sample firm, we describe the financial performance, business idea, point(s) of
differentiation, non-human capital assets and technology, growth strategy, customers, competitors, alliances,
top management, ownership structure, and board of directors. We then consider how firm financial measures
and firm characteristics evolve by describing the firms at the IPO and at the third annual report after the IPO.
We pay particular attention to measuring if those characteristics remain constant, change, or disappear.
After describing the initial characteristics and evolution of these firms, we examine two cross-
sectional relationships. We consider the relation between human capital turnover and the nature of firm
assets. Then, we consider the division of value between human and non-human capital assets by estimating
the determinants of founder ownership.
In describing the initial characteristics of firms and how they evolve, we try to shed light on different
theories of the firm. While some of these theories are motivated by specific examples or cases, we provide
some of the first systematic and (relatively) large sample evidence on these issues.
Several theories emphasize the difference between non-human and human assets. For example, the
basic assumption of the Hart-Moore framework is that firms are defined by their non-human assets. In the
1 Both Holmstrom and Roberts (1998) and Gibbons (2004) describe and summarize some of this work.
1

words of Hart (1995), “a firm’s non-human assets, then, simply represent the glue that keeps the firm
together, whatever this may be … Control over non-human assets leads to control over human assets… If
non-human assets do not exist, then it is not clear what keeps the firm together.” (p. 57). Holmström (1999)
comes to a similar conclusion, but argues that firm ownership of non-human assets allows the firm to
structure internal incentives and to influence external parties (e.g., suppliers) who contract with the firm.
Two aspects of our analysis address these theories. First, we try to identify the “glue” that holds
firms together and determine the extent to which the glue derives from non-human or human assets. Second,
to the extent that the theories are static theories (in that they assume a non-human asset or glue already
exists), we provide evidence as to the stage of a firm at which the glue emerges or “sticks” and how the
“glue” evolves over a firm’s life cycle.
We also relate our results to theories of the firm that emphasize the existence of specific assets or
resources that are critical to the firm’s evolution and growth. In particular, Wernerfelt (1984) and Rajan and
Zingales (2001b) focus on critical resources. A critical resource may be a person, “an idea, good customer
relationships, a new tool, or superior management technique.” According to these theories, a “firm is a web
of specific investments built around a critical resource or resources… At some point, the critical resource
becomes the web of specific investment itself.” [Zingales (2000)]. One can interpret this latter statement as
something of a dynamic theory. By examining firms’ resources (non-human and human assets) early in their
lives and over time, we shed light on the nature of critical resources and the periods in which they are
critical.
The theories above (as well as others such as Hart and Moore (1994)) also have implications for how
rents are divided between providers of human (founders) and non-human capital and the ability of firms to
raise outside financing. When specific human capital is more crucial, these models suggest that the specific
human capital will capture more of the rents and make it more difficult to finance firms. With our data, we
estimate the magnitude of the rents retained by specific human capital (founders) and the relation of those
rents to the nature of the firms’ assets.
2