NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE INCREDIBLE VOLCKER DISINFLATION
Marvin Goodfriend
Robert King
Working Paper 11562
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11562
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2005
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Marvin Goodfriend and Robert King. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Incredible Volcker Disinflation
Marvin Goodfriend and Robert King
NBER Working Paper No. 11562
August 2005
JEL No. E3, E4, E5, N1
ABSTRACT
Using a simple modern macroeconomic model, we argue that the real effects of the Volcker
disinflation in the early 1980s were mainly due to imperfect credibility, evident in volatility and
stubbornness of long-term interest rates. Studying recently released transcripts of the Federal Open
Market Committee, we find -- to our surprise -- that Volcker and other FOMC members also
regarded long-term interest rates as key indicators of inflation expectations and of their
disinflationary policy's credibility. We also consider the interplay of monetary targets, operating
procedures, and credibility during the Volcker disinflation.
Marvin Goodfriend
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
701 East Byrd Street
Richmond, VA 23219
marvin.goodfriend@rich.frb.org
Robert G. King
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
rking@bu.edu

The Incredible Volcker Disinflation 1
1. Introduction1
In August 1979, when Paul Volcker became chairman of the Federal
Reserve Board, the annual average inflation rate in the United States
was 9%. Inflation had risen by 3 percentage points over the prior eigh-
teen months and there were indications that it was poised to continue
to rise (as it did, rising to a peak of 11% in early 1980). The Fed had
pursued restrictive monetary policy to stabilize inflation on a number
of occasions in the prior two decades but, each time, inflation moved
higher shortly thereafter. Against the backdrop of a volatile interna-
tional and domestic situation in the early 1980s, the Fed brought the
inflation rate down to 4% by the end of 1983. During this period, the
U.S. experienced two recessions generally attributed to disinflationary
monetary policy, the 1981-82 recession exhibiting the largest cumula-
tivebusiness cycledeclineof employmentandoutput inthepost-World
War II period.
The “rise and fall” of inflation in the post-war period, and the Vol-
cker disinflation in particular, are central events that attracted many
economists to macroeconomics and have been the subject of a huge
body of research. We first met Bennett McCallum in the late 1970s
and have discussed these events many times during a friendship of a
quarter century. In these conversations, Ben always stood for three
practices: a careful review of the macroeconomic facts, the elabora-
tion of small forward-looking linear macroeconomic models linking the
core variables in macroeconomics, and an appraisal of events in light
of these models. In this paper, we study the Volcker disinflation using
this approach.
We think of the disinflation as “incredible” in three senses. First,
looking backward, Volcker initiated a change in the average rate of
inflation that has been large and sustained, so that the inflation peak
in early 1980 stands out dramatically in the U.S. experience shown in
Figure 1. Second, relative to the perspectives of many contemporary
1Theviews expressedin thepaperdonotnecessarilyreflect thoseof theFederal
ReserveBankofRichmondortheFederalReserveSystem. TheauthorsthankCarl
Christ, Motoo Haruta, Robert Hetzel, Andrew Levin, Allan Meltzer, Athanasios
Orphanides (our discussant), Robert E. Lucas, Jr., Bennett T. McCallum, Edward
Nelson, Robert Rasche and seminar participants at Johns Hopkins for comments
on this research.

The Incredible Volcker Disinflation 2
observers in 1978, including ourselves, it is remarkable that a reduction
in inflation took place since inflation seemed to be a permanent feature
of the U.S. economy at the time and the costs of reducing it seemed
so large. Third, we believe that “imperfect credibility of monetary
policy” was a core feature of the disinflation on several dimensions that
we highlight further below.
Prior to the disinflation, most economists thought that there would
be large and protracted output losses from reducing the long-term rate
of inflation in the United States. Notably, Okun [1978] surveyed six
macroeconomic Phillips curves with two common features: (i) “all...are
essentially accelerationist, implying virtually no long-run trade-off be-
tween inflation and unemployment,” and (ii) “all point to a very costly
short-run trade-off”. Specifically, Okun reported that the average esti-
mate of “the cost of a 1 point reduction in the basic inflation rate is
10 percent of a year’s GNP, with a range of 6 percent to 18 percent.”
Thus, if it had led to a downturn lasting four years, the 6 percent-
age point reduction in inflation engineered by the Volcker Fed would
have led to a modern Great Contraction, with output averaging 9 to
27 percent below capacity for a total loss of 36 to 108 percent.
Infact,therealconsequencesofthedisinflationweresharplysmaller
than Okun’s predictions. Figure 2 shows the decline in inflation and in
realactivityduringtheVolckerdisinflation,whichinvolvesacumulative
output loss of about 20 percent according to traditional calculations.
While far less than predicted, the output losses were substantial by the
standards of post-war U.S. history and had great effect on the lives
of many individuals during the period, as we recall from discussions
with friends, relatives, and neighbors. It is now fairly standard for
macroeconomists to suggest that the Volcker disinflation had a lower
thanpredictedrealoutputcostpreciselybecauseofVolcker’scredibility.
By contrast, we think that the reduction in inflation engineered by
the Fed under Volcker was accompanied by substantial output losses
precisely because it was viewed as not credible, in the sense that firms
and households believed for several years that the reduction in inflation
was temporary with a return to high inflation likely.
Imperfect credibility in a macroeconomic model: We build a very
simplemacroeconomicmodeloftheVolckerdisinflationwhichattributes
all output costs to imperfect credibility. To match the actual decline