NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO LOCAL ANALYSTS KNOW MORE?
A CROSS-COUNTRY STUDY OF THE PERFORMANCE OF
LOCAL ANALYSTS AND FOREIGN ANALYSTS
Kee-Hong Bae
René M. Stulz
Hongping Tan
Working Paper 11697
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11697
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2005
Respectively, Bank of Montreal Associate Professor of Finance, Queen’s University, Reese Chair of Banking
and Monetary Economics, The Ohio State University, NBER and ECGI, and Ph.D. candidate in finance,
Queen’s University. We are grateful to Thomson Financial for access to their Institutional Brokers Estimate
System (I/B/E/S) provided as part of a broad academic program to encourage earnings expectations research.
We also thank Roger Loh for useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Kee-Hong Bae, René M. Stulz, and Hongping Tan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Do Local Analysts Know More? A Cross-Country Study of the Performance of Local Analysts
and Foreign Analysts
Kee-Hong Bae, René M. Stulz, and Hongping Tan
NBER Working Paper No. 11697
October 2005
JEL No. F30, G11, G14, G24
ABSTRACT
This paper examines whether analysts resident in a country make more precise earnings forecasts
for firms in that country than analysts who are not resident in that country. Using a sample of 32
countries, we find that there is an economically and statistically significant analyst local advantage
even after controlling for firm and analyst characteristics. The importance of the local advantage is
inversely related to the quality of the information provided by firms. In particular, the local
advantage is high in countries where earnings are smoothed more, less information is disclosed by
firms, and firm idiosyncratic information explains a smaller fraction of stock returns. The local
advantage is also negatively related to market participation by foreign investors and by institutions
and positively related to holdings by insiders. U.S. investors underweight a country's stocks more
in their portfolios if that country has a higher analyst local advantage.
Kee-Hong Bae
Queen’s University
kbae@business.queensu.ca
René M. Stulz
Fisher College of Business, Ohio State University
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu
Hongping Tan
Queen’s University
ptan@business.queensu.ca

1. Introduction
Does distance reduce the quality of the information investors have? A large literature investigates the
role of distance in investors’ portfolio decisions and investment performance. The largest segment of this
literature focuses on investors who are separated by borders, but a growing segment investigates the role
of distance within countries. Some of the literature concludes that local investors have an advantage. In
the international finance literature, it is often believed that at least part of the home bias can be accounted
for by the information advantage of local investors.1 However, there are also papers that find that foreign
investors who participate in a market can be better informed than local investors. In contrast to most
studies which focus on investor choices and performance, in this paper we investigate directly whether
distance affects the quality of information possessed by one group of market participants, analysts. It is
known that in the U.S. analysts who are closer to the headquarters of a firm have an information
advantage (Malloy, 2005). We find that local analysts have a significant information advantage over
foreign analysts for a large sample of countries.
We investigate the relation between the precision of earnings forecasts of local analysts and of foreign
analysts for 32 countries for 2001 through 2003. Our main measure of accuracy for an analyst is the price-
scaled absolute forecast error of the analyst minus the average price-scaled absolute forecast error across
analysts for the earnings forecasted. We define the local analyst advantage as the difference between the
accuracy of local analysts and the accuracy of foreign analysts. If the local analysts have better
information, they should predict earnings with more precision. We find that this is the case both for
univariate comparisons and when we control for various determinants of forecast accuracy. The
difference in the average forecast error in univariate comparisons between local and foreign analysts
corresponds to 7.8 percent of the average price-scaled forecast error. When we control for various
determinants of the forecast error, the local advantage falls slightly in most cases.
1 See Lewis (1999) and Karolyi and Stulz (2003) for reviews of the literature on the home bias.
2

Our dataset makes it possible to investigate whether the advantage of local analysts arises because
they belong to local brokerage houses which might have established relationships with the local firms
they follow or because local analysts are located close to the firms they follow. We consider separately
local analysts belonging to local firms and local analysts belonging to foreign firms. We find that there is
no difference between the two groups of analysts.
There is considerable variation in the magnitude of the advantage of local analysts. Out of 32
countries, the estimate of the advantage of local analysts is positive in 26 countries and significantly
positive in 10 countries. We use this cross-country variation to investigate why local analysts have an
advantage.
A plausible explanation for the local advantage is that local analysts have access to information
because they are on the spot. They can talk to firm representatives in person. They have access to
information by observing what goes on in firms directly. For instance, if a firm is unusually busy, they
might observe lots of trucks being loaded. Alternatively, they might talk to employees, customers,
competitors. With this explanation, we would expect that the local advantage is inversely related to the
quality of the information put forward by the firm. We find that this is strongly the case. Using the S&P
Transparency and Disclosure index, we find a smaller analyst local advantage for firms that have an index
value above the sample median. Similarly, the analyst local advantage is significantly lower in countries
with above-median accounting transparency. There is no analyst local advantage in countries where
earnings management is less prevalent. Further, the local advantage is significantly lower in countries
where stock returns incorporate more idiosyncratic information. More precisely, the local advantage is
strong in countries where the aggregate stock market return has much explanatory power for individual
stock returns as measured by the R2 measure of Morck, Yeung, and Yu (2000).
The local advantage is closely tied to the quality of disclosure. More disclosure levels the playing
field for analysts. Generally, though, countries with low disclosure are also countries with weaker
investor protection and poorer financial and economic development. We find that measures of financial
development are not associated with the local advantage. One would think that local analysts would be
3