NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ESTIMATING BANK TRADING RISK:
A FACTOR MODEL APPROACH
James O’Brien
Jeremy Berkowitz
Working Paper 11608
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11608
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2005
Prepared for the NBER Conference on the Risks of Financial Institutions. We are grateful for the substantial
help of Mathew Chesnes in developing programs and compiling data bases and to Anthony Cho for valuable
research assistance. For helpful suggestions, we would like to thank Andy Lo, Sean Campbell, Paul Kupiec
(our discussant), Ken Abbott (our discussant), Peter Christoffersen, Mark Flannery, Bill English, Egon
Zakrajsek, Alexandre Baptista, Andrew Karolyi and the editors, Mark Carey and Rene Stulz. The views
expressed are solely those of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by James O’Brien and Jeremy Berkowitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Estimating Bank Trading Risk: A Factor Model Approach
James O’Brien and Jeremy Berkowitz
NBER Working Paper No. 11608
September 2005
JEL No. G21
ABSTRACT
Risk in bank trading portfolios and its management are potentially important to the banks’ soundness
and to the functioning of securities and derivatives markets. In this paper, proprietary daily trading
revenues of 6 large dealer banks are used to study the bank dealers’ market risks using a market
factor model approach. Dealers’ exposures to exchange rate, interest rate, equity, and credit market
factors are estimated. A factor model framework for variable exposures is presented and two
modeling approaches are used: a random coefficient model and rolling factor regressions. The results
indicate small average market exposures with significant but relatively moderate variation in
exposures over time. Except for interest rates, there is heterogeneity in market exposures across the
dealers. For interest rates, the dealers have small average long exposures and exposures vary
inversely with the level of rates. Implications for aggregate bank dealer risk and market stability
issues are discussed.
James O’Brien
Division of Research and Statistics
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System
Washington, DC 20551
jmobrien@frb.org
Jeremy Berkowitz
Department of Finance
University of Houston
334 Melcher Hall
Houston, TX 77204-6021
jberkowitz@uh.edu

Estimating Bank Trading Risk: A Factor Model Approach
1. Introduction
Bank dealers play a central role in securities and derivatives markets and are active
traders in their own right. Their trading risks and risk management are important to the
banks’ soundness and the functioning of securities and derivatives markets. In this paper, we
use proprietary daily trading revenues of 6 large bank dealers to study their market risks
using a market factor model approach. We estimate the bank dealers’ exposures to exchange
rate, interest rate, equity, and credit market factors.
Traditionally, the safety and soundness of the banking system has been the principal
focus of interest in bank dealer risk. Important for this purpose is the level of market risk
taken by bank dealers and commonality in their risk exposures. In recent literature, the focus
has been extended to the effects of bank dealer and other trading institutions’ risk
management policies on market stability. In using risk measures based on market volatility
and in particular Value-at-Risk (VaR), it has been argued that institutions’ demands for risky
assets will move together, which will lead to exaggerated price movements and market
instability. When market volatility is low, institutions will increase demands to hold risky
assets, putting upward pressure on prices and, when market volatility becomes high,
institutions will attempt to reduce their positions in risky assets, putting downward pressure
on prices. This behavior is said to have exaggerated market instability in the late summer
and fall of 1998 following the Russian ruble devaluation and debt moratorium and the near
failure of LTCM.1
1 For dynamic analyses of market effects of a VaR constraint, see Basak and Shapiro (2001), Danielsson, Shin,
and Zigrand (2002), Persaud (2002), and Morris and Shin (1999). For different analyses of the risk-taking
incentives and portfolio choice effects of a VaR constraint, see Basak and Shapiro (2001), Cuoco and Liu
(2003), and Alexander and Baptista (2004).
2

Despite the strong interest, there has been little study of bank dealer risks and risk
management and there appears to be little formal evidence on the size, variation, or
commonality in dealer risks. In significant measure, this owes to limited public information
on dealer positions and income which limits the study of dealer risks and risk management.
Individual banks report on trading positions and revenues only quarterly and reporting is
limited to securities and derivatives in broad market categories. While there is weekly
reporting, it includes security positions and transactions but only limited information on
derivatives and data is reported only for aggregated primary (bank and non-bank) dealers.2
Bank VaRs, which forecast the maximum loss on the trading portfolio with a given
confidence, provide a direct measure of market risk. However VaRs do not reveal the
dealers’ underlying market exposures or their size. Berkowitz and O’Brien (2002) also found
the risk forecast performance of the daily VaRs for the banks examined in this study to be
weak. Further, there was no common pattern in the correlation of VaRs across the banks.
Here we apply a factor model to the daily trading revenues of 6 large bank dealers to
estimate their market risk exposures. Factor models have long been used to study portfolio
and firm market risks (e.g., Chen, Roll and Ross (1986), Flannery and James (1984)). Closer
to our objectives is their application to mutual fund and hedge fund returns to characterize
the market risks in the funds’ portfolios (e.g., Sharpe (1992), Fung and Hsieh (1997)).
With daily trading revenues, we can study the effects of daily market price moves on
the banks’ trading portfolios. Also, the sample sizes are large, about 1200 daily observations
per bank. However, the trading revenue data is subject to significant limitations as well.
2 Jorion (2005) analyzes bank dealer trading risks and VaRs and implications for systemic market risk using
quarterly reported trading revenues and VaR-based market risk capital requirements. Adrian and Fleming
(2005) provide a description of data collected and reported for primary securities dealers and present some
evidence on dealer risk-taking based on dealer financing data.
3