NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXCHANGE-RATE PASS-THROUGH TO
IMPORT PRICES IN THE EURO AREA
José Manuel Campa
Linda S. Goldberg
José M. González-Mínguez
Working Paper 11632
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11632
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2005
The views expressed in this paper are those of the individual authors and do not necessarily reflect the
position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. Address correspondences
to José M. Campa, IESE Business School, Camino del Cerro de Aguila 3, 28023 E-Madrid; or Linda S.
Goldberg, Federal Reserve Bank of NY, Research Department, 33 Liberty St, New York, N.Y. 10045. email:
jcampa@iese.edu or Linda.Goldberg@ny.frb.org. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by José Manuel Campa, Linda S. Goldberg and José M. González-Mínguez. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Exchange-Rate Pass-Through to Import Prices in the Euro Area
José Manuel Campa, Linda S. Goldberg and José M. González-Mínguez
NBER Working Paper No. 11632
September 2005
JEL No. F3, F4
ABSTRACT
This paper presents an empirical analysis of transmission rates from exchange rate movements to
import prices, across countries and product categories, in the euro area over the last fifteen years. Our
results show that the transmission of exchange rate changes to import prices in the short run is high,
although incomplete, and that it differs across industries and countries; in the long run, exchange rate
pass-through is higher and close to one. We find no strong statistical evidence that the introduction
of the euro caused a structural change in this transmission. Although estimated point elasticities seem
to have declined since the introduction of the euro, we find little evidence of a structural break in the
transmission of exchange rate movements except in the case of some manufacturing industries. And
since the euro was introduced, industries producing differentiated goods have been more likely to
experience reduced rates of exchange rate pass-through to import prices. Exchange rate changes
continue to lead to large changes in import prices across euro-area countries.
José Manuel Campa
IESE Business School
Camino del Cerro de Aguila 3
28023 E-Madrid
SPAIN
jcampa@iese.edu
Linda S. Goldberg
Federal Reserve Bank of NY
Research Department
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER
linda.goldberg@ny.frb.org

I. Introduction
While exchange rate pass-through has long been of interest, the focus of this interest has
evolved considerably over time. After a long period of debate over the law of one price and
convergence across countries, beginning in the late 1980s exchange rate pass-through
studies emphasized industrial organization and the role of segmentation and price
discrimination across geographically distinct product markets. More recently, pass-through
issues play a central role in debates over appropriate monetary policies, exchange rate
regime optimality in general equilibrium models, and adjustment scenarios with respect to
country external imbalances. These debates have broad implications for the conduct of
monetary policy, for macroeconomic stability, international transmission of shocks and
efforts to contain large imbalances in trade and international capital flows.
Another issue receiving attention in the recent macroeconomic debate is the stability
of exchange rate pass-through rates over time. Taylor (2000), Goldfajn and Werlang (2000),
Campa and Goldberg (forthcoming), and Chinn and Frankel (2005), have argued that pass-
through rates may have been declining over time in some countries. The Brazilian
experience of the late 1990s is often cited. In this experience, consumer prices responded
very little to a large home currency depreciation, in sharp contrast with past depreciation
episodes. Campa and Goldberg (forthcoming) caution against the assumption that pass-
through has been declining over time across all OECD countries. While some countries have
experienced reduced transmission of exchange rate changes into import prices, much of their
measured declines are due to a change in the composition of their import bundle toward
goods with lower pass-through elasticities. Other recent studies argue that declining pass-
through has been more pervasive, at least for the United States (Marazzi et al. 2005).
However, measurement and interpretation issues leave these findings under debate. The
issue posed in these and related studies is whether this decline in pass-through rates is
statistically significant, and if so whether it stems from improved macroeconomic conditions
in the importing countries, changing competitive conditions facing exporters, changes in the
composition of imports or from some other economic changes.
1

The analysis of aggregate pass-through rates can be divided into two parts. The first
part is a border phenomenon and addresses the extent to which there are changes in pass-
through rates at the level of import prices. The second issue addresses the extent to which
these border price changes are transmitted to consumers or even offset by anticipated current
or future monetary policy changes. Our analysis specifically deals with the former question.
This component of the question motivates an analysis that explicitly focuses on the pricing
and invoicing decisions of the foreign exporter.
In this paper, we begin with a review of the conceptual underpinnings of exchange
rate pass through. While debates over pass through elasticities seem to focus on estimates,
theoretical analyses appropriately emphasize that there are clear structural forces at work in
determining the sensitivities of prices to exchange rates (as well as the more general
equilibrium determination of exchange rates). In Section III we apply these lessons to
import prices for the euro area countries. We estimate short- and long-run pass-through
elasticities and allow them to differ by country of destination and by industry. Short-run
pass-through is incomplete and country- and industry-specific. In the long-run, elasticities
are larger, although it can generally be rejected that they are equal to unity. Moreover, long-
run pass-through rates are not statistically different for most industries in each country and
for most countries given an industry. Finally, we perform tests of structural stability in the
pass-through rates around the introduction of the euro. Although several arguments point
towards a possible reduction in the rates of transmission of exchange rate movements to
import prices after the start of EMU, there is only very weak statistical evidence in that
direction.
II. Conceptual underpinnings
Pass-through of exchange rate movements into a country’s import prices has been at the
center of macroeconomic debate over the past two decades. The increased openness of most
developed economies and the incidence of large fluctuations in nominal exchange rates have
led to a need for a better understanding of the determinants of the transmission of exchange
rate changes into import prices.
2