NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RATIONAL INATTENTION: A SOLUTION
TO THE FORWARD DISCOUNT PUZZLE
Philippe Bacchetta
Eric van Wincoop
Working Paper 11633
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11633
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2005
We would like to thank Gianluca Benigno and participants at an RTN International Capital Markets meeting
and seminar participants at the universities of Illinois and St Gallen and the Hong Kong Monetary Authority.
We also thank Elmar Mertens for outstanding research assistance. Van Wincoop acknowledges financial
support from the Bankard Fund for Political Economy and the Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research.
Support from the National Centre of Competence in Research "Financial Valuation and Risk Management"
(NCCR FINRISK) is also gratefully acknowledged. The NCCR FINRISK is a research program supported
by the Swiss National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Philippe Bacchetta and Eric van Wincoop. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Rational Inattention: A Solution to the Forward Discount Puzzle
Philippe Bacchetta and Eric van Wincoop
NBER Working Paper No. 11633
September 2005
JEL No. F3, G1, E4
ABSTRACT
The uncovered interest rate parity equation is the cornerstone of most models in international macro.
However, this equation does not hold empirically since the forward discount, or interest rate
differential, is negatively related to the subsequent change in the exchange rate. This forward
discount puzzle is one of the most extensively researched areas in international finance. It implies
that excess returns on foreign currency investments are predictable. In this paper we propose a new
explanation for this puzzle based on rational inattention. We develop a model where investors face
a cost of collecting and processing information. Investors with low information processing costs
trade actively, while other investors are inattentive and trade infrequently. We calibrate the model
to the data and show that (i) inattention can account for most of the observed predictability of excess
returns in the foreign exchange market, (ii) the benefit from frequent trading is relatively small so
that few investors choose to be attentive, (iii) average expectational errors about future exchange
rates are predictable in a way consistent with survey data for market participants, and (iv) the model
can account for the puzzle of delayed overshooting of the exchange rate in response to interest rate
shocks.
Philippe Bacchetta Eric Van Wincoop
Study Center Gerzensee Department of Economics
Dorfstr. 2 P.O. Box 21 University of Virginia
CH-3115 Gerzensee P.O. Box 400182
SWITZERLAND Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
phbacchetta@szgerzensee.ch and NBER
vanwincoop@virginia.edu

1 Introduction
One of the best established puzzles in international (cid:12)nance is the forward discount
puzzle. Fama (1984) illuminated the problem with a regression of the monthly
change in the exchange rate on the preceding one-month forward premium. The
uncovered interest rate parity equation, which is the cornerstone of many models
in international macro, implies a coe(cid:14)cient of one. But surprisingly Fama found a
negative coe(cid:14)cient for each of nine di(cid:11)erent currencies. This evidence implies that
excess returns on foreign currency investment are predictable.1 Using more recent
data from 1978 to 2004, panel A of Table 1 presents evidence for the average of
5 currencies against the US dollar. A regression of the 3-month excess return of
a foreign currency investment on the preceding 3-month forward discount yields
an average coe(cid:14)cient of -2.5.2 Similar evidence of excess return predictability
has been extensively documented for stock and bond markets. While there are
potential statistical problems in these predictability regressions, they do not fully
explain the results.3
Inthispaperwefocusontheforeignexchangemarket. Twosetsofexplanations
for the forward discount puzzle have been proposed in the literature: time-varying
risk premia and predictable expectational errors. In the (cid:12)rst approach, the risk
premiumisbothtimevaryingandnegativelycorrelatedwiththeforwardpremium.
Numerous studies have attempted to implement this explanation, but so far have
fallen short of explaining the puzzle.4 In the second approach investors make
1For surveys see Lewis (1995) and Engel (1996). Some of the more recent contributions on
the forward discount puzzle include Backus, Foresi and Telmer (2001), Beakert, Hodrick and
Marshall (1997), Chaboud and Wright (2005), Chinn and Meredith (2005), Chinn and Frankel
(2002), Fisher (2005), Flood and Rose (2001), Gourinchas and Tornell (2004), Mark and Wu
(1998) and Sarno, Valente and Leon (2004). Sarno (2005) provides a recent survey.
2The regression in Panel A of Table 1 is q =(cid:11)+(cid:12)fd +u where q =s s fd
t+1 t t+1 t+1 t+1 t t
(cid:0) (cid:0)
istheexcessreturnonaninvestmentinforeigncurrency,s isthelognominalexchangerateand
t
fd is the forward discount.
t
3The main statistical problems of excess return regressions relate to small sample bias and
bias caused by the persistence of right hand side variables (e.g. forward discount, interest rate
or dividend yield). However, these problems usually can only explain a part of the total bias.
See, for example, Stambaugh (1999), Campbell and Yogo (2005), or Liu and Maynard (2005).
4See the surveys by Lewis (1995) and Engel (1996), which reach this conclusion. Bekaert,
Hodrick and Marshall (1997) (cid:12)nd that even a model with (cid:12)rst-order risk aversion, in which
risk-premia are very volatile, cannot account for the evidence.
1

predictable expectational errors about future exchange rates that are negatively
correlated with the forward premium. Froot and Frankel (1989) use exchange rate
survey data to show that this can explain the entire forward discount bias. Using
an updated data set, Panel B of Table 1 presents evidence for 5 currencies show-
ing that expectational errors by market participants about future exchange rates
continue to be highly predictable by the forward discount.5 While the empirical
evidence appears more consistent with this second explanation, many researchers
feel uneasy because predictable expectational errors appear to imply deviations
from rationality.
In this paper we propose an explanation for the forward discount puzzle where
investors are rational, but may make predictable expectational errors. There are
signi(cid:12)cant costs associated both with collecting information, processing informa-
tion and making decisions based on that information. These costs are added to
the usual transaction costs. This makes it optimal for many investors to only in-
frequently assess available information and revise portfolios.6 Investors may there-
fore be rationally inattentive, which gives rise to predictable expectational errors.
Froot and Thaler (1990) and Lyons (2001) have informally argued that models
where some agents are slow in responding to new information may explain the
forward discount puzzle. Here we formally show that a model with rational inat-
tention calibrated to the data can explain the forward bias puzzle. In a companion
paper (Bacchetta and van Wincoop, 2005), we show that a similar mechanism can
5The survey data is from Forecasts Unlimited Inc. It is based on monthly forecasts by 43
(cid:12)nancial institutions from 1986 to 2004. See Bacchetta, Mertens, and van Wincoop (2005) for
more details.
6Transaction costs are fundamentally di(cid:11)erent in that they are only incurred if assets are
traded. After observing the state of nature each period, investors can decide whether to trade
or not. These are state-dependent decision rules. By contrast, information processing costs
are incurred whether the resulting information leads to any transactions or not. In contrast to
transaction costs, the decision about when to incur these costs is not based on current informa-
tion, but on past information. They lead to time-dependent decision rules, whereby investors
process information infrequently and decide in advance when to process information next. The
two types of costs can interact though. When there are information processing costs, investors
processinformationlessfrequentlywhentheyalsofacetransactioncosts. Baldwin(1990)studies
deviationsfromuncoveredinterestrateparitythatariseasaresultoftransactioncostsalone. In
that case investors do not make predictable expectational errors since they continuously process
all available information.
2