NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INVESTOR INATTENTION, FIRM REACTION,
AND FRIDAY EARNINGS ANNOUNCEMENTS
Stefano DellaVigna
Joshua Pollet
Working Paper 11683
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11683
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2005
An earlier version of the paper was distributed under the title “Strategic Release of Information on Friday:
Evidence from Earnings Announcements”. We thank John Campbell, David Card, Raj Chetty, Kent Daniel,
Yonca Ertimur, John Graham, David Hirshleifer, Wei Jiang, Lawrence Katz, David Laibson, Owen Lamont,
Ulrike Malmendier, Maria Nondorf, Allen Poteshman, Torsten Persson, Matthew Rabin, Jeremy Stein, Xiao-
Jun Zhang, and audiences at Fuqua, the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Kellogg, IIES
(Stockholm), London Business School, University College (London), UC Berkeley, UI Urbana-Champaign,
University of Zurich, the Adam Smith Asset Pricing Conference (LBS), the AEA Meetings 2005, the Yale
Conference on Behavioral Science, and SITE 2004 (Psychology and Economics) for valuable comments.
Jessica Chan, Eric Fleekop, Richard Kim, Clarice Li, Ming Mai, Raymond Son, Matthew Stone, and Terry
Yee helped collect the announcement dates from the newswires. Dan Acland and Saurabh Bhargava provided
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Stefano DellaVigna and Joshua Pollet. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Investor Inattention, Firm Reaction, and Friday Earnings Announcements
Stefano DellaVigna and Joshua Pollet
NBER Working Paper No. 11683
October 2005
JEL No. G1, G3, J0
ABSTRACT
Do firms release news strategically in response to investor inattention? We consider news about
earnings and analyze the response of returns to announcements on Friday and other weekdays. Friday
announcements have less immediate and more delayed stock return response. The delayed response
as a percentage of the total response is 60 percent on Friday and 40 percent on other weekdays. In
addition, abnormal trading volume around announcement day is 10 percent lower for Friday
announcements. These findings suggest that weekends distract investor attention temporarily. They
support explanations of post-earning announcement drift based on underreaction to information
caused by limited attention. We also document that firms release worse announcements on Friday.
Friday announcements are associated with a 45 percent higher probability of a negative earnings
surprise and a 50 basis points lower abnormal return. The firm-based evidence of strategic news
release corroborates the investor-based evidence of inattention on Friday. The results for stock
returns, volume, and strategic behavior support the hypothesis of limited attention.
Stefano DellaVigna
UC, Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
sdellavi@berkeley.edu
Joshua Pollet
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 S. Sixth St.
Champaign, IL 61820
pollet@uiuc.edu

1 Introduction
Consumers are bombarded with information regarding their personal and professional obliga-
tions. The cognitive capacities to process all of this information are limited. Limited cognitive
capacities can explain, among other findings, the use of heuristics in cognitive decision-making
(Gabaix et al., 2002) and underreaction to information (Huberman and Tomer, 2001). Despite
the importance of limits to cognitive resources, little evidence exists on the extent to which
the quality of decision-making declines in response to distractions.
Weexamineadecisionwhereattentiontonewinformationplaysacrucialrole, theresponse
to earnings surprises. We consider a regular event that is likely to distract investors from job-
related tasks, the weekend. We compare the reaction to earnings surprises for announcements
that occur just before the weekend, on Friday, to the reaction on other weekdays.
If weekends distract investors and lower the quality of decision-making, the immediate
response to Friday earnings surprises should be less pronounced. As investors revisit their
decisions in subsequent periods, the information should eventually be incorporated in stock
prices. As a result, the delayed response, measured by the post-earnings announcement drift,
should be of greater magnitude for Friday announcements.
This paper contributes to the debate regarding the causes of post-earnings announcement
driftandmomentum. Behavioral explanationsfortheseanomaliesdependondispositioneffect
(Grinblatt and Han, 2002; Frazzini, 2004), fluctuations in overconfidence (Daniel, Hirshleifer,
andSubrahmanyam,1998),beliefsaboutmeanreversion(Barberis,Shleifer,andVishny,1998),
or underreaction to information due to cognitive limits (Hong and Stein, 1999). Of these
explanations,onlyunderreactiontoinformationmakesthepredictionthatdistractionsincrease
the drift. Our paper, therefore, constitutes a novel test of the underreaction explanation.
We also consider the firm reaction to investor distraction. Managers that maximize short-
term value may exploit investor inattention by releasing negative announcements on Friday.
The tendency to release bad news on Friday is allegedly common among firms and politicians.
However, little evidence exists, because it is difficult to quantify good and bad news. We
exploitthemeasurabilityofnewsqualityforearningsannouncementsanddocumenttheextent
of strategic release on Friday, controlling for other factors.
The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we present a model of the response of stock
prices to signals about earnings. In each period a share of the agents is distracted and does
not observe a signal regarding company performance. Given limits to arbitrage in the form
of risk aversion, the distracted agents affect prices. A larger share of inattentive investors
shrinks the immediate response and magnifies the delayed response of prices to the signals.
Distraction,therefore,increasesthepost-earningsannouncementdrift. Thecombinedresponse
to the announcement, however, is not affected by the distracted investors.
Wealsoanalyzethemanagerialdecisiontoannouncethesignalonalow-distractionorhigh-
1

distraction day. Companies that maximize the long-term share price do not have any incentive
to strategically release information. Companies that maximize short-term share value, instead,
adopt a simple threshold rule and release bad news on high-distraction days.
Intheempiricalsection, weconsiderearningsannouncementsfromJanuary1995untilJune
2004. Since we analyze the difference between Friday and non-Friday announcements, the
accuracy of the announcement date is critical. In Section 3 we devise a rule that identifies the
correct announcement date from I/B/E/S and Compustat data with over 95 percent accuracy.
In Section 4, we evaluate the immediate, delayed, and long-term stock response to informa-
tion by comparing the top and bottom quantile of the earnings surprise. The immediate stock
response is 15 percent lower for Friday announcements than for non-Friday announcements.
We find a similar attenuation using non-linear regressions for the whole sample. Conversely,
the delayed response is 60 percent larger for Friday announcements. The combined long-term
reaction is similar for Friday and non-Friday announcements.
We combine these findings in a summary measure. The delayed response as a percentage of
the total response is 60 percent on Friday and 40 percent on other weekdays. The results are
precisely estimated and are similar in the different specifications. The pattern is present for
bothpositiveandnegativesurprises, althoughtheresultsarelessprecisefornegativesurprises.
These findings are consistent with weekend distractions. Individuals are more likely to
underreact initially to Friday announcements. Eventually, investors become aware of the in-
formation they neglected and trade accordingly. The stronger delayed response reverses the
initial underreaction induced by the distractions.
If investors are more distracted on Friday, we also expect lower abnormal trading volume
for Friday announcements. In Section 5, we find that the abnormal volume is indeed 10 to
20 percent lower for Friday announcements than for non-Friday announcements. The results
remain large and significant even after the introduction of controls and firm fixed effects.
The stock return and volume results suggest that investors exhibit a lower immediate
response to Friday announcements. If firm managers wish to control the short-term response
to earnings announcements, they should release worse announcements on Friday than on other
weekdays. Indeed, in Section 6 we show that earnings announced on Friday are 25 percent
more likely to be negative, and 45 percent more likely to fail to meet analyst expectations.
Moreover, abnormal stock returns around announcement date are 50 basis points lower for
Friday announcements. The evidence on the strategic release of bad news on Friday builds on
Damodaran (1989). Damodaran documents worse earnings announcements and lower stock
returns for Friday earnings(and dividend) announcements in the period 1981-1985. Compared
to Damodaran (1989), we show that analysts are also disappointed by news released on Friday
and that the results are robust to the introduction of company fixed effects and other controls.
In addition, we provide an explanation for the release of negative news on Friday.
In Section 7 we consider alternative interpretations of the empirical findings regarding
2