NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TRADE INVOICING IN THE ACCESSION
COUNTRIES: ARE THEY SUITED TO
THE EURO?
Linda Goldberg
Working Paper 11653
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11653
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2005
Federal Reserve Bank of New York and NBER. Prepared for the International Seminar on Macroeconomics,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Budapest June 2005. Roc Armenter, Charles Engel, Rebecca
Hellerstein, Richard Portes, Cedric Tille, and participants at the ISOM meeting provided valuable comments.
Eleanor Dillon provided excellent research support. The views expressed in this paper are those of the
individual authors and do not necessarily reflect the position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or
the Federal Reserve System. Address correspondences to Linda S. Goldberg, Federal Reserve Bank of NY,
Research Department, 33 Liberty St, New York, N.Y. 10045. email: Linda.Goldberg@ny.frb.org. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2005 by Linda Goldberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Trade Invoicing in the Accession Countries: Are They Suited to the Euro?
Linda Goldberg
NBER Working Paper No. 11653
September 2005, Revised March 2006
JEL No. F3, F4
ABSTRACT
The accession countries to the euro area are increasingly binding their economic activity, external
and internal, to the euro area countries. One aspect of this phenomenon concerns the currency
invoicing of international trade transactions, where accession countries have reduced their use of the
US dollar in invoicing international trade transactions. Theory predicts that the optimal invoicing
choices for accession countries depend on the composition of goods in exports and imports and on
the macroeconomic fluctuations of trade partners, both bearing on the role of herding and hedging
considerations within exporter profitability. These considerations yield country-specific estimates
about the degree of euro-denominated invoicing of exports. I find that the exporters of some
accession countries, even in their trade transactions with the euro zone and other European Union
countries, might be pricing too much of their trade in euros rather than in dollars, thus taking on
excessive risk in international markets.
Linda S. Goldberg
Research Department, 3rd Floor
Federal Reserve Bank-New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER
linda.goldberg@ny.frb.org

I. Introduction
The accession countries to the euro area are increasingly binding their economic activity,
external and internal, to the euro area countries. One aspect of this phenomenon concerns the
currency invoicing of international trade transactions. There has been a substantial shift away
from the use of the US dollar in accession country international trade transactions. In this paper, I
explore the theoretical drivers of optimal invoicing choices for exporters, highlighting the
importance of the composition of goods in exports and imports, and the partner composition of
these forms of trade. I explore whether accession country exporters, by invoicing in euros and
thus closely aligning their trade with that of the rest of the euro area, are pursuing economically
appropriate strategies. Perhaps some of the accession country export transactions are not as well
suited to euro invoicing, leading producers with overly high euro shares in pricing to expose
themselves to excessive risk in international markets.
The analysis draws on lessons from the theoretical model of Goldberg and Tille (2005),
which presents the determinants of the relative importance of hedging motives and herding
motives in currency invoicing (and exchange rate pass through) choices by exporters. This
model motivates an empirical application to the accession countries. The model shows the role of
macroeconomic volatility and industry composition in exporter pricing strategies, demonstrating
that optimal currency invoicing strategies consist of a mix of hedging considerations and
herding. Macroeconomic volatility considerations have been emphasized in a range of papers,
from Giovannini (1988) through recent contributions by Devereux, Engel and Storegaard (2004),
Oi, Otani, and Shirota (2004), and Engel (2005). By introducing an explicit role for elasticities
of substitution in demand and decreasing returns to scale in pricing, Bacchetta and van Wincoop
(2005) and Goldberg and Tille (2005) [GT] show that macroeconomic volatility may mainly play
a role in pricing and currency invoicing decisions for differentiated products.1 Instead, they
stress that industry structure, emphasized early on by McKinnon (1979), is the key determinant
of how much herding occurs in pricing and currency invoicing decisions. Producers in highly
competitive industries, and producers facing a high degree of decreasing returns to scale in
production, may optimally mimic the pricing strategies of their competitors in markets in which
1 While Bacchetta and van Wincoop discuss this herding motive in the case where the exchange rate is the only
source of volatility, Goldberg and Tille also include volatility in wages and foreign demand. Campa and Goldberg
(2005) and Campa, Goldberg, and Gonzalez-Minguez (2005) show that macroeconomic volatility is less important
than industry features in determining exchange rate pass through into import prices.
1

their goods are sold. This leads to herding in invoice currency selection, while not explicitly
seeking to identify which currencies will be used in such herding. Various strategies have been
offered elsewhere to pin down the equilibrium choice of herding currency. One example is
through introducing “network externalities” in foreign exchange markets interacting with
transaction costs in securities markets, as in Portes and Rey (1998). Using reasonable ranges of
parameters, GT show that this herding activity could be much more important in decision
making than the influence of hedging and macroeconomic volatility.
These considerations are applied to the trade transactions of eleven countries aspiring to
join the euro area: Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Malta, Poland, Slovakia, and Slovenia. A simple picture drawn from GT motivates the focus of
the paper, which explores the extent to which accession country exporters use dollars, euros, or
other currencies in invoicing their international trade transactions. Using mostly data for 2002,
GT compared the actual share of dollar use in invoicing country exports to what might be
“expected” purely on the basis of trade with the United States and the composition of country
trade. The pattern of this relationship for a broad sample of countries is shown in Chart 1.
Chart 1 works with the assumption that all exports to the United States and all exports of
“referenced priced” and “organized-exchange” traded goods (“RW goods”) to other countries are
invoiced in dollars, the standard currency for pricing most of these transactions. If this
assumption were true, a country would have its observations lie along the 45 degree line in this
figure. Observe that many of the accession countries have invoicing patterns above the 45
degree line, suggesting that they have fewer exports invoiced in dollars compared with what
would be predicted by this simple metric. Estonia, Slovenia, Slovakia, Hungary, and the Czech
Republic all fit this description. The exception is Latvia which, like Greece, had considerably
more use of dollars in invoicing exports than expected purely on the basis of Latvia’s trade with
the United States and exports of highly substitutable goods.
What are the consequences of exporters making invoice currency choices that are
inappropriate, given observed industry features and the volatility of macroeconomic conditions?
These choices would lead to lower expected profits and more volatile profits than are optimal. As
a hypothetical, consider the case of an accession country exporter invoicing in euros while
competitors in euro area countries or in the United States are invoicing in dollars. Suppose as
well that there is a high degree of product substitutability between the exporter’s goods and its
2