NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE RISK-ADJUSTED COST OF FINANCIAL DISTRESS
Heitor Almeida
Thomas Philippon
Working Paper 11685
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11685
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2005
We wish to thank Viral Acharya, Ed Altman, Yakov Amihud, Long Chen, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, Joost
Driessen, Marty Gruber, Jing-Zhi Huang, Augustin Landier, Francis Longstaff, Matt Richardson, Pascal
Maenhout, Anthony Saunders, Ken Singleton, and seminar participants at MIT, USC, New York University,
HEC, and Rutgers University for valuable comments and suggestions. We also thank Ed Altman for
providing data on default rates of high yield bonds, and Joost Driessen for providing data on risk neutral
default probabilities. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Heitor Almeida and Thomas Philippon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

The Risk-Adjusted Cost of Financial Distress
Heitor Almeida and Thomas Philippon
NBER Working Paper No. 11685
October 2005
JEL No. G31
ABSTRACT
In this paper we argue that risk-adjustment matters for the valuation of financial distress costs, since
financial distress is more likely to happen in bad times. Systematic distress risk implies that the risk-
adjusted probability of financial distress is larger than the historical probability. Alternatively, the
correct valuation of distress costs should use a discount rate that is lower than the risk free rate. We
derive a formula for the valuation of distress costs, and propose two strategies to implement it. The
first strategy uses corporate bond spreads to derive risk-adjusted probabilities of financial distress.
The second strategy estimates the risk adjustment directly from historical data on distress
probabilities, using several established asset pricing models. In both cases, we find that exposure to
systematic risk increases the NPV of financial distress costs. In addition, the magnitude of the risk-
adjustment can be very large, suggesting that a valuation of distress costs that ignores systematic risk
significantly underestimates their true present value. Finally, we show that marginal distress costs
computed using our new formula can be large enough to balance the marginal tax benefits of debt
derived by Graham (2000), and we conclude that systematic distress risk can help explain why firms
appear rather conservative in their use of debt.
Heitor Almeida
NYU Stern School of Business
Department of Finance
44 West 4th Street, Room 9-85
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
halmeida@stern.nyu.edu
Thomas Philippon
NYU Stern School of Business
Department of Finance
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
tphilipp@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
There is a large literature that argues that financial distress can have both direct and
indirect costs (Warner, 1977, Altman, 1984, Weiss, 1990, Ofek, 1993, Asquith, Gertner and
Scharfstein, 1994, Opler and Titman, 1994, Sharpe, 1994, Gilson, 1997, and Andrade and
Kaplan, 1998). However, there is much debate as to whether such costs are high enough to
matter much for corporate valuation practices and capital structure decisions. Direct costs
of distress, such as those entailed by litigation fees, are relatively small.1 Indirect costs,
such as loss of market share (Opler and Titman, 1994) and inefficient asset sales (Shleifer
and Vishny, 1992), are believed to be more important, but they are also much harder to
quantify. Andrade and Kaplan (1998), for example, estimate losses of the order of 10% to
23% of firm value at the time of distress for a sample of highly leveraged firms. However,
they also argue that part of these costs might actually not be genuine financial distress
costs, but rather consequences of the economic shocks that drove the firms into distress.
They suggest that, from an ex-ante perspective, distress costs are probably small, specially
in comparison to the potential tax benefits of debt.2 In contrast, Opler and Titman (1994)
argue that distress costs can be large for certain types of firms, such as those that engage
in substantial R&D activities.3
While the previous literature has analyzed in detail the nature of distress costs, and has
attempted to estimate the loss in value upon distress, it has devoted much less attention to
the proper capitalization of financial distress costs. For example, Molina (2005) calculates
the ex-ante cost of distress as the historical probability of default multiplied by Andrade
and Kaplan’s (1998) estimates of the loss in firm value given default. This calculation
ignores the capitalization and discounting of distress costs. Other papers do incorporate
1Warner(1977) and Weiss (1990), forexample, estimatecostsoftheorderof3%-5% offirm valueat the
time of distress.
2Altman (1984) finds similar cost estimates of 11% to 17% of firm value on average, three years prior to
bankruptcy. However,itisnotclearthatallsuchcostscanbeattributedtogenuinefinancialdistress(Opler
and Titman, 1994, and Andrade and Kaplan, 1998).
3Notalltheliteratureagreeswiththepropositionthatdistressonlyhascosts. Wruck(1990)arguesthat
the organizational restructuring that accompanies distress might have benefits, and Ofek (1993) suggests
that leverage might force firms to respond more quickly to poor performance. In addition, Eberhardt,
Altman and Aggarwal (1997) find that firms appear to do unexpectedly well post-bankruptcy.
1

some form of discounting. The usual approach in the literature is to assume risk-neutrality,
and discount the product of historical probabilities and losses in value given default by a
risk-free rate (e.g., Altman (1984)).4
In this paper we develop a methodology to value financial distress costs. Like the
existing literature, we take as given the estimates of losses in value given distress provided
by Andrade and Kaplan (1998) and Altman (1984). We suggest a simple way to capitalize
these losses into a NPV formula for (ex-ante) distress costs, which takes into account time
variation in marginal probabilities of financial distress, and the shape of the term structure
of interest rates.5 Most importantly, we argue that the common practice of using both
historical probabilities of distress and risk free rates to value distress costs is wrong.
The problem with the traditional approach is that the incidence of financial distress is
correlated with macroeconomic shocks such as major recessions,6 generating a systematic
component to distress risk. In fact, the asset pricing literature on credit yield spreads
has provided substantial evidence for a systematic component in corporate default risk.
It is well-known that the spread between corporate and government bonds is too high
to be explained only by expected default.7 The literature also presents direct evidence
for a default risk premium implicit in corporate bond spreads (Elton, Gruber, Agrawal
and Mann, 2001, Huang and Huang, 2003, Longstaff, Mittal, and Neis, 2004, Driessen,
2005, Chen, Collin-Dufresne, and Goldstein, 2005).8 This systematic component of default
risk raises the possibility that investors might care more about default (and thus financial
distress) than what is implied by risk-free discounting. In particular, this insight suggests
that in order to value distress costs correctly, either the discount rate or the probability of
distress must be adjusted for risk. If historical probabilities are used to compute expected
4Recent models of dynamic capital structure that incorporate distress costs also assume risk-neutrality,
and thus implicitly discount the costs of financial distress by the risk free rate (e.g., Titman and Tsyplakov
(2004), and Hennessy and Whited (2005)).
5Thereisevidencethatmarginaldefaultprobabilitiesincreaseovertimeforfirmsratedinvestment-grade,
but show the opposite pattern for firms whose debt is rated junk (Duffie and Singleton, 2003).
6SeeDenisandDenis(1995)forsomeevidencethattheincidenceofdistressisrelatedtomacroeconomic
conditions.
7Jones, Mason and Rosenfeld (1984) provide some early evidence on this.
8SeealsoCollin-Dufresne,Goldstein and Martin (2001), whoexaminethedeterminantsofmovementsin
credit spreads.
2