NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AN INFORMATION-BASED TRADE OFF BETWEEN
FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT AND
FOREIGN PORTFOLIO INVESTMENT
Itay Goldstein
Assaf Razin
Working Paper 11757
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11757
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2005
We thank Patrick Bolton, Charles Engel, Amit Goyal, Alexander Guembel, Michael Klein, Enrique Mendoza,
Maury Obstfeld, Jacob Sagi, the late Oved Yosha, two referees, and the editor (Linda Tesar) for valuable
discussions and comments. We also thank seminar participants at Cornell University, London Business
School, Tel Aviv University, the University of California at Berkeley and participants at the following
conferences: The LACEA annual meeting (October 2002), the fall meeting of the NBER IFM research group
(October 2002), the Summer Meetings of the Econometric Society (June 2003), the International Finance
Conference at Georgia Tech (April 2004), and the WFA annual meeting (June 2005). All remaining errors
are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Itay Goldstein and Assaf Razin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

An Information-Based Trade Off between Foreign Direct Investment and Foreign Portfolio
Investment
Itay Goldstein and Assaf Razin
NBER Working Paper No. 11757
November 2005
JEL No. F3, G3
ABSTRACT
The paper develops a model of foreign direct investments (FDI) and foreign portfolio investments
(FPI).The model describes an information-based trade off between direct investments and portfolio
investments. Direct investors are more informed about the fundamentals of their projects. This
information enables them to manage their projects more efficiently. However, it also creates an
asymmetric-information problem in case they need to sell their projects prematurely, and reduces the
price they can get in that case. As a result, investors, who know they are more likely to get a liquidity
shock that forces them to sell early, are more likely to choose portfolio investments, whereas
investors, who know they are less likely to get a liquidity shock, are more likely to choose direct
investments. FDI is characterized by hands-on management style which enables the owner to obtain
relatively refined information about the productivity of the firm. This superiority of FDI relative to
FPI, comes with a cost: a firm owned by the relatively well-informed FDI investor has a low resale
price because of a "lemons" type asymmetric information between the owner and potential buyers.
The model can explain several stylized facts regarding foreign equity flows, such as the larger ratio
of FDI to FPI inflows in developing countries relative to developed countries, and the greater
volatility of FDI net inflows relative to FPI net inflows.
Itay Goldstein Assaf Razin
Finance Department Department of Economics
The Wharton School Cornell University
University of Pennsylvania Ithaca, NY 14583
3620 Locust Walk and NBER
Philadelphia, PA 19104 razin@post.tau.ac.il
itayg@wharton.upenn.edu

1 Introduction
International equity flows are the main feature of the recent globalization of capital markets both
in developing and in developed economies. These flows take two major forms: Foreign Direct
Investments (FDI) and Foreign Portfolio Investments (FPI). An empirical regularity is that the
share of FDI in total foreign equity flows is larger for developing countries than for developed
countries.1 Regarding the second moments of foreign equity flows, it is known that the volatility
of FDI net inflows is, in general, much smaller than that of FPI net inflows.2 Moreover, empirical
analysis has established that the differences in volatility between FPI and FDI flows are much
smaller for developed economies than for developing economies.3
Despite the empirical interest in foreign equity flows, very little work has been done on jointly
explaining FDI and FPI in a rigorous theoretical framework. In this paper, we propose such a
framework, and provide a model of a trade off between FDI and FPI, which is consistent with the
empirical facts mentioned above.
Our model highlights a key difference between the two types of investment: FDI investors, who
take both ownership and control positions in the domestic firms, are in effect the managers of the
firms under their control; whereas FPI investors, who gain ownership without control of domestic
firms, must delegate decisions to managers, but limit their freedom to make decisions because the
managers’ agenda may not be always consistent with that of the owners. Consequently, due to
an agency problem between managers and owners, portfolio investment projects are managed less
efficientlythandirectinvestmentprojects.4 Tobemorespecific,directinvestors,whoacteffectively
1For a summary, based on World Bank data, see Albuquerque (2003).
2Net inflows account for net investments made by foreign investors (that is, new investments by foreign investors
minus withdrawals of old investments by foreign investors).
Using World Bank data on 111 countries, Albuquerque (2003) shows that 89% of the countries in his sample have
lower coefficient of variation of net FDI inflows than that of other net inflows. A related set of evidence suggests
that FDI has proven to be much more resilient during financial crises, and thus contributes to the stability of the
host country. (See: Chuhan, Perez-Quiros and Popper, 1996; Frankel and Rose, 1996; Lipsey, 2001; and Sarno and
Taylor, 1999).
3Lipsey(1999)showsthattheratioofFDI’svolatilitytootherlong-termflows’volatilityis0.59inLatinAmerica,
0.74 in South East Asia, 0.86 in Europe, and 0.88 in the US. Thus, the differences in volatilities between net FDI
inflows and other types of net inflows are smaller in developed economies.
4For a recent survey on agency problems and their effect on financial contracting, see: Hart (2001).
2

as managers of their own projects, are more informed than portfolio investors regarding changes
in the prospects of their projects. This information enables them to manage their projects more
efficiently. Thiseffectgenerates anadvantage, with anadded valuein the capital markets, to direct
investments relative to portfolio investments.
There are, however, costs to direct investments. We specify two types of costs. The first type
reflectstheinitialcostthatanFDIinvestorhastoincurinordertoacquiretheexpertisetomanage
the project directly. This cost is exogenously given in the model. The second type, an information-
based cost, is derived endogenously in the model. It results from the possibility that investors need
to sell their investments before maturity because they face liquidity shocks. In such circumstances,
the price they can get will be lower if they have more information on the economic fundamentals
of the investment project. This is because when potential buyers know that the seller has more
information, they may suspect that the sale results from bad information on the prospects of the
investment, and will thus be willing to pay a lower price. Thus, if they invest directly, the investors
bear the costof getting alower priceif andwhen they are forcedto sell the projectbeforematurity.
Our model, therefore, describes a key trade off between management efficiency and liquidity.5
Both sides of this trade off are driven by the effect of asymmetric information, which comes with
control. When they invest directly, investors get more information about the fundamentals of the
investment, and thereby can manage the project more efficiently, than their portfolio-investors
counterparts. However, this also generates a ”lemons” type problem when they try to sell the
investment before maturity (Akerlof (1970)). Therefore, this superior information effect reduces
the price they can get when they are forced to sell the project prematurely.
This trade off between efficiency and liquidity has strong roots in existing empirical evidence.
The idea that control increases efficiency and value of the firm, which constitutes one side of the
trade off, is supported empirically by two recent papers in the international finance literature. The
first paper — by Perez-Gonzalez (2005) — shows that after a foreign investor establishes a position
thatisgreaterthan50%ofthefirm’sshares, thefirm’sproductivity, computedusingdataonfuture
earnings, improves. The second paper — by Chari, Ouimet, and Tesar (2005) — demonstrates the
5Notethattheinterpretationoftheword”liquidity”hereisdifferentfromtheoneinthephrase”liquidityshock”.
Here,”liquidity”meansthatwhentheyinvestinFDI,investorswillfacealessliquidmarketwhentheywanttosell,
in the sensethat they will get a lower price. A ”liquidity shock” means that an investoris facing a shock that forces
her to liquidate the investment.
3