NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW DOES INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
REALLY AFFECT PRODUCTIVITY?
PLANT-LEVEL COMPARISONS OF PRODUCT INNOVATION,
PROCESS IMPROVEMENT AND WORKER SKILLS
Ann P. Bartel
Casey Ichniowski
Kathryn L. Shaw
Working Paper 11773
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11773
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2005
The authors gratefully acknowledge the generous support of a grant from the Russell Sage and Rockefeller
Foundations and outstanding research assistance from Ricardo Correa, Radha Iyengar and Yoonsoo Lee.
We thank the seminar participants at the Harvard-MIT Organizational Economics Workshop, Princeton
University, Stanford University, UC Berkeley, the NBER Labor Studies/Personnel Summer Institute, and
the NBER Organizational Economics Conference, the 2004 AEA meetings and the 2004 Society of Labor
Economics. We appreciate the detailed comments of David Autor, George Baker, Thomas Hubbard,
Lawrence Katz, Edward Lazear, and Erica Plambeck. Finally, the authors also thank the industry participants
who generously provided their time and insights in the course of conducting this study, and Scott MacIntyre
for his careful review of the technological elements of the paper. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Ann P. Bartel, Casey Ichniowski, and Kathryn L. Shaw. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

How Does Information Technology Really Affect Productivity? Plant-Level Comparisons of
Product Innovation, Process Improvement and Worker Skills
Ann P. Bartel, Casey Ichniowski, and Kathryn L. Shaw
NBER Working Paper No. 11773
November 2005
JEL No. O33, J24, L25
ABSTRACT
This study presents new empirical evidence on the relationship between investments in new
computer-based information technology (IT) and productivity by investigating several plant-level
mechanisms through which IT could promote productivity growth. We have assembled a data set
on plants with a common production technology in a narrowly defined industry - valve
manufacturing - to study the effects of new IT on product innovation, production process
improvements, employee skills and work practices. The homogeneity of the plants' production
processes within this narrowly defined industry together with the estimation of longitudinal models
eliminate many sources of unmeasured heterogeneity that could confound productivity comparisons
in more aggregate data and in broader samples. The three main results of this study highlight how
the adoption of new IT-enhanced machinery involves much more than just the installation of new
equipment on the factory floor. We find that adoption of new IT-enhanced equipment (1)alters
business strategies, moving valve manufacturers away from commodity production based on long
production runs to customized production in smaller batches; (2)improves the efficiency of all stages
of the production process with reductions in setup times supporting the change in business strategy
and (3)increases the skill requirements of workers while promoting the adoption of new human
resource practices.
Ann P. Bartel Casey Ichniowski Kathryn L. Shaw
Graduate School of Business Graduate School of Business GSB, Littlefield 339
3022 Broadway, 816 Uris Hall 3022 Broadway, 713 Uris Hall Stanford University
Columbia University Columbia University Stanford, CA 94305-5015
New York, NY 10027 New York, NY 10027 and NBER
and NBER and NBER kathryns@gsb.stanford.edu
apb2@columbia.edu bei1@columbia.edu

I. Introduction
Rapidly advancing capabilities of computing equipment have spawned hosts of new
information technologies that have undoubtedly reshaped the economy. Many analysts argue that
business investments in new information technologies (IT) were responsible for accelerated
productivity growth of the 1990’s. This study presents new empirical evidence on the
relationship between investments in new computer-based IT and productivity by investigating
several plant-level mechanisms through which IT could promote productivity growth. We
investigate whether IT serves as a “general purpose technology” (Bresnahan and Trajtenberg,
1995, p. 84) that makes it easier to invent and produce new products, thereby contributing to
increases in productivity growth.1 We also study whether plants that make new IT investments
also make complementary investments in a more skilled workforce or in new types of work
organization that themselves can contribute to higher productivity.2 While several studies
indicate that the timing of IT investments matches the timing of productivity changes for the
economy and that industries that made larger investments in computer technologies experienced
larger productivity gains,3 evidence which documents whether plants that adopt new IT are in
fact the same ones that increase the customization and reliability of their products and the speed
and efficiency of their operations would provide a fuller understanding of what lies behind the
macro-level trends.
To study the effects of new IT on product innovation, production process improvements,
employee skills and work organization, we have assembled a data set on plants with a common
production technology in a narrowly defined industry – valve manufacturing. These data allow
us to conduct particularly convincing empirical tests of the effects of IT. The homogeneity of the
plants’ production processes within this narrowly defined industry together with the estimation
of longitudinal models eliminate many sources of unmeasured heterogeneity that confound
1 For evidence on the micro-level empirical relationship between IT and productivity, see Brynjolfsson and Hitt
(2003). Milgrom and Roberts (1990) provide a theoretical framework that explains how IT promotes the movement
towards customization based on the design of unique products for each customer while Da Silveira, Borenstein and
Fogliatto (2001) discuss the effects of IT on mass customization. Athey and Stern (2002) and Hubbard (2003) study
IT-related improvements in production processes.
2 Examples from the extensive literature on the effects of computer technologies on worker skills are Autor, Katz
and Kearny (2005), Autor, Katz and Krueger (1998), Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003), Dunne and Schmitz (1995),
and Doms, Dunne and Troske (1997). Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson, and Hitt, (2002), Black and Lynch (2001),
Bresnahan and Greenstein (1996), and Mendelson (2000) present evidence on the link between computer-based IT
and new work practices.
3 See Jorgenson, Ho and Stiroh (2003) and Oliner and Sichel (2000).
1

productivity comparisons in more aggregated data and in broader samples. Also, our industry-
specific measures of IT are more detailed than expenditures on computing equipment or
employees’ use of computers, and instead identify specific types of IT-enhanced capital
equipment used in valve manufacturing. These measures of IT vary across stages of production
within a plant, permitting the estimation of within-plant stage-specific models of the effects of IT
that can further rule out interpretations that any estimated productivity improvements are due to
unmeasured plant-specific factors.
The empirical analysis reveals three main results that highlight how the adoption of new
IT-enhanced machinery involves much more than just the installation of new equipment on the
factory floor. First, adopting new IT-enhanced equipment alters business strategies of valve
makers, moving them away from commodity production based on long production runs to
customized production in smaller batches. Second, new IT investments improve the efficiency of
all stages of the production process by reducing setup times, run times and inspection times. The
reductions in setup times are theoretically important because they make it less costly to switch
production from one product to another, and support the change in business strategy to more
customized production in smaller batches. Third, the adoption of new computer-based IT also
increases the skill requirements of workers, notably technical skills, while also promoting the
adoption of new human resource practices.
While an obvious limitation of such a plant-level study from a single industry is its
generalizability, there are important reasons to believe that the positive effects of IT investments
on process efficiency and product customization apply more broadly throughout the economy.
Increasing customization of products and services is common across many areas of the economy,
and this change often appears to be accompanied by the adoption of new computer-aided IT. The
patterns that we document here in valve manufacturing are mirrored by examples from research
on many non-manufacturing industries. In call centers, new IT reduces preparation times
between calls. In hospital emergency rooms, new technologies speed the time between a patient
coming into the hospital and treatment by the proper experts (Gabor, 2004). And in concert
events, IT allows for customization of ticket packages based on current demand conditions and
ticket supply.4 Just as new IT promotes more customized production by reducing setup times for
4 Michael Rapino, CEO of Clear Channel reported that his concert production business “has become a lot more
about customization. It used to be fairly generic: three ticket prices and maybe a T-shirt and a hat. There’s an
2