NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
U.S. v. MICROSOFT:
DID CONSUMERS WIN?
David S. Evans
Albert L. Nichols
Richard Schmalensee
Working Paper 11727
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11727
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2005
Vice Chairman, LECG Europe and Visiting Professor, Faculty of Laws, University College London;
Director, LECG LLC; and John C Head III Dean, Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. The authors were consultants to Microsoft on the litigation discussed in this paper and
Schmalensee testified at trial in the liability phase of the case. We are grateful to Microsoft for supporting
the research for this paper. All views expressed are own and not necessarily shared by Microsoft or any
organization with which we are affiliated.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by David S. Evans, Albert L. Nichols, and Richard Schmalensee. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

U.S. v. Microsoft: Did Consumers Win?
David S. Evans, Albert L. Nichols, and Richard Schmalensee
NBER Working Paper No. 11727
October 2005
JEL No. K21, L1, L4, L6
ABSTRACT
U.S. v. Microsoft and the related state suit filed in 1998 appear finally to have concluded. In a
unanimous en banc decision issued in late June 2004, the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals rejected
challenges to the remedies approved by the District Court in November 2002. The wave of follow-on
private antitrust suits filed against Microsoft also appears to be subsiding. In this paper we review
the remedies imposed in the United States, in terms of both their relationship to the violations found
and their impact on consumer welfare. We conclude that the remedies addressed the violations
ultimately found by the Court of Appeals (which were a subset of those found by the original district
court and an even smaller subset of the violations alleged, both in court and in public discourse) and
went beyond them in important ways. Thus, for those who believe that the courts were right in
finding that some of Microsoft's actions harmed competition, the constraints placed on its behavior
and the active, ongoing oversight by the Court and the plaintiffs provide useful protection against
a recurrence of such harm. For those who believe that Microsoft should not have been found liable
because of insufficient evidence of harm to consumers, the remedies may be unnecessary, but they
avoided the serious potential damage to consumer welfare that was likely to accompany the main
alternative proposals. The remedies actually imposed appear to have struck a reasonable balance
between protecting consumers against the types of actions found illegal and harming consumers by
unnecessarily restricting Microsoft's ability to compete.
David S. Evans Richard Schmalensee
LECG, LLC MIT Sloan School of Management
350 Mass Avenue 50 Memorial Drive
Suite 300 Cambridge, MA 02142
Cambridge, MA 02139 and NBER
david_evans@lecg.com rschmal@mit.edu
Albert L. Nichols
LECG, LLC
350 Mass Avenue
Suite 300
Cambridge, MA 02139
nnichols@lecg.com

I. Introduction
The D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals issued a unanimous en banc decision in June 2004
upholding the remedy ordered in U.S. v. Microsoft.1 A District Court has been actively
overseeing compliance with that order since May 2003.2 Several of the major derivative private
actions have either been dismissed or settled.3 It thus appears that this long conflict is nearing
an end.4 It is concluding in a way that prevents hard-core warriors on either side from claiming
victory, though some who opposed Microsoft have claimed, in effect, that victory was stolen
from them in the remedy phase of the struggle.5
What about consumers, however, whose interests both sides claimed to be serving? As
the rhetorical dust kicked up by the Microsoft battles settles, we believe it is becoming clearer
that the end result—the violations ultimately found by the appeals court and the remedy
imposed under its guidance by the district court—is broadly consistent with basic, pro-
consumer antitrust principles. To the extent it departs from those principles, it reflects some
1 Massachusetts v. Microsoft Corp., 373 F. 3d 1199 (D.C. Cir., 2004).
2 Microsoft began complying with the terms of the settlement before it was entered by the courts. That process
started in December 2001. J Colleen Kollar-Kotelly did not issue a decision on the settlement until November
2002. In May 2003, J. Kollar-Kotelly ordered that Microsoft begin filing compliance status reports with the
court. The first such report was due in July 2003. (Stipulation and Revised Proposed Final Judgment, U.S. v.
Microsoft, Civil Action No. 98–1232 (CKK), November 6, 2001, available at
http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/cases/f9400/9495.pdf; Memorandum Opinion, New York v. Microsoft Corp., 224 F.
Supp. 2d 76 (D.D.C., 2002) (No. 98–1233); J. Colleen Kollar-Kotelly, Order, State of New York v. Microsoft
Corp., Civil Action No. 98–1233 (CKK), May 14, 2003. Since that Order, the parties have filed Status Reports
with the court at three-month intervals starting in July 2003.
3 Suits by Sun and AOL (which bought Netscape in 1999) have both been settled. Several other suits were brought
by other competitors of Microsoft, including Be, Inc., which offered the Be operating system in the mid 1990s
(case settled), and two suits by companies involved in digital media, Burst and RealNetworks (both cases still
pending as of February 2005). In addition, dozens of class-action suits were filed alleging overcharges on
Windows and, in some cases, Microsoft Word and Excel. Most of those suits have been dismissed or settled, but
a handful remain pending as of February 2005.
4 As we discuss further below, however, Microsoft still faces a major antitrust challenge in Europe. See the
European Commission’s decision: Case COMP/C-3/37.792 Microsoft, Mar. 24, 2004. The Court of First
Instance (CFI) denied Microsoft’s request to stay the remedy until the case was reviewed on the merits. (Order
of the President of the Court of First Instance, Case T-201/04 R, December 22, 2004.) The CFI is not likely to
reach a decision on whether to uphold or void the Commission’s decision until 2006.
1

serious bumps along the procedural road and, in part as a consequence, embodies an element of
punishment for Microsoft’s perceived aggressiveness and arrogance.6 As we discuss in this
essay, the courts did find that Microsoft engaged in anticompetitive actions, but, in the absence
of any evidence that those actions actually reduced competition, the remedy imposed is well
designed to prevent similar violations without imposing potentially expensive structural
changes or substantially restricting Microsoft’s ability to compete on the merits.
Accordingly, we argue below, if one accepts the courts’ ultimate findings of fact one
must conclude that the Microsoft remedy is likely to contribute future benefits for consumers.7
Even if one goes beyond those findings and harbors a deep and broad distrust of Microsoft, as
some observers plainly do,8 it is hard to escape the conclusion that the constraints placed on
Microsoft’s behavior and its active oversight by the parties and the District Court will benefit
consumers by reducing the likelihood of future anticompetitive behavior—even if one believes
that more severe constraints should have been imposed.
At the other end of the spectrum, even if one believes, as we do, that Microsoft’s
conduct did not justify a finding that it had violated the Sherman Act, because there was no
credible evidence of likely consumer harm flowing from the challenged actions, 9 it is hard to
find much fault with a remedy that does not impose costly structural change or significantly
reduce Microsoft’s ability to compete on the merits—in particular, its ability to design,
5 Timothy F. Bresnahan, A Remedy that Falls Short of Restoring Competition, 16 ANTITRUST 67 (2001).
6 Eleanor M. Fox, What Is Harm to Competition? Exclusionary Practices and Anticompetitive Effect, 70
ANTITRUST L.J. 371 (2002).
7 Whether a rigorous cost-benefit analysis, taking into account litigation and compliance costs, would conclude
that this litigation enhanced discounted expected social welfare is a harder question. We do not attempt to
answer it here.
8 See, e.g., Reforming Microsoft, N.Y. TIMES, Sept. 7, 2001.
9 Howard H. Chang et al., Has the Consumer Harm Standard Lost its Teeth? AEI-Brookings Joint Center Working
Paper; MIT Sloan Working Paper No. 4263–02, 2002, available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=332021.
2