NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STOCK RETURNS AND EXPECTED BUSINESS CONDITIONS:
HALF A CENTURY OF DIRECT EVIDENCE
Sean D. Campbell
Francis X. Diebold
Working Paper 11736
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11736
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2005
For support we thank the Humboldt Foundation, the Guggenheim Foundation, the National Science
Foundation, and the Wharton Financial Institutions Center. For helpful conversations we thank seminar
participants at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Swiss National Bank (Study
Center Gerzensee), as well as Andrew Ang, Ravi Bansal, Hui Guo, Martin Lettau, Sydney Ludvigson, Josh
Rosenberg, Steve Sharpe, Jessica Wachter, and Kamil Yilmaz. None of those thanked, however, are
responsible for the outcome. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Sean D. Campbell and Francis X. Diebold. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Stock Returns and Expected Business Conditions: Half a Century of Direct Evidence
Sean D. Campbell and Francis X. Diebold
NBER Working Paper No. 11736
November 2005
JEL No. G12
ABSTRACT
We explore the macro/finance interface in the context of equity markets. In particular, using half a
century of Livingston expected business conditions data we characterize directly the impact of
expected business conditions on expected excess stock returns. Expected business conditions
consistently affect expected excess returns in a statistically and economically significant counter-
cyclical fashion: depressed expected business conditions are associated with high expected excess
returns. Moreover, inclusion of expected business conditions in otherwisestandard predictive return
regressions substantially reduces the explanatory power of the conventional financial predictors,
including the dividend yield, default premium, and term premium, while simultaneously increasing
R-squared. Expected business conditions retain predictive power even after controlling for an
important and recently introduced non-financial predictor, the generalized consumption/wealth ratio,
which accords with the view that expected business conditions play a role in asset pricing different
from and complementary to that of the consumption/wealth ratio. We argue that time-varying
expected business conditions likely capture time-varying risk, while time-varying
consumption/wealth may capture time-varying risk aversion.
Sean D. Campbell
Federal Reserve Board
Francis X. Diebold
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER
fdiebold@sas.upenn.edu

“... [if] cyclical variation in the market risk premium is present, ...we would expect to
find evidence of it from forecasting regressions of excess returns on macroeconomic
variables over business cycle horizons. Yet the most widely investigated predictive
variables have not been macroeconomic variables, but financial indicators.”
(Lettau and Ludvigson, 2005)
1. Introduction
The equity market macro-finance interface presents a clear puzzle: Many have argued
that business conditions should be linked to expected excess returns (e.g., Fama and French,
1989, 1990; Chen, Roll and Ross, 1986; Barro, 1990 ), yet the standard predictors are not
macroeconomic, but rather financial: dividend yields, default premia, and term premia. Several
authors have claimed that the standard financial predictors may serve as proxies for expected
business conditions, and they interpret their predictive power through that lens.1 In the absence
of direct expectations data, however, the claim that expected excess equity returns are driven by
expected business conditions remains largely speculative.
Against this background, we use a well-known survey to provide direct evidence on the
links between expected business conditions and expected excess equity returns over some fifty
years. We ask two key sets of questions. First, are the standard financial predictors related to
expected business conditions, and if so, how?
Second, do expected business conditions indeed forecast future returns? Are expected
business conditions a useful predictor of excess returns even after controlling for the standard
financial predictors? And conversely, are the standard financial predictors useful even after
controlling for expected business conditions? If not, do any standard financial predictors retain
power after conditioning on expected business conditions?
1 See, among many others, Campbell and Shiller (1988), Fama and French (1988, 1989),
Ferson and Harvey (1991), Campbell (1991) and Lettau and Ludvigson (2005).

We proceed as follows. In section 2 we describe the data, and in particular our survey-
based measure of expected business conditions. In section 3 we examine the links between
expected business conditions and the standard financial predictors of excess returns. In section 4
we document the effects of including expected business conditions in otherwise-standard return
predictive regressions, at both short and long horizons, and we also examine a recently-
introduced predictor, the consumption/wealth ratio, which turns out to be very important. We
conclude in section 5.
2. Data
Here we introduce the data on which our analysis is based, with special attention paid to
the Livingston survey, and we briefly document some of their properties.
Excess Returns and Financial Predictors
We construct excess stock returns using the CRSP value-weighted portfolio and the 90-
day U.S. Treasury bill rate, 1952:1-2003:2. We examine several standard and widely-studied
financial return predictors, the dividend yield (DP, calculated for the CRSP value-weighted
portfolio), the default premium (DEF, calculated as the yield difference between a broad
corporate bond portfolio and the Aaa yield) and the term premium (TERM, calculated as the
yield difference between a ten-year Treasury bond and a one-month Treasury bill), also 1952:1-
2003:2. In Table 1, we present summary statistics for excess returns and all predictors.
The Livingston Forecasts
Our business conditions expectations data come from the Livingston Survey of
Professional Forecasters. The Livingston survey is widely followed, heavily studied, and
-2-