NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ESTABLISHING CREDIBILITY:
EVOLVING PERCEPTIONS OF THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK
Linda S. Goldberg
Michael W. Klein
Working Paper 11792
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11792
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2005
The views expressed in this paper are those of the individual authors and do not necessarily reflect
the position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. We have benefited
from comments from Donald Andrews, Menzie Chinn, Sylvester Eijffinger, Graham Elliott, Arturo
Estrella, Jeff Fuhrer, Francesco Giavazzi, Ulrich Muller, Zhongjun Qu, Richard Portes, John Rogers,
David Romer, Jim Stock, Cedric Tille and participants at the January 2005 ASSA meeting, the March
2005 TAFI JIMF conference, the Spring 2005 NBER IFM meeting, the NBER Monetary Economics
2006 Summer Institute, and participants in the Federal Reserve System Committee Meeting on International
Economics.
© 2005 by Linda S. Goldberg and Michael W. Klein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Establishing Credibility: Evolving Perceptions of the European Central Bank
Linda S. Goldberg and Michael W. Klein
NBER Working Paper No. 11792
November 2005, Revised December 2006
JEL No. F3,E5,E6
ABSTRACT
The perceptions of a central bank's inflation aversion may reflect institutional structure or, more dynamically,
the history of its policy decisions. In this paper, we present a novel empirical framework that uses
high frequency data to test for persistent variation in market perceptions of central bank inflation aversion.
The first years of the European Central Bank (ECB) provide a natural experiment for this model. Tests
of the effect of news announcements on the slope of yield curves in the euro-area, and on the euro/dollar
exchange rate, suggest that the market's perception of the policy stance of the ECB during its first
six years of operation significantly evolved, with a belief in its inflation aversion increasing in the
wake of its monetary tightening. In contrast, tests based on the response of the slope of the United
States yield curve to news offer no comparable evidence of any change in market perceptions of the
inflation aversion of the Federal Reserve.
Linda S. Goldberg
Research Department, 3rd Floor
Federal Reserve Bank-New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER
linda.goldberg@ny.frb.org
Michael W. Klein
Fletcher School
Tufts University
Medford, Massachusetts 02155
and NBER
michael.klein@tufts.edu

Establishing Credibility
1. Introduction
The perception of the inflation aversion of a central bank plays a key role in
determining whether its goal of low inflation is attained. This point is, by now, a standard
theoretical result.1 It is also received wisdom among practitioners. In a survey of the heads
of 84 central banks, as well as 52 prominent academic monetary economists, Blinder (2000)
finds that anti-inflation credibility is considered vitally important and “helps keep inflation
low.”
This consensus on the importance of the perception of inflation aversion naturally
leads to the question of how it is achieved, and whether and how it evolves over time. One
view is that establishing an appropriate institutional structure is the key element in insulating
the monetary authority from political pressure and thereby convincing markets that a central
bank has strong aversion to inflation. A second, more dynamic, view focuses on the role that
actual policy conduct plays in building the reputation of a central bank. These two different
views have distinct implications for the relative importance of the institutional structure of a
central bank as compared to its conduct for attaining and maintaining its credibility. 2
A majority of respondents to Blinder’s survey believe that central bank credibility is
based more on its history of actions than on the construction of institutional structures that
insulate a central bank from political concerns and afford it independence. Nonetheless,
there is also a consensus among respondents that structure matters. This latter view is
consistent with empirical research that has found that institutional structure is associated with
economic performance in cross sections of countries, perhaps because it indicates the ability
of an institution to “tie its hands” and commit to a policy that may cause short-term pain in
1 Seminal contributions on the role of credibility include Kydland and Prescott (1977), Calvo (1978), and Barro
and Gordon (1983).
2 Blinder (2000) points out that the term “central bank credibility” can mean inflation aversion, incentive
compatibility or pre-commitment. He reports that, among these three concepts, “…central bankers identify
inflation aversion with credibility far more closely than do [academic] economists.” (p. 1424) Using a five-
point scale, nearly 90 percent of his central bank respondents identified the concepts “credibility” and
“dedication to price stability” as “quite closely related” or “virtually the same,” while just over half of the
academic respondents replied that these two terms were either “unrelated,” slightly related,” or “moderately
related.” In the title and body of this paper, we use the term “credibility” to mean inflation aversion.
Theoretical contributions in which credibility is synonymous with inflation aversion include Rogoff (1985,
1987) and Backus and Driffill (1985).
1

Establishing Credibility
the pursuit of longer-run gain.3 There is less evidence, however, on whether and how the
credibility of a particular central bank evolves over time in response to the conduct of policy.
The goal of our paper is to use high-frequency data from asset markets to address this issue.
Thus, this work contributes to a growing literature that focuses on shifts in the market
assessment of the policy stance of a central bank and central bank efforts to obtain and keep
policy credibility.
Questions relating to the achievement and the maintenance of inflation aversion
credibility are especially relevant for a new central bank, or a central bank that has a change
in leadership. An analysis of the experience of the European Central Bank (ECB) during its
early years of operation provides a natural experiment for considering this question. The
architects of the institutional structure of the ECB were mindful of lessons from economic
theory concerning the importance of independence from political considerations.4 The role
of conduct was also clearly apparent. As indicated by the survey results in Blinder (2000),
the directors of central banks are vitally aware that their policies are closely scrutinized for
indications of general tendencies. This may be especially true with a new central bank where
each policy choice can lead to a larger updating of market priors than would be the case for a
long-established central bank.
This paper starts, in Section II, with the insight that the response of asset prices to
inflation news reflects market perceptions of the policy stance of the central bank.5 In
particular, Ellingsen and Söderström (2001) have demonstrated that a surprise increase in
3
For example, Cukierman (1992) analyzes the charters of central banks and shows, in a cross-country panel,
that average inflation is lower in countries in which laws afford central banks greater independence. Alesina and
Summers (1993) also find cross-country evidence that the level of inflation, as well as its variability, is
negatively associated with indicators of central bank independence, but there is no association between central
bank independence and real variables. Questions have been raised, however, about whether the de jure structure
is closely linked to the de facto behavior of institutions (Forder 1999).
4 Article 108 of the treaty establishing the European Community discusses insulating monetary policy decisions
from political influence. More recently, the May 2006 ECB publication “The European Central Bank, the
Eurosystem, the European System of Central Banks” states “When performing Eurosystem related tasks, the
ECB and the national central banks must not seek or take instructions from Community institutions or bodies, or
from any government of an EU country or from any other body. Likewise, the Community institutions and
bodies and the governments of the Member states must not seek to influence the members of the decision
making bodies of the ECB or of the NCBs [national central banks] in the performance of their tasks.” (p. 14)
5 Forward market information has been used in other tests of policy regime credibility. For example, Svensson
(1991) shows that forward exchange rates were not within the target zone band of the European Monetary
System (EMS) in the 1980s, a result he interprets as indicating that the EMS generally did not offer credible
bands on its members’ currencies. Svensson (1993) presents a similar set of tests to determine whether the
inflation targets of Canada, New Zealand and Sweden were consistent with market yields.
2