NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS AND STOCK MARKET VOLATILITY
Xavier Gabaix
Parameswaran Gopikrishnan
Vasiliki Plerou
H. Eugene Stanley
Working Paper 11722
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11722
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2005
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Xavier Gabaix, Parameswaran Gopikrishnan, Vasiliki Plerou, and H. Eugene Stanley. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Institutional Investors and Stock Market Volatility
Xavier Gabaix, Parameswaran Gopikrishnan, Vasiliki Plerou, and H. Eugene Stanley
NBER Working Paper No. 11722
October 2005
JEL No. G1, G12
ABSTRACT
We present a theory of excess stock market volatility, in which market movements are due to trades
by very large institutional investors in relatively illiquid markets. Such trades generate significant
spikes in returns and volume, even in the absence of important news about fundamentals. We derive
the optimal trading behavior of these investors, which allows us to provide a unified explanation for
apparently disconnected empirical regularities in returns, trading volume and investor size.
Xavier Gabaix
Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive, E52-274B
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
xgabaix@mit.edu
Parameswaran Gopikrishnan
gopi@bu.edu
Vasiliki Plerou
plerou@bu.edu
H. Eugene Stanley
Department of Physics
Boston University
590 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02215
hes@bu.edu

INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS AND STOCK MARKET
VOLATILITY
∗
Xavier Gabaix
Parameswaran Gopikrishnan
Vasiliki Plerou
H. Eugene Stanley
October 2, 2005
Abstract
Wepresentatheoryofexcessstockmarketvolatility,inwhichmarketmovementsaredueto
trades by very large institutional investors in relatively illiquid markets. Such trades generate
significant spikes in returns and volume, even in the absence of important news about funda-
mentals. Wederivetheoptimaltradingbehavioroftheseinvestors,whichallowsustoprovidea
unifiedexplanationforapparentlydisconnectedempiricalregularitiesinreturns,tradingvolume
and investor size.
I. Introduction
Ever since Shiller [1981], economists have sought to understand the origins of volatility in stock
market prices, which appears to exceed the predictions of simple models with rational expectations
Wethankoureditorandrefereesforveryhelpfulcomments. WealsothankTobiasAdrian,NicholasBar-
∗
beris,OlivierBlanchard,Jean-PhilippeBouchaud,JohnCampbell,VictorChernozhukov,EmanuelDerman,
Peter Diamond, Alex Edmans, Edward Glaeser, Joel Hasbrouck, David Hirshleifer, Harrison Hong, Soeren
Hvidjkaer, Ivana Komunjer, David Laibson, Augustin Landier, Ananth Madhavan, Andrew Metrick, Lasse
Pedersen, Thomas Philippon, Marc Potters, Jon Reuter, Bryan Routledge, Gideon Saar, Andrei Shleifer,
Didier Sornette, Dimitri Vayanos, Jessica Wachter, Jiang Wang, Jeffrey Wurgler, and seminar participants
atUniversityofCalifornia,Berkeley,DépartementetLaboratoired’EconomieThéoriqueetAppliquée,Duke
University, Harvard University, John Hopkins University, Kellogg School of Management, Massachusetts In-
stitute of Technology, National Bureau of Economic Research, New York University, Princeton University,
Stanford University, Wharton School of Business, the Econophysics conferences in Indonesiaand Japan, the
Western Finance Association and Econometric Society meetings. We thank Fernando Duarte, Tal Fishman,
and David Kang for their research assistance. Gopikrishnan’s contribution was part of his Ph.D. thesis. We
thank Morgan Stanley, the National Science Foundation and the Russell Sage Foundation for support.
1

and constant discounting.1 Even after the fact, it is hard to explain changes in the stock market
using only observable news [Cutler, Poterba and Summers 1989; Fair 2002; Roll 1988].
Wepresentamodelinwhichvolatilityiscausedbythetradesoflargeinstitutions. Institutional
investors appear to be important for the low-frequency movements of equity prices, as shown by
Gompers and Metrick [2001]. Understanding better the behavior of institutional investors also
sheds light on many issues, such as momentum and positive feedback trading [Chae and Lewellen
2004; Cohen, Gompers and Vuolteenaho 2002; Choe, Khoand Stulz 1999; Hvidkjaer 2005], bubbles
[Brunnermeier and Nagel 2004], liquidity provision [Campbell, Ramadorai and Vuolteenaho 2005],
and the importance of indexing [Goetzman and Massa 2003]. We further this research by analyzing
how trading by individual large investors may create price movements that are hard to explain by
fundamental news.
In our theory, spikes in trading volume and returns are created by a combination of news and
the trades by large investors. Suppose news or proprietary analysis induces a large investor to
trade a particular stock. Since his desired trading volume is then a significant proportion of daily
turnover, he will moderate his actual trading volume to avoid paying too much in price impact.2
The optimal volume will nonetheless remain large enough to induce a significant price change.
Traditional measures, such as variances and correlations, are of limited use in analyzing spikes
in market activity. Many empirical moments are infinite; moreover, their theoretical analysis is
typically untractable.3 Instead, a natural object of analysis turns out to be the tail exponent of the
distribution, for which some convenient analytical techniques apply. Furthermore, there is much
empirical evidenceon the tails of the distributions, whichappear to bewell approximatedby power
laws. For example, the distribution of returns r over daily or weekly horizons decays according to
P(r > x) x ζr where ζ is the tail or Pareto exponent.4 This accumulated evidence on tail
− r
| | ∼
behavior is useful to guide and constrain any theory of the impact of large investors. Specifically,
our theory unifies the following stylized facts.
(i) the power law distribution of returns, with exponent ζ 3;
r
'
(ii) the power law distribution of trading volume, with exponent ζ 1.5;
q
'
(iii) the power law distribution of price impact;
(iv) the power law distribution of the size of large investors, with exponent ζ 1.
S
'
1See also Campbell and Shiller [1988], French and Roll [1986], LeRoy and Porter [1981].
2See Section II.C.
3The variance of volume and the kurtosis of returns are infinite. Section II provides more details.
4Appendix 1 reviews the relevant techniques.
2