NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE CREATION OF THE RULE OF LAW
AND THE LEGITIMACY OF PROPERTY RIGHTS:
THE POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES
OF A CORRUPT PRIVATIZATION
Karla Hoff
Joseph E. Stiglitz
Working Paper 11772
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11772
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2005
Hoff: World Bank, Washington DC 20433; Stiglitz: Columbia University, New York, NY 10027. We thank
Mayuresh Kshetramade for outstanding research assistance. We benefited from valuable suggestions from
Avinash Dixit, Branko Milanovic, the editor Andrew Scott, Ken Sokoloff, two anonymous referees, and
seminar participants at Berkeley, Harvard’s center for Political Institutions and Economic Policy (PIEP),
Pennsylvania State University, Princeton, UCLA, the World Bank, and meetings of the American Political
Science Association. Hoff thanks the MacArthur Research Network on Inequality and Economic
Performance for financial support. The findings and interpretations expressed in this paper are those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Karla Hoff and Joseph E. Stiglitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Creation of the Rule of Law and the Legitimacy of Property Rights: The Political and
Economic Consequences of a Corrupt Privatization
Karla Hoff and Joseph E. Stiglitz
NBER Working Paper No. 11772
November 2005
JEL No. K0, K4, P26
ABSTRACT
How does the lack of legitimacy of property rights affect the dynamics of the creation of the rule of
law? We investigate the demand for the rule of law in post-Communist economies after privatization
under the assumption that theft is possible, that those who have "stolen" assets cannot be fully
protected under a change in the legal regime towards rule of law, and that the number of agents with
control rights over assets is large. We show that a demand for broadly beneficial legal reform may
not emerge because the expectation of weak legal institutions increases the expected relative return
to stripping assets, and strippers may gain from a weak and corrupt state. The outcome can be
inefficient even from the narrow perspective of the asset-strippers.
Karla Hoff
Room MC3-367
World Bank
1818 H Street
Washington, DC 20433
khoff@worldbank.org
Joseph E. Stiglitz
Uris Hall, Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Room 814
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jes322@columbia.edu

The central issue in this paper are the dynamics of transition to the rule of law—an
issue that has become paramount in the debate over the transition from communism to a
market economy. There is a long history recognizing that property rights are very
important. There has also been a long debate about how the institutions of property rights
evolved (e.g., Smith, 1776, Book III, iv; Marx and Engels, 1848; North 1981). In Western
European history, in general, they evolved gradually and incrementally. But for transition
and developing countries today, policymakers seek to expedite this process. For the
countries in transition from communism, the theory was put forward that the process could
be expedited by the mass privatization of state enterprises to individuals: Privatization
would create a demand for property rights institutions and the rule of law.1 The institutional
evolution that was expected to follow would lead to growth—wealth creation and wealth
maximization. There was a logic to this theory, but the theory neglected a variety of reasons
why rapid privatization might not have the desired effect on institutional change.
Preliminary evidence more than a decade out is that this strategy has not worked
in Russia and many other transition countries. The political scientist Stephen Holmes
(2002, p. 87) writes that “no well-organized constituency for the rule of law exists in
Russia today” and that for lack of one, the rule of law cannot be established. This view is
shared by numerous scholars with respect to not only Russia but also many other
1For example, Shleifer and Vishny (1998) argued that “Privatization offers an enormous political benefit
for the creation of institutions supporting private property because it creates the very private owners who
then begin lobbying the government…to create market-supporting institutions . . . [Such] institutions would
follow private property rather than the other way around” (pp. 10-11). Privatization creates “an
economically and politically powerful lobby for institutional reform” (Boycko, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1995,
p. 154), central to which is the rule of law (Hay, Shleifer, and Vishny 1996, p. 96).

transition countries.2 Figure 1 plots nonparametric estimates of the distribution, in 1996
and 2004, of World Bank scores of adherence to the rule of law for 27 transition
countries and the world as a whole.3 The rule of law indicator is scaled so that the values
of the world average and median are zero and the standard deviation is one. Higher
scores represent greater adherence to the rule of law. In 1996, the transition countries
had, on average, slightly less adherence to the rule of law than the world as a whole, but
showed a low level of dispersion. Between 1996 and 2004, a twin peaks pattern emerged
in the transition countries: Some achieved a good measure of rule of law by world
standards, while the majority had scores that remained low or even deteriorated.
When it became clear in Russia’s privatization that many individuals were
obtaining equity stakes through rigged bids and that controlling shareholders were
stripping assets, even then some people argued that businessmen would, sooner or later,
settle down to value-building. The following passage attributed in 1996 to the first head
of Russia’s privatization program (Anatoly Chubais) is suggestive:
2 See, for example, Pistor (1999) and the symposium “Demand for Law” in the East European
Constitutional Review, Hellman (1998, 2002), Aslund and Dmitriev (1999), Black et al. (2000), Nagy
(2000, p. 88), Sperling (2000, pp. 16-17), Kolodko (2001), and Graham (2002, esp. p. 49). Other scholars
have argued that in many countries, the cause of the absence of the rule of law lies on the supply side—for
instance, the inability to collect taxes to finance a market-oriented system (Johnson, Kaufmann, and
Shleifer (1997) and Roland and Verdier (1999)). But financial problems reflect endogenous decisions of
essentially the same kind as the demand side that we analyze here. In Russia, it was clear that the state was
giving away assets of value an order of magnitude greater than the cost of administering a rule of law
system. The lack of finance was a reflection of the same lack of demand for the rule of law on which we
focus here.
3
The governance indicators are weighted composite scores constructed by Kaufmann, Kraay, and
Mastruzzi (2005) from indicators produced by 31organizations, including Freedom House and the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
2