NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A SIMPLE TEST OF ADVERSE EVENTS AND
STRATEGIC TIMING THEORIES OF CONSUMER BANKRUPTCY
Li Gan
Tarun Sabarwal
Working Paper 11763
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11763
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2005
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Li Gan and Tarun Sabarwal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

A Simple Test of Adverse Events and Strategic Timing Theories of Consumer Bankruptcy
Li Gan and Tarun Sabarwal
NBER Working Paper No. 11763
November 2005
JEL No. D12, D14
ABSTRACT
A test of adverse events and strategic timing theories can be conducted by determining whether some
relevant financial decision variables, such as financial benefit from filing for bankruptcy, or debt
discharged in bankruptcy are endogenous with the bankruptcy decision or not. For the strategic
timing theory such decisions are endogenous, while for the adverse events theory they are not.
Hausman tests for endogeneity show that financial benefit, unsecured debt, and non-exempt assets
are exogenous with the bankruptcy decision, consistent with the adverse events theory.
Li Gan
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
4228 TAMU
College Station, TX 77843
and NBER
gan@econmail.tamu.edu
Tarun Sabarwal
Department of Economics, Box 1208
Washington University in St. Louis
One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
sabarwal@wustl.edu

1. Introduction
Among the several theories put forth to understand the determinants of a household's
decision to file for bankruptcy, two have received particular attention: the adverse events
theory and the strategic timing theory.
The adverse events theory postulates that consumers file for bankruptcy mainly because
they experience adverse events, and financial stresses associated with such events.
Adverse events occur, for example, in the form of a job loss, medical problems, and
particular family issues such as divorce. Financial stresses associated with such events
arise, for example, in the form of income interruption, income reduction, or debt increase.
The strategic timing theory postulates that a rational consumer incorporates in her
decision-making, the bankruptcy option available under law, and its associated costs and
benefits, and making the best use of her economic environment, chooses an optimal time
to file for bankruptcy. In particular, if the best choice includes a strategic, and lawful, use
of debt and the bankruptcy system, then that is reflected in consumer choice.
Both theories are emblems of long-standing debates to derive an optimal bankruptcy law;
one that balances rights of a creditor against misfortune of a debtor, one that protects a
creditor from a dishonest debtor, and one that trades-off losses in bankruptcy against
increases in expected economic growth from greater risk-taking arising from wealth
insurance. In the United States, examples of such debates are found in early conventions
regarding the U.S. Constitution, as can be seen in Warren (1935).
It is important to understand which theory is correct, because each theory is based on
different assumptions on consumer behaviors, and therefore, each theory implies
potentially different policy responses to reduce bankruptcy filings. For example, if
adverse events theory is correct, and if it is determined that bankruptcy filings are too
high, then policies to reduce bankruptcy filings could include, among others, those that
minimize the impact of adverse events, or increase financial literacy for planning for such
events. On the other hand, if strategic timing theory is correct, then policies to reduce
filings could include, among others, those that tighten access to bankruptcy courts, or
make bankruptcy more expensive, perhaps by lowering exemptions, diverting more
debtors to longer repayment plans, lengthening minimum time between repeat filings, or
requiring debt management programs outside of bankruptcy.
In deriving a test of these theories, a simple model for the strategic timing theory is easy
to formulate using a standard economic model of consumer decision-making. A
comparable model for the adverse events theory is not available, and a simple model is
formulated here using a standard economic model and incorporating some basic
ingredients of consumer behavior consistent with the adverse events theory.
Using these models, this paper formulates a simple test of these two competing theories.
Essentially, this test determines whether a consumer’s decision to file for bankruptcy and
her decision regarding some variables relevant for filing (for example, unsecured debt, or
3

financial benefit, or non-exempt assets) are both endogenously determined, or not. For
the strategic timing theory, it is easy to see that these decisions are endogenously and
simultaneously determined. For the adverse events theory, the model here implies that
decisions regarding unsecured debt or financial benefit are exogenous to the filing
decision.
The dataset used here is a combined cross section and time series sample of PSID
households over the period 1984-95; the same dataset is used in Fay, Hurst, and White
(2002).1 The model specifications are similar to their work as well. In each of two models
of interest, two estimations are conducted – one using least squares specification, and the
other using log-normal specification.2 In all four cases, the results are consistent with
adverse events theory.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the relevant literature. Section 3
formulates simple models of these two theories, and a prediction based on these models.
Section 4 presents test results.
2. Related Literature
There is a long literature that tries to understand household bankruptcy decisions. Early
work is presented in Stanley and Girth (1971), based on a study of bankruptcy cases
closed in 1964.
Results of studies of bankrupt debtors in 1981, in 1991, and their comparison are
provided in Sullivan, Warren, and Westbrook (1989, 2000, 1994), respectively. These
authors relate bankrupt debtors to the population, and conclude that bankruptcy is mainly
due to adverse events. Moreover, Domowitz and Sartain (1999), combining data from
filings in the early 1980s and the Survey of Consumer Finances, present evidence of the
role of credit card debt and adverse events (especially medical debt) in bankruptcy
decisions.
Using comprehensive data aggregated by bankruptcy district, White (1987) provides
evidence of economic incentives in bankruptcy by showing that bankruptcy filings are
positively related to exemption levels. Moreover, using data from the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics, Fay, Hurst, and White (2002) (henceforth denoted FHW) show strong
evidence that financial benefit from bankruptcy affects a household’s decision to file for
bankruptcy. As mentioned in their work, a distinction between adverse events and
strategic timing theories is not clear, but for the most part, direct inclusion of variables
for adverse events (such as health problems, divorce, and length of unemployment) does
not significantly affect the bankruptcy decision. Additional aspects of these incentives are
explored in White (1998), and in Fan and White (2003). Further, using the same dataset
1 We are grateful to Erik Hurst for making this dataset available to us.
2 As mentioned below, additional estimators such as the least absolute deviations (LAD) estimator and the
robust estimator could not be applied successfully to this dataset.
4