NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEFAULT RISK SHARING BETWEEN BANKS AND MARKETS:
THE CONTRIBUTION OF COLLATERALIZED DEBT OBLIGATIONS
Günter Franke
Jan Pieter Krahnen
Working Paper 11741
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11741
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2005
We are indebted to Dennis Hänsel, Thomas Weber and Christian Wilde for their excellent computational
assistance and their comments which greatly helped us to improve the paper. Furthermore, we owe a lot to
Mark Carey and René Stulz for their detailed and very helpful comments on earlier versions of this paper.
We also gratefully acknowledge financial support by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and by the Center
for Financial Studies at Frankfurt’s Goethe University. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Günter Franke and Jan Pieter Krahnen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Default Risk Sharing Between Banks and Markets: The Contribution of Collateralized Debt
Obligations
Günter Franke and Jan Pieter Krahnen
NBER Working Paper No. 11741
November 2005
JEL No. D82, G21, D74
ABSTRACT
This paper contributes to the economics of financial institutions risk management by exploring how
loan securitization affects their default risk, their systematic risk, and their stock prices. In a typical
CDO transaction a bank retains through a first loss piece a very high proportion of the default losses,
and transfers only the extreme losses to other market participants. The size of the first loss piece is
largely driven by the average default probability of the securitized assets. If the bank sells loans in
a true sale transaction, it may use the proceeds to expand its loan business, thereby affecting
systematic risk. For a sample of European CDO issues, we find an increase of the banks’ betas, but
no significant stock price effect around the announcement of a CDO issue.
Günter Franke
Center for Finance and Econometrics
at the University of Konstnaz
guenter.frnake@uni.konstanz.de
Jan Pieter Krahnen
Goethe-University Frankfurt

1 Introduction1
In recent years securitization of loan and bond portfolios became more and
more popular among banks. The volume of collateralized loan obligations
(CLOs) and collateralized bond obligations (CBOs) strongly increased in the
US and in Europe. This development raises several issues at the micro- and
the macro level. This paper will address some issues on the micro level, in
particular the impact of CLO-transactions on the banks’ risk taking.
In a CLO-transaction the bank transfers default risks of the underlying
loans to other market participants, the investors. Since the bank usually
has inside information about its borrowers, it has to offer some credit en-
hancements in a CLO-transaction to protect the investors against potential
effects of asymmetric information. For that purpose the bank usually takes
a first loss position in the default risks of the underlying loan portfolio. This
raises the question about the effective extent of the risk transfer in a CLO-
transaction. The first purpose of this paper is to look into this issue.
Our results show, first, that contrary to what many observers believe,
the default losses of the securitized portfolio largely remain on the books of
the issuing bank. Second, in a fully funded transaction, the risk of extreme
unexpected losses, i.e. the bad tail risk, is transferred from the bank to
investors. We argue that the combined effect of retaining the first loss piece
and selling senior tranches to investors achieves an efficient risk allocation,
reducing the bank’s exposure to extreme risks which might endanger the
bank’s solvency. Thus, securitization should have a positive impact on the
bank’s solvency.
This direct effect of securitization on the bank´s default risk is derived
fromsimulations of the loss rate distribution of theunderlyingloanportfolio.
This distribution and the first loss position jointly determine the eventual
risk transfer to investors. The loss rate distribution depends not only on the
averagequalityoftheunderlyingloans, butalsoonthecorrelationofdefaults
among these loans. Therefore the correlation impact is also analyzed in the
simulations.
Banks usually securitize loan portfolios not only for their direct effect,
but also to enlarge their investment opportunity set. In a fully funded trans-
action the bank can use the proceeds from issuing securities in various ways.
The most conservative use would be to reinvest the proceeds in risk-free as-
sets or to repay some of its own debt. In this case, securitization would
reduce the overall risk of the bank. Alternatively, the bank could expand its
loan business by granting new loans to new customers. Then the bank would
retain the default risk of the first loss position and, in addition, take the de-
fault risks of the new loans. Even though the total loan portfolio of the bank
2

is now better diversified, the overall risk of the bank is likely to be higher
than before securitization. We also simulate the effects of this reinvestment
policy, assuming different correlations among the loan defaults. The simu-
lation results indicate that the standard deviation of the bank´s loan loss
rate increases after securitization. Thus, it would be naive to assume that
securitization generally reduces the banks´ risks.
The nature of the bank´s reinvestment policy is an empirical matter.
Therefore, we try to obtain some insight into this question by analyzing the
stock market reaction to securitization. This is the second main purpose of
the paper. The underlying approach is based on the CAPM. In an event
study we look at the abnormal stock returns of a bank around the announce-
ment date of a securitization to find out whether the stockholders consider
securitization as value enhancing. We also look at the bank´s beta change
around the securitization and try to infer from this change the nature of the
bank´s reinvestment policy. Obviously, such an approach is based on several
assumptions. Therefore the conclusions are preliminary, at best. A more
careful analysis needs to look at the details of the bank´s balance sheets.
But this is beyond the scope of this paper.
We find no significant abnormal stock returns around the announcement
dates. But we find significant increases in the banks´ stock betas. We in-
terpret this as evidence that most banks use securitization to take more
systematic risks. Suppose, for example, that banks use the proceeds from
securitization in a fully funded transaction to grant new loans to new cus-
tomers. Then the granularity of the bank´s total loan portfolio should in-
crease so that also the correlation between the bank´s default losses and the
macrofactor of default losses should increase. Assuming a strong correlation
between the macrofactor of default losses and the stock market return and a
strong correlation between the bank´s default losses and its stock return, the
correlation between the bank´s stock return and the market return should
increase. In addition, this reinvestment policy is likely to raise the standard
deviation of the bank´s default losses and , thus, the standard deviation of
the bank´s stock return so that the bank´s beta should increase.
The finding that, on average, the banks´ betas increase with securitiza-
tion announcements could be explained not only by taking more systematic
risks, but also by secular increases of banks’ betas over the sampling period.
However, we control for this possibility. Therefore, we regard our finding as
preliminary empirical evidence about the banks´ reinvestment policies.
These findings on the micro level can have important consequences on
the macro level, in particular, on the stability of financial markets. We will
comment on these potential effects only briefly in the conclusion.
The paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we first provide some
3