NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
USURY CEILINGS, RELATIONSHIPS AND
BANK LENDING BEHAVIOR:
EVIDENCE FROM NINETEENTH CENTURY NEW YORK
Howard Bodenhorn
Working Paper 11734
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11734
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2005
I thank the staff of the Jefferson County Historical Society for generously making the original manuscript
records available to me. I thank Hugh Rockoff whose work on usury inspired this study and Ed Gamber for
his advice on time series procedures. Tim Guinnane, Michael Kelly, Eugene White, seminar participants at
Rutgers University and two anonymous referees offered many constructive comments. I also thank Pam
Bodenhorn for her assistance in transcribing and coding the data and Lafayette College’s Academic Research
Committee for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Howard Bodenhorn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Usury Ceilings, Relationships and Bank Lending Behavior: Evidence from Nineteenth Century
New York
Howard Bodenhorn
NBER Working Paper No. 11734
November 2005
JEL No. N2, N8, G2
ABSTRACT
Few pieces of economic regulation are ubiquitous as usury limits. Similarly, few economic principles
are as widely accepted as the belief that interference with freely contracted prices leads to market
distortions, and many studies of financial markets find that usury limits negatively affect credit
availability. This study shows that when no regulatory authority monitors and stands ready to punish
violators of the usury limit when intermediaries and borrowers form long-term relationships, banks
and borrowers regularly contract for interest rates in excess of the usury ceiling. Time series analysis
reveals limited effects on credit availability when market rates exceed the usury ceiling. Cross-
sectional analysis of individual loan contracts also shows that the positive effect of a long-term
relationship offsets the negative effect of the usury limit on credit availability.
Howard Bodenhorn
Department of Economics
Lafayette College
Easton, PA 18042
and NBER
bodenhoh@lafayette.edu

Usury Ceilings, Relationships and Bank Lending Behavior:
Evidence from Nineteenth-Century New York
1. Introduction
Few pieces of economic regulation are as ubiquitous across time and space as interest rate
ceilings or usury laws. The code of Hammurabi, the Old Testament, Vedic and Roman law, and the
Koran among other religious and legal codes, banned usury (Glaeser and Scheinkman 1998). In an
American context, nearly every U.S. state imposed a usury limit at some point in its history and a
usury provision was included in the National Currency Act of 1863 (Rockoff 2003). Given the
ubiquity of usury prohibitions, the taking of interest and usury absorbed the minds of some of
history’s greatest thinkers. Economic and political philosophers from Aristotle to Aquinas, from
Locke to Smith, and from Bentham to Keynes all weighed in on the subject. Even if we do not fully
understand the economic ramifications of usury laws, we have a reasonably good appreciation for
the motives underlying them. Usury ceilings were established to curb monopoly power, to protect
small borrowers, to discourage profligacy and, perhaps most importantly, to influence the allocation
of resources (Riemersma 1952, Blitz and Long 1865, Avio 1973).
Although the most common defenses of usury laws by religious and political leaders are that
they protect small borrowers from the depredations of unscrupulous lenders when interest rates rise
markedly and that they redirect credit to sectors of the economy deemed meritorious, such
-1-

regulations may distort markets so that the good intentions of assisting meritorious agents or sectors
may not be achieved (Tuccillo 1977). When usury ceilings become binding, banks unable to equate
supply and demand through price increases will adjust other terms of the loans to push the market
toward equilibrium.1 Substantial changes in the nonprice terms of credit can actually make small
borrowers worse off because they are either cut off from credit or they are driven to other, sometimes
disreputable, sources of credit. Interest rate ceilings force some borrowers into the hands of lenders
who employ inefficient and extra-legal methods of enforcement and collection (Masciandaro 2001,
2002). In less extreme instances, a binding usury law encourages the expenditure of resources in
identifying loopholes to exploit or camouflage illegal behavior (Nathan 1980). The implication is
that high-risk or low-wealth borrowers are excluded from credit markets when freely fluctuating
market rates rise above the usury limit.
Although Wright (2002) argues that banks were reluctant to violate usury laws because doing
so placed their corporate charter at risk, Davis (1960) finds that at least some banks chose to violate
the legal interest-rate ceiling, if not with impunity, at least regularly. The relevant question is: Under
what circumstances would a bank choose to violate the law? Or, to recast the question in economic
terms: When would a bank find it profitable to violate the law? A related question is: What effect
did the bank’s choice to violate the law, when it chose to do so, have on credit availability?
The early literature holds that binding interest-rate ceilings introduce market distortions, but
much of this literature assumes that banks observe the law. Indeed, in their influential analysis of
credit rationing, Jaffee and Modigliani (1969) assume that a combination of usury laws,
1 See Blitz and Long (1965), Ostas (1976), Nathan (1980), Villegas (1989), Wolken and Navratil (1981),
Peterson (1983), and Rockoff (2003).
-2-