NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE THEORY OF PUBLIC ENFORCEMENT OF LAW
A. Mitchell Polinsky
Steven Shavell
Working Paper 11780
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11780
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2005
To appear in: A. Mitchell Polinsky & Steven Shavell (eds.), Handbook of Law and Economics, Volume 1,
forthcoming 2006. Stanford Law School and National Bureau of Economic Research; and Harvard Law
School and National Bureau of Economic Research. Research on this article was supported by the John M.
Olin law and economics programs at Stanford Law School and Harvard Law School. An earlier version of
portions of this chapter appeared in Polinsky and Shavell (2000a). We are at work on a book-length treatment
of public enforcement of law. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by A. Mitchell Polinsky and Steven Shavell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

The Theory of Public Enforcement of Law
A. Mitchell Polinsky and Steven Shavell
NBER Working Paper No. 11780
November 2005
JEL No. D23, D62, D63, H23, H26, K14, K42, L51
ABSTRACT
This chapter of the forthcoming Handbook of Law and Economics surveys the theory of the public
enforcement of law – the use of governmental agents (regulators, inspectors, tax auditors, police,
prosecutors) to detect and to sanction violators of legal rules. The theoretical core of our analysis
addresses the following basic questions: Should the form of the sanction imposed on a liable party
be a fine, an imprisonment term, or a combination of the two? Should the rule of liability be strict
or fault-based? If violators are caught only with a probability, how should the level of the sanction
be adjusted? How much of society’s resources should be devoted to apprehending violators? We
then examine a variety of extensions of the central theory, including: activity level; errors; the costs
of imposing fines; general enforcement; marginal deterrence; the principal-agent relationship;
settlements; self-reporting; repeat offenders; imperfect knowledge about the probability and
magnitude of sanctions; corruption; incapacitation; costly observation of wealth; social norms; and
the fairness of sanctions.
A Mitchell Polinsky
Stanford Law School
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
polinsky@stanford.edu
Steven Shavell
Harvard Law School
1575 Massachusetts Avenue
Hauser Hall 508
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
shavell@law.harvard.edu

1. INTRODUCTION
Public enforcement of law — the use of governmental agents to detect and to sanction
violators of legal rules — is a subject of obvious importance. Police and prosecutors endeavor
to solve crimes and to punish criminals, regulators attempt to control violations of
environmental, safety, consumer protection, and financial disclosure laws, and agents of the
Internal Revenue Service seek to enforce the tax code.
The earliest economically-oriented writing on the subject of public law enforcement dates
from the eighteenth century contributions of Montesquieu (1748), Beccaria (1767), and,
especially, Bentham (1789). Curiously, after Bentham, the subject of law enforcement lay
essentially dormant in economic scholarship until the late 1960s, when Becker (1968) published
a highly influential article. Since then, several hundred articles have been written on the
economics of law enforcement.1
The main purpose of our chapter is to present the economic theory of public law
enforcement in a systematic and comprehensive way.2 The theoretical core of our analysis
addresses the following basic questions: Should the form of the sanction imposed on a liable
party be a fine, an imprisonment term, or a combination of the two? Should the rule of liability
be strict or fault-based? If violators are caught only with a probability, how should the level of
the sanction be adjusted? How much of society’s resources should be devoted to apprehending
violators?
The chapter is outlined as follows. We begin in section 2 by considering the rationale for
1 See, for example, the references cited in Bouckaert and De Geest (1992, pp. 504-526), Garoupa (1997),
Mookherjee (1997), and Polinsky and Shavell (2000a).
2 For other surveys of the theory of public enforcement, see Garoupa (1997) and Mookherjee (1997). For
surveys of empirical research on law enforcement and crime, see Eide (2000) and Levitt and Miles (2006), and for a
survey of empirical research on enforcement of environmental regulation, see Cohen (1999, pp. 78-95).
- 3 -

public enforcement of law, that is, by asking why society cannot rely exclusively on private
enforcement of law to control undesirable behavior. We then state the problem of public
enforcement of law in general terms in section 3. In sections 4 through 6, we analyze strict
liability and fault-based liability when enforcement is certain, first considering monetary
sanctions, next non-monetary sanctions, and then the two together. In sections 7 through 9, we
perform the same analysis when enforcement is uncertain because it is costly. In section 10 we
summarize the theory, and in section 11 we discuss enforcement practices in the light of the
theory we have reviewed.
We subsequently examine a variety of extensions of our core analysis in sections 12
through 28. These concern mistake, the costs of imposing sanctions, marginal deterrence, the
settlement process, self-reporting of violations, corruption of law enforcers, and the fairness of
sanctions, among other topics. We conclude in section 29.
2. WHY PUBLIC ENFORCEMENT RATHER THAN PRIVATE ENFORCEMENT?
Before proceeding, we should comment on the rationale for public, as opposed to private,
law enforcement, where, by the latter, we mean the bringing of suits by victims of harm or those
threatened by harm. An important element of the justification for private enforcement concerns
information about the identity of violators. When victims of harm naturally possess knowledge
of who injured them, allowing private suits for harm will motivate victims to initiate legal action
and thus will harness the information they have for purposes of law enforcement. This may help
to explain why, for example, the enforcement of contract law and tort law is primarily private in
nature: a victim of a contract breach obviously knows who committed the breach, and a victim of
a tort usually knows who the tortfeasor was. When, however, victims cannot easily identify who
injured them, it may be desirable for public enforcement to be employed.
- 4 -