NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MACRO FACTORS IN BOND RISK PREMIA
Sydney C. Ludvigson
Serena Ng
Working Paper 11703
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11703
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2005
Ludvigson acknowledges financial support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and the CV Starr Center at
NYU. We thank Greg Du¤ee and Monika Piazzesi for helpful comments. We are also grateful to Monika
Piazzesi for help with the bond data, to Mark Watson for help with the macro data, and to Bernadino Palazzo
for excellent research assistance. Any errors or omissions are the responsibility of the authors. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2005 by Sydney C. Ludvigson and Serena Ng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Macro Factors in Bond Risk Premia
Sydney C. Ludvigson and Serena Ng
NBER Working Paper No. 11703
October 2005, Revised September 2006
JEL No. G10, G12, E0, E4
ABSTRACT
Empirical evidence suggests that excess bond returns are forecastable by financial indicators such
as forward spreads and yield spreads, a violation of the expectations hypothesis based on constant
risk premia. But existing evidence does not tie the forecastable variation in excess bond returns to
underlying macroeconomic fundamentals, as would be expected if the forecastability were
attributable to time variation in risk premia. We use the methodology of dynamic factor analysis for
large datasets to investigate possible empirical linkages between forecastable variation in excess
bond returns and macroeconomic fundamentals. We find that several common factors estimated from
a large dataset on U.S. economic activity have important forecasting power for future excess returns
on U.S. government bonds. Following Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005), we also construct single
predictor state variables by forming linear combinations of either five or six estimated common
factors. The single state variables forecast excess bond returns at maturities from two to five years,
and do so virtually as well as an unrestricted regression model that includes each common factor as
a separate predictor variable. The linear combinations we form are driven by both "real" and
"inflation" macro factors, in addition to financial factors, and contain important information about
one year ahead excess bond returns that is not captured by forward spreads, yield spreads, or the
principal components of the yield covariance matrix.
Sydney C. Ludvigson Department of Economics
Department of Economics University of Michigan
New York University 317 Lorcha Hall
269 Mercer Street Ann Arbor, MI 48109
7th Floor serena.ng@umich.edu
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
sydney.ludvigson@nyu.edu
Serena Ng

1 Introduction
Recent empirical research in …nancial economics has uncovered signi…cant forecastable varia-
tionintheexcessreturnsofU.S.governmentbonds,aviolationoftheexpectationshypothesis.
Fama and Bliss (1987) report that n-year excess bond returns are forecastable by the spread
between the n-year forward rate and the one-year yield. Campbell and Shiller (1991) …nd
that excess bond returns are forecastable by Treasury yield spreads. Cochrane and Piazzesi
(2005) …nd that a linear combination of …ve forward spreads explains between 30 and 35
percent of the variation in next year’s excess returns on bonds with maturities ranging from
two to …ve years. These …ndings imply that risk premia in bond returns and bond yields vary
over time and are a quantitatively important source of ‡uctuations in the bond market.
An unanswered question is whether such movements in bond market risk premia bear
any relation to the macroeconomy. Are there important cyclical ‡uctuations in bond market
premia and, if so, with what macroeconomic aggregates do these premia vary? Economic
theories that rationalize time-varying risk premia almost always posit that such premia vary
with macroeconomic variables. For example, Campbell and Cochrane (1999) posit that risk
premia on equity vary with a slow-moving habit driven by shocks to aggregate consumption.
Wachter (2006) adapts the Campbell-Cochrane habit model to examine the nominal term
structure of interest rates, and shows that bond risk premia (as well as equity premia) should
vary with the slow-moving consumption habit. Brandt and Wang (2003) argue that risk
premia are driven by shocks to in‡ation, as well as shocks to aggregate consumption. Such
theories imply that rational variation in bond risk premia should be evident from forecasting
regressions of excess bond returns on macroeconomic fundamentals.
Despite these theoretical insights, there is little direct evidence of a link between the
macroeconomy and bond risk premia. The empirical evidence cited above, for example, …nds
that excess bond returns are forecastable not by macroeconomic variables such as aggregate
consumption or in‡ation, but rather by pure …nancial indicators such as forward spreads and
yield spreads.
There are several possible reasons why it may be di¢ cult to uncover a direct link between
macroeconomic activity and bond market risk premia. First, some macroeconomic driving
variables may be latent and impossible to summarize with a few observable series. The
Campbell-Cochrane habit mayfall into this category. Second, macro variables are more likely
than …nancial series to be imperfectly measured and less likely to correspond to the precise
economicconceptsprovidedbytheoreticalmodels. Asoneexample, aggregateconsumptionis
1

oftenmeasuredasnondurablesandservicesexpenditure,butthismeasureomitsanimportant
component of theoretical consumption, namely the service ‡ow from the stock of durables.
Third, the models themselves are imperfect descriptions of reality and may restrict attention
toasmallsetofvariablesthatfailtospantheinformationsetsof…nancialmarketparticipants.
This paper considers one way around these di¢ culties using the methodology of dynamic
factor analysis for large datasets. Recent research on dynamic factor analysis …nds that
the information in a large number of economic time series can be e¤ectively summarized
by a relatively small number of estimated factors, a¤ording the opportunity to exploit a
much richer information base than what has been possible in prior empirical study of bond
risk premia. In this methodology, “a large number”can mean hundreds or, perhaps, even
more than one thousand economic time series. By summarizing the information from a large
number of series in a few estimated factors, we eliminate the arbitrary reliance on a small
number of imperfectly measured indicators to proxy for macroeconomic fundamentals, and
make feasible the use of a vast set of economic variables that are more likely to span the
unobservable information sets of …nancial market participants.
We use dynamic factor analysis to revisit the question of whether there are important
macro factors in bond risk premia. We begin with a comprehensive analysis of whether
excess bond returns are predictable by macroeconomic fundamentals, and then move on to
investigate whether risk premia in long-term bond yields (sometimes called term premia),
vary with macroeconomic fundamentals.
Our results indicate bond premia are indeed forecastable by macroeconomic fundamen-
tals, and we …nd marked countercyclical variation in bond risk premia. To implement the
dynamic factor analysis methodology, we estimate common factors from a monthly panel of
132 measures of economic activity using the method of principal components. We …nd that
several estimated common factors have important forecasting power for future excess returns
on U.S. government bonds. Following Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005), we also construct single
predictor state variables from these factors by forming linear combinations of the either …ve
orsixestimatedcommonfactors(denotedF5 andF6 , respectively). We…ndthatsuchstate
t t
variables forecast excess bond returns at all maturities (two to …ve years), and do so virtually
as well as a regression model that includes each common factor in the linear combination as
a separate predictor variable.
The magnitude of the forecastability we …nd associated with macroeconomic activity is
economically signi…cant. The estimated factors have their strongest predictive power for two-
year bonds, explaining 26 percent of the one year ahead variation in their excess returns.
2