HAS FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT
MADE THE WORLD RISKIER?
Raghuram G. Rajan
Working Paper 11728

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HAS FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT
MADE THE WORLD RISKIER?
Raghuram G. Rajan
Working Paper 11728
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11728
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2005
]
The author is the Economic Counselor and Director of Research of the International Monetary Fund. This
paper reflects the author’s views and not necessarily those of the International Monetary Fund, its
management, or its Board. I thank Laura Kodres for extremely useful conversations and suggestions, Sergei
Antoshin for valuable research assistance, and Douglas Diamond, Jonathan Fiechter, Laura Kodres, Donald
Kohn, Hyun Shin, Jeremy Stein, and Hung Tran for valuable comments on a previous draft. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2005 by Raghuram G. Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?
Raghuram G. Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 11728
October 2005
JEL No. G0, G1, G2, G3
ABSTRACT
Developments in the financial sector have led to an expansion in its ability to spread risks. The
increase in the risk bearing capacity of economies, as well as in actual risk taking, has led to a range
of financial transactions that hitherto were not possible, and has created much greater access to
finance for firms and households. On net, this has made the world much better off. Concurrently,
however, we have also seen the emergence of a whole range of intermediaries, whose size and
appetite for risk may expand over the cycle. Not only can these intermediaries accentuate real
fluctuations, they can also leave themselves exposed to certain small probability risks that their own
collective behavior makes more likely. As a result, under some conditions, economies may be more
exposed to financial-sector-induced turmoil than in the past. The paper discusses the implications
for monetary policy and prudential supervision. In particular, it suggests market-friendly policies that
would reduce the incentive of intermediary managers to take excessive risk.
Raghuram G. Rajan
International Monetary Fund
Research Department, Rm 10-700
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20431
and NBER
rrajan@imf.org

- 1 -
In the last thirty years, financial systems around the world have undergone revolutionary
change. People can borrow greater amounts at cheaper rates than ever before, invest in a
multitude of instruments catering to every possible profile of risk and return, and share risks
with strangers from across the globe. Have these undoubted benefits come at a cost? How
concerned should central bankers and financial system supervisors be, and what can they do
about it? These are the issues examined in this paper.
Consider the main forces that have been at work in altering the financial landscape.
Technical change has reduced the cost of communication and computation, as well as the
cost of acquiring, processing, and storing information. One very important aspect of technical
change has been academic research and commercial development; Techniques ranging from
financial engineering to portfolio optimization, from securitization to credit scoring, are now
widely used. Deregulation has removed artificial barriers preventing entry, or competition
between products, institutions, markets, and jurisdictions. Finally, the process of institutional
change has created new entities within the financial sector such as private equity firms and
hedge funds, as well as new political, legal, and regulatory arrangements.
These changes have altered the nature of the typical transaction in the financial sector,
making it more arm’s length and allowing broader participation. Financial markets have
expanded and become deeper. The broad participation has allowed risks to be more widely
spread throughout the economy.
While this phenomenon has been termed “disintermediation” because it involves moving
away from traditional bank centered ties, the term is a misnomer. Though in a number of
industrialized countries, individuals do not deposit a significant portion of their savings
directly in banks any more, they invest indirectly in the market via mutual funds, insurance
companies, and pension funds, and indirectly in firms via (indirect) investments in venture
capital funds, hedge funds, and other forms of private equity. The managers of these financial
institutions, whom I shall call “investment managers” have displaced banks and
“reintermediated” themselves between individuals and markets.
What about banks themselves? While banks can now sell much of the risk associated with
the “plain-vanilla” transactions they originate, such as mortgages, off their balance sheets,
they have to retain a portion, typically the first losses. Moreover, they now focus far more on
transactions where they have a comparative advantage, typically transactions where explicit
contracts are hard to specify or where the consequences need to be hedged by trading in the
market. In short, as the “plain vanilla” transaction becomes more liquid and amenable to
being transacted in the market, banks are moving on to more illiquid transactions.
Competition forces them to flirt continuously with the limits of illiquidity.
The expansion in the variety of intermediaries and financial transactions has major benefits,
including reducing the transactions costs of investing, expanding access to capital, allowing
more diverse opinions to be expressed in the marketplace, and allowing better risk sharing.
However, it has potential downsides, which I will explore in this paper. This focus is not
meant to minimize the enormous upsides that have been explored elsewhere (see, for
1