NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REVIEW OF A HISTORY OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE.
VOLUME 1 (2003) BY ALLAN H. MELTZER
Michael D. Bordo
Working Paper 11714
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11714
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2005
Article written for the Journal of Monetary Economics. For helpful suggestions and comments I would
like to thank Forrest Capie, Bruce Champ, Charles Goodhart, Chris Hanes, Joseph Haubrich, David
Laidler, Athanasios Orphanides, Angela Redish, Hugh Rockoff, Anna Schwartz, Francois Velde, David
Wheelock, Eugene White and John Wood. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Michael D. Bordo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Review of A History of the Federal Reserve. Volume 1 (2003) by Allan H. Meltzer
Michael D. Bordo
NBER Working Paper No. 11714
October 2005
JEL No. E58
ABSTRACT
In this essay I distill the seven major themes in A History of the Federal Reserve which covers the
Federal Reserve's record from 1914 to 1951. I conclude with a critique.
Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu

The History of the Federal Reserve 1913-1951 Vol. I by Allan Meltzer: A Review Essay
1. Introduction
Allan Meltzer’s A History of the Federal Reserve 1913-1951 Vol. I is a monumental
accomplishment. The volume provides a very detailed history of the Fed in its formative years
from its establishment in 1913 to the Federal Reserve Treasury Accord of 1951. The narrative
covers the key events of four decades; getting started; war finance in World War I; the 1920-21
recession; the boom years in the 1920s; the Wall Street crash and the Great Depression;
subservience to the Treasury beginning in 1934; World War II finance and the pegging of
interest rates; and the 1951 Accord when the Fed regained its independence from the Treasury.
In painstaking detail Meltzer documents how the Fed grew up to be an adult central bank
and what a drawn out and rocky adolescence it suffered through. The narrative in Volume I sets
the stage for the yet to be completed Volume II which covers the period from the Accord to the
beginning of Alan Greenspan’s tenure as chairman - - the Federal Reserve’s far from tranquil
adulthood.
The volume complements Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz’s A Monetary History of
the United States: 1867-1960 published in 1963. However unlike their work, which is a monetary
history of the United States, Meltzer’s book is a biography of its central bank, portrayed within
the broader context of U.S. monetary history. More importantly, because Meltzer had access to a
much more complete archived official record than they had (the records of the Federal Reserve
Board, the Board of Governors and the minutes of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s
board of directors as well as of the Federal Advisory Council), his interpretation of many of the
key episodes in Fed history greatly expands upon and in several episodes, differs considerably
2

from theirs. This is most evident in Volume I’s treatment of the Fed’s policy failure in the 1920s
and 1930s that culminated in the debacle of the Great Depression. Indeed his chapters four and
five are the signature chapters in the book, as of course is chapter seven The Great Contraction,
1929-1933 in Friedman and Schwartz. They are essential reading for any serious student of that
disaster.
Section 2 of my essay discusses what I distill to be the seven major themes in History
of Federal Reserve. A History is an excellent source for any serious student of the Federal
Reserve. It is also very detailed and a time consuming read. Appendix I offers a succinct Readers
Guide to the Historical Narrative in Volume I. Section 3 concludes with some critical insights.
2. Major Themes
Seven major themes knit the historical narrative together and are the essence of Meltzer’s
thesis: (1) the Fed followed the wrong model from the beginning and never really got it right
even by 1951; (2) as in Friedman and Schwartz, the structure of the Federal Reserve was flawed
from the beginning and contributed greatly to its inability to learn; (3) in distinction to Friedman
and Schwartz, the effects of adhering to a flawed policy model outweighed the contribution of
bright officials, even Benjamin Strong, who may have known better; (4) the interpretation of the
Great Depression by Friedman and Schwartz and other scholars such as Bernanke and
Eichengreen is wanting; (5) economic forces in the rest of the world are important and the Fed
had ongoing problems coming to grips with them; (6) the Fed had a long and protracted struggle
in maintaining its independence from the Treasury; (7) Meltzer views the history of the Fed
through monetarist glasses.
3