NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNDERSTANDING ORDER FLOW
Martin D. D. Evans
Richard K. Lyons
Working Paper 11748
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11748
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2005
Corresponding author: Martin Evans. Both authors thank the National Science Foundation for financial
support, including a clearing-house for micro-based research on exchange rates (at
georgetown.edu/faculty/evansm1 and at faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/lyons). The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Martin D. D. Evans and Richard K. Lyons. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Understanding Order Flow
Martin D. D. Evans and Richard K. Lyons
NBER Working Paper No. 11748
November 2005
JEL No. F3, F4, G1
ABSTRACT
This paper develops a model for understanding end-user order flow in the FX market. The model
addresses several puzzling findings. First, the estimated price-impact of flow from different end-user
segments is, dollar-for-dollar, quite different. Second, order flow from segments traditionally thought
to be liquidity-motivated actually has power to forecast exchange rates. Third, about one third of
order flow's power to forecast exchange rates one month ahead comes from flow's ability to forecast
future flow, whereas the remaining two-thirds applies to price components unrelated to future flow.
We show that all of these features arise naturally from end-user heterogeneity, in a setting where
order flow provides timely information to market-makers about the state of the macroeconomy.
Martin D. D. Evans
Department of Economics
Georgetown University
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
evansm1@georgetown.edu
Richard K. Lyons
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
lyons@haas.berkeley.edu

Introduction
This paper addresses order ‡ow heterogeneity and its empirical implications. By order ‡ow hetero-
geneity, we mean transactions initiated by agents of di¤erent types (e.g., non-…nancial corporations
versus hedge funds versus mutual funds). Recent theoretical work on exchange rates stresses the
analytical importance of heterogeneity across agents, stemming from both dispersed information
and non-informational shocks to asset demands (e.g., Bacchetta and van Wincoop 2003, Hau and
Rey 2002, Dunne, Hau, and Moore 2004, Evans and Lyons 2004a,b). Empirical predictions from
these models are borne out: trades have causal and persistent e¤ects on price, a …nding that runs
counter to textbook exchange rate models (e.g., Evans and Lyons 2002a,b, Payne 2003, among
many others).2 Theory generally assumes, however, that agents are symmetrically heterogeneous;
that is to say, they di¤er, but in the same way. In contrast, trades in the foreign exchange (FX)
market come from categories of agents that are quite di¤erent: they have di¤erent motivations,
di¤erent attitudes toward risk, and di¤erent horizons. Extant theory provides little guidance for
empiricists seeking to exploit transaction data that is disaggregated into segments.3
Several puzzling empirical …ndings suggest that new modeling is needed. First, the price im-
pact of order ‡ow is, dollar–for–dollar, quite di¤erent across end–user segments. This is not what
one would expect to see if agents are symmetrically heterogeneous. Second, order ‡ow from seg-
mentstraditionallythoughttobeliquidity–motivatedactuallyhaspowertoforecastexchangerates.
Third, about one third of order ‡ow’s power to forecast exchange rates comes from ‡ow’s ability
to forecast future ‡ow, whereas the remaining two–thirds applies to price components unrelated
to future ‡ow. In this paper, we present a model where all these features arise naturally from
heterogeneity across end–user segments, in a setting where order ‡ow provides timely information
to market-makers about the state of the macroeconomy.
A one-period version of the Kyle (1985) model illustrates why intuition based on standard
microstructure models is an unreliable guide to empirical work using order ‡ow data from di¤erent
end-user(henceforth"customers")segments. Inthismodel,thechangeinpricequotedbyamarket-
maker (i.e., the change in the log exchange rate s ) depends on the total order ‡ow arriving in the
t
2In textbook models, all of which assume that variables relevant to exchange rates are common knowledge (CK),
trades per se have no causal e¤ect on price. Demand shifts have causal e¤ects on price. But because demand shifts
come from public information only, prices adjust before transactions occur, so no causality from trades to price is
present. Put di¤erently, in CK environments demand and order ‡ow are quite di¤erent, whereas in purely non-CK
environments they are the same.
3Recentresearch usingtransaction datafrom di¤erentsegmentsincludesFrootandRamadorai(2002),Carpenter
and Wang (2003), Mende and Menkho¤(2003), Bjønnes, Rime, and Solheim (2004), Marsh and O’Rourke (2005),
and Sager and Taylor (2005).
1

market, x :
t
(cid:1)s = (cid:12)x ;
t t
where (cid:12), the price–impact coe¢ cient, governs the sensitivity of the market–maker’s price quote to
order ‡ow. By assumption, the market-maker cannot distinguish di¤erent order ‡ow components,
but must instead respond to the aggregated total ‡ow x . Expected order ‡ow in this model is
t
zero. Even in dynamic versions of the Kyle model, the market-maker expects order ‡ow to be zero
in each period (a property that also applies to standard versions of the other canonical information
model, the Glosten and Milgrom 1985 model). This conditional i.i.d. structure is an analytically
attractive feature of these models.
Now suppose that a researcher has a dataset that breaks total FX customer ‡ow at a given
bank into three segments, say short-term investors (e.g., hedge funds), long-term investors (e.g.,
mutual funds), and international-trade-based (e.g., non-…nancial corporations); xi for i = 1;2;3.
t
The researcher then runs the regression:
(cid:1)s = (cid:12) x1+(cid:12) x2+(cid:12) x3+(cid:15) : (1)
t 1 t 2 t 3 t t
With the perspective of the Kyle model, it would be natural to interpret the (cid:12) coe¢ cients as
i
price–impact parameters. However, this would be problematic for three reasons: First, the three
regressors are not likely to be independent intratemporally. Indeed, in our data the order ‡ows
from di¤erent segments are signi…cantly correlated. If the xis are known to covary, and each of
t
the (cid:12)’s are non-zero, then no one coe¢ cient summarizes the total price–impact of changes in a
single ‡ow segment. Second, the three regressors are not likely to be independent intertemporally.
In fact, the ‡ow segments in our dataset are signi…cantly auto-correlated. In this context, the
speci…cation in (1) is a reduced-form for potentially complex microeconomic dynamics. As non-
structural estimates, the (cid:12)’s are not reliable measures of the price–impact of incremental trades.
Third, the speci…cation misses the fact that regressors in equation (1) come from a single bank,
whereas the ‡ows that move the exchange rate are the market-wide ‡ows from all segments. This is
problematicintermsofprice–impactparameters: positivecorrelationbetween‡owsegmentsacross
banks means that when the regression omits other-bank ‡ows, the ‡ows from the source bank are
getting too much price–impact credit (a form of omitted variable bias). More fundamentally, the
FX market is not transparent, at least not with respect to customer ‡ows, so that the ‡ows that
drive (cid:1)s proximately are in fact the interdealer ‡ows. The exchange rate re‡ects the information
t
in any individual bank’s customer ‡ows only when other dealers learn that information.
2