NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE MYTH OF LONG-HORIZON PREDICTABILITY
Jacob Boudoukh
Matthew Richardson
Robert Whitelaw
Working Paper 11841
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11841
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2005
a Arison School of Business, IDC and NBER; b Stern School of Business, New York University and NBER.
We would like to thank Jeff Wurgler, John Cochrane (the discussant), and seminar participants at Yale
University, New York University and the NBER asset pricing program for helpful comments. Contact: Prof.
M. Richardson, NYU, Stern School of Business, 44 W. 4th St., New York, NY 10012;
mrichar0@stern.nyu.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Jacob Boudoukh, Matthew Richardson, and Robert Whitelaw. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Myth of Long-Horizon Predictability
Jacob Boudoukh, Matthew Richardson, and Robert Whitelaw
NBER Working Paper No. 11841
December 2005
JEL No. G12, G10, C32
ABSTRACT
The prevailing view in finance is that the evidence for long-horizon stock return predictability is
significantly stronger than that for short horizons. We show that for persistent regressors, a
characteristic of most of the predictive variables used in the literature, the estimators are almost
perfectly correlated across horizons under the null hypothesis of no predictability. For example, for
the persistence levels of dividend yields, the analytical correlation is 99% between the 1- and 2-year
horizon estimators and 94% between the 1- and 5-year horizons, due to the combined effects of
overlapping returns and the persistence of the predictive variable. Common sampling error across
equations leads to ordinary least squares coefficient estimates and R2s that are roughly proportional
to the horizon under the null hypothesis. This is the precise pattern found in the data. The asymptotic
theory is corroborated, and the analysis extended by extensive simulation evidence. We perform joint
tests across horizons for a variety of explanatory variables, and provide an alternative view of the
existing evidence.
Jacob Boudoukh Robert Whitelaw
34 Burla St #19 NYU, Stern School of Business
Tel Aviv 69364 44 W. 4th St.
Israel New York, NY 10012
and NBER and NBER
jboudouk@idc.il rwhitela@stern.nyu.edu
Matthew Richardson
NYU, Stern School of Business
44 W. 4th St.
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
mrichar0@stern.nyu.edu

I. Introduction
Over the last two decades, the finance literature has produced growing evidence of stock return
predictability, though not without substantive debate. The strongest evidence cited so far
comes from long-horizon stock returns regressed on variables such as dividend yields, term
structure slopes, and credit spreads, among others. A typical view is expressed in Campbell,
Lo, and MacKinlay’s standard textbook for empirical financial economics, The Econometrics
of Financial Markets (1997, p.268):
At a horizon of one month, the regression results are rather unimpressive: The
R2 statistics never exceed 2%, and the t-statistics exceed 2 only in the post-
World War II subsample. The striking fact about the table is how much
stronger the results become when one increases the horizon. At a two-year
horizon the R2 statistic is 14% for the full sample … at a four-year horizon the
R2 statistic is 26% for the full sample.
However, there is an alternative interpretation of this evidence: Researchers should be
equally impressed by the short- and long-horizon evidence for the simple reason that the
regressions are almost perfectly correlated. For an autocorrelation of 0.953 for annual dividend
yields, we show analytically that the 1-year and 2-year predictive estimators are 98.8%
correlated under the null hypothesis of no predictability. For longer horizons, the correlations
are even higher, reaching 99.6% between the 4- and 5-year horizon estimators. This degree of
correlation manifests itself in multiple-horizon regressions in a particularly unfortunate way.
1

Since the sampling error that is almost surely present in small samples shows up in each
regression, both the estimator and R2 are proportional to the horizon.
This paper provides analytical expressions for the correlations across multiple-horizon
estimators, and then shows, through simulations, that these expressions are relevant in small
samples. The analytical expressions relate the correlations across these estimators to both the
degree of overlap across the horizons and the level of persistence of the predictive variable.
Our findings relate to an earlier literature looking at joint tests of the random walk hypothesis
for stock prices using multiple-horizon variance ratios and autocorrelations, among other
estimators (see, e.g., Richardson and Smith (1991, 1994) and Richardson (1993)). This earlier
literature stresses accounting for the degree of overlap. The problem here is much more severe.
In the univariate framework, the predictive variable—past stock returns—is approximately
independently and identically distributed (IID). In this paper’s framework, the predictive
variable, e.g., dividend yields, is highly persistent.
Our simulations show that any sampling error in the data under the null hypothesis of no
predictability appears in the same manner in every multiple-horizon regression when the
predictive variable is highly persistent. Using box plots and tables describing the relation
across the multiple horizon estimates and R2s, we show the exact pattern one should expect
under the null hypothesis: The multiple-horizon estimates are monotonic in the horizon
approximately two-thirds of the time, and the mean ratios of the 2- to 5-year estimators to the
1-year estimator are 1.93, 2.80, 3.59, and 4.32, respectively. Consider the actual estimated
coefficients for the regression of 1- to 5-year stock returns on dividend yields over the 1926–
2004 sample period: 0.131, 0.257, 0.390, 0.461, and 0.521. These correspond to monotonically
increasing estimates with corresponding ratios of 1.96, 2.98, 3.53, and 3.99. We show that
2