NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIMITS OF ARBITRAGE:
THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM THE
MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES MARKET
Xavier Gabaix
Arvind Krishnamurthy
Olivier Vigneron
Working Paper 11851
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11851
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2005
Respectively: MIT and NBER; Northwestern University; Unicredit Bank. For valuable comments, we thank
Kobi Boudoukh, Donald Bronstein, John Campbell, Kent Daniel, Thomas Davido., John Geanakoplos,
Massoud Heidari, Jingzhi Huang, Ravi Jagannathan, Adam Kolasinski, Ananth Krishnamurthy, Yong Liu,
Francis Longsta., Bob McDonald, Andrew Metrick, Anna Pavlova, Matt Richardson, Tim Riddiough,
Anthony Sanders, Jose Scheinkman, Richard Stanton, Rene Stulz, Raman Uppal, Dimitri Vayanos, Nancy
Wallace, and Bill Wheaton. We are particularly grateful to the referee for many constructive suggestions.
We thank participants at the NBER Asset Pricing meeting, Econometric Society Summer meeting,
Gerzensee-CEPR meeting, WFA, Utah Finance Conference and seminars at UC-Berkeley, University of
British Columbia, University of Chicago, HEC-Montreal, LBS, LSE-FMG, MIT, University of Maryland,
NYU, and Northwestern for their comments. We also thank Salomon-Smith-Barney, Smith-Breeden and
UBS for providing data. Kripa Freitas provided excellent research assistance. Correspondence to
xgabaix@mit.edu and a-krishnamurthy@northwestern.edu. All errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2005 by Xavier Gabaix, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Olivier Vigneron. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Limits of Arbitrage: Theory and Evidence from the Mortgage-Backed Securities Market
Xavier Gabaix, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Olivier Vigneron
NBER Working Paper No. 11851
December 2005
JEL No. G12, G14, G21
ABSTRACT
"Limits of Arbitrage" theories hypothesize that the marginal investor in a particular asset market is
a specialized arbitrageur rather than a diversified representative investor. We examine the mortgage-
backed securities (MBS) market in this light. We show that the risk of homeowner prepayment,
which is a wash in the aggregate, is priced in the MBS market. The covariance of prepayment risk
with aggregate wealth implies the wrong sign to match the observed prices of prepayment risk. The
price of risk is better explained by a kernel based on MBS-market-wide specific risk. This finding
is consistent with the specialized arbitrageur hypothesis.
Xavier Gabaix
Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive, E52-274B
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
xgabaix@mit.edu
Arvind Krishnamurthy
Kellogg Graduate School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
a-krishnamurthy@northwestern.edu
Olivier Vigneron
UBM
95 Queen Victoria Street
London EC4V 4HN
olivier.vigneron@ubm.unicredit.it

A number of recent “limitsof arbitrage”theories predict that the distressed liquidationof assets by
hedgefundsresults inalargedropinasset prices(see, forexample,ShleiferandVishny(1997),Kyle
and Xiong (2001), Gromb and Vayanos (2002), or Geanakoplos (2003)). These theories are often
referenced in explaining episodes of market illiquidityand fallingasset prices, such as the events of
Fallof 1998.
In traditional asset pricing theory, the marginal investor in every asset market is the same
broadlydiversified representative investor. Thus,a hedge fund liquidating$200billionofmortgage-
backed securities finds a large pool of ready buyers (comparable to the entire capital market).
The liquidationdoes not affect expected returns because the representative investor acts quickly to
eliminateexcess returns. Ontheother hand,accordingtothelimitsofarbitragetheory,therelevant
set of buyers is a smaller specialized pool of investors and the liquidationscan have large effects on
prices. The limitsof arbitrage theory posits that the marginalinvestor in a particular asset market
is an investor who specializes in that market.
Weprovidesupport fortheexistence oflimitsofarbitrageinthecontext ofthemortgage-backed
securities (MBS) market. We present a simple model of delegated fund management in which the
marginalinvestorintheMBSmarketisarisk-aversefundmanagerwhohasallofhiswealthinvested
in this market. The novelty of the theory lies in its implications for the pricing of MBS-market
specific risk. We predict that MBS-market specific risk willcarry a positive risk premium, contrary
to traditional asset pricing theory. Moreover, we predict that the market price of this risk will be
high when the total riskiness of the MBS-market is also high. We argue that prepayment risk is a
good example of an MBS-market specific risk, and present evidence consistent with our theoretical
predictions.
MBS securities rise and fall in value based on the exercise of homeowners’ prepayment options.
When a homeowner prepays a mortgage, the MBS backed by the mortgage is called back at par.
Dependingontheinterestrateenvironment,prepaymentcaneitherhurtorbenefittheMBSinvestor.
Thus, for an investor who specializes in the MBS market, prepayment risk represents a risk to the
valueofhisportfolio. Atthe aggregatelevel,prepayments donotcause changes toaggregatewealth
or the aggregate endowment, since for every MBS investor who is short a prepayment option, there
is a homeowner who is long the prepayment option. Any observed covariance between aggregates
and prepayments is due to some common economic factors driving both aggregates and homeowner
prepayments. Intraditionalassetpricingtheory,thecovariancebetween prepaymentsandaggregate
wealth or consumption explains the price of prepayment risk.
We establish three principalempirical results in the paper. First, we show that prepayment risk
carries apositiverisk premium. Second, weshow that the observed covariancebetween prepayment
risk and either aggregate wealth or consumption implies a sign opposite to that required to match
the observed prices of prepayment risk, under traditional asset pricing theory. This suggests that
the marginal investor in the MBS market is not the representative investor hypothesized by the
traditionalCAPM or consumption-CAPM model. Finally,we derive a proxyfor the riskiness ofthe
MBS market and show that the market price of prepayment risk comoves with this proxy.
Taken together, these results support the existence of limits to arbitrage in the MBS market.
Weargue that the marginalinvestor inthe MBS market isa hedge fund or mutualfund that trades
exclusively in the MBS market. We show that when the fund manager has a coefficient of relative
1

risk aversion of 4, the model’s empirical predictions are consistent with what we find in the data.
An importanttheme inthe limitsof arbitrage literature is that negative shocks to the capital of
hedge funds cause them toliquidateassets, whichresults inhigherexpected returns onthese assets.
In the MBS market the events of 1993 and 1994 (collapse of the Askins CapitalManagement MBS
fund) and 1998 and 1999 (LTCM crisis) in which MBS spreads widened substantially, are usually
taken tobe asign ofacapital-relatedshock. Althoughwe donot providedirect evidence ofcapital-
related movements in MBS prices, we do establish a necessary condition for a capital-related shock
to effect a large move in MBS prices. Namely, the marginal investor must be an MBS specialist
rather than a broadly diversified representative investor.
The maindifficultywe encounter inestablishing ourresults arises fromameasurement problem.
In order to draw a relation between prepayment risk and the risk premium on an MBS, we need to
measureanMBS’sriskpremium. Weproxyforthisriskpremiumusingthesecurity’soptionadjusted
spread (OAS). The OAS measures the yield on anMBS inexcess of Treasuries, after accountingfor
the value of the homeowner’s prepayment option. However, accounting for the prepayment option
dependsonthespecificpricingmodelusedtocomputetheOAS.Thus,theOASisamodel-dependent
measure ofthe MBS’s risk premium. Tothe extent that the pricingmodelismis-specified, the OAS
is a noisy measure of the true risk premium, potentially rendering the interpretation of our results
suspect (e.g., see Kupiec and Kah, 1999).
One waytobypass the mis-specificationissue istouse actualMBS returns, aproxyforexpected
returns, asthedependent variableinourregressions. Wehavechosen againstthisapproachbecause
of data limitations. Actual bond returns are a very noisy estimate of the expected return on the
securities. Thus, we need more data than we have to implement these regressions. Using the
OAS greatly reduces this measurement error problem, at the cost of raising the mis-specification
possibility.
We address the mis-specification possibilityin the OAS inthree ways. First, ourtheory predicts
that securities with more prepayment risk will have differentially higher risk premia at times when
the market-wide price of prepayment risk is higher. We provide support for the theory from panel
data regressions where the independent variable is the interaction between constructed measures of
security-specificprepaymentriskandmarket-widepriceofprepaymentrisk. Sincethetheoryisbased
on the interaction between a security measure and a time measure, we are able to apply both time
dummies and security dummies as controls in our regressions. The profusion of dummy variables
controls for all possible linear time-specific and security-specific sources of OAS mis-specification.
Indeed, our results are strengthened when these controls are added.
Second, as we explain in the next sections, our theoretical measure of the market-wide price of
prepayment risk is partly based on the average coupon of all traded MBS. While a mis-specification
explanation of the OAS may involve the coupon of a specific MBS, it is unclear why it would
involve the average market-wide coupon on mortgages. We present regressions that isolate the
average coupon measurement and show that it has independent explanatory power for the OAS.
Such explanatory power is consistent with our theory of the determination of risk premia, but
inconsistent with a pure mis-specification explanation of the OAS.
Lastly, we introduce controls in our regressions for specific alternative hypotheses for the deter-
mination of the OAS, and show that our results continue to hold-up. Two of the hypotheses we
2