NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CENTRAL BANK COMMUNICATION
AND POLICY EFFECTIVENESS
Michael Woodford
Working Paper 11898
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11898
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2005
Presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium \The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the
Future," Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 25-27, 2005. I would like to thank Charlie Bean, Ben Bernanke,
Alan Blinder, Michael Ehrmann, Marcel Fratzscher, Charles Goodhart, Larry Meyer, and Anders Vredin for
helpful comments on an earlier draft, without implicating any of them in the views expressed here. I would
also like to thank Mauro Roca for research assistance and the National Science Foundation for research
support through a grant to the NBER. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Michael Woodford. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Central Bank Communication and Policy Effectiveness
Michael Woodford
NBER Working Paper No. 11898
December 2005
JEL No. E52, E58
ABSTRACT
A notable change in central banking over the past 15 years has been a world-wide movement toward
increased communication by central banks about their policy decisions, the targets that they seek to
achieve through those decisions, and the central bank's view of the economy's likely future evolution.
This paper considers the role of such communication in the successful conduct of monetary policy,
with a particular emphasis on an issue that remains controversial: to what extent is it desirable for
central banks to comment on the likely path of short-term interest rates?
After reviewing general arguments for and against central-bank transparency, the paper considers
two specific contexts in which central banks have been forced to consider how much they are willing
to say about the future path of interest rates. The first is the experiment with policy signaling by the
FOMC in the U.S., using the statement released following each Committee meeting, since August
2003. The second is the need to make some assumption about future policy when producing the
projections (for future inflation and other variables) that are central to inflation-forecast targeting
procedures, of the kind used by the Bank of England, the Swedish Riksbank, the Reserve Bank of
New Zealand, and others. In both cases, it is argued that increased willingness to share the central
bank's own assumptions about future policy with the public has increased the predictability of policy,
in ways that are likely to have improved central bank's ability to achieve their stabilization
objectives.
Michael Woodford
Department of Economics
Columbia University
1009B I.A.B., mc3308
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
mw2230@columbia.edu

One of the most notable changes at the Federal Reserve during the tenure of Alan
Greenspan as Chairman of the Board of Governors has been a steady increase in the
FOMC’s willingness to talk openly about the policy decisions that it has made and
thoseitislikelytomakeinthefuture. Beforethe1990s, centralbankingwasshrouded
in mystery, at the Fed as elsewhere. The title of William Greider’s 1987 bestseller
about the Fed — Secrets of the Temple — gives an idea of the common perception
of the institution at the beginning of the Greenspan era. This “mystique” of central
banking was jealously guarded by central bankers — as the epigraph indicates — as
essential to their success.
Things have changed rapidly over the past 15 years, both at the Fed and else-
where. Indeed, St. Louis Fed President William Poole (2005) lists the increase in
transparency, and the consequent increase in the predictability of monetary policy,
as one of the four defining characteristics of “the Greenspan policy regime.” Before
1994, the FOMC made no public announcement regarding its target for the federal
funds rate following the meetings at which the target was determined; markets had
to try to infer the target rate from the type and size of open-market operations that
were subsequently conducted by the Trading Desk in New York to implement the
policy. According to Poole, “before Greenspan many within the Fed believed that
policy effectiveness depended on taking markets by surprise.” But since February
1994, the FOMC has issued a public statement following each meeting at which the
target has been changed, indicating the new target rate. The FOMC has also been
increasingly willing to give advance signals of the likely future stance of policy. Begin-
ning in December 1998, the FOMC began to include in the post-meeting statement
an assessment of the FOMC’s current “bias” with respect to possible changes in the
stance of policy; in December 1999, the Committee decided that from then on it
would issue a statement after every meeting, whether policy was changed or not, and
that this would include a “balance of risks” assessment, understood to refer to a time
horizon extending beyond the next Committee meeting. Since August 2003 — as
is discussed further in section 2 — the post-meeting statements have included even
more explicit statements about the likely future path of interest rates. This aspect
of the statement now attracts considerable attention, in financial markets and in the
financial press. Most recently, the FOMC has moved to expedite the release of the
minutes of its deliberations, so that these are now available to the public before the
next Committee meeting. This too has facilitated public understanding of current
policy, and helped to increase the clarity with which the FOMC is able to explain its
1

view of the likely future path of policy.
Poole argues that the “improved predictability of policy [under Greenspan] has
had much to do with improved effectiveness of policy.” Is there reason to believe that
this is true? And more specifically, does the Fed’s bold recent experiment in greater
explicitness about the future outlook for interest rates represent an innovation that
should be expected to further enhance the effectiveness of policy, or does it represent
a step too far?1
I shall begin by reviewing the general case for the importance of effective com-
munication for effective monetary policy, and then ask, in the light of these general
considerations, to what extent it makes sense for a central bank to be willing to make
public statements about future policy. I then discuss in further detail two specific
contexts in which central banks have recently given a great deal of attention to the
question of how much they should talk about the future path of interest rates. The
first is the Fed’s experiment with policy signaling since August 2003, already men-
tioned. The second concerns the assumption about future policy that should be used
in projections of the economy’s likely future evolution that are made public. This
has been a particularly crucial issue for the inflation-forecast targeting central banks,
for reasons discussed further in section 3; but the issue is also being debated within
the Federal Reserve System, especially among those considering the possibility of
inflation targeting in the United States.
1 Why Communication Matters
The importance of communication strategy for policy effectiveness follows from a
fundamentalfeatureofthekindofproblemthatacentralbankiscalledupontosolve.
Central banking is not like steering an oil tanker, or even guiding a spacecraft, which
follows a trajectory that depends on constantly changing factors, but that does not
depend on the vehicle’s own expectations about where it is heading. Because the key
decisionmakers in an economy are forward-looking, central banks affect the economy
as much through their influence on expectations as through any direct, mechanical
effects of central bank trading in the market for overnight cash. As a consequence,
there is good reason for a central bank to commit itself to a systematic approach to
1Even William Poole, in the remarks just cited, refrains from taking a stand on this last issue.
2