NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO CAPITAL ADEQUACY REQUIREMENTS
MATTER FOR MONETARY POLICY?
Stephen G. Cecchetti
Lianfa Li
Working Paper 11830
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11830
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2005
Brandeis University and NBER; and China International Capital Corporation. Email Addresses: cec-
chetti@brandeis.edu and lilianfa@cicc.com.cn. We would like to especially thank David Van Hoose and
Kenneth West, as well as conference and seminar participants for their comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2005 by Stephen G. Cecchetti and Lianfa Li. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Do Capital Adequacy Requirements Matter for Monetary Policy?
Stephen G. Cecchetti and Lianfa Li
NBER Working Paper No. 11830
December 2005
JEL No. E52, E58, G21
ABSTRACT
Central bankers and financial supervisors often have different goals. While monetary policymakers
want to ensure that there are always sufficient lending activities to maintain high and stable
economic growth, supervisors work to limit banks. lending capacities in order to prevent excessive
risk-taking. To avoid working at cross-purposes, central bankers need to adopt a policy strategy that
accounts for the impact of capital adequacy requirements. In this paper we derive an optimal
monetary policy that reinforces prudential capital requirements at the same time that it stabilizes
aggregate economic activity. We go on to show that policymakers at the Federal Reserve adjust
interest rate policy in a way that would neutralize the procyclical impact of bank capital
requirements. By contrast, central bankers in Germany and Japan clearly do not act as the theory
suggests they should.
Stephen G. Cecchetti
International Business School
Mail Stop 021
Brandeis University
P.O. Box 9110
Waltham, MA 02454
and NBER
cecchett@brandeis.edu
Lianfa Li
China International Corporation
China World Tower 2
No. 1 Jian Guo Men Wai Avenue
Beijing China 100004, P.R. China
lilianfa@cicc.com.ca

Capital Requirements and Monetary Policy
1 Introduction
CentralbankersknowthatÞnancialintermediationisimportantforachievingmacroeconomic
stability. Without a functioning banking system, an economy will grind to a halt. It is the
jobof regulators and supervisors to ensure that the Þnancial system functions smoothly. But
monetary policy and prudential supervisory policy can work at cross-purposes. An economic
slowdown can cause deterioration in the balance sheets of Þnancial institutions. Seeing the
decline in the value of assets, supervisors will insist that banks should follow the regulation
and ensure that they have sufficient capital given their risk exposures. The limit on bank
lending set by capital adequacy requirements declines during recessions and increases during
booms. And as intermediation falls, the level of economic activity goes down with it. It
looks as if regulation deepens recessions. As the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
(2001) put, the capital regulation “has the potential to amplify business cycles.”
BlumandHellwig(1995)providedtheÞrst theoreticaldemonstrationthatcapitalrequire-
ments can exacerbate business-cycle ßuctuations. In focusing on entirely on the behavior of
the banking system, the Blum and Hellwig model provides an important Þrst step, but in the
end their analysis is incomplete. They do not consider the response of the central bank to
economic ßuctuations. This assumption is critical for their result but certainly unrealistic.
What if central banks conduct monetary policy to explicitly account for the impact of cap-
ital requirements?1 Will the procyclical effect of capital requirements remain? Is this the
optimal thingto do for central banks? To answer these questions, we derive anoptimal mon-
etary policy rule with both static and dynamic models in which the potential procyclicality
of capital requirements is embedded.
Our conclusions are as follows: A country’s monetary policymakers should react to the
state of their banking system’s balance sheet. And when they do, the procyclical effect
of prudential capital regulation can be counteracted and completely neutralized. For a
given level of economic activity and inßation, the optimal policy reaction dictates setting
interestrateslowerthe moreÞnancialstressthereisinthe bankingsystemwhentheeconomic
activity is in the downturn. We present simulation results to give a sense of the magnitude
of the required reaction. But when taking this proposition to the data and estimating
forward-looking monetary policy reaction functions for the United States, Germany (pre-
1In an economy with bankcapitalrequirements,a policy gamebetween bankregulators and centralbanks
can emerge. In this paper, we assume that monetary policymakers have more advantage in making the
movement in the game with bank regulators. This is based on the observation that the monetary policy is
usually conducted on the daily basis,while the bank regulation is altered slowly.
1

Capital Requirements and Monetary Policy
uniÞcation) and Japan, we Þnd that while monetary policymakers in the U.S. behave as the
theory suggests, lowering interest rates by more in downturns in which the banking system is
under stress, by contrast, central bankers in Germany and Japan do not.
We derive optimal interest rate rules with the static model and the dynamic model in
Section 2 and 3, respectively. Section 4 reports the simulation results and Section 5 discusses
the empirical estimation. Section 6 concludes.
2 A Static Model
2.1 The model
We beginwithastaticaggregatedemand-aggregate supply modelmodiÞedtoinclude abank-
ing sector. The purpose of this simple model is to highlight the impact of introducing bank
capital requirements in their most stripped down in order to show the extent to which the
banking industry can affect business cycles. The static model alsosheds lights onthe fruitful
approach that solves the dynamic model.
The starting point is an aggregate demand curve that admits the possibility of banks
having an impact on the level of economic activity. Following Bernanke and Blinder (1988)
we distinguish between policy-controlled interest rate and lending rates and write aggregate
demand as:
yd =yd(i πe,ρ πe,π)+η, (1)
− −
where i is short-term nominal interest rate, ρ is nominal loan rate, πe is expected inßation,
π is inßation rate, and η is a white noise random variable. We will refer to η as the aggregate
demand shock, since in equilibrium it will tend to move output and inßation in the same
direction. Aswewillseeinamoment,whilethelendingrateρisdeterminedbytheequilibrium
in the lending market, the short-term rate i is set by the monetary authority, and so can be
treatedasaconstant. Forfuturereferencewenotethatwewillmakethestandardassumption
that aggregate demand falls when any of the three arguments in equation (1) rises. That is,
both higher inßation and higher real interest rates result in lower level of aggregate demand.
Turning to the loan market, banks receive deposits and make loans. We have two cases.
When the capital requirement is not binding, we write real loan supply when the bank has
2