NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CASH-FLOW RISK, DISCOUNT RISK,
AND THE VALUE PREMIUM
Tano Santos
Pietro Veronesi
Working Paper 11816
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11816
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2005
We thank seminar participants at Carnegie Mellon, UCLA, Princeton University, The Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, Columbia Business School, London Business School, London School of Economics, and the
Graduate School of Business of the University of Chicago for their comments and Gene Fama, Lars Hansen,
John Heaton, and Wei Jiang for valuable suggestions. Errors, of course, remain our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2005 by Tano Santos and Pietro Veronesi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Cash-Flow Risk, Discount Risk, and the Value Premium
Tano Santos and Pietro Veronesi
NBER Working Paper No. 11816
December 2005
JEL No. G12
ABSTRACT
A habit persistence, general equilibrium model with multiple assets matches both the time series
properties of the market portfolio and the cross-sectional predictability of returns on price sorted
portfolios, the value premium. Consistent with empirical evidence, the model shows that (a) value
stocks are those with higher cash-flow risk; (b) the size of the value premium is larger in “bad
times,” due to time variation in risk preferences; (c) the unconditional CAPM fails, because of
general equilibrium restrictions on the market portfolio. The dynamic nature of the value premium
rationalizes why the conditional CAPM and a Fama and French (1993) HML factor outperform the
unconditional CAPM.
Tano Santos
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 414
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
js1786@columbia.edu
Pietro Veronesi
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
fpverone@gsb.uchicago.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
Historically, stocks with high book-to-market ratios, value stocks, have yielded higher
average returns than stocks with low book-to-market ratios, growth stocks. The CAPM’s
majorfailure is its inabilityto price book-to-market sorted portfolios. A large collectionof ex-
planations– both rationaland behavioral– havebeen proposed to address this value premium
1
puzzle. These explanations though are surprisingly detached from the voluminous literature
that focuses on the properties of the aggregate market portfolio, such as the large equity pre-
mium and the high volatility and predictability of aggregate returns. In this paper we argue
that the time series behavior of the market portfolio imposes general equilibrium restrictions
on the behavior of the cross-section of averagereturns of price sorted portfolios. These restric-
tions are important as they provide tight implications about the cash-flow characteristics of
value and growth stocks as well as about the variation over time of the value premium itself.
Our predictions are broadly consistent with empirical evidence.
Specifically, ours is a representativeagenteconomy where preferences are of the external
habit persistence type introduced by Campbell and Cochrane (1999). This model generates
plausible quantitative implications for the market portfolio through the time variation of the
market price of consumption risk. We follow Menzly, Santos and Veronesi (2004, MSV hence-
forth),and embed these preferences in a general equilibriumsetting withmultiplerisky assets.
These assets have time varying expected dividend growth and differ from each other in their
cash-flow risk, that is, in the covariance of their cash-flow with the aggregate economy. By
generalizing the model of MSV, we are able to obtain numerous predictions about the cross-
section of stock returns. In particular, we show that (a) value stocks are those with higher
cash-flow risk and that cross-sectional differences in fundamentals cash-flow risk generate a
value premium; (b) the time variation in risk preferences, due to habits, induces fluctuations
in the value premium, which is high whenever the market premium is also high; (c) because
of general equilibrium restrictionson the totalwealth portfolio,the unconditional CAPM fails
andthusavaluepremiumpuzzle obtains;and(d)anHMLfactorlinesupreturnsasitcaptures
aggregate differences in cash-flow risk in the economy. In addition, our model sheds light on
the performance of the recently proposed conditional CAPM models.
1For the value premium see Rosenberg, Reid, and Lanstein (1985) and Fama and French (1992) and Fama
andFrench (1998)fortheinternationalevidence. Forbehavioral explanationsseeforexampleRosenberg, Reid,
andLanstein(1985),DeBondtandThaler(1987)andLakonishok,Shleifer,andVishny(1994). Fortherational
onesseeFamaandFrench(1993),LettauandLudvigson(2001),Gomes,KoganandZhang(2003)amongothers.
1

To understand the intuition of our results consider first the case where all assets have
identicalcash-flow riskand cross-sectionaldifferences in expected returns arise onlybecause of
differences in the timing of their cash-flows, that is, in their “durations.” We show that assets
with high expected cash-flow growth are relatively more sensitive to shocks in risk preferences
2
thanotherwiseidenticalassetswithlowexpected cash-flowgrowth. Canthesediscount effects
alone generate the value premium? No, rather they generate a “growth premium.” Indeed,
assets with strong expected cash-flow growth have high price-dividend ratios and, as just
mentioned, a high sensitivity to changes in the aggregate discount. As a consequence they
command a higher premium and a counterfactual positive relation obtains between price-
dividend ratios and average excess returns.
Suppose now that instead an asset has low duration and cash-flows that are positively
correlated with aggregate consumption. In this case, and due to its low expected dividend
growth, the total value of this asset is mainly determined by the current level of cash-flows,
rather than by those in the future. The price of the asset is then mostly driven by cash-flow
shocks and the fundamental riskembedded in these cash-flows drivesalso the riskof the asset.
Thus, when cash-flows display substantial fundamental risk, the asset’s premium is higher
when the duration is lower. Can these cash-flow effects generate the value premium? Yes.
Assets with high cash-flow riskand lowdurationhave lowprice-dividend ratios. This is due to
both the fact that they are risky, and thus prices have to be low to compensate agents for the
risk they take, and because they have low expected dividend growth. Thus, potentially, the
value premium can now arise, and whether it does or not depends on how the tension between
“discount effects” (high risk when the asset has a high duration) and “cash-flow effects” (high
risk when the asset has low duration) resolves quantitatively. An important objective of this
paper is to analyze and assess this tension.
A second important contribution of our paper is to obtain predictions for the dynamics
of the value premium. In particular, variation in risk preferences interacts with the cross-
sectional dispersion in cash-flow risk to make value stocks particularly risky during “bad”
times: Agentsdemand a relativelyhighercompensation forholding assetswithcash-flows that
covary positively with consumption growth when faced with adverse consumption shocks.
To evaluate the model’s abilityto yield quantitativelyplausible implicationswe perform
2This point, which is standard in the fixed income literature, has been emphasized by Cornell (1999) who
builds on Campbell and Mei (1993) to note that “pure technology bets that produce cash flows that are
uncorrelated with the market, but which have long durations, willhave high systematic risk.”
2