NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GENERALIZING THE TAYLOR PRINCIPLE
Troy Davig
Eric M. Leeper
Working Paper 11874
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11874
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2005
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Troy Davig and Eric M. Leeper. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Generalizing the Taylor Principle
Troy Davig and Eric M. Leeper
NBER Working Paper No. 11874
December 2005, Revised September 2006
JEL No. E31, E52, C62
ABSTRACT
The paper generalizes the Taylor principle---the proposition that central banks can stabilize the
macroeconomy by raising their interest rate instrument more than one-for-one in response to higher
inflation---to an environment in which reaction coefficients in the monetary policy rule evolve
according to a Markov process. We derive a long-run Taylor principle that delivers unique bounded
equilibria in two standard models. Policy can satisfy the Taylor principle in the long run, even while
deviating from it substantially for brief periods or modestly for prolonged periods. Macroeconomic
volatility can be higher in periods when the Taylor principle is not satisfied, not because of
indeterminacy, but because monetary policy amplifies the impacts of fundamental shocks. Regime
change alters the qualitative and quantitative predictions of a conventional new Keynesian model,
yielding fresh interpretations of existing empirical work.
Troy Davig
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
troy.davig@kc.frb.org
Eric M. Leeper
Department of Economics
304 Wylie Hall
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405
and NBER
eleeper@indiana.edu

GENERALIZING THE TAYLOR PRINCIPLE
TROY DAVIG AND ERIC M. LEEPER
1. Introduction
Monetary policy making is complex. Central bankers examine a vast array of data,
hear from a variety of advisors, use suites of models to interpret the data, and apply
judgment to adjust the predictions of models. This process produces a monetary
policy rule that is a complicated, probably non-linear, function of a large set of
information about the state of the economy.
For both descriptive and prescriptive reasons, macroeconomists seek simple char-
acterizations of policy. Perhaps the most successful simplification is due to Taylor
(1993). He finds that a verysimplerule does a good job of describing FederalReserve
interest-rate decisions, particularly since 1982. Taylor’s rule is
i =¯i+α(π −π ∗ )+γx +ε , (1)
t t t t
where i is the central bank’s policy interest rate, ¯i is the long-run policy rate, π
t t
is inflation, π∗ is the central bank’s inflation target, x is output, and ε is a random
variable. With settings of α = 1.5 and γ = .5 or 1, Taylor (1999a) uses this equation
to interpret Federal Reserve behavior over several eras since 1960.
The Taylor principle—theproposition that central banks can stabilize the macroe-
conomy by adjusting their interest rate instrument more than one-for-one with infla-
tion (setting α > 1)—and the Taylor rulethat embodies ithaveprovento be powerful
devices to simplify the modeling of policy behavior. In many monetary models, the
Taylor principle is necessary and sufficient for the existence of a determinate rational
Date: August 28, 2006. Research Department, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City, Troy.Davig@kc.frb.org; Department of Economics, Indiana University and NBER,
eleeper@indiana.edu. We thank Mark Gertler for the suggestions that spawned this paper and
comments that improved it, Mike Woodford for comments that made the exposition more precise,
and two anonymous referees whose comments were particularly helpful. We also thank Gadi Bar-
levy,Marco Bassetto, Hess Chung,Steven Durlauf,Marty Eichenbaum,Jon Faust, DavidMarshall,
Tack Yun, Tao Zha and seminar participants Columbia University and the Federal Reserve Banks
of Atlanta, Chicagoand Kansas City. Leeper acknowledges support from NSF Grant SES-0452599.
The views expressed herein are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City or the Federal Reserve System.

GENERALIZING THE TAYLOR PRINCIPLE 2
expectations equilibrium. Failure of monetary policy to satisfy the principle can pro-
duce undesirable outcomes in two ways. First, the effects of fundamental shocks are
amplified and can cause fluctuations in output and inflation that are arbitrarilylarge.
Second, there exist a multiplicityof bounded equilibria in which output and inflation
respond to non-fundamental—sunspot—disturbances. If the objective of a central
bank is to stabilize output and inflation, these outcomes are clearlyundesirable. Tay-
lor (1999a) and Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000), among others, have argued that
failure of Federal Reserve policy to satisfy the Taylor principle may have been the
source of greater macroeconomic instability in the United States in the 1960s and
1970s.
Taylor-inspired rules have been found to perform well in a class of models that is
now in heavy use in policy research [Bryant, Hooper, and Mann (1993), Rotemberg
and Woodford (1997), Taylor (1999b), Faust, Orphanides, and Reifschneider (2005),
Schmitt-Groheand Uribe(2006)]. Some policyinstitutionspublish thepolicyinterest
rate paths produced by simple rules, treating the implied policy prescriptions as
useful benchmarks for policy evaluation [Bank for International Settlements (1998),
Sveriges Riksbank (2001, 2002), Norges Bank (2005), Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis (2005)]. In large part because it is a gross simplification of reality, the Taylor
rule has been extraordinarily useful.
Gross simplificationis both a strength and a weakness of a constant-parameter rule
like (1). Because the rule compresses and reduces information about actual policy
behavior, it can mask important aspects of that behavior. There are clearly states
of the economy in which policy settings of the nominal interest rate deviate from
the rule in substantial and serially correlated ways. This confronts researchers with
a substantive modeling choice: it matters whether these deviations are shuffled into
the ε’s or modeled as time-varying feedback coefficients, α and γ . Positing that pol-
t t
icy rules mapping endogenous variables into policy choices evolve according to some
probability distribution can fundamentally change dynamics, including conditions
that ensure a unique equilibrium, and substantially expand the set of determinate
rational expectations equilibria supported by conventional monetary models.
This paper generalizes Taylor’s rule and principle by allowing the parameters of
1
that ruletovary stochasticallyovertime. Itexamineshowsuchtimevariation affects
1
Incontrasttoourapproach,somepapersconsider changesinprocesses governingexogenouspol-
icyvariables[Dotsey(1990),Kaminsky(1993),Ruge-Murcia(1995),AndolfattoandGomme(2003),
Davig(2003,2004),andLeeper and Zha (2003)]. Each ofthese considers changes in exogenous pro-
cesses forpolicyinstruments likeataxrate,moneygrowthrate,orgovernmentexpenditures. Other
papers modelpolicyswitchingaschanges inendogenous policyfunctions[Davig,Leeper, andChung
(2006) and Davigand Leeper (2006b)].