NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHAT CAN RATIONAL INVESTORS DO ABOUT
EXCESSIVE VOLATILITY AND SENTIMENT FLUCTUATIONS?
Bernard Dumas
Alexander Kurshev
Raman Uppal
Working Paper 11803
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11803
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2005
We are grateful to Wei Xiong for extensive discussions. We are also grateful for comments from Andrew
Abel, Suleyman Basak, Tomas Björk, Andrea Buraschi, Joao Cocco, John Cotter, Xavier Gabaix, Francisco
Gomes, Joao Gomes, Tim Johnson, Leonid Kogan, Kostas Koufopoulos, Karen Lewis, Deborah Lucas,
Pascal Maenhout, Massimo Massa, Stavros Panageas, Anna Pavlova, Ludovic Phalippou, Valery
Polkovnichencko, Bryan Routledge, Andrew Scott, Alex Stomper, Allan Timmermann, Skander van den
Heuvel, Luis Viceira, Pierre-Olivier Weill, Hongjun Yan, Amir Yaron, Moto Yogo, Joseph Zechner, Stanley
Zin and participants in workshops held at Bank of England, INSEAD, London Business School,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, University of Vienna, Wharton School, University College Dublin,
University of Piraeus, the European Summer Symposium in Financial Markets at Gerzensee, and the NBER
“Capital Markets and the Economy” workshop. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Bernard Dumas, Alexander Kurshev, and Raman Uppal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

What Can Rational Investors Do About Excessive Volatility and Sentiment Fluctuations?
Bernard Dumas, Alexander Kurshev, and Raman Uppal
NBER Working Paper No. 11803
November 2005
JEL No. G1
ABSTRACT
Our objective is to understand the trading strategy that would allow an investor to take advantage
of "excessive" stock price volatility and "sentiment" fluctuations. We construct a general equilibrium
model of sentiment. In it, there are two classes of agents and stock prices are excessively volatile
because one class is overconfident about a public signal. This class of irrational agents changes its
expectations too often, sometimes being excessively optimistic, sometimes being excessively
pessimistic. We find that because irrational traders introduce an additional source of risk, rational
investors reduce the proportion of wealth invested into equity except when they are extremely
optimistic about future growth. Moreover, their optimal portfolio strategy is based not just on a
current price divergence but also on a prediction concerning the speed of convergence. Thus, the
portfolio strategy includes a protection in case there is a deviation from that prediction. We find that
long maturity bonds are an essential accompaniment of equity investment, as they serve to hedge this
"sentiment risk." The answer to the question posed in the title is: "There is little that rational
investors can do optimally to exploit, and hence, eliminate excessive volatility, except in the very
long run."
Bernard Dumas
Department of Finance
INSEAD
77305 Fontainebleau Cedex
FRANCE
and NBER
bernard.dumas@insead.edu
Alexander Kurshev
London Business School
akurshev.phd2003@london.edu
Raman Uppal
London Business School
ruppal@london.edu

1 Introduction
Suppose that a Bayesian, intertemporally optimizing investor operates in a financial market that is
deemed to have fluctuations in market sentiment and asset returns that are “excessively volatile.” We
would like to know what investment policy this person will undertake under market equilibrium, what
effect his or her intervention will have on equilibrium prices, and whether he or she will ultimately
eradicate the source of excess volatility.
Toaddresstheseissues, weneedamodelofafinancialmarketinwhichasubpopulationofinvestors
tradesonsentimentandgeneratesexcessvolatilityandweneedtospecifytherulesofthecontestbetween
these investors and the rational investors.
We construct a model where some investors are non-Bayesian in the sense that they give too much
credencetosomepublicinformationsignal. Onewaytocapturethatbehavioralfeaturehasrecentlybeen
proposed by Scheinkman and Xiong (2003). In their model of a “tree” economy, a stream of dividends
is paid. Some aspect of the stochastic process of dividends is not observable by anyone. All investors
are risk neutral, are constrained from short selling, and receive information in the form of the current
dividend and some public signals. Rational agents know the true correlation between innovations in the
signal and innovations in the unobserved variables. Irrational (they call them “overconfident”) agents
arepeoplewhosteadfastlybelievethatthiscorrelationisapositivenumberwhen,infact,itiszero. This
causes them to give too much weight to the signals. Thus, when they receive a signal, they overreact to
it, which then generates excessive stock price movements.
Here,weconsiderasettingsimilartothatinScheinkmanandXiong(2003)exceptthatallinvestors
are risk averse (and are allowed to sell short) and only one group of agents is overconfident while the
otherisrational. Becausesomeinvestorsinourmodelareoverconfidentaboutthepublicsignal,theyare
also fickle and change their beliefs too often about economic prospects. This is the source of excessive
volatility. We refer to “excessive volatility” as a situation in which, for the given utility functions of
agents, the level of volatility is larger than it would if all agents were rational Bayesians, and we refer
to the fluctuations in the probability beliefs of irrational agents relative to those of rational agents as
fluctuations in “sentiment.”
Intheircontestwithrationalinvestors, we wantthetraders whoareirrationalinthewaytheyform
theirbeliefs,tostillbefull-fledgedintertemporaloptimizers. Itiswell-knownthatcompleteirrationality
in the manner of positive “feedback traders” `a la De Long, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990b)
canamplifythevolatilityofstockpricesandthattheadditionalvolatilitycreates“noise-traderrisk”for
rational arbitrageurs, thereby creating a limit to arbitrage. However, feedback traders or traders acting
randomly may not be the best representation of irrational behavior as they constitute excessively easy
game for rational investors. For this reason, we prefer to model a general equilibrium economy where
the irrational traders are intertemporal optimizers, even if they are non-Bayesian in their learning. In
this way, welfare analysis and the analysis of gains and losses of the two categories of traders remain
meaningful.1
Ourmaingoalistoderiveandanalyzeequilibriumpricesandtheoptimaldynamictradingstrategy
of the rational investors. We identify three distinctive aspects of the portfolio strategy adopted by
rationalinvestors. First,theseinvestorsmaynotagreetodaywiththemarketaboutitscurrentestimate
of the growth rate of dividends: there is dispersion of beliefs. When the rational investors are more
optimistic than the market, they increase their investment in equity while decreasing their investment
in bonds, because equity and bonds are positively correlated. Second, if there is disagreement today,
rational investors are aware that irrational investors will revise their estimate differently from the way
their own estimate is revised: disagreement drives sentiment. Third, even if the two groups of investors
1Furthermore,modelsoffeedbacktradingdonotdiscussthebudgetconstraintofthefeedbacktradersand,therefore,
leave unclear the origin of the gains that the rational arbitrageurs would make at their expense. And, even when noise
traders pursue an explicit objective, as is done in De Long, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990a), one must be
careful not to confuse “noise risk” with some output risk induced by the noise risk, as has been pointed out recently by
Loewenstein and Willard (2005). Restricting our analysis to a pure exchange general equilibrium economy allows us to
maintainacleandistinctionbetweenoutputriskandnoiserisk.
1

happen to agree today, investors are aware that next period they will all revise their estimates. The
second and third effects cause rational investors to hedge: they hold fewer shares of equity than would
beoptimalinamarketwithoutexcessvolatilityandtheytakeapositivepositioninbonds(whichwould
be zero in the absence of excess volatility).
Overall, rational risk arbitrageurs find it beneficial to trade on their belief that the market is being
foolishbut,whendoingso,musthedgefuturefluctuationsinthemarket’ssentiment. Thus,ouranalysis
illustrateshow“riskarbitrage”mustbebasednotjustonacurrentpricedivergencebutalsoonamodel
of irrational behavior and a prediction concerning the dynamics of market sentiment. And, the risk
arbitrage must include a protection in case there is a deviation from that prediction.
Theprofitabilityoftherational“riskarbitrage”strategyandthesurvivaltimeofirrationalinvestors
are two sides of the same coin. We derive the speed of impoverishment of the irrational traders, or the
speed of enrichment of the rational ones. Previous work (Kogan, Ross, Wang, and Westerfield (2003);
Yan (2004)) has examined the survival of traders who are permanently optimistic or pessimistic. Here,
we study the survival of traders who are sometimes optimistic and sometimes pessimistic, depending on
the sequence of signals they have received. We find that, in contrast to what is typically assumed in
standard models of asset pricing, in our model the presence of a few rational traders is not sufficient to
eliminate the effect of overconfident investors on excess volatility, and that even a moderate-sized group
of overconfident investors may do a lot of damage and survive for a long time before being driven out of
the market by rational investors.
Our model can be viewed as an equilibrium model of investor sentiment, in the sense of Barberis,
Shleifer, and Vishny (1998). Several authors have supported the hypothesis that agents active in the
financial markets exhibit aspects of behavior that deviate from rationality. This was done typically on
the basis of some natural experiments, for instance, spin offs, share repurchases, initial public offerings,
reactionstonews,etc. Agamutofbehavioralaspectshavebeensuggested,notallofwhichareconsistent
with each other. We do not know which behavioral aspects actually prevail in the financial markets and
which do not. In order to sort this out, it would be important to conduct tests using data on asset
prices. Tothataim,onemustdeducetheoreticallythebehaviorofassetpricesandportfoliochoicesthat
will prevail in the financial markets as a result of a particular deviation from rationality. Indeed, if one
could then establish empirically that asset prices and portfolio choices deviate from market efficiency
precisely in the manner predicted by the theory, one would be able to distinguish between behavioral
aspects that are not actually present from those that have a decisive impact on financial choices and
equilibria. That was the intent of three classic papers in this strand of the literature, which can be
called “behavioral equilibrium theory:” Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998), Daniel, Hirshleifer, and
Subrahmanyam (1998), and Hong and Stein (1999). The first two of these papers feature a single group
ofagentswhoarenon-Bayesian.2 ThemodelofHongandStein(1999),likeours,featurestwocategories
of agents with heterogeneous beliefs who, however, are not intertemporal optimizers.
The balance of this paper covers the following material. Section 2 reviews additional literature that
is related to our work. In Section 3, we present our modeling choices for the economy. In Section 4,
we determine the equilibrium in this economy. In Section 5, we discuss the impact of irrational traders
on asset prices, return volatilities, and risk premia and we analyze the proportion of rational investors
needed in the economy to reduce the excessive volatility. In Section 6, we identify the main factors
driving the portfolio strategy of the rational trader. In Section 7, we discuss the survival of irrational
traders over time and the profits made at their expense by the rational ones. Section 8 contains the
conclusion. We highlight our main results in propositions, while all the mathematical derivations are
collected in appendixes.
2The agents in Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998) update their beliefs using Bayes’ formula but they do so on the
basisofthewrongpriorcategoryofmodels,whichtheyrefusetoupdate.
2