NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAN THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY AFFORD TO NEGLECT
THE NEED FOR MORE ACCOUNTABLE
SAFETY-NET MANAGEMENT?
Edward J. Kane
Working Paper 11860
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11860
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2005
Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the following conferences: XXXV Meeting of the
European Working Group on Financial Modeling, University of Brescia, Italy, Johns Hopkins
University School of Advanced International Studies, Bologna Center, Bologna, Italy, and
Presidential Address, International Atlantic Economic Society, New York, NY. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2005 by Edward J. Kane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Can the European Community Afford to Neglect the Need for More Accountable Safety-Net
Management?
Edward J. Kane
NBER Working Paper No. 11860
December 2005
JEL No. G21, G28, P51
ABSTRACT
As financial institutions and markets transact more and more cross-border business, gaps and flaws
in national safety nets become more consequential. Because citizens of host (home) countries may
be made to pay for mistakes made in the home (host) country, Basel's lead-regulator paradigm
violates the principle of democratic accountability. Because important differences exist in
policymaking authority, instruments, and goals, banking supervisors need to improve their ability
to monitor and mitigate the consequences of defects in one another's performance. A straightforward
way to enhance both capacities would be to establish opportunities for public trading in debt
obligations and reinsurance derivatives issued by country-level deposit-insurance entities.
Edward J. Kane
Department of Finance
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02458
and NBER
edward.kane@bc.edu

December 5, 2005
CAN THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY AFFORD TO RESIST THE NEED FOR MORE ACCOUNTABLE SAFETY-
*
NET MANAGEMENT?
Edward J. Kane
Boston College
Financial-institution supervision combines a capacity to observe fluctuations in balance-
sheet values (“vision”) with a capacity to influence managerial actions (“control”) and an
incentive system that governs the pursuit and exercise of these capacities. Even when portfolios
and attendant risks are concentrated within a single country, it is difficult to establish a
combination of adequate oversight of institutional balance sheets, adequate authority to intervene
in timely fashion, and bureaucratic incentives to detect and resolve insolvent institutions in ways
that adequately protect taxpayer interests. As a result, individual countries solve this contracting
problem in different ways.
Sincere efforts to integrate the financial markets of individual countries must also
integrate national safety nets. Safety nets are instruments for preventing and resolving financial
crises. Crisis prevention and crisis management entail a right to take over insolvent financial
institutions. Efforts to assess the viability of troubled institutions and to assign fair values to
stakeholder claims against failing firms are rife with incentive conflict.
As European institutions and markets book more and more cross-border business, the
potential for conflict grows. This is because some or all of the bill for one country’s regulatory
mistakes or gambles can be presented to citizens of other countries. Gaps in the jurisdiction of
national regulators and supervisors can break the link between efforts to control bank and
nonbank risk-taking and the allocation of losses that taxpayers might accrue in financial-
institution failures.
*
This paper extends and refocuses analysis first presented in Kane (2003) and (2005). The author wishes to thank
Richard C. Aspinwall, Bill Bergman, and Mark Flannery for helpful criticisms of an earlier draft.
2

December 5, 2005
To keep the discussion concrete, this paper focuses on potential cross-country
abuse of nation-based systems of explicit deposit insurance. However, it should be understood
that this is merely the tip of a global safety-net iceberg and that past abuses of the U.S. safety net
have exploited accountability breakdowns that extend de facto forms of safety-net support for
institutions and instruments that reach far beyond the limits of de jure coverages. The major
problem of modern financial regulation is to restore economic logic to the de jure and de facto
coverage of country safety nets. In the U.S., claims on banks that are not deposits and claims on
instutions that are not banks (e.g., government-sponsored enterprises, mutual funds, and even
hedge funds) have managed to extract de facto safety-net support.
The social norms on which the regulatory systems of European countries are built
typically weaken regulators’ capacity and incentives to intervene strongly and promptly at
systemically important banks. Differences in these norms make the effort to coordinate vision,
control, and incentives across countries an especially thorny problem. Cross-border activity
expands opportunities for insolvent banks (and incentive-conflicted government officials) to hide
losses and concentrations in risk exposure from supervisors in home and/or host countries. To
lessen this danger, information-sharing arrangements between national regulatory bodies have
been expanding as well, but unfortunately at a much slower pace (Dermine, 2003; Garcia and
Nieto, 2005; Schoenmaker and Osterloo, 2004; Schüler, 2003).
But being able to monitor bank risk exposures is only part of the cross-border
coordination problem. Differences in regulatory authority, instruments, and goals must also be
reconciled and imbedded into a cross-border architecture of democratic accountability. Cross-
border accountability and emergency tax-collecting capacity mean that whoever manages a
multinational safety net must be accountable to the taxpayers of whatever countries supply the
3