NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW BIG A PROBLEM IS TOO BIG TO FAIL?
Frederic S. Mishkin
Working Paper 11814
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11814
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2005
This review essay has been written for the Journal of Economic Literature. I thank for their helpful
comments Beverly Hirtle, Don Morgan and Til Schuerman and Beverly Hirtle for supplying me with data.
Any views expressed in this paper are those of the author only and not those of Columbia University or the
National Bureau of Economic Research. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Frederic S. Mishkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

How Big a Problem is Too Big to Fail?
Frederic S. Mishkin
NBER Working Paper No. 11814
December 2005
JEL No. G21, G28
ABSTRACT
This review essay examines whether too-big-to-fail is as serious a problem as Gary Stern and Ron
Feldman contend. This essay argues that Stern and Feldman overstate the importance of the too-big-
to-fail problem and do not give enough credit to the FDICIA legislation of 1991 for improving bank
regulation and supervision. However, this criticism of the Stern and Feldman book does not detract
from many of its messages. Even if the too-big-to-fail problem is not as serious as they contend, the
policies they outline can make it less likely that a banking crisis will occur even if driven by other
factors.
Frederic S. Mishkin
Graduate School of Business
Uris Hall 817
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
fsm3@columbia.edu

Banking institutions are especially well suited to minimizing transaction costs and
adverse selection and moral hazard problems. This is why banks are “special” and play such an
important role in the financial system. When banks fail, the information capital they have
developed may disappear, and as a result, many borrowers will not have access to funds to pursue
productive investment opportunities.2 Indeed, if a large enough number of banks fail at the same
time, in other words a banking panic occurs, the economy’s ability to channel funds to those with
productive investment opportunities may be severely hampered, leading to a full-scale financial
crisis and a large decline in investment and output. Indeed, the worst economic downturns are
almost always associated with bank panics and financial crises, and not only has this been true in
the United States when the Great Depression was triggered by banking panics (Friedman and
Schwartz, 1963, Bernanke, 1983, and Mishkin, 1991), but it has been true in recent years in
emerging market countries (Mishkin, 1996, Bordo and Eichengreen, 2002).
Concerns about bank panics have led most governments throughout the world to provide
a safety net for the banking system. Federal government deposit insurance, a guarantee of
repayment for depositors, was established in the United States when the FDIC (Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation) started operations in 1934. Deposit insurance can short circuit bank panics
by providing protection for depositors. When a depositor has fully insured deposits, up to
$100,000 of deposits in the United States, the depositor doesn’t need to run to the bank to make
a withdrawal when she is worried about the bank’s health because her deposits will be worth 100
cents on the dollar no matter what. Hence, deposit insurance can short circuit runs on banks and
bank panics and can overcome reluctance by depositors to put their funds into the banking system.
For the first thirty years after the FDIC was created, only six countries emulated the United
States and adopted deposit insurance. However, this began to change in the late 1960s, with the
trend accelerating in the 1990s when the number of countries adopting deposit insurance doubled
to over seventy and now is close to 90 (Demirguc-Kunt and Kane, 2002, and Demirguc-Kunt,
Kane and Laeven, 2005) . Deposit insurance is now the norm in much of the world.
Deposit insurance is not the only way in which governments provide a safety net for
depositors. Even without explicit deposit insurance, many countries provide a safety net by
providing direct support to domestic banks. This support is sometimes provided by lending from
the central bank to troubled institutions as part of the central bank’s lender of last resort role or
by direct government infusion of cash into these institutions.
The good news of having a government safety net is that it can prevent bank panics, as it
has since the establishment of the FDIC in the 1930s. The bad news is that creates moral hazard
incentives for banks to take on greater risk. When a depositor is fully protected, she knows that
she will not suffer losses if a bank fails, and thus has little incentive to monitor the bank’s
-1-

activities and withdraw funds if the bank is taking on too much risk. Without this discipline from
depositors, banks know that they can engage in risky activities with impunity, and this can
increase the probability of bank failures.
The moral hazard created by a government safety net is even more severe for large banking
institutions because when they fail, it can lead to systemic risk in which the whole banking system
is threatened. The failure of a large institution not only can cause immediate failures of its
counterparties in both the banking and the rest of the financial system, but can also lead to a crisis
of confidence that may spill over to other banks and financial institutions, leading to a cascade of
failures and a financial crisis. Given the potential costs to the economy from a large bank failure,
governments are very reluctant to let large banking institutions fail, or if they do, impose any costs
on depositors, even if deposit insurance is limited to a fixed amount, say $100,000. A particular
manifestation of this phenomenon occurred when Continental Illinois, then one of the ten largest
banks in the United States became insolvent in May 1984. Not only did the FDIC guarantee
depositors up to the $100,000 insurance limit, but it also guaranteed all accounts exceeding
$100,000 and even prevented losses for Continental Illinois bondholders. Shortly thereafter, the
Comptroller of the Currency (the regulator of U.S. national banks) testified to Congress that
eleven of the largest banks would receive a similar treatment to that of Continental Illinois.
Although the Comptroller did not use the term “too-big-to-fail” (which was actually used by
Congressman McKinney in those hearings), this term now is applied to a policy in which the
government provides guarantees of repayment of large uninsured creditors of the largest banks,
so that no depositor or creditor suffers a loss, even when they are not automatically entitled to this
guarantee. (The “too-big-to-fail” characterization is somewhat of a misnomer because under the
too-big-to-fail policy, banks are often closed or merged into another bank, and then the managers
are often fired and the equityholders in the bank lose much of their investment.)
The too-big-to fail policy increases the moral hazard problem for big banks. If a deposit
insurance agency like the FDIC were willing to close a bank and pay off depositors only up to the
$100.000 insurance limit, large depositors would suffer losses if the bank failed. Thus they would
have incentives to monitor the bank’s activities closely and pull their money out if the bank is
taking on too much risk. To prevent such a loss of deposits, the bank would be less likely to
engage in risky activities. However, once large depositors know that a bank is too-big-to-fail, they
have no incentive to monitor the bank because no matter what the bank does, large depositors will
not suffer any losses. The result of the too-big-to-fail policy is that large banks are likely to take
on greater risks, thereby making bank failures more likely. Indeed, this is exactly what we saw
happen in the United States in the 1980s when large banks took on riskier loans than smaller
commercial banks which led to higher loan losses for big banks (Boyd and Gertler, 1993).
-2-