NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERNATIONALIZATION AND STOCK MARKET LIQUIDITY
Ross Levine
Sergio Schmukler
Working Paper 11894
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11894
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2005
Levine: Brown University and the NBER (ross_levine@brown.edu). Schmukler: World Bank
(sschmukler@worldbank.org). The paper was revised while Schmukler was visiting the IMF Research
Department. We thank Tatiana Didier and Juan Carlos Gozzi Valdez for truly outstanding research
assistance. We are grateful to Franklin Allen and Marco Pagano for very useful and detailed comments. We
also received very helpful suggestions from Gordon Alexander, Luca Benzoni, Stijn Claessens, Peter Henry,
Eduardo Loyo, Ugo Panizza, Valery Polknichenko, Helene Rey, Michael Schill, Frank Warnock, two
anonymous referees, seminar participants at Dartmouth College, the Econometric Society Meetings (Chile),
the NBER IASE Meeting in PUC-Rio (Brazil), the University of Minnesota, the University of Virginia
(Darden School of Business), the University of Zurich, and the World Bank. For help with the data, we thank
particularly Florencia Moizeszowicz and also Pamela Dottin, Monica Erpen, Dori Flanagan, Marina Halac,
Angela Marshall, Konstantinos Tzioumis, Richard Webster-Smith, and Cheryl Workman. Levine is grateful
for generous financial support from the BSI Gamma Foundation. Schmukler thanks the World Bank Latin
American Regional Studies Program and Research Support Budget for ample financial support. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the views of the World Bank. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Ross Levine and Sergio Schmukler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Internationalization and Stock Market Liquidity
Ross Levine and Sergio Schmukler
NBER Working Paper No. 11894
December 2005
JEL No. IG15, F36, F20
ABSTRACT
What is the impact of internationalization (firms raising capital and trading in international markets)
on the liquidity of the remaining firms in domestic markets? To address this question, we assemble
a panel database of nearly 2,900 firms from 45 emerging economies over the period 1989-2000,
constructed from annual and daily data. First, we find evidence of migration. The domestic trading
of firms that cross-list or issue depositary receipts in foreign public exchanges tends to decrease,
while a significant proportion of their trading activity concentrates in international markets. Second,
this migration is negatively related to the liquidity of the remaining firms in their home market
through two separate channels. There are liquidity spillovers within markets, with aggregate
domestic trading activity being positively associated with the liquidity of individual firms in the
same market. Moreover, the proportion of trading abroad is negatively related to the liquidity of
firms in the domestic market.
Ross Levine
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
ross_levine@brown.edu
Sergio Schmukler
World Bank
sschmukler@worldbank.org

1. Introduction
This paper analyzes the impact of firms from emerging economies that internationalize by
issuing depositary receipts, cross-listing, or raising capital in international equity markets on the
liquidity of the remaining firms in the domestic stock market. Although an extensive literature finds
that internationalization helps these “international firms,” researchers are only beginning to assess the
ramifications of internationalization on “domestic firms,” those firms that do not internationalize.1
Similarly, although emerging market policymakers increasingly express concerns that
internationalization is hurting their domestic markets, surprisingly little research examines the impact
of internationalization on domestic firms.2 To evaluate the cross-firm distributional effects of
internationalization, we first examine the relation between internationalization and the trading of
international firms by documenting what happens to a firm’s trading activity and location of this
trading after it internationalizes. We then study whether the trading activity of international firms is
associated with the liquidity of domestic firms. Specifically, we examine whether there are market
externalities: Is aggregate trading activity related to the liquidity of individual firms trading in the
same market? We also test whether the location of trading activity of international firms affects the
liquidity of domestic firms.
The literature provides conflicting predictions about the relation between internationalization
and the liquidity of domestic firms. Consider first the two-part “migration and spillover” mechanism.
“Migration” means that internationalization induces a shift in the trading of international firms out of
1 Some examine the volume and liquidity of international firms in domestic markets, e.g., see Hargis (1998), Noronha et
al. (1996), and Pulatkonak and Sofianos (1999). Others study the impact of internationalization on stock prices, e.g., see
Alexander et al. (1988), Foerster and Karolyi (1999), and Miller (1999). Still others analyze asset size, growth, financing
constraints, and the capital structure of firms, e.g., see Pagano et al. (2002), and Schmukler and Vesperoni (2006). See
Karolyi (2006) for a review.
2 For concerns that local markets are becoming illiquid due to internationalization, see Bovespa, (1996), Federation des
Bourses de Valeurs (2000), Financial Times (1998), Latin Finance (1999, 2004); and The Economist (2000). To
overcome the illiquidity of domestic markets policymakers are trying to come up with new solutions, like the creation of
Novo Mercado in Brazil or the establishment of regional stock exchanges. See World Bank (2004).
1

the domestic market and into international financial centers. This may occur because international
markets have lower information and transaction costs (Chowdhry and Nanda, 1991; Lang et al.,
2003), lower settlement risk (Velli, 1994), or more efficient risk pricing (Patro, 2000). “Spillover”
means that the aggregate trading in a market is related to the liquidity of individual equities. Using
data from the U.S., Chordia et al. (2000), Hasbrouck and Seppi (2001), and Coughernour and Saad
(2004) find that liquidity is not simply an asset specific attribute; rather, an individual asset’s
liquidity co-moves with market liquidity. Beyond the possibility that common factors influence the
liquidity of all firms in a market, there might be spillovers, whereby aggregate market activity
influences the liquidity of individual firms. Spillovers could occur because of fixed costs associated
with operating a market, like running brokerage firms and clearing and settling transactions. With
spillovers, therefore, the migration of trading of international firms could increase the per-trade cost
of domestic stock transactions and reduce the liquidity of domestic firms. Combined, migration and
spillovers imply that cross-listing or issuing depositary receipts in public international stock markets
hurts the liquidity of domestic firms.
The internationalization process might affect domestic markets beyond the migration-
spillover channel. If it is more desirable to trade securities in major international financial centers and
if investors are concerned about country-specific risk, then as some firms from a country
internationalize, investors will shift their trading of that country’s risk (as embodied in both
international and domestic firms) out of domestic firms and into international firms in the
international market. Indeed, there is evidence that U.S. investors prefer ADR over non-ADR stocks.3
The resultant shift in investor interest from domestic to international firms could hurt the liquidity of
domestic firms beyond the effect through the reduction in domestic trading of international firms. At
the firm level, internationalization might signal firm quality, which provides an additional mechanism
3 See, Aggarwal et al. (2005), Bradshaw et al. (2004), and Edison and Warnock (2004).
2