NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FIRM EXPANSION AND CEO PAY
Lucian Bebchuk
Yaniv Grinstein
Working Paper 11886
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11886
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2005
We are grateful to Arturo Bris, John Core, Cliff Holderness, Lu Zhang, and participants in workshops at
Harvard University, University of Rochester, and the NBER for helpful comments and discussions. For
financial support, we would like to thank the Guggenheim Foundation, the Nathan Cummins Foundation,
the Lens Foundation for Corporate Excellence, and the Harvard John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics,
and Business. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Lucian Bebchuk and Yaniv Grinstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Firm Expansion and CEO Pay
Lucian Bebchuk and Yaniv Grinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 11886
December 2005
JEL No. D23, G32, G38, J33, J44, K22, M14
ABSTRACT
We study the extent to which decisions to expand firm size are associated with increases in
subsequent CEO compensation. Controlling for past stock performance, we find a positive
correlation between CEO compensation and the CEO's past decisions to increase firm size. This
correlation is economically meaningful; for example, other things being equal, CEOs who in the
preceding three years were in the top quartile in terms of expanding by increasing the number of
shares outstanding receive compensation that is higher by one-third than the compensation of CEOs
belonging to the bottom quartile. We also find that stock returns are correlated with subsequent CEO
pay only to the extent that they contribute to expanding firm size; only the component of past stock
returns not distributed as dividends is correlated with subsequent CEO pay. Finally, we find an
asymmetry between increases and decreases in size: while increases in firm size are followed by
higher CEO pay, decreases in firm size are not followed by reduction in such pay. The association
we find between CEOs' compensation and firm-expanding decisions undertaken earlier during their
service could provide CEOs with incentives to expand firm size.
Lucian Bebchuk
Harvard Law School
1557 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu
Yaniv Grinstein
Cornell University
yg33@cornell.edu

1. Introduction
A long-standing view in economics and finance holds that managers have an excessive
incentive to expand the size of their firm, (e.g., Baumol (1959), Jensen (1986), Morck,
Shleifer, and Vishny (1990)). On this view, managers could choose to make some value-
decreasing acquisitions, as well as to retain excessive cash flow instead of distributing it to
shareholders. Managers might act in this way because increasing firm size could serve their
private interests in various ways. Among other things, Jensen (1986) suggests that expanding
firm size might benefit managers by enabling them to obtain larger executive pay.
The view that firm expansion might be rewarded by higher executive pay relies in part on
the observation that pay and firm size appear to be correlated. As many studies document (see,
e.g., Core, Holthausen, and Larcker (1999), and Cyert, Kang, and Kumar (2002))—and as any
casual look at compensation tables published by the financial press suggests—larger firms tend
to provide their CEOs with larger pay packages. However, upon reflection, the correlation
between firm size and CEO pay does not establish that CEOs could increase the size of their
pay package by expanding firm size or that CEO pay is correlated with the CEO’s own choices
whether (and to what extent) to expand firm size.
For example, suppose that the compensation of continuing CEOs at any given year is a
function only of (i) the size of the firm when the executive started serving as a CEO (say,
because firms with a larger size seek to attract more talented executives), and (ii) the stock
performance of the company during the CEO’s service thus far. If boards act in this way,
expanding the size of the firm will by itself (i.e., putting aside any effect it might have on stock
returns) have no effect on the CEO’s subsequent compensation. In such a case, however, we
will still observe a correlation between CEOs’ current compensation and the size of their firms
because the size of a continuing CEO’s firm is likely to be correlated both with the firm’s size
when the CEO began serving and with the stock performance during the CEO’s service. Thus,
to identify whether the prospect of higher subsequent pay could provide CEOs with incentives
to expand firm size, we need to investigate whether past CEO decisions to expand are followed
by a compensation increase beyond the increase due to improved performance associated with
these expansions (if any). We pursue such an investigation in this study.
We find that a CEO’s compensation is correlated with the firm’s stock performance during
the preceding years of the CEO’s service. We also find, however, that, controlling for such past
performance, a CEO’s compensation, as well as the change in the CEO’s compensation from
1

earlier levels, is correlated with increases in the firm’s size — in terms of either assets or sales
— during the preceding years of the CEO’s service.
We further investigate the association between pay and size-expansion decisions by
decomposing changes in firm size into two components: increases in shares outstanding and
increases in size (whether measured by assets or sales) per share. We find that, other things
being equal, a CEO’s current pay is correlated with the rate of growth in the number of shares
outstanding during the CEO’s preceding service. This rate of share growth is the product of (i)
issuance of shares to finance acquisitions, (ii) issuance of shares to finance investments and
internal expansion, (iii) issuances of shares to finance compensation to employees (in lieu of
paying them in cash, which reduces firm size), and (iv) decisions whether to repurchase shares
(which operate to reduce firm size and share growth). By increasing the number of shares
outstanding, a CEO can increase firm size without necessarily increasing shareholder returns.
The identified correlation between CEO pay and preceding growth of shares outstanding is
economically meaningful: Holding all else constant, the average compensation in firms that
belong to the top quartile in terms of change in shares outstanding in the preceding three years
is higher by about one-third than the average compensation given to the bottom quartile.
We also find that, other things being equal (including past stock returns), a CEO’s pay is
correlated with the increase in assets per share and sales per share during the CEO’s preceding
service. This association is also economically meaningful. Holding all else constant, the
average compensation in firms that belong to the top quartile in terms of increasing per share
sales during the preceding three years is higher by about one-fifth than the average
compensation given to the bottom quartile. Similarly, holding all else constant, the average
compensation in firms that belong to the top quartile in terms of increasing per share assets
during the preceding three years is higher by about one-fourth than the average compensation
given to the bottom quartile. Because strategies that would maximize per share sales or per
share assets might differ from ones that would maximize stockholder returns, these finding are
also relevant for assessing executives’ incentives.
We also decompose past stock returns under a continuing CEO into the capital gain
component—that is, the part of the return not paid out as dividends—and the dividend
component. We find that a CEO’s compensation is correlated with the capital gain component
of the stock returns under the CEO’s preceding service, but we do not find such correlation for
the dividend component. Because the dividend component of total stock returns does not
contribute to firm size (even though it does contribute to shareholder wealth), this finding is
2