NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INVESTOR SENTIMENT AND CORPORATE FINANCE:
MICRO AND MACRO
Owen A. Lamont
Jeremy C. Stein
Working Paper 11882
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11882
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2005
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Owen A. Lamont and Jeremy C. Stein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Investor Sentiment and Corporate Finance: Micro and Macro
Owen A. Lamont and Jeremy C. Stein
NBER Working Paper No. 11882
December 2005
JEL No. G14, G32, G34
ABSTRACT
We document that net equity issuance is considerably more sensitive to aggregate stock returns and
Q's than to firm-level stock returns and Q's. Very similar patterns also emerge when we look at
merger activity. In light of earlier work (Campbell 1991, Vuolteenaho 2002) which finds that
aggregate stock returns are less informative about future cashflows than are firm-level stock returns--
and thus, potentially more strongly influenced by investor sentiment--these results suggest that both
equity issuance and mergers are to a significant extent driven by market-timing considerations, as
opposed to by purely fundamental factors.
Owen A. Lamont
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
owen.lamont@yale.edu
Jeremy C. Stein
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer 209
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeremy_stein@harvard.edu

Investor Sentiment and Corporate Finance: Micro and Macro
Owen A. Lamont and Jeremy C. Stein*
Figure 1 plots three time series over the interval 1927-2003: i) a measure of
aggregate net equity issuance in the U.S.; ii) a measure of aggregate merger activity; and
iii) the aggregate market-to-book ratio.1 As can be clearly seen, and as a number of
observers have pointed out, both equity issuance and merger activity are strongly
correlated with the level of the stock market, and with each other.
Broadly speaking, there are two classes of theories that might explain these
patterns. According to the neoclassical view, the market is efficient, and all movements
in stock prices rationally reflect changes either in expected future cashflows or in proper
discount rates. Thus if prices are high, firms might want to issue more equity because the
flexibility inherent in a less-leveraged capital structure is especially appealing when a
large number of positive-NPV projects are available. And similarly, mergers might be
more valuable in such periods, because it becomes all the more important to reallocate
capital to the highest-value users (Boyan Jovanovic and Peter L. Rousseau, 2002).
By contrast, the behavioral view argues that managers time their equity issues to
take advantage of stock prices that are sometimes too high relative to fundamentals (e.g.,
Jay R. Ritter and Tim Loughran, 1995, Malcolm Baker and Jeffrey Wurgler 2000). And
similarly, some mergers—in particular, stock-for-stock mergers—are nothing more than
a leading example of such opportunistic timing, since a stock-for-stock merger makes a
convenient excuse for a large equity issue that might otherwise be hard to justify (Andrei
Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny 2003).2
In this paper, we provide some new evidence that cuts in favor of the behavioral
view. Our starting point is Paul A. Samuelson’s dictum that market efficiency is a better
1

description of the pricing of individual stocks in the cross section than of the pricing of
the aggregate market. As quoted by Robert J. Shiller (2001, p. 243), Samuelson claims:
“Modern markets show considerable micro efficiency…I [hypothesize] considerable
macro inefficiency, in the sense of long waves in the time series of aggregate indexes of security
prices below and above various definitions of fundamental values.”
Samuelson’s dictum has been made concrete in empirical work by John Campbell
(1991) and Tuomo Vuolteenaho (2002). Campbell shows that innovations to aggregate
stock returns are largely transitory: less than half of the variance in returns is due to
changes in expected cashflows, leading to predictable reversals in future returns. If one
adopts a behavioral perspective and thinks of return predictability as being indicative of
investor sentiment, this is consistent with Samuelson’s idea that the aggregate market is
quite inefficient, with a large fraction of its price variation being due to non-fundamental
factors. In contrast, Vuolteenaho shows that innovations to idiosyncratic firm-level
returns are largely permanent: most of the variation in returns is driven by cashflow
news, with a smaller component due to time-varying expected returns. This suggests that
firm-level relative prices are reasonably efficient, with a smaller role for sentiment.
The key insight that underlies our testing strategy is the following: if a given
movement (say one percent) in aggregate stock prices contains a greater proportion of
investor sentiment than the same-sized movement in firm-level prices, then according to
the behavioral/timing view, equity issuance and mergers should respond more sensitively
to aggregate price movements than to firm-specific price movements. In contrast,
according to the neoclassical view all movements in stock prices are about some aspect of
fundamentals (either cashflows or discount rates) and so there should be no differential
sensitivity to the aggregate vs. firm-specific components of prices.3
2