NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEMAND-BASED OPTION PRICING
Nicolae Garleanu
Lasse Heje Pedersen
Allen M. Poteshman
Working Paper 11843
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11843
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2005
We are grateful for helpful comments from David Bates, Nick Bollen, Oleg Bondarenko, Menachem Brenner,
Andrea Buraschi, Josh Coval, Apoorva Koticha, Sophie Ni, Jun Pan, Neil Pearson, Mike Weisbach, Josh
White, and especially from Steve Figlewski, as well as from seminar participants at the Caesarea Center
Conference, Columbia University, Harvard University, HEC Lausanne, the 2005 Inquire Europe Conference,
London Business School, the 2005 NBER Behavioral Finance Conference, the 2005 NBER Universities
Research Conference, the NYU-ISE Conference on the Transformation of Option Trading, New York
University, Oxford University, Stockholm Institute of Financial Research, Texas A&M University, the
University of Chicago, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, the University of Pennsylvania,
University of Vienna, and the 2005 WFA Meetings. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Nicolae Garleanu, Lasse Heje Pedersen, and Allen M. Poteshman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Demand-Based Option Pricing
Nicolae Garleanu, Lasse Heje Pedersen, and Allen M. Poteshman
NBER Working Paper No. 11843
December 2005
JEL No. G0, G12, G13, G14, G2
ABSTRACT
We model the demand-pressure effect on prices when options cannot be perfectly hedged. The model
shows that demand pressure in one option contract increases its price by an amount proportional to
the variance of the unhedgeable part of the option. Similarly, the demand pressure increases the price
of any other option by an amount proportional to the covariance of their unhedgeable parts.
Empirically, we identify aggregate positions of dealers and end users using a unique dataset, and
show that demand-pressure effects help explain well-known option-pricing puzzles. First, end users
are net long index options, especially out-of-money puts, which helps explain their apparent
expensiveness and the smirk. Second, demand patterns help explain the prices of single-stock
options.
Nicolae Garleanu
Wharton School of Business
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
garleanu@wharton.upenn.edu
Lasse Heje Pedersen
NYU Stern Finance
44 West Fouth Street
Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
lpederse@stern.nyu.edu
Allen M. Poteshman
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
poteshma@uiuc.edu

1 Introduction
“[Option implied volatility] skew is heavily influenced by supply and de-
mand factors.”
— Gray, director of global equity derivatives, Dresdner Kleinwort Benson
“The number of players in the skew market is limited. ... there’s a huge
imbalance between what clients want and what professionals can provide.”
— Belhadj-Soulami, head of equity derivatives trading for Europe, Paribas
“To blithely attribute divergences between objective and risk-neutral prob-
ability measures to the free ‘risk premium’ parameters within an affine
model is to abdicate one’s responsibilities as a financial economist. ... a re-
newed focus on the explicit financial intermediation of the underlying risks
by option market makers is needed.”
— Bates (2003)
We take on this challenge by providing a model of option intermediation, and by
showing empirically using a unique dataset that demand pressure can help explain the
main option-pricing puzzles.
The starting point of our analysis is that options are traded because they are useful
and, therefore, options cannot be redundant for all investors (Hakansson (1979)). We
denote the agents who have a fundamental need for option exposure as “end users.”
Intermediaries such as market makers and proprietary traders provide liquidity to
end users by taking the other side of the end-user net demand. If intermediaries can
hedge perfectly — as in a Black and Scholes (1973) and Merton (1973) economy —
then option prices are determined by no-arbitrage and demand pressure has no effect.
In reality, however, even intermediaries cannot hedge options perfectly because of the
impossibilityoftradingcontinuously, stochasticvolatility, jumpsintheunderlying, and
transaction costs (Figlewski (1989)).1
To capture this effect, we depart from the standard no-arbitrage literature that
follows Black-Scholes-Merton by considering explicitly how options are priced by com-
petitive risk-averse dealers who cannot hedge perfectly. In our model, dealers trade an
arbitrary number of option contracts on the same underlying at discrete times. Since
the dealers trade many option contracts, certain risks net out, while others do not. The
dealers can hedge part of the remaining risk of their derivative positions by trading the
underlying security and risk-free bonds. We consider a general class of distributions
for the underlying, which can accommodate stochastic volatility and jumps. Dealers
trade with end users. The model is agnostic about the end users’ reasons for trade.
We compute equilibrium prices as functions of demand pressure, that is, the prices
that make dealers optimally choose to supply the options that the end users demand.
1Also, traders have capital constraints as emphasized, e.g., by Shleifer and Vishny (1997).
2

We show explicitly how demand pressure enters into the pricing kernel. Intuitively,
a positive demand pressure in an option increases the pricing kernel in the states of
nature in which an optimally hedged position has a positive payoff. This pricing-kernel
effect increases the price of the option, which entices the dealers to sell it. Specifically,
a marginal change in the demand pressure in an option contract increases its price by
an amount proportional to the variance of the unhedgeable part of the option, where
the variance is computed under a certain probability measure. Similarly, the demand
pressure increases the price of any other option by an amount proportional to the
covariance of their unhedgeable parts. Hence, while demand pressure in a particular
option raises its price, it also raises the price of other options on the same underlying,
especially similar contracts.
Empirically, we use a unique dataset to identify aggregate daily positions of dealers
and end users. In particular, we define dealers as market makers and end users as
proprietary traders and customers of brokers.2 We find that end users have a net long
position in S&P500 index options with large net positions in out-of-the-money puts.
Hence, since options are in zero net supply, dealers are short index options. While it
is conventional wisdom among option traders that Wall Street is short index volatility,
this paper is the first to demonstrate this fact using data on option holdings. This
can help explain the puzzle that index options appear to be expensive, and that low-
moneyness options seem to be especially expensive (Longstaff (1995), Bates (2000),
Coval and Shumway (2001), Amin, Coval, and Seyhun (2004), Bondarenko (2003)). In
the time series, demand for index options is related to their expensiveness, measured
by the difference between their implied volatility and the volatility measure of Bates
(2005). Further, the steepness of the smirk, measured by the difference between the
implied volatility of low-moneyness options and at-the-money options, is positively
related to the skew of option demand, measured by the demand for low-moneyness
options minus the demand for high-moneyness options.
Jackwerth (2000) finds that a representative investor’s option-implied utility func-
tion is inconsistent with standard assumptions in economic theory.3 Since options are
in zero net supply, a representative investor holds no options. We reconcile this finding
for dealers who have significant short index option positions. Intuitively, an investor
will short index options, but only a finite number of options. Hence, while a standard-
utility investor may not be marginal on options given a zero position, he is marginal
given a certain negative position. We do not address why end users buy these op-
tions; their motives might be related to portfolio insurance and agency problems (e.g.
between investors and fund managers) that are not well captured by standard utility
theory.
Another option-pricing puzzle is that index option prices are so different from the
prices of single-stock options despite the fact that the distributions of the underlying
2The empirical results are robust to classifying proprietary traders as either dealers or end users.
3See also Driessen and Maenhout (2003).
3