NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCIAL EXPERTISE OF DIRECTORS
A. Burak Güner
Ulrike Malmendier
Geoffrey Tate
Working Paper 11914
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11914
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2006
We thank Alexander Ljungqvist, Ernst Maug, Stefan Nagel and Philip Strahan for helpful comments.
We also thank the seminar audiences at the NBER Summer Institute Corporate Governance meeting,
WFA, Fall 2004 NBER Corporate Finance program meeting, at the University of Pennsylvania, Stanford,
Cornell, University of Notre Dame, UC Irvine, Emory University, UT Austin, Columbia University,
USC and University of North Carolina. Justin Fernandez, George Georgiev, Vaibhav Gupta, Nicole
Hammer, Rumit Kanakia, Jared Katseff, Catherine Leung, Chenkay Li, Scott McLin, Felix Momsen,
Neeraj Shah, Ning Xu, and Nancy Yu provided excellent research assistance. Earlier versions of this
paper were titled "The Impact of Boards with Financial Expertise on Corporate Policies." The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by A. Burak Güner, Ulrike Malmendier, and Geoffrey Tate. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Expertise of Directors
A. Burak Güner, Ulrike Malmendier, and Geoffrey Tate
NBER Working Paper No. 11914
January 2006, Revised June 2007
JEL No. D82,G21,G24,G31
ABSTRACT
The composition and functioning of corporate boards is at the core of the academic and policy debate
on optimal corporate governance. But does board composition matter for corporate decisions? In this
paper, we analyze the role of financial experts on boards. In a novel panel data set on board composition,
we find that financial experts significantly affect corporate decisions, though not necessarily in the
interest of shareholders. First, when commercial bankers join boards, external funding increases and
investment-cash flow sensitivity diminishes. But, the increased financing affects mostly firms with
good credit and poor investment opportunities. Second, investment bankers on the board are associated
with larger bond issues, but also worse acquisitions. Third, we find little evidence that financial expertise
matters for compensation policy or for experts without affiliation to a financial institution. The results
suggest a tradeoff between outside incentives (e.g. bank profits) and the incentive to maximize firm
value. Requiring financial expertise on boards, as mandated by regulatory proposals, may not benefit
shareholders if conflicting interests are neglected.
A. Burak Güner Geoffrey Tate
1219 Clark Way Finance Department - Rm C420
Stanford West Apt UCLA Anderson School of Management
Palo Alto, CA 94304 110 Westwood Plaza
burak.guner@barclaysglobal.com Los Angeles, CA 90095
geoff.tate@anderson.ucla.edu
Ulrike Malmendier
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall # 3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ulrike@econ.berkeley.edu

Much of the recent corporate-governance debate revolves around the composition of cor-
porate boards. The question is which types of directors can be expected to serve the inter-
ests of shareholders. Following the recent wave of accounting scandals, regulators have
stressed the need for more financial experts on boards. The implicit assumption is that
“an understanding of generally accepted accounting principles and financial statements”
will lead to better board oversight and serve the interest of shareholders.1
Financial experts, however, might affect firm policies beyond more accurate dis-
closure and better audit committee performance. Directors spend a significant portion of
their time on advising rather than monitoring (Adams and Ferreira (2003)). This influ-
ence can be problematic if directors are affiliated with financial institutions and pursue
the interests of those institutions rather than maximizing shareholder value. Affiliation
has raised concerns in several areas of financial intermediation, such as analyst recom-
mendations and IPO allocations.2 Nevertheless, recent regulatory efforts to increase fi-
nancial expertise on boards do not preclude such conflicts. As Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) en-
acts a very broad definition of financial expertise,3 bankers remain a common type of fi-
nancial expert on corporate boards.4
In this paper, we ask whether directors with financial expertise influence corpo-
rate policies and whether affiliation hampers their advisory role. We analyze both internal
investment (capital expenditure) and external investment (mergers and acquisitions), us-
ing a novel data set on the board composition of 282 companies over 14 years.
Our analysis proceeds in three steps. First, we study the impact of financial ex-
perts on internal investment and on the financing of investment with bank loans. We ex-
amine all financial experts, but focus on commercial bankers. One hypothesis is that, if
1 See Section 407 of the Sarbanes-Oxley (2002) Act (definition of audit committee financial experts). Simi-
larly, all major stock exchanges have introduced listing requirements on director financial literacy. See also
the governance survey by Jensen, Murphy, and Wruck (2004), e.g. recommendation R-36.
2 Malmendier and Shanthikumar (2007); Reuter (2005).
3 The original SOX proposal had a more restrictive definition of financial expert, which would have only
included CPAs and people with direct accounting experience. The objection from the business community
(e.g. “Blue Ribbon Commissions”), which led to the softening of the definition, was that the pool of experts
is too small, especially if bankers were to be excluded. (See Tenorio, 2003; Stuart, 2005). In our sample,
accountants make up only 0.5% of directors. CFOs make up 1%.
4 According to CFO Magazine’s analysis (Stuart, 2005), roughly 30% of boards (among the Fortune 100)
identified a director who is “an evaluator of financial statements, such as a banker or investor,” an execu-
tive who merely supervised the finance or accounting function, or a director with “no discernible profes-
sional experience in finance” as their financial expert for the purpose of compliance with SOX.
1

firms are financially constrained due to information asymmetries (Myers and Majluf
(1984); Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988)), bankers enable firms to finance value-
creating projects they would otherwise forgo. In that case, bankers decrease the sensitiv-
ity of investment to the availability of internal funds.5 An alternative hypothesis is that
bankers provide loans even when it is not in the interest of shareholders. Lending to un-
constrained firms with low default risk – even if they have no value-creating projects –
may increase bank profits. And it may enable empire-building or overconfident managers
(Jensen and Meckling (1976); Jensen (1986); Malmendier and Tate (2005)) to divert
funds or to overinvest. Such arrangements are more likely if the lending bank is repre-
sented on the board so that the board is unlikely to intervene. In this case, investment-
cash flow sensitivity also decreases, but mostly in financially unconstrained firms.
We test these hypotheses empirically. We find that when commercial bankers join
the board of a firm, the firm displays less investment-cash flow sensitivity and obtains
larger loans. The effect depends on affiliation, i.e., directors whose banks have a lending
relationship with the firm. Moreover, lending increases only for firms that are least finan-
cially constrained, such as firms with investment-grade debt. These firms also appear to
have worse investment opportunities and lower profitability. Constrained firms receive
no such assistance. Thus, the additional lending appears to benefit creditors rather than
shareholders. We find no measurable impact of other, unconflicted financial experts.
Second, we consider external investment (i.e. mergers and acquisitions) and fi-
nancing with public securities. Here, we focus on investment bankers. We find that firms
with investment bankers on their boards undertake worse acquisitions. In the 5 days
around takeover bids, they lose 1% more than firms without investment banker directors.
They also lose significantly more value over the three years following an acquisition.
Firms with investment bankers on their board are also associated with larger bond issues,
in particular if the director’s bank is involved in the deal. And, while investment bankers
on the board generally seem to reduce underwriting fees, this helping hand is not visible
when their own bank is involved in the deal. Thus, like commercial bankers, investment
bankers have a significant impact on corporate decisions, but not necessarily in the inter-
5 Consistent with this story, Hoshi, Kashyap, and Scharfstein (1991) find that investment is less sensitive to
cash flow in Japanese firms with keiretsu membership. Ramirez (1995) finds that firms with J.P. Morgan
executives on their boards displayed lower investment-cash flow sensitivity at the turn of the 20th century.
2