NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
VYING FOR FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT:
A EU-TYPE MODEL OF TAX-COMPETITION
Assaf Razin
Efraim Sadka
Working Paper 11991
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11991
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2006
We thank Alon Cohen for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Vying for Foreign Direct Investment: A EU-type Model of Tax Competition
Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka
NBER Working Paper No. 11991
January 2006
JEL No.
ABSTRACT
This paper brings out the special mechanism through which taxes influence bilateral FDI, when
investment decisions are two-fold in the presence of fixed setup flows costs. For each pair of source-
host countries, there is a set of factors determining whether aggregate FDI flows will occur at all, and
a different set of factors determining the volume of FDI flows (provided they occur). We develop
a two-country tax competition model which yield an asymmetric Nash-equilibrium with high
corporate tax rate and high level of public good provision in the rich source country for FDI outflows
and with low corporate tax rate and low level of public good provision in the poor host country for
FDI outflows. This is akin to the asymmetry among the EU 15 and EU 10 in the enlarged European
Union, as of 2004. We also demonstrate that the notion that the mere international tax differentials
are a key factor behind the direction and magnitude of FDI flows, the traditional race to the bottom
argument in tax competition are too simple.
Assaf Razin
Department of Economics
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14583
and NBER
razin@post.tau.ac.il
Efraim Sadka
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 69978
ISRAEL
sadka@post.tau.ac.il

2 Introduction
"Europeancountrieshavebeensteadilyslashingcorporate-taxrates
as they vie for foreign investment, potentially adding to pressure on
the U.S. for similar cuts as it weighs a tax overhaul. Following the
lead of Ireland, which dropped its rates to 12.5%from24%between
2000 and 2003, one nation after another has moved toward flatter,
lower corporate rates with fewer loopholes" (Wall Street Journal
Europe, January 28-30, 2005).1,2
Indeed, the economic literature has extensivelydealt with the effects of tax-
ation on investment, going back to the well-known works of Harbeger (1962)
and Hall and Jorgenson (1967). Of particular interest in this era of increasing
globalization are the effects of international differences in tax rates on foreign
direct investment (FDI);see, forinstance, AuerbachandHassett (1993), Hines
(1999), Desai and Hines (2001), De Mooij and Ederveen (2001), and Devereux
and Hubbard (2003).
In this paper (1) we attempt to provide a new look at the mechanisms
throughwhichcorporatetaxratesinfluenceaggregateFDIflows;(2)wedevelop
and simulate a model of tax competition.
We assume "lumpy" setup costs for new investment. This specification,
which has been recently supported empirically by Caballero and Engel (1999,
2000),createsasituationinwhichFDIdecisionsaretwo-fold: whethertoexport
FDIatall,and,ifso,howmuch. Thesedecisionsarepair-wise: thatis,theyare
madebyeachsourcecountrywithrespecttoeachhost country, as the"lumpy"
cost is specific for each source-host pair. In this context, the source and host
tax rates may have different effects on these two decisions.
We begin withtheobservation that thereareinfact noinvestment flows for
manysource-hostpaircountries,asindeedourlumpysetupcostmodelsuggests.
WeemployaHeckmanestimationapproachtoaskwhichsource-hostpairshave
any investment at all and to investigate which are the determinants of these
flows in those pairs that have. We employ panel data for OECD countries for
the period 1981 to 1998.3
The organization of this paper is as follows. Section 2 is an introduc-
tion.Section 3 provides a simple conceptual framework for the analysis of the
effects of taxation on two-fold FDI decisions. Section 4 presents the data and
empirical findings. Section 5 develops a model of tax competition. Section 6
reports on the simulation results. Section 5 concludes.
1Infact,Irelandhadduringthe1990’scorporatetaxratesofonly10%oncertainactivities.
UnderpressurefromtheEU,ithaslimitedtheapplicabilityofthislowratetocertainregimes
(e.g. the Shanon Free Zone).
2The tax rate was 28% in 1999.
3For a recent survey of the empirical literature about the determinants (including taxes)
ofFDI,see Blonigen (2005).
2

3 Source and Host Taxation
Elsewhere (Razin, Rubinstein and Sadka (2004)) we emphasize the two-fold
nature of investment decisions. In the presence of fixed setup costs of new
investment, a firm determines how much to invest according to the standard
marginalproductivityconditions. Forthisdecision,thesetupcostsplaynorole.
Butinthepresenceoffixedsetupcosts,theprofits,thataregeneratedwhenthe
firm carries out the amount of investment called for by marginal productivity
conditions, may be negative. Therefore, the firm faces also a decision whether
to incur the setup costs and invest at all. Thus, the investment decision of the
firmistwo-fold: whethertoinvestatall, andif so, howmuchtoinvest. Indeed,
in Razin, Rubinstein and Sadka (2004) we provide evidence in support of this
two-fold mechanism of investment in the context of foreign direct investment.
Looking at aggregate FDI inflows and outflows among all potential source-host
pairs of OECD countries, we find a large proportion of such pairs with no
FDI flows at all. Following the two-fold decision mechanism, we accordingly
estimate jointly a selection equation (whether to invest all) and a flowequation
(how much to invest). The estimation results point out to the importance of
fixed setup costs of new investments for the determination of aggregate FDI
flows.
Consider for concreteness the case of a parent firm that weighs the develop-
ment of a new product line. We can think of the fixed setup costs as the costs
of developing the product line. The firm may choose to make the development
athomeandthencarrytheproductionatasubsidiaryabroad. Thischoicemay
be determined by some "genuine" economic considerations such as source-host
differences in labor costs, in infrastructure, in human capital, etc. But it may
also be influenced by tax considerations. Of course, the fixed setup cost is not
limited only to R&D, but may include also the cost of orientation in a foreign
country - such as learning and adopting a new language, a new judicial system,
a set of new political norms and institutions, etc.
InthiscontextofFDI,therearisestheissueofdoubletaxation. Theincome
ofaforeignaffiliateistypicallytaxedbythehostcountry. Ifthesourcecountry
taxes this income too, then the combined (double) tax rate may be very high,
andevenexceeds100%4. Thisdoubletaxationistypicallyrelievedatthesource
country by either exempting foreign-source income altogether or granting tax
credits5. In the former case, foreign-source income is subject to the tax levied
by the host country only. When the source country taxes its resident on their
world-wide income and grants full credit for foreign taxes, then in principle
the foreign-source income is taxed at the source-country tax rate, so that the
host-country tax rate becomes irrelevant for investment decisions in the source
country. But, in practice, foreign-source income is far from being taxed at the
sourcecountryrate. First,therearevariousreducedtaxratesforforeign-source
income. Second, foreign-source income is usually taxed only upon repatriation,
4Fora succinctreview ofthisissue see,forexample,Hines(2001).
5ThisisalsotherecommendationoftheOECDmodeltaxtreaty(OECD,1997). Asimilar
recommendation is made also by the United Nations modeltax treaty (U.N.1980).
3