NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIFE IS CHEAP:
USING MORTALITY BONDS TO HEDGE
AGGREGATE MORTALITY RISK
Leora Friedberg
Anthony Webb
Working Paper 11984
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11984
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2006
Anthony Webb, Ph.D., (corresponding author) is a research economist at the Center for Retirement Research
at Boston College (CRR), located at 258 Hammond Street, Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3808. 646-662-7254
(phone), 617-552-0191(fax). Webbaa@bc.edu. Leora Friedberg, Ph.D., is an Assistant Professor in the
Department of Economics of the University of Virginia, P.O. Box 400182, Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182.
434-924-3225 (phone), 434-982-2904 (fax). lfriedberg@virginia.edu. We would like to thank Jeff Brown,
Steve Cooperstein, Francesca Golub-Sass, Jim Poterba, John Ralfe, Mauricio Soto, Bob Triest, and seminar
participants at the Center for Retirement Research, Boston College, for their very helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Leora Friedberg and Anthony Webb. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Life is Cheap: Using Mortality Bonds to Hedge Aggregate Mortality Risk
Leora Friedberg and Anthony Webb
NBER Working Paper No. 11984
January 2006
JEL No. G12, G22, G23, J11, J14
ABSTRACT
Using the widely-cited Lee-Carter mortality model, we quantify aggregate mortality risk as the risk
that the average annuitant lives longer than is predicted by the model, and we conclude that annuity
business exposes insurance companies to substantial mortality risk. We calculate that a markup of
3.7% on an annuity premium (or else shareholders’ capital equal to 3.7% of the expected present
value of annuity payments) would reduce the probability of insolvency resulting from uncertain
aggregate mortality trends to 5% and a markup of 5.4% would reduce the probability of insolvency
to 1%. Using the same model, we find that a projection scale commonly referred to by the insurance
industry underestimates aggregate mortality improvements. Annuities that are priced on that
projection scale without any conservative margin appear to be substantially underpriced. Insurance
companies could deal with aggregate mortality risk by transferring it to financial markets through
mortality-contingent bonds, one of which has recently been offered. We calculate the returns that
investors would have obtained on such bonds had they been available over a long period. Using both
the Capital and the Consumption Capital Asset Pricing Models, we determine the risk premium that
investors would have required on such bonds. At plausible coefficients of risk aversion, annuity
providers should be able to hedge aggregate mortality risk via such bonds at a very low cost.
Leora Friedberg
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
114 Rouss Hall
P.O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
and NBER
lfriedberg@virginia.edu
Anthony Webb
Research Economist
Center for Retirement Research at Boston College
258 Hammond Street
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3808
webbaa@bc.edu

INTRODUCTION
Annuities provide a means by which risk-averse households facing an uncertain
lifespan can insure themselves against the risk of outliving their wealth in old age. Annuitization
is predicted to raise average expected utility under a variety of assumptions (Brown, Davidoff,
and Diamond 2005), yet voluntary annuity purchases are rare. Only 10.2% of a large sample of
elderly households had voluntarily annuitized any of their wealth between 1993 and 2000 (Dushi
and Webb 2004).1 Immediate annuity sales were only $10.2 billion in 2001 (NAVA 2002), and
approximately half of that total may have been life-contingent (Brown and Poterba 2000).2
Interest in private annuities may well jump in coming years, though, as pre-annuitized defined
benefit (DB) pensions provided by employers are largely replaced by lump-sum defined
contribution (DC) pensions, and also if Social Security is similarly transformed using private
accounts.3
The meager market for private annuities remains a puzzle. One reason may rest on
difficulties which insurers face in offering annuities. Annuity providers face two kinds of
mortality risk: idiosyncratic risk, since any particular annuitant may live longer than anticipated,
and aggregate mortality risk, since annuitants may on average live longer than expected.4 The
former risk can be eliminated through diversification. The latter risk is non-diversifiable unless
the insurer can write other classes of business, for example life insurance, with negatively
correlated risks.5 Notably, one explanation for the shift in private pension structure may be a
growing reluctance of employers to take on aggregate mortality risk (ACA 2005, pp.13-14).
The academic literature on the value of annuitization to households assumes that
average future mortality is known with certainty. In reality, there is considerable uncertainty
about the possible course of mortality reductions. Forecasting life expectancy 50 or 100 years
1 These statistics were computed from the Asset and Health Dynamics of the Oldest Old, a panel of households with
a member born before 1924.
2 Sales of deferred annuities substantially exceed those of immediate annuities. A deferred annuity enables people
to accumulate wealth while deferring taxes but lacks the essential feature of an immediate annuity, namely the
irrevocable exchange of a capital sum in return for a lifetime income. Individuals may withdraw deferred annuity
assets in the form of a lifetime income, but rarely do so.
3 Some Social Security privatization proposals involve annuitization. Social Security investment fund providers in
Chile are required to offer voluntary annuities. While the provision will end in April 2006, the U.K. has required
that “individual pensions” be annuitized by the time that individuals turn 75.
4 Since adverse selection is not our focus, we simplify the analysis by ignoring uncertainty over the degree of
selection experienced by the insurer.
5 The actual scope for doing so may be limited because the average ages of life insurance and annuity holders differ
and mortality shocks differ in magnitude and occasionally even in sign across ages.
1

hence involves taking a controversial position on the potential for either scientific discoveries to
slow the aging process or emergent conditions to hasten it. The potential for longevity gains
over such time horizons generates considerable disagreement. S. Jay Olshansky and Stephen
Austad, two of the most famous researchers in the field, take divergent positions and have
wagered $500 million on whether someone recently born will live to 150 by 2150.6
Insurance companies and potential annuitants make their decisions over much shorter
time horizons. Over such horizons, it is common to use models that combine extrapolations of
past trends with some consideration of likely medical threats or advances, while avoiding a
strong position on medical progress or the biology of aging. Purely extrapolative models fit the
data closely, have been shown to perform well in sample, and importantly for our purposes,
enable researchers to quantify the uncertainty surrounding the future course of mortality.
Yet, past forecasts from these models indicate that point estimates of expected
mortality rates carry wide margins of error. Insurance companies and other annuity providers
that base their pricing on those estimates would be exposed to significant aggregate mortality
risk. Annuity providers can respond to this risk in a number of ways. One approach is to add on
a margin for error, though doing so may further deter high-expected mortality households from
annuitizing, exacerbating adverse selection. Other more efficient alternatives would be to
transfer aggregate mortality risk to third parties through the reinsurance market or through
financial markets by issuing mortality-contingent bonds, with interest payments that depend on
mortality experience.7
What is an appropriate risk premium for such bonds? This paper quantifies the
magnitude of the aggregate mortality risk faced by annuity providers and then prices that risk.
As far as we know, no other paper in the economics literature applies the tools of financial
economics to price aggregate risks which beset the insurance industry. In Section 1 of the paper,
we discuss the literature on aggregate mortality risk and present the Lee-Carter (1992) model,
which – according to Deaton and Paxson (2004) – has become the “leading statistical model of
mortality in the demographic literature.” The Lee-Carter model has been adopted by the U.S.
Census Bureau, among others, and was viewed favorably by the Social Security Administration’s
6 Due to the power of compound interest, the present value of the wager is considerably more modest!
7 The pricing and availability of reinsurance may depend on reinsurers’ ability to transfer the same risk yet more
broadly. Later, we discuss relevant evidence and describe how mortality bonds can be used to effect this transfer.
2