NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAPITALIZING PATRIOTISM:
THE LIBERTY LOANS OF WORLD WAR I
Sung Won Kang
Hugh Rockoff
Working Paper 11919
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11919
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2006
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Sung Won Kang and Hugh Rockoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Capitalizing Patriotism: The Liberty Loans of World War I
Sung Won Kang and Hugh Rockoff
NBER Working Paper No. 11919
January 2006
JEL No. N2
ABSTRACT
In World War I the Secretary of the Treasury, William Gibbs McAdoo, hoped to create a broad
market for government bonds, the famous Liberty Loans, by following an aggressive policy of
"capitalizing patriotism." He called on everyone from Wall Street bankers to the Boy Scouts to
volunteer for the campaigns to sell the bonds. He helped recruit the nation's best known artists to
draw posters depicting the contribution to the war effort to be made by buying bonds, and he
organized giant bond rallies featuring Hollywood stars such as Douglas Fairbanks, Mary Pickford,
and Charlie Chaplin. These efforts, however, enjoyed little success. The yields on the Liberty bonds
were kept low mainly by making the bonds tax exempt and by making sure that a large proportion
of them was purchased directly or indirectly by the Federal Reserve. Patriotism proved to be a weak
offset to normal market forces.
Sung Won Kang
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
kang@eocn.rutgers.edu
Hugh Rockoff
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
rockoff@econ.rutgers.edu

1. The Liberty Bonds1
When World War I began the Secretary of the Treasury, William Gibbs McAdoo,
turned initially to the record of Lincoln’s Secretary of the Treasury, Samuel Chase, for
lessons on how to finance a major war.2 In the end, however, McAdoo rejected Chase’s
methods. To start with, McAdoo believed that Chase had made a major error in turning
over the marketing of the government’s securities to a private firm, Jay Cooke and
Company. McAdoo would make no such mistake. He expected bankers, insurance
executives, and ordinary citizens to donate their services to the government. Moreover,
while he acknowledged that Jay Cooke and Company had succeeded to some degree in
marketing bonds to middle class Americans, McAdoo thought that he could push
Cooke’s policy much further. Britain and Germany had already undertaken noisy
“drives” aimed at selling bonds, especially to middle class and working class investors,
Noyes (1926, 181-2). And McAdoo enthusiastically adopted the same strategy.
McAdoo crisscrossed the country on an exhausting speaking tour urging the
public to express its support for the war by buying bonds, and he arranged rallies at
1 We must thank our colleagues, Michael Bordo and Eugene White, and Kim Oosterlinck,
who was visiting Rutgers while we were working on this paper, for numerous helpful
discussions of war finance. We must also thank the participants in a session at the
American Economic Association meetings in the of Fall 2004, and in particular our
discussant Paul Rhode and the chair of the session Gavin Wright, for their comments.
Martha Olney patiently explained the 1917-1919 survey of family saving to us.
Subsequent seminars at New York University at a seminar organized by Richard Sylla,
and at Pompeu Fabra University at a seminar organized by Hans-Joachim Voth and Allan
Taylor, were also very helpful.
2 David M. Kennedy (2004, 100) suggests that McAdoo turned to Chase’s experience,
rather than to that of our European allies and enemies, because of “an almost instinctual
sense of the uniqueness of American society.” But this only accounts for the direction in
which McAdoo’s thoughts initially ran.
3

which movie stars such as Douglas Fairbanks, Mary Pickford, and Charlie Chaplin
exhorted the crowd to buy bonds. (Kennedy 1980, 105). In the closing week of the
campaign for the Fourth Liberty loan $4,800,000 was raised from an audience at
Carnegie Hall who heard Enzo Caruso and other stars perform (Noyes 1926, 185). But it
wasn't just stars. Everyone who could, was asked to sell bonds. The Boy Scouts were
enlisted under the slogan “Every Scout to Save a Soldier.” Even the names of the bonds
reflected the emphasis on patriotism. While one of the most popular Civil War issues was
known prosaically as the 5-20 (callable after 5 years, redeemed at 20), the World War I
debt consisted of four “Liberty loans,” and a final issue of “Victory loans” after the
armistice.
The campaign attempted to create strong social pressures to buy bonds. When, for
example, the Comptroller of the Currency learned that a national bank charter had been
granted to six applicants from a “certain western state” who had between them bought
only $200 worth of Liberty bonds, the charter was revoked. (Whittlesey 1950, 175).
Much of the campaign to sell the Liberty Bonds was developed by the
government’s Committee on Public Information created on April 13, 1917. Its Division
of Pictorial Publicity, created on April 22, produced many of the famous Liberty Bond
Posters. The Division was headed by Charles Dana Gibson, who’s “Gibson’s Girls” had
become an American icon. Gibson explicitly rejected an appeal to the material side of
American life and believed that “war art ‘must appeal to the heart,’” Vaughn (1980, 150).
As the war wore on the emphasis shifted toward greater reliance on emotional
appeals. The campaign to sell the Fourth Liberty loan, although making some appeals to
financial self-interest, explicitly emphasized the bestiality of the Germans. It is not
4