NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REGULATION OF HEALTH, SAFETY,
AND ENVIRONMENTAL RISKS
W. Kip Viscusi
Working Paper 11934
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11934
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2006
This research is supported by the Harvard Olin Center for Law, Economics and Business and by the Harvard
Program on Empirical Legal Studies. Rob Stavins provided excellent detailed comments on a draft of this
paper. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by W. Kip Viscusi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Regulation of Health, Safety, and Environmental Risks
W. Kip Viscusi
NBER Working Paper No. 11934
January 2006
JEL No. K32, Q2, J28, J17
ABSTRACT
This paper provides a systematic review of the economic analysis of health, safety, and
environmental regulations. Although the market failures that give rise to a rationale for intervention
are well known, not all market failures imply that market risk levels are too great. Hazard warnings
policies often can address informational failures. Some market failures may be exacerbated by
government policies, particularly those embodying conservative risk assessment practices. Labor
market estimates of the value of statistical life provide a useful reference point for the efficient risk
tradeoffs for government regulation. Guided by restrictive legislative mandates, regulatory policies
often strike a quite different balance with an inordinately high cost per life saved. The risk-risk
analysis methodology enables analysts to assess the net safety implications of policy efforts.
Inadequate regulatory enforcement and behavioral responses to regulation may limit their
effectiveness, while rising societal wealth will continue to generate greater levels of health and
safety.
W. Kip Viscusi
Harvard Law School
Hauser 302
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
kip@law.harvard.edu

1. The Rise of Risk Regulation
Beginning in the 1970s, there was a major wave of health, safety, and environmental
regulation. In the United States, the government established new regulatory agencies with broad
regulatory responsibilities for risk and environmental policy. Some of these agencies addressed
risks to people, such as mortality and morbidity risks, while others focused on dangers to natural
resources, such as endangered species, which affect people indirectly. Among these new federal
agencies were the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA), the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), and the Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC).
In some cases, these agencies inherited functions that already existed but had been scattered
among other regulatory agencies, such as the U.S. Department of Interior. In other instances,
these agencies had entirely new legislative mandates that greatly expanded the scope and
character of regulation.
The creation of these agencies did not take place because there was a sudden increase in
societal risk levels. Indeed, individual mortality risks levels of almost all kinds had been
declining throughout the twentieth century and had been continuing to decline. For example,
there were declines in accident rates at home and occupational fatalities throughout the past
century, long before there was any government regulation in place.1 One exception to this
mortality risk trend was the automobile fatality rate, which had increased overall due to the
greater usage of motor vehicles. The motor vehicle death rate per 100,000 population peaked in
1937 and has exhibited an uneven but downward trend thereafter. However, the fatality rate per
mile driven had continued to decline quite steadily so that in 2003 it was 1.56 per 100,000
vehicle miles, as compared to 4.88 per 100,000 vehicle miles in 1970 and 14.68 per 100,000
1 The statistics cited in this paragraph are drawn from the National Safety Council (2004).
2

vehicle miles in 1937. Auto safety became the first target of the emerging consumer movement
that had been fostered in part by the auto safety efforts of Ralph Nader (1965). Environmental
risks displayed a somewhat different temporal trajectory, as many concentrations of air and water
pollutants increased until the early 1970s and declined thereafter once the environmental
regulations were instituted, as documented by Freeman (2002). These regulations in turn have
led to steady improvements in environmental quality with only a few exceptions, such as carbon
dioxide, which has continued to rise. Support for both consumer protection and risk regulation
generally also can be traced to rising societal wealth levels that increased individual valuations of
risk reduction, thus increasing the demand for regulatory intervention.
The role of the courts with respect to risk also increased since the 1970s. A noteworthy
period was the mid-1980s when liability insurance premiums for general liability and medical
malpractice approximately tripled in a two-year period, prompting claims that there was a
“liability crisis.” The counterargument to the crisis view was that the upsurge in premium rates
reflected the normal ebb and flow in the insurance industry known as the underwriting cycle.
Periodic declines in interest rates led to an associated increase in premium rates because the
return insurers received on the invested premium amounts had declined. Although the increases
in liability costs abated, the costs imposed by tort liability remained at or above the mid-1980s
levels, in part because the scope of liability rules had expanded.
The expanded role of liability in some cases encouraged additional regulatory activity. A
notable example is that of asbestos. Traditionally there had been comparatively lax regulation of
asbestos, in that the risks were substantial and could be reduced at modest cost. The wave of
asbestos-related lawsuits spurred the imposition of stringent occupational and environmental
standards. After a period of inadequate regulation of asbestos, both EPA and OSHA imposed a
3