NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCIAL GLOBALIZATION,
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE, AND EASTERN EUROPE
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 11912
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11912
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2006
Reese Chair in Banking and Monetary Economics at the Ohio State University and Research Associate at
the NBER. Prepared for the Conference on European Economic Integration, Vienna, November 2005. I am
grateful to Carrie Pan for research assistance and for conference participants for comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2006 by René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Globalization, Corporate Governance, and Eastern Europe
René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 11912
January 2006
JEL No. G11, G15, G32, F30
ABSTRACT
For many countries, the most significant barriers to trade in financial assets have been knocked
down. Yet, the financial world is not flat because poor governance prevents firms from being widely
held and from taking full advantage of financial globalization. Poor governance has implications for
corporate finance as well as for macroeconomics. I show that poor governance in Eastern Europe is
accompanied, as expected, by high corporate ownership concentration, low firm valuation, poor
financial development, and low foreign participation.
René M. Stulz
Fisher College of Business, Ohio State University
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu

In his recent book, Friedman (2005) makes the case that globalization leads to a flat world.1 By that,
he means that it removes obstacles that, in the past, would have prevented firms and individuals from
competing with each other across the world. Such competition improves welfare not only by insuring that
goods are produced at the lowest cost but also by making sure that consumers get access to new and better
goods. Assuredly, the world is not flat yet. Nevertheless, the metaphor is helpful to understand the forces
that shape our world. It is even more apt to describe the financial world than the world of trade in goods.
For many countries, the most significant explicit barriers to trade in financial assets have been
knocked down. Economists believe that this liberalization is extremely beneficial, because it enables
investors worldwide to share risks better. Capital can be allocated more efficiently, and countries can
exploit their comparative advantage better. With complete financial globalization and perfect markets
within countries, welfare is maximized. Further, asset prices, portfolios, and firm financial policies are not
country-dependent.
Despite a dramatic increase in cross-border trade in financial assets, the positive impact of financial
globalization has been surprisingly limited. Capital does not flow to countries with low capital stocks as
strongly as one would expect if the financial world were flat.2 As Lucas (1990) points out forcefully,
differences in the marginal product of capital between industrialized countries and emerging countries are
large. In fact, over the recent past, capital has come rushing into the U.S., when one would expect it
instead to flow to emerging countries. According to data from the IMF, the cumulative sum of net equity
flows to less developed countries from 1996 to 2004 is a negative $67.4 billion.3
What are the obstacles left that make the financial world full of ridges and mountains, so that capital
does not flow where the physical marginal product of capital is highest? The answer is that what I call the
twin agency problems (see Stulz (2005)), poor corporate governance and high political risk, stand in the
way of countries getting the full benefit of financial globalization. When the twin agency problems are
serious, diffuse ownership is not feasible. Consequently, risk cannot be spread efficiently across investors
1

throughout the world because the corporate insiders must bear much of a firm’s risk. Ownership
concentration limits a country’s ability to benefit from financial globalization. It leads to lower financial
development, more consumption volatility, stronger correlation between savings and investment, less
foreign investment, lower firm valuations, smaller firms, and lower economic growth.
In this paper, I first analyze the implications of the twin agency problems for how firms are owned
and governed. I then discuss how these twin agency problems restrict firms and countries from taking full
advantage of financial globalization. I finally turn to Eastern Europe and provide evidence that the twin
agency problems affect these countries adversely and prevent them from capturing the full benefit of
financial globalization.
I. The twin agency problems.
Consider a country with a high physical productivity of capital. For a marginal dollar of capital that
could be invested anywhere in the world to be invested in that country, it has to be that the investors
expect to receive a return on that dollar which is, after taking into account risk, at least as high as they
could get anywhere else in the world. Poor governance can make it impossible for that marginal dollar to
be invested in the country because poor governance decreases the cash flows investors can expect to
receive from capital raised by the firm and hence the value of their claims on the firm. When the
governance problems are sufficiently serious, the firm cannot promise a high enough dollar return to
investors to raise capital to exploit its investment opportunities.
The reason a firm with poor governance cannot promise a sufficient dollar return to investors is that
each firm has to resolve a fundamental agency problem which arises because corporate insiders maximize
their own welfare rather than the welfare of outside investors. There are many ways for insiders to take
advantage of outside investors. In countries where the rule of law is strong, the concern is often that
managers choose to build empires rather than maximize shareholder wealth. In such countries, the so-
called free cash flow problem is therefore an important component of agency costs. However, in countries
2