NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SECURITIZATION AND THE DECLINING IMPACT
OF BANK FINANCE ON LOAN SUPPLY:
EVIDENCE FROM MORTGAGE ACCEPTANCE RATES
Elena Loutskina
Philip E. Strahan
Working Paper 11983
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11983
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2006
We thank Scott Frame, Jeff Pontiff, Toby Moskowitz, Amir Sufi, and Andrei Zmatchenok for helpful
comments on the paper, as well as seminar participants at the Financial Research Association Conference,
the Federal Reserve Banks of New York and San Francisco, RPI, the University of Connecticut, and the
University of Chicago. The authors also thank the Fondation Banque de France for financial support. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Elena Loutskina and Philip E. Strahan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Securitization and the Declining Impact of Bank Finance on Loan Supply: Evidence from
Mortgage Acceptance Rates
Elena Loutskina and Philip E. Strahan
NBER Working Paper No. 11983
January 2006
JEL No. G2
ABSTRACT
This paper shows that securitization reduces the influence of bank financial condition on loan supply.
Low-cost funding and increased balance-sheet liquidity raise bank willingness to approve mortgages
that are hard to sell (jumbo mortgages), while having no effect on their willingness to approve
mortgages easy to sell (non-jumbos). Thus, the increasing depth of the mortgage secondary market
fostered by securitization has reduced the impact of local funding shocks on credit supply. By
extension, securitization has weakened the link from bank funding conditions to credit supply in
aggregate, thereby mitigating the real effects of monetary policy.
Elena Loutskina
Boston College
loutskin@bc.edu
Philip E. Strahan
Carroll School of Management
324B Fulton Hall
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
strahan@bc.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
Liquidity transformation – funding illiquid loans with liquid deposits – has been viewed
as a fundamental role for banks. Diamond and Dybvig (1983) argue that banks improve welfare
by allowing depositors to diversify liquidity risk while investing in high-return, illiquid projects.
Securitization has changed the way banks provide liquidity. Today, while real projects remain
illiquid, loans have become more liquid because banks often securitize them, thereby replacing
deposits with bonds as the primary source of finance. Securitization has grown fastest in
mortgage markets because the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs, i.e. Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac) enhance mortgage-loan liquidity.1 By regulation, however, the GSEs only buy
mortgages below a given size threshold (the jumbo-loan cutoff). Mortgages below this threshold
are more liquid than those above the threshold. This paper shows that bank financial condition,
while continuing to affect bank acceptance rates on illiquid loans (jumbos), has no effect on
acceptance rates on liquid loans (non-jumbos). Thus, securitization has reduced the impact of
bank financial condition on credit supply.
We study mortgages because their liquidity falls sharply around the jumbo-loan cutoff.
Such a discrete and exogenous drop in liquidity is difficult to find elsewhere.2 To exploit this
special feature of the U.S. mortgage market, we first regress the difference in acceptance rates
for non-jumbo and jumbo mortgages on bank financial variables and other controls. By
comparing relative acceptance rates in our regressions, we ‘difference out’ unobservable but
potentially confounding demand-side factors. The results suggest that this acceptance-rate
difference widens at financially constrained banks.
1

We further show that while acceptance rates depend on financial condition for jumbo
mortgages, acceptance rates for non-jumbos do not vary with the originating bank’s financial
position because these loans can be easily sold. Thus, loan liquidity seems to eliminate the link
from a bank’s financial condition to its willingness to supply credit. Mortgage liquidity has
increased rapidly over the past 30 years, in part through GSE subsidies. Private-sector financial
institutions, however, have also increased loan liquidity in other sectors by securitizing consumer
and business loans. Our results therefore extend into these other markets as well.
Figure 1 illustrates our main findings. Panel A compares the aggregate probability of
accepting mortgages originated by banks in the top quartile of the funding-cost distribution with
those in the bottom quartile of this distribution, where funding costs equal the ratio of a bank’s
total interest expenses on deposits to total deposits. The figure suggests that banks with high
funding costs are reluctant to approve jumbo mortgages, relative to competing banks with low
funding costs. On average, the acceptance rate for jumbo mortgages rises from 88.4 percent for
high-cost banks to 91.1 percent for low-cost banks. In contrast, the acceptance rate for non-
jumbo mortgages barely reflects the originating bank’s funding costs at all.3 This difference
makes sense because banks usually fund accepted jumbo mortgages with deposits. In contrast,
banks have the option to sell non-jumbo mortgages to the GSEs, thus avoiding the need to
finance them. Panel B reports a similar set of results but focuses on balance-sheet liquidity,
defined as the ratio of marketable securities and federal funds sold to assets. Like funding costs,
bank liquidity seems to matter less for non-jumbo mortgages (because the bank holds the option
to sell the loan) than for jumbos (because the bank must hold the loan).
Funding costs and liquidity may also affect the characteristics of a bank’s flow of
mortgage applications. For example, loan-application size may be endogenous if funding-
2