NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STRATEGIC INFORMATION DISCLOSURE:
THE CASE OF MULTI-ATTRIBUTE PRODUCTS WITH HETEROGENEOUS CONSUMERS
V. Joseph Hotz
Mo Xiao
Working Paper 11937
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11937
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2006
We thank Dan Ackerberg, Alberto Bernardo, Hongbin Cai, Harold Demsetz, Ginger Jin, Phillip Leslie,
Bentley MacLeod, Robert Porter, John Riley, Michael Rothschild, Kenneth Sokoloff, Mark Stegeman,
Gabor Virag, Bill Zame, participants of the IO Seminar at UCLA, and participants of the 2002 North
American Econometric Society Summer Meeting and the 2002 Annual Conference of the European
Association for Research in Industry Economics for comments on preliminary versions of this paper.
All errors are ours. This research was funded by a grant from the National Institute for Child Health
and Human Development (R01 HD035382). The authors are solely responsible for the contents of
the paper.
© 2006 by V. Joseph Hotz and Mo Xiao. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Strategic Information Disclosure: The Case of Multi-Attribute Products with Heterogeneous
Consumers
V. Joseph Hotz and Mo Xiao
NBER Working Paper No. 11937
January 2006(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:36)(cid:88)(cid:74)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:19)
JEL No. L15,L5
ABSTRACT
We examine the incentives for firms to voluntarily disclose otherwise private information about the
quality attributes of their products. In particular, we focus on the case of differentiated products with
multiple attributes and heterogeneous consumers. We show that there exist certain configurations of
consumers’ multi-dimensional preferences under which a firm, no matter whether producing a high-
or low-quality product, may choose not to reveal the quality even with zero disclosure costs. The failure
of information unraveling arises when providing consumers with more information results in more
elastic demand, which triggers more intensive price competition and leads to lower prices and profits
for competing firms. As a result, the equilibrium in which disclosure is voluntary may diverge from
that in which disclosure is mandatory.
V. Joseph Hotz
Department of Economics
Box 90097
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708-0097
and NBER
hotz@econ.duke.edu
Mo Xiao
260 Heady Hall
Iowa State University
Ames, IA 50011-1070
mxiao@email.arizona.edu

1. Introduction
As technological innovation constantly expands the dimensionality of the attribute space of products, the
lack of information that consumers have about product quality has become of increasing concern for
modern economies. However, one strand of the economics literature, initiated independently by
Grossman (1981) and Milgrom (1981), suggests that this concern is misplaced. Both authors argue that
strong incentives exist in markets for privately-informed firms voluntarily to disclose the quality of their
products as long as there exists a verifiable disclosure mechanism with negligible costs. In equilibrium,
firms’ private information about the quality of their products would “unravel” and, as a result, a manda-
tory disclosure requirement would be redundant.1 In their models, there is little scope for firms to act stra-
tegically with respect to their disclosure decisions. In essence, high-quality firms, by distinguishing them-
selves from their lower-quality rivals, would always gain from revealing the true quality of their products,
allowing them to charge consumers higher prices that reflect differences in quality. Only those with the
lowest quality would choose not to reveal the quality of their products. However, their non-disclosure
ends up being completely revealing as consumers correctly infer that a firm’s failure of disclosure is al-
ways associated with the lowest-quality products.
If the above results hold, there are several phenomena that are somewhat difficult to explain. The
first concerns the findings in a number of studies showing that consumers do respond to the imposition of
mandatory disclosure requirements. For example, Jin and Leslie (2003) find that sales of restaurants be-
came more sensitive to restaurants’ hygiene quality after restaurants were required to post “grade cards”
about their hygiene quality in Los Angeles County in the late 1990s. They further find that as a result of
these grade cards the incidence of hospitalizations due to food-borne illnesses declined significantly.
Similarly, Mathios (2000) finds that salad dressings with high fat content experienced large reductions in
1 The logic of their result is as follows. If no firm discloses its product quality, consumers will be unable to distin-
guish between the highest-quality product and the lower-quality ones. Firms producing products with the highest
quality will want to disclose their quality, because they will then be able to charge a higher price and achieve higher
profits. Firms with the next highest quality product have the same incentive to distinguish themselves from the re-
maining firms. This process continues, so long as the benefits of disclosure outweigh the costs. In the limit when
1

sales after the Nutritional Labeling and Education Act mandated all food products to carry standardized
labels with information on a product’s nutritional content.
Second, there is evidence that firms in some industries actively oppose the imposition of laws and
regulations that require mandatory disclosure. For example, lobbying by the National Automobile Dealers
Association in 1976 led to the abolishment of the Federal Trade Commission’s mandatory inspection and
disclosure rules on used-car dealers. In 1998, the National Restaurant Association strongly opposed the
imposition of a requirement that all restaurants in Los Angeles County publicly display “grade cards” that
revealed each restaurant’s hygiene practices.2 Finally, the National Hospital Association opposed a pro-
posal in 2000 by the Clinton administration to impose mandatory reporting on hospitals of all fatal and
other serious medical errors.3 If it is in the self-interest of firms—unless the firm produces the worst qual-
ity—to voluntarily reveal the quality of their products, why would they, or their industry representatives,
expend resources to avoid mandatory disclosure requirements?
In this paper, we consider the robustness of the Grossman (1981) and Milgrom (1981) unraveling
result. We consider the decisions of firms to voluntarily provide information about the quality of their
products that would otherwise be unobserved by consumers. We assume that firms have access to a
mechanism with which they can credibly disclose such information at zero cost. There are two features
that distinguish our model from previous work. First, we allow products to have multiple attributes. Sec-
ond, we assume that there is heterogeneity across consumers in their preferences over these attributes.
Following the literatures on product differentiation and hedonic pricing, we consider a model in which
products are both horizontally and vertically differentiated, where quality is the vertical attribute. We
show that a firm producing a high-quality product may actually benefit, rather than lose, from consumers’
disclosure costs are zero, the situation in which firms withhold private information about product quality “unravels.”
2 See Food Council News, Vol. 5, Issue 1, January 2002. The National Restaurant Association stated that the “rating
initiatives reduce complex issues to a score or letter based on subjective decisions by individual inspectors.” The in-
dustry maintained that if an establishment is good enough to pass a hygiene inspection, having to post ratings would
constitute overkill.
3 See CNN News, February 22, 2000. “A culture of silence” in the medical profession can be traced back to 1930s,
when physicians were advised to “keep a cautious tongue” regarding medical errors (Gallagher et al., 2002).
2