NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOUSEHOLD OWNERSHIP OF VARIABLE ANNUITIES
Jeffrey Brown
James Poterba
Working Paper 11964
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11964
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2006
We thank Hui Shan and Amir Sufi for outstanding research assistance, Andrew Samwick for providing us
with computer code to impute marginal tax rates for households in the Survey of Consumer Finances,
Cynthia Saccocia of Cerulli Associates for helpful discussions and data, Peter Davis, Moshe Milevsky,
Austin Nichols, Kent Smetters and participants at the 2004 AEA meeting and the NBER Tax Policy and the
Economy meeting for helpful comments, and the Social Security Administration and the Boston College
Center for Retirement Research for research funding. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Jeffrey Brown and James Poterba. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Household Ownership of Variable Annuities
Jeffrey Brown and James Poterba
NBER Working Paper No. 11964
January 2006
JEL No. G22, J14, J32, H24
ABSTRACT
Variable annuities have been one of the most rapidly growing financial products of the last two
decades. Between 1996 and 2004, nominal sales of variable annuities in the U.S. more than doubled,
from $51 billion to $130 billion. Variable annuities now account for approximately nearly two thirds
of annuity sales. The investment returns associated with variable annuities resemble those from
mutual funds, and variable annuity buyers can select among a range of asset allocation options.
Variable annuities are considered insurance products under the tax law, so buyers are not taxed on
their investment returns until they make withdrawals from their variable annuity accounts. This paper
describes the tax treatment of variable annuities, presents summary information on their ownership
patterns, and explores the importance of several distinct motives for household purchase of variable
annuities. The discussion of tax treatment examines the impact of the 2001 and 2003 tax bills on the
relative tax treatment of variable annuities and other financial products. Household data from the
1998 and 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances shows that variable annuity ownership is highly
concentrated among high income and high net wealth sub-groups of the population. Variable annuity
ownership is less concentrated, however, than ownership of several other types of financial assets.
Evidence on the role of tax incentives in encouraging ownership of variable annuities is mixed. The
probability of owning a variable annuity rises with the marginal tax rate throughout most of the
income distribution, but it is lower for households in the top tax bracket than for those with slightly
lower tax rates.
Jeffrey Brown James Poterba
Department of Finance Department of Economics
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign MIT, E52-350
340 Wohlers Hall, MC-706 50 Memorial Drive
1206 South Sixth Street Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
Champaign, IL 61820-9080 and NBER
and NBER poterba@mit.edu
brownjr@uiuc.edu

The shift from defined benefit pension plans to self-directed defined contribution plans, the
possibility of reforming Social Security so that it includes personal accounts, and the growth in
IRAs are examples of a broad shift toward greater self-reliance in the provision of retirement
income in the United States. In policy and academic discussions of individual retirement security
in this new environment, two issues are particularly prominent. One is the role of equity markets
in providing for future retirement income. There has been a steady rise in the extent of equity
market participation over the past two decades, largely as a result of the growth of mutual funds
and the expansion of IRAs and 401(k) plans. The second issue is the decline in life annuitization
in retirement, arising primarily from the shift away from automatically annuitized DB plans and
towards DC plans. Many defined contribution plans do not offer life annuities as a payout option.
Despite the significance of both equity ownership and annuitization, very little research has
focused on the rapid growth during the last two decades of a class of products known as variable
annuities, which in principle combine equity ownership and an option to annuitize. Variable
annuities were introduced in the mid-1950s to compete with mutual funds. The College
Retirement Equity Fund (CREF) offered the first variable annuity product. The market for variable
annuities remained quite small for several subsequent decades. In the early 1990s, however, the
market began to grow rapidly. The American Council of Life Insurers (1999) reports that between
1990 and 1999, gross sales of individual (non-group) variable annuities rose from $3.5 billion to
$63 billion. More recent data from the National Association for Variable Annuities (2005) suggest
that variable annuity sales have declined since the late 1990s. The NAVA data show 1999 sales of
variable annuities outside pension accounts, almost exclusively individual annuities, of $60 billion,
with a decline to $51.3 billion in 2004. Total variable annuity sales in 2004, combining qualified
account and non-qualified account sales, totaled $129.7 billion. Sales to qualified accounts were
2

slightly less than forty percent of the market. Sales of fixed annuities, the annuity products that are
most often the subject of economic analysis, totaled $89 billion in 2004. Total assets invested in
variable annuity products amounted to $1.12 trillion at the end of 2004, compared with $532
billion in fixed annuities.
Individuals may demand variable annuities for at least three, not necessarily exclusive,
reasons. The first is a desire to accumulate wealth at favorable after-tax rates of return. Interest,
dividends, and capital gains that accrue on assets held in variable annuity accounts are not taxed
until the policyholder receives variable annuity payouts. This provides policyholders with the tax
benefits of "inside build up," just as in IRAs and 401(k) plans. Gentry and Milano (1998) use both
cross-state variation in income tax rates and time series variation in federal rates between 1984 and
1993 to study how taxes affect variable annuity demand. They find that aggregate sales of variable
annuities are positively correlated with state marginal income tax rates, suggesting that variable
annuities are purchased in part to avoid the tax burden on investments in traditional taxable
accounts. At the time of their study, there was no publicly-available household survey data on
variable annuity ownership.
A second potential attraction of variable annuities is their insurance component. Variable
annuity contracts offer various forms of insurance. A common provision specifies that if the
policyholder dies before retirement, heirs receive at least the nominal value of the policy
contributions. Milevsky and Posner (2001) use risk-neutral option pricing to value the guaranteed
minimum death benefit in variable annuities, and they conclude that in most cases the value of this
insurance is quite small. However, many variable annuity contracts offer additional insurance
features. We are not aware of any study that examines whether investor characteristics, such as
self-reported risk aversion, can explain variable annuity demand.
3