NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ESTIMATING THE INTERTEMPORAL RISK-RETURN
TRADEOFF USING THE IMPLIED COST OF CAPITAL
Lubos Pastor
Meenakshi Sinha
Bhaskaran Swaminthan
Working Paper 11941
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11941
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2006
Pastor is Professor of Finance at the Graduate School of Business at the University of Chicago,
Faculty Research Fellow at the NBER, and Research Affiliate at the CEPR. Sinha is Research
Associate at Cornerstone Research. Swaminathan is Director of Research at LSV Asset Management
and Professor of Finance at the Johnson Graduate School of Management at Cornell University.
Email: lubos.pastor@ChicagoGSB.edu, ms233@cornell.edu, bswamina@johnson.cornell.edu.
Helpful comments were gratefully received from George Constantinides, Doug Diamond, Gene
Fama, Toby Moskowitz, Rob Stambaugh, Pietro Veronesi, Robert Whitelaw, Franco Wong, and the
audiences at the University of Chicago and at the 2005 meetings of the Western Finance Association.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Lubos Pastor, Meenakshi Sinha, and Bhaskaran Swaminathan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Estimating the Intertemporal Risk-Return Tradeoff Using the Implied Cost of Capital
Lubos Pastor, Meenakshi Sinha, and Bhaskaran Swaminathan
NBER Working Paper No. 11941
January 2006
JEL No. G1
ABSTRACT
We reexamine the time-series relation between the conditional mean and variance of stock market
returns. To proxy for the conditional mean return, we use the implied cost of capital, computed using
analyst forecasts. The usefulness of this proxy is shown in simulations. In empirical analysis, we
construct the time series of the implied cost of capital for the G-7 countries. We find strong support
for a positive intertemporal mean-variance relation at both the country level and the world market
level. Some of our evidence is consistent with international integration of the G-7 financial markets.
Lubos Pastor
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
lubos.pastor@chicagogsb.edu
Meenakshi Sinha
Cornerstone Research
msinha@cornerstone.com
Bhaskaran Swaminathan
Cornell University
bswamina@johnson.cornell.edu

1. Introduction
Thetradeoff betweenriskand returnisacentralconceptinfinance. Financetheorygenerally
predicts a positive risk-return relation, both across assets and over time. For example,
the intertemporal capital asset pricing model of Merton (1973) predicts a positive time-
series relation between the conditional mean and variance of market returns. However, the
empirical evidence on the sign of the intertemporal risk-return relation is inconclusive.1
To explain the mixed nature of the evidence, some researchers have shown that the
intertemporal mean-variance relation need not be positive theoretically (e.g., Abel (1988),
Backus and Gregory (1993), and Whitelaw (2000)). Others have argued that a positive
mean-variance relation emerges when the empirical specification includes hedging demands
(e.g., Scruggs (1998) and Guo and Whitelaw (2005)). Yet others argue that the relation
is highly sensitive to the way conditional variance is measured (e.g., Harvey (2001), Wang
(2004), and Ghysels, Santa-Clara, and Valkanov (2005)). For example, Ghysels et al. state
that “the main difficulty in testing the ICAPM relation is that the conditional variance of
the market is not observable,” and that “the conflicting findings of the above studies are
mostly due to differences in the approach to modeling the conditional variance.”
While estimating the conditional variance of market returns is clearly important, to us,
estimatingtheconditionalmeanreturnseemsnolessimportant. Firstmomentsofreturnsare
generally more difficult to estimate than second moments (Merton (1980)). The conditional
mean return is sometimes estimated by projecting future returns onto a set of conditioning
variables.2 The results produced by this approach tend to be sensitive to the choice of the
conditioning variables (Harvey, 2001). Another popular estimate of the conditional mean
return in this literature is the realized future return.3 Although realized returns provide
unbiased estimates of expected returns, they are notoriously noisy. For example, Elton
(1999) argues that “realized returns are a very poor measure of expectedreturns.” Lundblad
(2005) shows that when realized returns proxy for expected returns, a very long sample is
needed to detect a positive risk-return relation in simulations.
1Some studies find a positive relation (e.g., Scruggs (1998), Ghysels, Santa-Clara, and Valkanov (2005),
Lundblad (2005)), but others find a negative relation (e.g., Campbell (1987), Turner, Startz, and Nelson
(1989),Glosten,Jagannathan,andRunkle(1993),Harvey(2001),Lettau andLudvigson(2003),Brandtand
Kang(2004)),andyet others findeither nosignificantrelationormixedevidence (e.g.,French,Schwert, and
Stambaugh (1987), Baillie and DeGennaro (1990), Nelson (1991), Campbell and Hentschel (1992), Chan,
Karolyi,and Stulz (1992), Whitelaw (1994,2000)).
2See, for example,Campbell (1987),Harvey (2001),Whitelaw(1994),andLettau and Ludvigson(2003).
3See,forexample,French,Schwert,andStambaugh(1987),BaillieandDeGennaro(1990),Nelson(1991),
Chan, Karolyi, and Stulz (1992), Glosten, Jagannathan, and Runkle (1993), De Santis and Imrohologlu
(1997), Scruggs (1998), Ghysels, Santa-Clara, and Valkanov(2005), and Lundblad (2005).
1

This paper reexamines the conditional mean-variance relation using a different proxy for
the conditional expected return: the implied cost of capital. The implied cost of capital for
a given asset is the discount rate (or internal rate of return) that equates the asset’s market
value to the present value of all expected future cash flows. One appealing feature of this
proxy is that it does not rely on realized asset returns. Estimating expected return using
the implied cost of capital is increasingly popular in the finance literature. For example,
Friend, Westerfield, and Granito (1978), Kaplan and Ruback (1995), Gebhardt, Lee, and
Swaminathan (2001), Brav, Lehavy, and Michaely (2003), and Lee, Ng, and Swaminathan
(2003) compute the implied costs of capital for a cross section of firms. Claus and Thomas
(2001) and Fama and French (2002) use similar approaches to estimate the expected return
for the marketportfolio. To our knowledge, the impliedcost of capital has not yet been used
to analyze the relation between the conditional mean and variance of stock returns.
We begin by deriving some general analytical results about the implied cost of capital.
We show that if dividend growth follows an AR(1) process, the implied cost of capital is a
linear function of the dividend yield and dividend growth. If, in addition, the conditional
expected return also follows an AR(1) process, then the implied cost of capital is perfectly
correlated with the conditional expected return over time. Therefore, the implied cost of
capital should be useful in capturing time variation in expected returns.
We conduct simulations to analyze the usefulness of the implied cost of capital in esti-
mating the intertemporal risk-return tradeoff. First, we design a simple framework in which
the conditional mean and variance of stock returns are positively related. We simulate the
time series of the conditional moments and compare the ability of various proxies for the
conditional mean to detect the positive mean-variance relation. We show that the relation
is much easier to detect using the implied cost of capital than using realized returns.
Importantly, the implied cost of capital outperforms realized returns even in the absence
of information about dividend growth. In that case, the implied cost of capital is perfectly
correlated with the dividend-price ratio, so its changes are driven mostly by changes in the
stock price: increases in the stock price are accompanied by declines in the implied cost
of capital, and vice versa. Therefore, the ability of the implied cost of capital to detect a
positive mean-variance relation in that case stems from the fact that price changes tend to
be accompanied by variance changes in the opposite direction. As long as price changes are
to some extent driven by changes in expected returns, the implied cost of capital should be
positively related to the conditional variance. In line with this intuition, we find that the
correlation betweenthe impliedcost of capital and the conditional variance is high especially
2