NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IS THERE HEDGE FUND CONTAGION?
Nicole M. Boyson
Christof W. Stahel
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 12090
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12090
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2006
Boyson is at Northeastern University, Stahel is at George Mason University, and Stulz is at The Ohio State
University, NBER, and ECGI. Corresponding author is Stulz: stulz@cob.osu.edu, (614) 292-1970. We wish
to thank participants in seminars at the University of Kansas and Bentley College. We also wish to thank
Jake Vukelic at Standard and Poor’s and Lisa Martin at Hedge Fund Research for assistance regarding their
firms’ products. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Nicole M. Boyson, Christof W. Stahel and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Is There Hedge Fund Contagion?
Nicole M. Boyson, Christof W. Stahel and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 12090
March 2006
JEL No. G11, G12, G18
ABSTRACT
We examine whether hedge funds experience contagion. First, we consider whether extreme
movements in equity, fixed income, and currency markets are contagious to hedge funds. Second,
we investigate whether extreme adverse returns in one hedge fund style are contagious to other hedge
fund styles. To conduct this examination, we estimate binomial and multinomial logit models of
contagion using daily returns on hedge fund style indices as well as monthly returns on indices with
a longer history. Our main finding is that there is no evidence of contagion from equity, fixed
income, and foreign exchange markets to hedge funds, except for weak evidence of contagion for
one single daily hedge fund style index. By contrast, we find strong evidence of contagion across
hedge fund styles, so that hedge fund styles tend to have poor coincident returns.
Nicole M. Boyson
Northeastern University
n.boyson@neu.edu
Christof W. Stahel
George Mason University
cstahel@gmu.edu
René M. Stulz
Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu

Assets managed by hedge funds have grown tremendously, with more than $1 trillion in assets under
management in the United States alone.1 This growth has led regulators to become concerned about the
risks that hedge funds might create for the financial system. Hedge funds could create systemic risk if
normal relations between hedge funds and financial markets break down when financial markets perform
poorly, and the probability of extreme negative returns for hedge funds when financial markets
experience extreme negative returns is much higher than could be predicted based on correlations
between hedge funds and financial markets. Paradoxically, however, a major reason for the tremendous
growth in assets managed by hedge funds is that investors believe these funds offer a valuable source of
diversification because of low correlations between hedge fund returns and returns on other asset classes.
For example, in a 2003 survey of institutional pension managers sponsored by State Street Global
Advisors, 77% of the respondents cited diversification as an “important” or “extremely important” reason
for including hedge funds in a portfolio.2 If there is contagion between hedge funds and financial
markets, the diversification benefit of investing in hedge funds would be least valuable when it is needed
most, i.e., when financial markets in general perform poorly. In this paper, we investigate whether there is
contagion between hedge funds and financial markets and within the hedge fund sector.
Studies have shown that hedge fund returns do not follow a normal distribution, that they tend to be
heavily skewed, and that their correlations with risk factors are not stationary.3 It is well-known that
correlation is a poor measure of dependence under such conditions (see, e.g., Embrecht, McNeil, and
Straumann, 2002). Consequently, the correlations that play a central role in modern portfolio theory can
1 A survey by Hedge Fund Manager magazine and Advent Software administered in November, 2005, which
included 44 hedge fund administrators, indicated that assets of about $1.3 trillion are managed by U.S. hedge funds.
The total assets under management worldwide is estimated at over $2 trillion. See full results at:
http://www.advent.com/collateral/HFMAdventNOV2006surveyfinal.pdf
2 Survey was administered by InvestorForce and included 111 large pension sponsors. See full results at:
http://www.investorforce.com/images/flonetwork/Hedge_Fund_Survey_2003.pdf.
3 See, for example, Agarwal and Naik (2000), Amin and Kat (2004), Bacmann and Gawron (2004), Brealey and
Kaplanis (2001), Chan, Getmansky, Haas, and Lo (2005), Fung and Hsieh (1997, 1999, 2001), Geman and Karoubi
(2003), Getmansky, Lo, and Makarov (2004) and Lo (2002).
2

lead to misleading inferences about the risk of hedge fund investments and the systemic risks created by
the growth of the hedge fund industry.
The most worrisome weakness of correlation, given the properties of hedge fund returns, is that it
fails to adequately capture contagion if contagion is present. By contagion, we mean the phenomenon
that regardless of the general correlation between assets, during bad times these assets tend to move
together more closely than could be predicted using correlations. Hence, contagion measures a nonlinear
effect that is not captured by correlation. For instance, during periods of contagious emerging market
crises, there is a greater probability that many markets perform poorly which is not what one would
expect if relying solely on correlations (see, for instance, Bae, Karolyi, and Stulz, 2003, hereafter BKS).
The possibility of contagion from traditional asset classes to hedge funds as well as between hedge
funds is important for investors, for risk managers, and for regulators. If there is a high probability of
contagion from traditional asset classes to hedge funds, the diversification benefits of hedge funds do not
extend to periods of extremely poor returns in traditional asset classes. If there is a high probability of
contagion within the hedge fund sector, diversification across hedge fund styles does not offer good
protection against extremely poor returns in a specific style. Further, there should be more of a concern
of systemic risk from hedge funds if there is contagion between hedge fund styles, because in bad times a
significant number of hedge funds will perform poorly.
Our paper contributes to a large and growing literature on the exposure of hedge funds to risk factors.
A number of studies, including Fung and Hsieh (1997, 1999, 2001), Brown, Goetzmann and Ibbotson
(1999), Ackermann, McEnally and Ravenscraft (1999), Liang (1999), and Agarwal and Naik (2000,
2004), have examined the relationship between hedge fund returns and broad market returns. The studies
that focus on linear measures of association, such as beta, generally find a weak relationship between
market returns and hedge fund returns. However, when studies relax the assumption of linearity, a more
complicated relationship is uncovered. For example, Edwards and Caglayan (2001) examine performance
in up and down markets, and show that, on average, hedge funds have stronger positive correlations with
3