NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CEO TURNOVER AND RELATIVE PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
Dirk Jenter
Fadi Kanaan
Working Paper 12068
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12068
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2006
We thank Nittai Bergman, Robert Gibbons, David McAdams, Andrew Bernard, François Degeorge, Diego
Garcia, Rafael LaPorta, Jonathan Lewellen, Katharina Lewellen, Kalina Manova, Antoinette Schoar, Karin
Thorburn, Joel Vanden, Eric Van den Steen, Kent Womack, and seminar participants at MIT Sloan, the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and the Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth for their
comments and suggestions. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Dirk Jenter and Fadi Kanaan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

CEO Turnover and Relative Performance Evaluation
Dirk Jenter and Fadi Kanaan
NBER Working Paper No. 12068
February 2006
JEL No. G30, G34, D20, D23, M51
ABSTRACT
This paper examines whether CEOs are fired after bad firm performance caused by factors beyond
their control. Standard economic theory predicts that corporate boards filter out exogenous industry
and market shocks to firm performance when deciding on CEO retention. Using a new hand-
collected sample of 1,590 CEO turnovers from 1993 to 2001, we document that CEOs are
significantly more likely to be dismissed from their jobs after bad industry and bad market
performance. A decline in the industry component of firm performance from its 75th to its 25th
percentile increases the probability of a forced CEO turnover by approximately 50 percent. This
finding is robust to controls for firm-specific performance. The result is at odds with the prior
empirical literature which showed that corporate boards filter exogenous shocks from CEO dismissal
decisions in samples from the 1970s and 1980s. Our findings suggest that the standard CEO turnover
model is too simple to capture the empirical relation between performance and forced CEO
turnovers, and we evaluate several extensions to the standard model.
Dirk Jenter
MIT Sloan School of Management
E52-446
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
djenter@mit.edu
Fadi Kanaan
MIT Sloan School of Management
E52-442
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
fadi@mit.edu

The decision whether to retain or fire an incumbent CEO after bad stock price or accounting
performance is one of the most important decisions made by corporate boards. Standard
economic theory suggests that in assessing the quality of its CEO the board of directors should
ignore components of firm performance which are caused by factors beyond the CEO’s control.
Previous studies that have examined the relation between (arguably exogenous) market or
industry shocks and CEO turnover have found evidence largely consistent with this hypothesis.
Using a larger data set of CEO dismissals over a more recent time period and an improved
methodology, we find to the contrary that CEOs are significantly more likely to be fired after
negative performance shocks to their peer group.
In a newly assembled data set of 1,206 voluntary and 384 forced CEO turnovers in 2,548 firms
from 1993 to 2001, we document that low industry stock returns and low market returns
significantly increase the likelihood of forced CEO turnovers. A decline in the industry
component of firm performance from its 75th to its 25th percentile increases the probability of a
forced CEO turnover by approximately 50 percent. There is some evidence that boards partially
filter industry and market performance from their assessment of CEO quality, but the extent of
this filtering is too limited to remove most of the peer performance effect. We conclude that
boards fail to fully filter exogenous shocks to firm performance from their CEO retention
decisions.
We document more effective filtering of more visible indicators of outside performance, such as
the performance of the value-weighted market index, suggesting that boards may use some rule-
of-thumb relative performance evaluation when assessing CEO quality. We also find that the
effect of peer group performance on CEO dismissals is almost entirely concentrated on CEOs
who underperform their peer group. CEOs who outperform their peer group are not affected by
worsening industry or market performance. Finally, we document that firm-specific performance
affects CEO dismissals most strongly when the peer group is not doing well. The evidence is
consistent with the hypothesis that performance in recessions is more informative about CEO
quality than performance in booms, and with the hypothesis that boards mistakenly credit or
blame CEOs for performance caused by factors beyond their control.
2

Our empirical results contrast with the small prior literature on the relationship between peer
group performance and CEO turnover. Warner, Watts, and Wruck (1988) examine CEO turnover
from 1963 to 1978 and find that stock returns relative to the overall market are a better predictor
of CEO dismissals than absolute performance. The results involving lagged returns are
ambiguous, and they find no evidence that industry shocks are filtered from the CEO dismissal
decision. Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1989) examine turnovers of entire top management teams
between 1980 and 1985 and find such turnovers equally likely to occur in troubled and in healthy
industries, suggesting that industry shocks are filtered from the dismissal decision. Barro and
Barro (1990) find evidence similarly consistent with complete filtering of peer performance in a
sample of CEO turnovers in commercial banks from 1982 to 1987. All three studies are based on
small samples, with 43 forced CEO turnovers in Warner et al., 93 cases of internally precipitated
turnover in Morck et al., and 51 bank CEO turnovers in Barro and Barro. Gibbons and Murphy
(1990), on the other hand, examine a large sample of 1,000 CEO successions over the 1974 to
1986 period and find strong evidence that both market-wide shocks and industry shocks are
filtered from stock price performance for the CEO dismissal decision. In summary, most of the
evidence from previous studies supports the hypothesis that corporate boards filter industry and
market shocks from firm performance when deciding whether to fire their CEO.1
Agency theory shows that there are benefits associated with evaluating agents on the basis of
their relative performances whenever agents’ performances are affected by common shocks
(Holmström (1979, 1982), Diamond and Verrechia (1982)). Most of the theoretical literature
modeling the CEO dismissal decision envisions a situation in which the corporate board learns
from firm performance and other public and private signals about the quality of its current CEO.2
If the board’s assessment of CEO quality falls below some threshold, often equal to the expected
quality of a replacement manager, then the board dismisses the CEO. Since CEO quality does
not change as a function of the business cycle in these models, it follows directly that efficient
boards do not force out more CEOs in down markets than in up markets. More generally, boards
1 Warner, Watts, and Wruck (1988), Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1989), and Gibbons and Murphy (1990) do not
formally test whether market or industry returns are completely filtered from firm performance for the management
dismissal decisions. Barro and Barro (1990) do perform a formal test and find results consistent with complete
filtering, with the caveat that their test imposes the assumption that firms have a stock return beta of one with respect
to the benchmark return.
2 See, for example, Hirshleifer and Thakor (1994, 1998), Hermalin and Weisbach (1998, 2003), Warther (1998),
Goldman, Hazarika, and Shivdasani (2003), Adams and Ferreira (2005), and Hermalin (2005).
3