NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE DOG THAT DID NOT BARK:
A DEFENSE OF RETURN PREDICTABILITY
John H. Cochrane
Working Paper 12026
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12026
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2006
University of Chicago GSB and NBER. Address: Graduate School of Business, 5807 S. Woodlawn, Chicago
IL 60637, 773 702 3059, john.cochrane@chicagogsb.edu. I acknowledge research support from CRSP and
from a NSF grant administered by the NBER. I thank Alan Bester, John Campbell, John Heaton, Lars
Hansen, Anil Kashyap and Ivo Welch for very helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by John H. Cochrane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Dog That Did Not Bark: A Defense of Return Predictability
John H. Cochrane
NBER Working Paper No. 12026
February 2006, Revised June 2006
JEL No. G0, G1
ABSTRACT
To question the statistical significance of return predictability, we cannot specify a null that simply
turns off that predictability, leaving dividend growth predictability at its essentially zero sample
value. If neither returns nor dividend growth are predictable, then the dividend-price ratio is a
constant. If the null turns off return predictability, it must turn on the predictability of dividend
growth, and then confront the evidence against such predictability in the data. I find that the absence
of dividend growth predictability gives much stronger statistical evidence against the null, with
roughly 1-2% probability values, than does the presence of return predictability, which only gives
about 20% probability values. I argue that tests based on long-run return and dividend growth
regressions provide the cleanest and most interpretable evidence on return predictability, again
delivering about 1-2% probability values against the hypothesis that returns are unpredictable. I show
that Goyal and Welch's (2005) finding of poor out-of-sample R² does not reject return forecastability.
Out-of-sample R² is poor even if all dividend yield variation comes from time-varying expected
returns.
John H. Cochrane
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
john.cochrane@gsb.uchicago.edu

1 Introduction
Are stock returns predictable? Table 1 presents regressions of the real and excess value-weighted
stock return on its dividend-price ratio, in annual data. In contrast to the simple “random
walk” view, stock returns do seem predictable. Similar or stronger forecasts result from many
variations of the right and left hand variables and in postwar data.
Regression b t R2(%) σ(bx)(%)
R =a+b(D /P )+ε 3.39 2.28 5.8 4.9
t+1 t t t+1
R Rf =a+b(D /P )+ε 3.83 2.61 7.4 5.6
t+1 t t t t+1
−
D /D =a+b(D /P )+ε 0.07 0.06 0.0001 0.001
t+1 t t t t+1
r =a +b (d p )+ε 0.097 1.92 4.0 4.0
t+1 r r t t t+1
−
∆d =a +b (d p )+ε 0.008 0.18 0.00 0.003
t+1 d d t t t+1
−
Table 1. Forecasting regressions. R is the real return, deflated by the CPI,
t+1
D /D is real dividend growth, and D /P is the dividend-price ratio of the CRSP
t+1 t t t
value-weighted portfolio.
Rf
is the real return on three-month Treasury Bills.
t+1
Smalllettersarelogsofcorrespondingcapitalletters. Annualdata,1926-2004. σ(bx)
gives the standard deviation of the fitted value of the regression.
Economic Significance
The estimates in Table 1 have very large economic significance. The standard deviation of
expected returns in the last column of Table 1 is about 5 percentage points, almost as large
as the 7.7% level of the equity premium in this sample. Thus, the equity premium varies over
time by as much as its unconditional mean. The 4% to 7% R2 do not look that impressive, but,
as emphasized by Fama and French (1988), the R2 rises with horizon, reaching values between
30 and 60 percent, depending on time period and estimation details. The coefficient of over
three in the top two rows means that when dividend yields rise one percentage point, prices
rise another two percentage points on average, rather than declining one percentage point to
offset the extra dividends. Finally, pricesvary ifexpected returns (discountrates)vary, and the
return forecastability shown in Table 1 neatly accounts for all variation in stock prices scaled by
dividends. (I present the calculation below). In place of the traditional view that price-dividend
ratios rise on news of higher future dividends, or the skeptics’ claim that bubbles are needed
to account for price volatility, the regressions of Table 1 imply that all variation in market
price-dividend ratios corresponds to changes in expected excess returns, i.e. risk premiums.
Statistical Significance
However, the statistical significance of the first row of Table 1 is marginal, with a t-statistic
only a bit above two. And the ink was hardly dry on the first studies1 to run regressions
like those of Table 1 before a large literature sprang up examining their econometric properties
and questioning that statistical significance. The right hand variable (dividend yield) is very
persistent,andreturnshocksarenegativelycorrelatedwithdividendyieldshocks,sinceachange
in prices moves both variables. As a result, the return-forecast regression inherits the near-unit-
root properties of the dividend yield. The coefficient is biased upward, and the t-statistic is
biased towards rejection.
1Rozeff (1984), Shiller (1984), Keim and Stambaugh (1986), Campbell and Shiller (1988), and Fama and
French (1988).
2

Goetzmann and Jorion (1993) and Nelson and Kim (1993) found the distribution of the
return-forecasting coefficient by simulation, and they found that the statistical significance of
return-forecasting coefficients is much lower than the t-statistics of Table 1 would lead one to
believe. Most clearly, Stambaugh (1999) derived the finite-sample distribution of the return-
forecasting regression, showing analytically the bias in the return forecast coefficient and the
finite-sample standard errors. In monthly regressions, Stambaugh found that in place of OLS
p-values of 6% (1927-1996) and 2% (1952-1996), the correct p-values are 17% and 15% — the
regressions are far from statistically significant at conventional levels.2
Does this evidence mean return forecastability is dead? No, and the key is in the dividend
growth regressions of Table 1. Dividends are clearly not forecastable at all. In fact, the small
point estimates have the wrong sign — a high dividend yield means a low price, which should
signal lower, not higher, future dividend growth.
If both returns and dividend growth are unforecastable, then present value logic implies that
the price/dividend ratio is a constant, which it surely is not. Alternatively (in cointegration
language), since the dividend yield is stationary, one of dividend growth or price growth must
be forecastable to bring the dividend yield back following a shock. We cannot just ask “Are
returns forecastable?” We must ask “which of dividend growth or returns is forecastable?” (Or
really, “how much of each?”)
Therefore, if we want to set up a null hypothesis in which returns are not forecastable,
that null hypothesis must also specify dividend growth that is forecastable, and the statistical
evaluationofthatnullmustalsoconfrontthelack ofdividend-growthforecastabilityinthedata.
I set up such a null, and I evaluate the joint distribution of return and dividend-growth
forecasting coefficients. I confirm that the return forecasting coefficient, taken alone, is not
significant, as Stambaugh and others find. Under the unforecastable-return null, we see return
forecast coefficients as large or larger than those in the data about 20% of the time. However,
I find that the absence of dividend growth forecastability offers much more significant evidence
against the null. The best overall number is a 1-2% probability value (last row of Table 5) — we
only see dividend growth that fails to be forecastable in 1-2% of the samples generated under
the null. The important evidence, as in Sherlock Holmes’ famous case, is the dog that does not
bark.3
Equivalent Views and Long-Run Regressions
There are several equivalent ways of stating the same point, and I connect them. They stem
from the approximate identity (derived below),
b =1 ρφ+b , (1)
r d
−
where b is the regression coefficient of log returns on the log dividend yield, b is the coefficient
r d
of log dividend growth on the log dividend yield, φ is the dividend yield autocorrelation, and
ρ 0.96 is a constant. This identity holds in each sample as well as for population moments.
≈
2Additionalcontributionsinclude KothariandShanken(1997),PayeandTimmermann(2003),Torous,Valka-
nov and Yan(2004) and Ang andBekaert (2005).
3Inspector Gregory: “Isthereany other point to whichyouwouldwish to draw my attention?”
Holmes: “To the curious incident of the dog inthe night-time.”
“Thedog did nothing inthe nighttime.”
“That was thecuriousincident.”
From“The Adventure of Silver Blaze” by Arthur ConanDoyle
3