NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ARE PRUDENTIAL SUPERVISION AND REGULATION
PILLARS OF FINANCIAL STABILITY? EVIDENCE FROM
THE GREAT DEPRESSION
Kris James Mitchener
Working Paper 12074
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12074
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2006
A version of this paper is forthcoming in the Journal of Law and Economics. I am grateful for comments
and suggestions provided by Brad DeLong, Barry Eichengreen, Cristian Echeverria, Dwight Jaffee, Joe
Mason, Darren Lubotsky, Martha Olney, Mark Rodini, Christina Romer, and Sally Woodhouse as well as
seminar participants at the University of Adelaide, the Bank for International Settlements, Bocconi
University, Santa Clara University, Trinity University, Wellesley College, the Federal Reserve Banks of
Boston and New York, and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2006 by Kris James Mitchener. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Are Prudential Supervision and Regulation Pillars of Financial Stability? Evidence from the
Great Depression
Kris James Mitchener
NBER Working Paper No. 12074
March 2006
JEL No. N2, E44, G21
ABSTRACT
Drawing on the variation in financial distress across U.S. states during the Great Depression, this
article suggests how bank supervision and regulation affected banking stability during the Great
Depression. In response to well-organized interest groups and public concern over the bank failures
of the 1920s, many U.S. states adopted supervisory and regulatory standards that undermined the
stability of state banking systems in the 1930s. Those states that prohibited branch banking, had
higher reserve requirements, granted their supervisors longer term lengths, or restricted the ability
of supervisors to liquidate banks quickly experienced higher state bank suspension rates from 1929
to 1933.
Kris James Mitchener
Department of Economics
Leavey School of Business
Santa Clara University
Santa Clara, CA 95053
and NBER
kmitchener@scu.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
Costly banking crises in both developing and industrial economies over the past several
decades have rekindled interest in understanding how supervisory and regulatory structures affect
the stability of banking systems.1 Led by the Basel Committee, policymakers have responded by
providing a blueprint for harmonizing banking supervision throughout the world.2 What has been
slower to emerge is a consensus on how bank supervision and regulation affect financial stability,
and which supervisory practices or quantitative rules, in particular, promote or discourage
financial stability. Analysis has been hampered in part by the difficulty of assembling data with
sufficient cross-sectional variation to test competing theories.3
Prudential regulation was also of interest to policymakers of the 1930s, when there were
significant banking crises both within and across countries.4 In the United States, for example,
over a third of all commercial banks suspended operations. What is less appreciated is the degree
to which banking distress varied across U.S. states (Figure 1), and the extent to which state
banking departments had established different prudential regimes. State banking departments and
legislatures, acting independently of one another, had instituted their own reserve and capital
requirements and branching laws for state-chartered banks. And in contrast to national banks
(which had a uniform system of supervision operating through the Office of the Comptroller of
Currency), state banking departments differed significantly in terms of the quality of their
supervision and their authority to charter and liquidate state-chartered banks.
1 For a discussion of prudential standards, see Folkerts-Landau and Lindgren (1998) and Herring and Litan
(1995). For discussion of recent crises, see Caprio and Klingebiel (1996).
2 The Basel Committee’s “Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision” outlines 25 basic standards
relating to preconditions for effective supervision, licensing and structure, prudential regulation and
requirements, methods of ongoing supervision, information requirements, formal powers of supervisors,
and cross-border banking.
3 Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001a) have assembled invaluable data on recent regulatory and supervisory
practices across 170 countries. However, since much of the data post-date the financial crises of the last
two decades, the ability to test and quantify how supervision and regulation affect financial stability is
somewhat limited (Barth, Caprio, and Levine, 2001b, p.31). Rossi (1999) has also examined these issues
for a small sample of 15 developing countries.
4 Friedman and Schwartz (1963), Bernanke and James (1991), and Grossman (1994). For a discussion of
prudential regulation from the 1930s, see Study Commission for Indiana Financial Institutions (1932).
1

Drawing on this rich cross-sectional and time-series variation of U.S. states, this article
examines whether differences in prudential supervision and regulation help account for the
regional variation in state bank suspension rates and the shares of total assets and deposits in
suspended institutions during the Great Depression. In contrast to previous research that has not
addressed the role of bank supervision (Grossman 1994; Wheelock 1995; Wicker 1996), this
paper utilizes a new historical data set with information on the authority and quality of state
banking departments, as well as data on prudential regulations and branching laws, to test
explicitly both pillars of the institutional environment. Since supervision and regulation work
together to influence bank behavior and systemic stability (Mishkin 2001), estimating both
factors reduces the likelihood of omitted variables bias and provides greater insight into how the
overall policy environment affected financial stability.
Examining the variation in financial distress across states rather than countries may also
produce better empirical estimates of the effects of bank regulation and supervision on financial
stability. First, they may be less susceptible to omitted variables bias since countries likely differ
in additional ways (other than supervision and regulation) that influence financial fragility.
Second, even if observable differences such as financial development, legal systems, and political
systems can be accounted for, differences in financial stability due to unobservable characteristics
will also likely be more pronounced for countries than for states. Using state data thus mitigates
the problem of unobserved heterogeneity. Third, accounting for the simultaneity between
financial instability and economic conditions is a thorny estimation that is made more tractable in
the context of the U.S. dual banking system. National bank failure rates can be used to control for
shocks affecting all banks within a state since they were uniformly supervised and regulated by
the Office of the Comptroller of Currency.
The analysis also places the regulatory environment squarely in the context of politics
and history in order to analyze both the causes and consequences of state bank regulation during
the Great Depression. In the spirit of recent research emphasizing how bank regulations are
produced (for example, Kroszner and Strahan 1999, 2001), competing theories of regulation are
2