NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCIAL CONSTRAINTS, ASSET TANGIBILITY,
AND CORPORATE INVESTMENT
Heitor Almeida
Murillo Campello
Working Paper 12087
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12087
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2006
We thank Matias Braun, Charlie Calomiris, Glenn Hubbard (NBER discussant), Owen Lamont, Anthony
Lynch, Bob McDonald (the editor), Eli Ofek, Leonardo Rezende, Paola Sapienza, David Scharfstein, Rodrigo
Soares, Sheri Tice, Greg Udell, Belén Villalonga (AFA discussant), Daniel Wolfenzon, and an anonymous
referee for their suggestions. Comments from seminar participants at the AFA meetings (2005), Baruch
College, FGV-Rio, Indiana University, NBER Summer Institute (2003), New York University, and Yale
University are also appreciated. Joongho Han provided support with GAUSS programming. Patrick Kelly
and Sherlyn Lim assisted us with the Census data collection. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Heitor Almeida and Murillo Campello. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Financial Constraints, Asset Tangibility, and Corporate Investment
Heitor Almeida and Murillo Campello
NBER Working Paper No. 12087
March 2006
JEL No. G31
ABSTRACT
When firms are able to pledge their assets as collateral, investment and borrowing become
endogenous: pledgeable assets support more borrowings that in turn allow for further investment in
pledgeable assets. We show that this credit multiplier has an important impact on investment when
firms face credit constraints: investment-cash flow sensitivities are increasing in the degree of
tangibility of constrained firms' assets. If firms are unconstrained, however, investment-cash flow
sensitivities are unaffected by asset tangibility. Crucially, asset tangibility itself may determine
whether a firm faces credit constraints - firms with more tangible assets may have greater access to
external funds. This implies that the relationship between capital spending and cash flows is non-
monotonic in the firm's asset tangibility. Our theory allows us to use a differences-in-differences
approach to identify the effect of financing frictions on corporate investment: we compare the
differential effect of asset tangibility on the sensitivity of investment to cash flow across different
regimes of financial constraints. We implement this testing strategy on a large sample of
manufacturing firms drawn from COMPUSTAT between 1985 and 2000. Our tests allow for the
endogeneity of the firm's credit status, with asset tangibility influencing whether a firm is classified
as credit constrained or unconstrained in a switching regression framework. The data strongly
support our hypothesis about the role of asset tangibility on corporate investment under financial
constraints.
Heitor Almeida Murillo Campello
NYU Stern School of Business University of Illinois
Department of Finance 430 A Wohlers Hall
44 West 4th Street, Room 9-85 1206 South Sixth Street
New York, NY 10012 Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER campello@uiuc.edu
halmeida@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
Whether …nancing frictions in‡uence real investment decisions is a central matter in contemporary
…nance (Stein (2003)). Various theories explore the interplay between …nancing frictions and invest-
ment to study issues ranging from …rm organizational design (e.g., Gertner et al. (1994) and Stein
(1997)) to optimal hedging and cash policies (Froot et al. (1993) and Almeida et al. (2004)). Unfor-
tunately, identifying …nancing–investment interactions in the data is not an easy task. The standard
identi…cationstrategyisbasedonthemethodologyproposedbyFazzarietal. (1988).1 Thoseauthors
argue that the sensitivity of investment to internal funds should increase with the wedge between the
costs of internal and external funds (monotonicity hypothesis). Accordingly, one should be able to
gaugetheimpactofcreditimperfectionsoncorporatespendingbycomparingthesensitivityofinvest-
menttocash‡owacrosssamplesof…rmssortedonproxiesfor…nancingfrictions. Anumberofrecent
papers, however, have questioned the validity of the Fazzari et al. approach. Kaplan and Zingales
(1997) argue that the monotonicity hypothesis is not a necessary implication of optimal investment
under constrained …nancing, and report evidence that contradicts Fazzari et al.’s …ndings. Work
by Erickson and Whited (2000), Gomes (2001), and Alti (2003) further suggests that the patterns
reported by Fazzari et al. are consistent with models in which …nancing frictions play no role.
In this paper, we develop and test a theoretical argument that allows one to identify whether
…nancing imperfections a¤ect …rm investment behavior. We explore the idea that variables that in-
crease a …rm’s ability to contract external …nance may in‡uence observed investment spending when
investment demand is constrained by credit imperfections. One such variable is the tangibility of
a …rm’s assets. Assets that are more tangible sustain more external …nancing, because tangibility
mitigates contractibility problems — asset tangibility increases the value that can be recaptured by
creditors in default states.2 Through a simple contracting model that draws on Kiyotaki and Moore
(1997), we show that investment–cash ‡ow sensitivities will be increasing in the tangibility of con-
strained …rms’assets. In contrast, tangibility willhave no e¤ect on investment–cash ‡owsensitivities
of …nancially unconstrained …rms. Crucially, asset tangibility itself a¤ects the credit status of the
…rm: …rms with very tangible (pledgeable) assets are likely to become unconstrained. This implies
a non-monotonic e¤ect of tangibility on investment–cash ‡ow sensitivities.
Inanutshell,ourtheorypredictsthatatrelativelylowlevelsoftangibility,thesensitivityofinvest-
mentspendingtocash‡owincreaseswithassettangibility. However,thise¤ectceasestoexistathigh
1ApartiallistofpapersthatusetheFazzarietal. methodologyincludesDevereuxandSchiantarelli(1990),Fazzari
and Petersen (1993), Himmelberg and Petersen (1994), Bond and Meghir (1994), Calomiris and Hubbard (1995),
Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1995), and Kadapakkam et al. (1998). See Hubbard (1998) for a comprehensive survey.
2Ourproxiesforassettangibilitydonotmeasuretheratiooftangibletointangibleassetsinthe…rm’sbalancesheet,
but rather gauge the degree of salability or the ease of redeployment of a …rm’s assets by its creditors. Hereinafter,
the term “tangibility”is meant to summarize these characteristics, rather than how hard are a …rm’s assets.
1

levels of tangibility, as highly tangible …rms become …nancially unconstrained. This prediction allows
us to formulate an empirical test of the interplay between …nancial constraints and investment that
usesadi¤erences-in-di¤erencesapproach. Weidentifythee¤ectof…nancingfrictionsoninvestmentby
comparingthedi¤erentiale¤ectofassettangibilityonthesensitivityofinvestmenttocash‡owacross
di¤erent (endogenously determined) regimes of …nancial constraints. In contrast to Kaplan and Zin-
gales(1997),wearguethatinvestment–cash‡owsensitivitiescan beusedasameanstogaugetheim-
pact of …nancing frictions on real investment. However, the conditions under which identi…cation oc-
cursalsosuggestthatinvestment–cash‡owsensitivitiesarenot monotonicallyrelatedtothedegreeof
…nancingconstraints. Inthissense,therelationshipbetweentangibilityandinvestment–cash‡owsen-
sitivities that we identify agrees with Kaplan and Zingales’s critique of the monotonicity hypothesis.
Our empirical approach provides a way to sidestep some of the problems associated with prior
work on …nancial constraints. Because we focus on the di¤erential e¤ect of asset tangibility on
investment–cash ‡ow sensitivities across constrained and unconstrained …rms, it is hard to argue
that our results could be generated by a model with no …nancing frictions in which poor proxies for
investmentopportunities(suchasQ)areemployed(cf. EricksonandWhited(2000)andAlti(2003)).
We recognize that problems with proxy quality might imply a di¤erent bias for the absolute levels
of the estimated investment–cash ‡ow sensitivities across constrained and unconstrained samples.
However, our empirical test focuses on the marginal e¤ect of asset tangibility on investment sensitiv-
ities. In order to generate our hypothesis in a model with frictionless …nancing, one would need to
generate residuals from poor proxies for investment opportunities that have very special properties.
Speci…cally, theseresidualswouldneedtoloadontovariationsinassettangibilitydi¤erentiallyacross
samples of …nancially constrained and unconstrained …rms, and do so precisely along the lines of the
predictions of our theory. We …nd it di¢ cult to articulate a good rationale for such a story. However,
to verify that our empirical results cannot be explained away by mismeasurement and other biases,
our analysis also employs the expectations GMM estimator proposed by Cummins et al. (1999), the
measurement error-consistent estimator of Erickson and Whited (2000), and the Euler-based model
of capital investment of Bond and Meghir (1994).
We test our hypothesis on a large sample of manufacturing …rms drawn from the COMPUSTAT
tapes between 1985 and 2000. We estimate investment equations that resemble those of Fazzari et al.
(1988), butincludeaninteractiontermthatcapturesthee¤ectoftangibilityoninvestment–cash‡ow
sensitivities. These equations are …tted over subsamples that are identi…ed based on the likelihood
that …rms face constrained access to capital markets. Importantly, our main tests do not rely on
standard a priori assignments of …rms into …nancial constraint categories. Instead, we look at cross-
sectional di¤erences in investment using a switching regression approach in which the probability
2