NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LEGAL-POLITICAL FACTORS AND THE
HISTORICAL EVOLUTION OF THE FINANCE-GROWTH LINK
Michael D. Bordo
Peter L. Rousseau
Working Paper 12035
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12035
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2006
This paper was prepared for the first Economic History Panel: Past, Present, and Policy, sponsored by the
CEPR, the Oesterreichische Nationalbank, and Sciences PO and held in Vienna, Austria on September 30-
October 1, 2005. The authors thank Marc Flandreau (the conference organizer), as well as Lee Alston, Naomi
Lamoreaux, Gary Libecap, and participants at the meeting of the program on the Development of the
American Economy held as part of the NBER's 2004 Summer Institute for comments and discussion on an
earlier version of this work. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Michael D. Bordo and Peter L. Rousseau. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Legal-Political Factors and the Historical Evolution of the Finance-Growth Link
Michael D. Bordo and Peter L. Rousseau
NBER Working Paper No. 12035
February 2006
JEL No. E44, F3, N1, N2
ABSTRACT
Recent cross-country investigations of the role of institutional fundamentals such as the protection
of property rights in promoting financial development have extended a literature that has for decades
maintained that financial factors can affect real outcomes. In this paper we pursue this new direction
by considering relationships between finance, growth, legal origin, and political environment in a
historical cross-section of 17 countries covering the period from 1880 to 1997. We find that
relationships between a county's legal origin (i.e., English, French, German, or Scandinavian) and
financial development are roughly consistent with earlier findings but are not persistent. At the same
time, political variables such as proportional representation election systems, frequent elections,
universal female suffrage, and infrequent revolutions or coups seem linked to larger financial sectors
and higher conditional rates of economic growth. Despite the explanatory power of some of our
measures of the deeper "fundamentals," however, a significant part of the growth-enhancing role of
financial development remains unexplained by them.
Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center - Room M27
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bordo@economics.rutgers.edu
Peter L. Rousseau
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
Box 1819 Station B
Nashville, TN 37235
and NBER
peter.l.rousseau@vanderbilt.edu

1. Introduction
A growing literature over the last decade finds strong and robust links between financial
development and subsequent economic growth. Most of the evidence derives from cross-country
studies of as many as 120 countries with data starting in 1960 or later (e.g., King and Levine 1993;
Levine, Loayza, and Beck 2000; Rousseau and Wachtel 2000, among others). And while the
evidence on the direction of causation is certainly not airtight, nor should we expect causation to be
unidirectional in the long run, a number of supporting time series studies offer evidence that finance
does not simply follow growth, but rather leads to it (Demetriades and Hussein 1996; Rousseau and
Wachtel 1998).
A number of economic historians (Gerschenkron 1962; Cameron 1967; Sylla 1969) and
development economists (Goldsmith 1969; McKinnon 1973) have long argued for a central role of
the financial sector in promoting long-run growth but have traditionally studied the question with
individual case studies or comparisons of small groups of countries. Only recently have Rousseau
and Sylla (2003) and Rousseau (2003) applied the tools of modern macroeconomics to examine the
link econometrically over longer periods of history. Though limited in scope by the available data for
countries that would today for the most part be considered “developed” members of the “Atlantic”
economy, these studies suggest that financial factors may have been even more important in
promoting growth in the 17th, 18th and 19th centuries than they are today.
One reason why we might expect financial factors to affect economic growth involves the
deep endogeneity of financial development itself. By this we mean that the extent of finance in a
given country may be linked to institutional preconditions established long before the start of modern
economic growth. A newer literature suggests that the existence of institutions that aid in the
protection of property rights may be among these preconditions (Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson
1

2001). Further, such institutions may be even more deeply linked to the tradition from which a
nation’s legal system emerged (La Porta et al., 1997, 1998; Beck and Levine 2002, 2004).
Though the more recent studies are appealing from a theoretical perspective, the problem of
measuring the willingness and ability to enforce “property rights” is a serious one. Acemoglu et al.
(2001) employ the mortality rate of European troops in various colonies as a measure of the
mortality rates of actual settlers, and then argue that this is also a good proxy for the protection of
property rights. Though this may at first glance seem to be a weak instrument, it actually performs
very well in explaining a significant part of the variation in per capita incomes today. La Porta et al.
(1997) use dummy variables to distinguish countries by their legal tradition (i.e., distinguishing the
English common law tradition from French, German, or Scandinavian civil law traditions). These
indicators explain a considerable amount of today’s cross-country variation in financial development
for a wide cross-section of developed and developing countries. With either approach, however, it is
possible that the proxies used to reflect the deeper fundamental also capture the combined role of
other factors not related to the protection of property rights.
In this paper, we take the historical analysis of Rousseau and Sylla (2003) as a starting point
for exploring the importance of these deeper fundamentals in fostering financial development and
economic growth. Among the fundamentals that we consider are legal origin as classified by La
Porta et al. (1997) and characteristics of the political environment. We include the latter because
more stable and democratic governments should provide more stable monetary arrangements and
greater protection of property rights than less democratic or unstable ones. We then ask how much of
long-run growth can be explained by the residual component of financial development (i.e., the part
not related to predetermined legal-political factors).
Our priors come from the economic history story told by Sylla (2002) and the earlier
2