NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECTS OF ENTRY ON INCUMBENT
INNOVATION AND PRODUCTIVITY
Philippe Aghion
Richard Blundell
Rachel Griffith
Peter Howitt
Susanne Prantl
Working Paper 12027
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12027
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2006
We are grateful to Fiona Scott-Morton, Francis Kramarz, Stephen Redding, Helen Simpson and seminar
participants at Brown University, IFS, Stanford GSB, Yale University and NBER, the Zvi Griliches
conference in Paris, the EEA conference and ES World Congress for useful comments and suggestions. This
work contains statistical data from the ONS which is Crown Copyright and reproduced with the permission
of the controller of HMSO and Queen‘s Printer for Scotland (under license number C02W002702). The use
of the ONS statistical data in this work does not imply the endorsement of the ONS in relation to the
interpretation or analysis of the statistical data. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Philippe Aghion, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griffith, Peter Howitt and Susanne Prantl. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effects of Entry on Incumbent Innovation and Productivity
Philippe Aghion, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griffith, Peter Howitt and Susanne Prantl
NBER Working Paper No. 12027
February 2006
JEL No. E2
ABSTRACT
How does firm entry affect innovation incentives and productivity growth in incumbent firms?
Micro-data suggests that there is heterogeneity across industries--incumbents in technologically
advanced industries react positively to foreign firm entry, but not in laggard industries. To explain
this pattern, we introduce entry into a Schumpeterian growth model with multiple sectors which
differ by their distance to the technological frontier. We show that technologically advanced entry
threat spurs innovation incentives in sectors close to the technological frontier--successful innovation
allows incumbents to prevent entry. In laggard sectors it discourages innovation--increased entry
threat reduces incumbents' expected rents from innovating. We find that the empirical patterns hold
using rich micro-level productivity growth and patent panel data for the UK, and controlling for the
endogeneity of entry by exploiting the large number of policy reforms undertaken during the
Thatcher era.
Philippe Aghion Peter Howitt
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Harvard University Brown University, Box B
Cambridge, MA 02138 Providence, RI 02912
and NBER and NBER
p_aghion@harvard.edu peter_howitt@brown.edu
Richard Blundell Susanne Prantl
University College London WZB
r.blundell@ucl.ac.uk Humboldt University
prantl@wz-berlin.de
Rachel Griffith
University College London
r.griffith@ucl.ac.uk

1 Introduction
There is a long standing interest in the effects of firm entry, which are widely recognized
as major drivers of economic growth. Entry can induce reallocation of inputs and outputs,
trigger knowledge spillovers and affect innovation incentives in incumbent firms. Entry by
foreign firms has been a focus of attention in recent years, particularly in countries or in-
dustries behind the technological frontier, and has spurred widespread policy reforms aimed
at fostering the free movement of goods, services, capital and firm management. Empir-
ical studies on the effects of market liberalizations and foreign direct investment provide,
however, mixed results on incumbent reactions.1 In this paper we take a new look at this
issue. We combine theoretical and empirical analysis to investigate a major source of sys-
tematic heterogeneity in foreign firm entry effects on incumbent innovation incentives and
productivity growth across industries, time and economic environments.
We are motivated by the following empirical regularity - we see substantial heterogeneity
in the effects of foreign firm entry on average incumbent total factor productivity (TFP)
growth when we look across industries in the United Kingdom (UK). In some industries
entry has a strongly positive effect, while in others it seems to depress incumbent TFP
growth. Positive effects are found in technologically advanced industries, and weak or even
negative ones in technologically laggard industries. This is illustrated in Figure 1, where
we plot the foreign entry rate in an industry at time t 1 against the average TFP growth
−
estimate for incumbent establishments in that industry at time t. The sample is split at the
median distance to the technological frontier, as measured on the industry level by relative
US-UK labor productivity.2
[Figure 1 here]
Thisfindingofheterogeneousentryeffectsiscompelling,butwefindnoreadyexplanation
1See, inter alia, Aitken and Harrison (1999), Pavcnik (2002) and Javorcik (2004) and the literature cited
there.
2See notes below figure 1 and section 4 for a description of the data and variables used here.
1

in the theoretical literature. Our contribution in this paper is first to discuss in detail a
theoretical explanation that is consistent with this form of heterogeneity, then to explore
the robustness of the finding using micro panel data, and paying particular attention to the
problem of entry endogeneity in incumbent performance equations.
Ourtheoretical explanationcomesfromamulti-sectorSchumpeteriangrowthmodel with
entrythreatthataffectstheinnovativeeffortbyincumbentfirmsinasystematicallydifferent
way according to the initial state of technological development in the industry. We focus
on technologically advanced entry in the theoretical part of the paper, which accords well
with our foreign firm entry measure in Figure 1, since firms that operate internationally are
morelikelytoproduceat thetechnological frontier.3 Amainimplicationof the model isthat
higherthreatoftechnologicallyadvancedentryshouldencourageinnovationbyincumbentsin
sectors that are initiallyclose to the technological frontier. This escape-entryeffect is similar
totheescape-competitioneffectanalyzedinAghionetal. (2001,2005a). Incumbentsthatare
furtherbehindthefrontierhavenohopetowinagainstapotential entrant, andthereforethe
effectofanincreasedentrythreatistoreducetheincumbents’expectedpayofffrominvesting
in R&D. This discouragement effect is similar to the Schumpeterian appropriability effect
of product market competition. The effects of entry on incumbent productivity growth in
sectors near and further behind the technological frontier mirror the heterogeneous pattern
of entry effects on innovation incentives.
The descriptive evidence provided in Figure 1 is of course not sufficient to establish a
causal relationship from entry to incumbent performance, measured by innovative activity
or productivity growth. The entry threat variable used in the theoretical model is not
observable, and it is endogenous in incumbent performance equations, as we show in greater
detail in the paper. Using, as we do, actual entry as a proxy for entry threat, only worsens
the endogeneity problem.4 To deal with this we exploit as instruments the large number of
3See section 4.2 for details.
4The reason is that actual entry deviates from entry threat only in situations where entrants may lose
against incumbents and the difference between entry threat and actual entry then depends again on incum-
bent performance in form of innovative activity.
2