NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE MOST IMPORTANT WORKS OF ART
OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY
David W. Galenson
Working Paper 12058
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12058
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2006
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by David W. Galenson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Most Important Works of Art of the Twentieth Century
David W. Galenson
NBER Working Paper No. 12058
February 2006
JEL No. J0, J4
ABSTRACT
A survey of art history textbooks identifies and ranks the eight most important works of the 20th
century. The most important painting of the century was Les Demoiselles d'Avignon, executed by
Picasso at the age of 26, which began the development of Cubism. Among the other seven works,
a collage, an earthwork, and a ready-made all represent new genres that had not existed at the start
of the century. All eight works were made by conceptual artists, at a median age of just 32. The
results underline the importance of young conceptual innovators, who made radical departures from
existing conventions, in the advanced art of the century. Four of the eight works were made by
Picasso and Marcel Duchamp, and this highlights the importance of the versatile conceptual
innovators who became a prominent feature of twentieth-century art.
David W. Galenson
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
dgalenson@uchicago.edu

3
Introduction
Quality in art is not just a matter of private experience. There is a
consensus of taste.
Clement Greenberg1
Important works of art embody important innovations. The most important works of art
are those that announce very important innovations.
There is considerable interest in identifying the most important artists, and their most
important works, not only among those who study art professionally, but also among a wider
public. The distinguished art historian Meyer Schapiro recognized that this is due in large part to
the market value of works of art: “The great interest in painting and sculpture (versus poetry)
arises precisely from its unique character as art that produces expensive, rare, and speculative
commodities.”2 Schapiro’s insight suggests one means of identifying the most important artists,
through analysis of prices at public sales.3 This strategy is less useful in identifying the most
important individual works of art, however, for these rarely, if ever, come to market.
An alternative is to survey the judgments of art experts. One way to do this is by
analyzing textbooks. The illustrations an author chooses implicitly tell us which works of art he
considers most valuable in providing a narrative of the successive innovations that make up the
history of art. Surveying a large number of textbooks effectively allows us to poll art historians as
to which works are generally considered the most essential to this narrative. This study will
identify and rank the individual works that authors of recent textbooks consider the most
important ones of the twentieth century. We will then consider why each of these works is
significant, and what common elements they share. The results are surprising in a number of
respects; understanding why this is the case will contribute to a richer understanding of the art of

4
the past century.
The Ranking
In the last analysis, the artist may shout from the rooftops that he is
a genius; he will have to wait for the verdict of the spectator in
order that his declarations take a social value and that, finally,
posterity includes him in the primers of Art History.
Marcel Duchamp4
The data collection for the present study can begin from the results of a series of earlier
surveys of textbooks. Each of these earlier studies ranked the most important artists and works of
art made at specific times and places throughout the twentieth century. In all, eight individual
works of art were found to have been illustrated in at least half of all the books surveyed in one
or more of these earlier studies.5 These eight works are listed in chronological order in Table 1.
The specific textbooks used in each of the earlier studies varied, since some books did not
cover the relevant times and places considered by some of those studies. To obtain a consistent
ranking of the eight works listed in Table 1, this study consequently required a new survey, in
which none of the textbooks analyzed excluded any of the eight works due to the book’s
specified coverage. A total of 33 books were found that were published since 1990 and covered
all relevant genres of art during the entire period from the earliest to the latest dates in Table 1.6
Table 2 presents the results of this new survey. Picasso’s Les Demoiselles d’Avignon
ranks first, illustrated in 85% of the textbooks surveyed. Understanding why it is the most
essential work of art of the twentieth century, and why the other seven works in the table are also
central to narratives of art history, requires us to consider each individually. The following
sections of this paper take up each work in turn, in the order of their production.