NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO HOT HANDS EXIST AMONG HEDGE FUND MANAGERS? AN EMPIRICAL
EVALUATION
Ravi Jagannathan
Alexey Malakhov
Dmitry Novikov
Working Paper 12015
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12015
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2006
We would like to thank Vikas Agarwal, Dmitri Alexeev, Torben Andersen, Duke Bristow, Art Bushonville,
Bhagwan Chowdhry, Randolph Cohen, Kent Daniel, Harry DeAngelo, Dobrislav Dobrev, Shingo
Goto, David Hsieh, Ken Judd, Robert Korajczyk, Ken Kroner, Ananth Madhavan, Rosa Matzkin, Narayan
Naik, Todd Pulvino, Bryan Routledge, Che-Lin Su, Melvyn Teo, Sergey Tsyplakov, Motohiro Yogo,
participants of the 2006 NBER Asset Pricing Program Meeting, 2006 Western Finance Association
Meeting, 2007 American Finance Association Meeting, 2007 Advances in Theory Based Estimation:
a Conference in Honor of Lars Hansen and Ken Singleton, and seminar participants at Barclays Global
Investors, China Europe International Business School, East Carolina University, Georgia State University,
Indian School of Business, National University of Singapore, Northwestern University, Singapore
Management University, University of Arkansas, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, University
of Melbourne, University of New South Wales, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, University
of South Carolina, University of Southern California, York University for their helpful discussions
and suggestions. We are grateful to HFR Asset Management for providing us with the data. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Ravi Jagannathan, Alexey Malakhov, and Dmitry Novikov. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Hot Hands Exist Among Hedge Fund Managers? An Empirical Evaluation
Ravi Jagannathan, Alexey Malakhov, and Dmitry Novikov
NBER Working Paper No. 12015
February 2006, Revised August 2008
JEL No. I1
ABSTRACT
We examine whether hot hands exist among hedge fund managers. In measuring performance persistence,
we use hedge fund style benchmarks. This allows us to identify managers with valuable skills, and
also to control for option-like features inherent in returns from hedge fund strategies. We take into
account the possibility that reported asset values may be based on stale prices. We develop a statistical
model that relates a hedge fund’s performance to its decision to liquidate or close in order to infer
the performance of a hedge fund that left the database. While we find significant performance persistence
among superior funds we find little evidence of persistence among inferior funds.
Ravi Jagannathan Dmitry Novikov
J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of Management Goldman, Sachs & Co.
2001 Sheridan Road dmitry.novikov@gs.com
Leverone/Anderson Complex
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
rjaganna@northwestern.edu
Alexey Malakhov
College of Business
University of Arkansas
malakhov@walton.uark.edu

1 Introduction
The hedge fund industry has grown at an astounding pace from 610 funds controlling $39
billion in 1990 to more than 9,000 funds with $1.9 trillion in 2007.1 While it appears
that investors have enthusiastically embraced hedge funds as an investment vehicle, and are
especiallyeagertoinvestinhedgefundsthathaveexhibitedoutstandingpastreturns,thereis
littleconsensusintheempiricalfinanceliteratureonwhetherthereisperformancepersistence
among hedge funds. In part that is due to the fact that any rigorous research about hedge
fund performance has to overcome numerous biases and irregularities in the available data.
These biases arise due to the unregulated nature of the hedge fund industry. There are
no legal requirements for hedge funds to report performance numbers, although there are
several different databases, to which hedge funds provide information about themselves on
a voluntarily basis.2 Ackerman, McEnally, and Ravenscraft (1999), Liang (2000), Fung and
Hsieh (2000) and Fung and Hsieh (2002) discuss the issues that arise when using data from
these sources.
In this paper we study performance persistence among hedge fund managers, while cor-
recting for measurement errors as well as for the backfill, serial correlation, and look-ahead
biases in the data. We conjecture that certain types of skills are more valuable at certain
points in time but the match decays over time. Given the decay, we cannot use a long time
seriestoidentifythosemanagerswhoseskillswillbeindemandinthenearfuture. Therefore,
we use peer3 evaluation to identify managers who are likely to have superior skills relative to
their peer group, i.e., positive relative alpha. To the extent that there are common factors
thataffectallmanagersinapeergroup,relativealphascanbeestimatedmorepreciselythan
alphas by controlling for these common effects. This is especially true with short time series
of hedge fund return data on individual hedge fund managers. However, evidence of the rel-
ative performance persistence cannot be directly interpreted as superior fund performance
to an investor. Indeed, outperforming the group of peers does not guarantee superior alpha
in absolute terms, as the entire peer group may have inferior performance. We examine
whether managers with superior historical relative alpha indeed also have superior future
alpha in the following way. We construct managed portfolios of hedge funds based on their
historical relative alpha, and examine their out-of-sample performance using the multifactor
hedge fund performance evaluation model of Fung and Hsieh (2004).
An important feature of a hedge fund database is backfill bias - the case when hedge
funds bring their history with them when they join a database. Since only funds with
1“Plenty of Alternatives,” The Economist, Feb 28, 2008.
2Among them are CISDM, TASS and HFR (we use the HFR database in the paper).
3We define “peers” as a group of hedge funds pursuing similar strategies.
2

relatively superior historical performance enter a database, when possible backfilling of data
is ignored, it results in a bias toward mistakenly assigning superior ability to managers of
funds in their earlier years. Since our HFR data contains the information on when funds
actually joined the database, we are able to eliminate the backfill bias by deleting all the
backfill observations in our data set. Moreover, our data is survivorship bias free, since the
HFR database retains all hedge funds, including those that ceased to exist.
Another issue with hedge fund analysis is that hedge fund returns exhibit substantial
serial correlation, a feature that is extensively investigated in Getmansky, Lo, and Makarov
(2004) and Okunev and White (2003). They showed that the presence of illiquid assets in
hedge fund portfolios are the primary source for the serial correlation. If serial correlation is
not accounted for properly, the manager’s performance measure will be biased. Notice that
whenhedgefundreturnsexhibitserialcorrelationduetothepresenceofilliquidassetsinthe
portfolio, benchmark style index factor returns will also exhibit such serial correlation. We
assumethatunobserved“true”returnsonassetsareseriallyuncorrelated, andidentifythem
using the MA2 approach suggested by Getmansky, Lo, and Makarov (2004). We measure
performance relative to a carefully chosen portfolio of fund specific style index benchmarks
and a broad stock market index, i.e., we use alpha relative to peers. To the extent peers
within each hedge fund style take similar risks, we are able to control for option-like features
in returns.
We evaluate hedge fund performance persistence by comparing the alphas over consec-
utive nonoverlapping three year intervals. This is a fairly long time period relative to the
time periods examined in the literature reviewed in the following section. Considering a
three-year period allows us to accurately capture relative alphas for individual funds, and
also provides us with a better sense of investor returns accounting for lockup, notice, and
redemption periods. For example, an investor in a fund with a two year lockup period can
realistically expect to receive her money from two years and three months to two years and
six months later. Lockup periods vary among different funds, but periods of two years or
more have gotten more common in recent years.4 Following Hsieh,5 we employ a method
of weighted least squares in order to minimize the downward bias in persistence caused by
measurement errors in alphas. We assign more weight to more precisely measured alphas in
our sample. We further apply this approach to study persistence among the best performing
and the worst performing funds separately.
4For example, in 1996, LTCM allowed to withdraw one third of investor’s capital in years 2, 3, and 4
(Perold (1999)). The adoption of a new SEC rule in December 2004 provided further incentives for hedge
funds to adopt lockup periods in excess of two years (the rule was struck down by the US Court of Appeals
in June 2006).
5Mimeo, private communication.
3