NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STATE AGE PROTECTION LAWS AND THE
AGE DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT ACT
Joanna Lahey
Working Paper 12048
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12048
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2006
Thanks to Liz Oltmans Ananat, Josh Angrist, David Autor, M. Rose Barlow, Dora Costa, Mary Lee Cozad,
Dan Hungerman, Christine Jolls, Guy Michaels, Olivia Mitchell, Sendhil Mullainathan, Jim Poterba, Peter
Siegelman, Ebonya Washington and participants at the UIUC labor seminar and at the MIT labor and public
finance lunches for helpful comments. Thanks also to Lisa Bell and Jennifer Greengold for excellent
research assistance in updating and correcting the list of state laws from original sources and to Luu Nguyen
and YiDing Yu for error checking. Funding from the National Institute on Aging, through Grant Number
T32-AG00186 to the National Bureau of Economic Research, is gratefully acknowledged. Opinions and
mistakes are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Joanna Lahey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

State Age Protection Laws and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act
Joanna Lahey
NBER Working Paper No. 12048
February 2006
JEL No. J1, J7
ABSTRACT
Some anti-discrimination laws have the perverse effect of harming the very class they were meant
to protect. This paper provides evidence that age discrimination laws belong to this perverse class.
Prior to the enforcement of the federal law, state laws had little effect on older workers, suggesting
that firms either knew little about these laws or did not see them as a threat. After the enforcement
of the federal Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) in 1979, white male workers over
the age of 50 in states with age discrimination laws worked between 1 and 1.5 fewer weeks per year
than workers in states without laws. These men are also .3 percentage points more likely to be retired
and .2 percentage points less likely to be hired. These findings suggest that in an anti-age
discrimination environment, firms seek to avoid litigation through means not intended by the
legislation – by not employing older workers in the first place.
Joanna Lahey
Post-Doctoral Fellow in Aging
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
jlahey@nber.org

1 Introduction
Although the hope is that anti-discrimination laws will raise employment and
wages for members of protected groups, a number of studies suggest that these laws may
be counter-productive. For example, Gruber (1994) finds that although mandates which
stipulated that childbirth be covered comprehensively in health insurance plans did not
change employment, they caused a decrease in wages of women of child bearing age.
Similarly, DeLiere (2000), Acemoglu and Angrist (2001), and Jolls and Prescott (2004),
among others, find a negative effect on employment prospects for disabled workers
following the 1990 Americans with Disabilities Act. In this paper I examine the impact
of state and federal legislation meant to protect older workers. The 1968 Age
Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) prohibits discrimination against older
workers in hiring, laying off, firing, compensation, or other conditions of employment.
This paper examines whether age discrimination laws have unintended
consequences for older workers. There are three margins upon which these laws can
affect older workers’ employment: firing, hiring, and retirement. Employment may
increase or decrease for older workers depending on which margins are most affected by
the laws. First, a firm affected by these laws will be unlikely to outright fire an older
worker for fear of a lawsuit. However, it is very difficult to prove or detect
discrimination in hiring, and thus employers may choose not to hire older workers who
will be difficult to fire (Donohue and Siegelman 1991). Finally, since the line between
unemployment and retirement tends to blur for older workers (Choi 2002), firms who
wish to avoid being sued may increase retirement incentives for these workers (rather
than fire them outright), thus decreasing the employment of older workers. At first
2

examination, increasing incentives for retirement for older workers may seem to benefit
both the worker and the company. However, if the increase in retirement incentives is
coupled with an increased threat of layoffs, then the resulting increase in retirement may
not be entirely voluntary. Because it is difficult for older workers to find new
employment, the possibility of losing one’s job without the retirement package is a worse
prospect for the older worker who may feel that he or she has no choice but to accept the
retirement package, than for the younger worker who has a higher probability of finding
new employment (Lahey 2005). Indeed, Schuster and Miller (1984) find that 31% of
cases brought under the ADEA before 1981 involved involuntary retirement.
This paper uses state age discrimination laws matched by state and year to the
March monthly Current Population Survey (CPS) to look at retirement outcomes for
protected workers. To investigate the impact of hiring and job separation outcomes for
older workers, I constructed measures of separations and accessions (hires) by matching
CPS rotation groups as in Bleakley et al. (1999). My empirical strategy uses the
assumption that, because of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC)
backlog, workers in states with their own age discrimination laws are more likely to be
affected by the federal ADEA law. Under this law, workers in states with age
discrimination laws have almost twice as long to file. Additionally, in states with laws
state Fair Employment Practices (FEP) offices may be able to process claims more
quickly than the EEOC. Thus, I compare workers in states with laws who are affected by
the law and workers in states with laws who are not affected by the law to those who are
in states without laws.
3