NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ESTIMATING AND TESTING BETA PRICING MODELS:
ALTERNATIVE METHODS AND THEIR PERFORMANCE IN SIMULATIONS
Jay Shanken
Guofu Zhou
Working Paper 12055
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12055
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2006
Shanken is the Goizueta Chair in Finance at Emory University and a Research Associate at NBER and Zhou
is from Washington University in St. Louis. This paper earlier version of the paper circulated under the titles
“Analytical cross-sectional tests of asset pricing models” and “On cross-sectional stock returns: maximum
likelihood approach.” We are grateful to Phil Dybvig, Wayne Ferson, Will Goeztmann, Campbell Harvey,
John Heaton, Ravi Jagannathan, Raymond Kan, Dongcheol Kim, Robert Korajczyk, Mark Loewenstein,
Cesare Robotti, William Schwert (the managing editor), seminar participants at Northwestern University,
Univerisyt of Michigan, University of Missouri-Columbia, and the 2005 SBFSIF conference, and especially
an anonymous referee for several insightful and detailed comments that substantially improved the paper.
We also appreciate the outstanding research of Jun Tu. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Jay Shanken and Guofu Zhou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Estimating and Testing Beta Pricing Models: Alternative Methods and their Performance in
Simulations
Jay Shanken and Guofu Zhou
NBER Working Paper No. 12055
February 2006
JEL No. G12
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we conduct a simulation analysis of the Fama and MacBeth (1973) two-pass procedure,
as well as maximum likelihood (ML) and generalized method of moments estimators of cross-
sectional expected return models. We also provide some new analytical results on computational
issues, the relations between estimators, and asymptotic distributions under model misspecification.
The GLS estimator is often much more precise than the usual OLS estimator, but it displays more
bias as well. A "truncated" form of ML performs quite well overall in terms of bias and precision,
but produces less reliable inferences than the OLS estimator.
Jay Shanken
Goizueta Business School
Emory University
1300 Clifton Road
Atlanta, GA 30322
and NBER
jay_shanken@bus.emory.edu
Guofu Zhou
Olin School of Business
Washington University
St. Louis, MO 63130
zhou@wustl.edu

1 Introduction
Explaining cross-sectional differences in asset expected returns is one of the great challenges of
modern finance. Theoretical models, such as the CAPM of Sharpe (1964), Lintner (1965), and
Black (1972), and the intertemporal/consumption models of Merton (1973), Breeden (1979), and
Rubinstein (1976), imply that expected returns should be linear in asset betas with respect to
fundamental economic aggregates. Equilibrium extensions of the Ross (1976) APT and the “mul-
tivariate proxy” perspective on factor pricing models, e.g. Shanken (1987), yield similar relations.
There is an enormous body of empirical research that examines these linear asset pricing relation-
ships. One of the most widely used methodologies is the two-pass regression approach, known as
the Fama-MacBeth procedure, developed by Fama and MacBeth (1973) and Black, Jensen and
Scholes (1972). The two-pass procedure is used not only in asset pricing, but also in many other
areas of finance. For example, Fama and French (1998), Grinstein and Michaely (2002) and Easley,
Hvidjkaer and O’Hara (2002) apply it in analyzing corporate finance and market microstructure
issues.1
The asymptotic statistical properties of the Fama-MacBeth procedure were first established
in the study by Shanken (1992) and later extended by Jagannathan and Wang (1998). However,
despite its widespread application, surprisingly little is known about the small-sample statistical
properties of the methodology. An early simulation study by Amsler and Schmidt (1985) provides
some insights, though the main focus of that paper is on multivariate tests of the linear expected
return relation. A contemporaneous paper by Chen and Kan (2005) provides analytical results
on estimation bias as well as some simulation evidence. Our paper attempts to fill in some of
the important gaps in our knowledge, comparing the performance of the usual OLS version of the
Fama-MacBeth procedure to the WLS and GLS approaches occasionally seen in the literature.2
In addition to the two-pass approach, we explore alternative analytically tractable procedures
based on maximum likelihood (ML) estimation and the generalized method of moments (GMM) of
Hansen(1982). TheMLmethodisimportantinthatitisasymptoticallyefficientundertheclassical
independent and identically distributed (iid) multivariate normal returns assumption. The GMM
approach is of further interest since serial correlation and conditional heteroscedasticity in the
joint distribution of returns and factors is easily accommodated in making asymptotically valid
1Applications of the procedure in recent years can be found in at least 735 papers that cite Fama and MacBeth
(1973), as complied by Google.
2BalduzziandRobotti(2004)considerestimationissuesrelatedtotheuseofmimickingportfoliosfornon-traded
factors.
1

inferences. These characteristics of the data have typically been ignored in the empirical literature,
but will likely receive more attention in the future. The computational simplifications that we
introduce facilitate the simulation analysis and should make these methods more accessible to
researchers. We also demonstrate an equivalence between ML estimation and one form of the
GMM estimator under the classical assumptions.
Application of the estimation methods considered here implicitly assumes that the expected
return relation is well specified. One approach to testing this specification is to include additional
cross-sectional regressors in the relation and see whether such variables are significantly related to
returns. For example, Fama-MacBeth add beta-squared and residual variance in their study. This
approachrequiresthattheresearcherhavesomeideaastothenatureofthedeparturefromtheasset
pricing relation and is vulnerable to the influence of data mining. In contrast, multivariate tests
focus on the overall magnitude of estimated pricing deviations and have the potential to reject the
null for a broad range of general alternatives. The downside, however, may be a reduction in power
against particular alternatives of interest. Moreover, since the tests typically require some sort of
sorting of securities into portfolios, data mining can still be a problem, e.g., Lo and MacKinlay
(1990). Weevaluatetheactualsizeofvarioustestsandpoweragainstseveralalternativesofinterest.
One could argue that, strictly speaking, all models are false and are, at best, close approxi-
mations to reality. Moreover, even if we entertain the possibility that a given asset pricing model
does hold exactly, the limited power of pricing tests implies that we cannot always know whether
the model is well-specified. Thus, it is inevitable that we will often, knowingly or unknowingly,
estimate an expected return relation that departs from exact linearity in the betas. We derive the
asymptotic distribution of the Fama-MacBeth estimator in this context, thereby providing insight
into the extent to which misspecification can affect inferences about factor risk premia.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the statistical specification of the asset
pricing model and the different versions of the Fama-MacBeth procedures. We then present the
asymptotic theory for the second-pass risk premium estimators when the asset pricing restrictions
are violated. In Section 3, we study the ML method and show how to obtain the parameter
estimates analytically. In Section 4, we develop two analytical GMM methods that are robust
to conditional heteroscedasticity and serial correlation. Extensive simulations are conducted in
Section 5, to study the finite sample properties of the various approaches to estimation and testing.
An empirical application is discussed in Section 6. Conclusions are offered in the final section.
2