NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OPTIMAL MARKET TIMING
Erica X. N. Li
Dmitry Livdan
Lu Zhang
Working Paper 12014
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12014
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2006
We thank Lubos Pastor, Leonid Kogan, and seminar participants at MIT for helpful discussions. The
Matlab and C++ programs used for the scientific computation in this paper are available from the authors
upon request. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Erica X. N. Li, Dmitry Livdan and Lu Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Optimal Market Timing
Erica X. N. Li, Dmitry Livdan and Lu Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 12014
January 2006
JEL No. E13, E22, E32, E44, G12, G14, G24, G31, G32, G35
ABSTRACT
We use a fully-specified neoclassical model augmented with costly external equity as a laboratory
to study the relations between stock returns and equity financing decisions. Simulations show that
the model can simultaneously and in many cases quantitatively reproduce: procyclical equity
issuance; the negative relation between aggregate equity share and future stock market returns; long-
term underperformance following equity issuance and the positive relation of its magnitude with the
volume of issuance; the mean-reverting behavior in the operating performance of issuing firms; and
the positive long-term stock price drift of firms distributing cash and its positive relation with book-
to-market. We conclude that systematic mispricing seems unnecessary to generate the return-related
evidence often interpreted as behavioral underreaction to market timing.
Erica X. N. Li
Simon School of Business
University of Rochester
lix1@simon.rochester.edu
Dmitry Livdan
Mays Business School
Texas A&M University
dlivdan@mays.tamu.edu
Lu Zhang
William E. Simon Graduate School of
Business Administration
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
zhanglu@simon.rochester.edu

1 Introduction
We study the dynamic, quantitative relations between stock returns and equity (cid:12)nancing
decisions using a fully-speci(cid:12)ed neoclassical model augmented with costly external equity.
The issue is important. Recent literature in empirical corporate (cid:12)nance has uncovered
an array of evidence often interpreted as substantiating a window-of-opportunity theory of
(cid:12)nancingdecisions inresponse tosystematic mispricing inequity markets. In particular, Rit-
ter(2003)arguesthatmanagerscancreatevalueforexistingshareholdersbytiming(cid:12)nancing
decisionstotakeadvantageoftime-varyingrelativecostsofdebtandequitycausedbymarket
ine(cid:14)ciencies. Managers can issue equity when their stock prices arehighand turntointernal
funds ordebt when stock prices are low. As supporting evidence, Ritter cites many empirical
studies that document long-run abnormal returns following corporate (cid:12)nancing events.
Using simulations, we demonstrate that our neoclassical model can reproduce simultane-
ously, and in many cases quantitatively, many stylized facts often interpreted as behavioral
market timing. These facts include: (i) the amount and frequency of equity issuance are pro-
cyclical (e.g., Choe, Masulis, and Nanda (1993)); (ii) the new equity share in total amount of
new equity and debt (cid:12)nancing is a signi(cid:12)cantly negative predictor of aggregate stock market
returns (e.g., Baker and Wurgler (2000)); (iii) (cid:12)rms conducting seasoned equity o(cid:11)erings
underperform nonissuing (cid:12)rms with similar size and book-to-market in the long run, and the
magnitude of this underperformance increases with the volume of issuance (e.g., Loughran
and Ritter (1995), and Spiess and A(cid:15)ect-Graves (1995)); (iv) the operating performance of
issuing (cid:12)rms exhibits substantial improvements prior to the equity o(cid:11)erings, but then deteri-
orates, and issuing (cid:12)rms are also disproportionately high-investing, high-growth (cid:12)rms (e.g.,
Loughran and Ritter (1997)); (v) there exists a positive long-term stock price drift for (cid:12)rms

distributing cash back to shareholders, and the magnitude of the drift is stronger among
value (cid:12)rms (e.g., Lakonishok and Vermaelen (1990), Ikenberry, Lakonishok, and Vermaelen
(1995), and Michaely, Thaler, and Womack (1995)); and (cid:12)nally (vi) capital investment is
negatively associated with future stock returns in the cross section, and the magnitude of
this association is stronger among (cid:12)rms with higher cash (cid:13)ows (e.g., Titman, Wei, and Xie
(2004), Anderson and Garcia-Feijo(cid:19)o (2005), Polk and Sapienza (2005), and Xing (2005)).
We deliberately do not include any behavioral bias in our model, in which (cid:12)rms choose
investment and (cid:12)nancing decisions optimally in response to aggregate and (cid:12)rm-speci(cid:12)c
productivity shocks. Firm-speci(cid:12)c shocks a(cid:11)ect corporate decisions through operating cash
(cid:13)ows. And aggregate shocks a(cid:11)ect corporate decisions through both operating cash (cid:13)ows
and an exogenously-speci(cid:12)ed stochastic discount factor that admits a countercyclical price of
risk, as in Berk, Green, and Naik (1999). Our simulations suggest that systematic mispricing
seems unnecessary to generate the evidence often interpreted as behavioral underreaction to
market timing, or more generally, the window-of-opportunity theory of (cid:12)nancing decisions.
However, investorsentiment, forexample, asmodeledbyBarberis,Huang,andSantos(2001),
can potentially a(cid:11)ect the countercyclical price of risk exogenously speci(cid:12)ed in our model.
We therefore do not suggest that the timing-related evidence is fully rational, but we do
argue that investor sentiment seems unnecessary.
The intuition driving our results is simple. Controlling for expected productivity, the
investment-to-asset ratio correlates negatively with expected returns: all else equal, (cid:12)rms
withlowercostsofcapitalinvestmore. Andthebalance-sheetconstraintequatingthesources
of funds with the uses of funds implies that equity issuing (cid:12)rms are disproportionally high
investment-to-asset (cid:12)rms and cash-distributing (cid:12)rms are disproportionally low investment-
to-asset (cid:12)rms. The negative investment-return relation then implies that equity issuance
2