NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A FRAMEWORK FOR ASSESSING CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REFORM
Benjamin E. Hermalin
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 12050
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12050
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2006
The authors thank seminar and conference participants at the London Business School, the University of
California, the University of Illinois, the Swedish Institute for Financial Research Conference, Stockholm,
the Olin Business School’s Second Annual Conference on Corporate Governance. The authors are grateful
to Philip Bond and, especially, Denis Gromb for their comments and suggestions. Hermalin is Willis H.
Booth Professor of Banking and Finance. Weisbach is Stanley C. and Joan J. Golder Distinguished Chair
in Finance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Benjamin E. Hermalin and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

A Framework for Assessing Corporate Governance Reform
Benjamin E. Hermalin and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 12050
February 2006
JEL No. G30, G38, L51
ABSTRACT
In light of recent corporate scandals, numerous proposals have been introduced for reforming
corporate governance. This paper provides a theoretical framework through which to evaluate these
reforms. Unlike various ad hoc arguments, this framework recognizes that governance structures
arise endogenously in response to the constrained optimization problems faced by the relevant
parties. Contract theory provides a set of necessary conditions under which governance reform can
be welfare-improving: 1) There is asymmetric information at the time of contracting; or 2)
Governance failures impose externalities on third parties; or 3) The state has access to remedies or
punishments that are not available to third parties. We provide a series of models that illustrate the
importance of these conditions and what can go wrong if they are not met.
Benjamin E. Hermalin
University of California
Haas School of Business
545 Student Services Building, #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720
hermalin@haas.berkeley.edu
Michael S. Weisbach
University Of Illinois
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 S. Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
weisbach@uiuc.edu

HermalinandWeisbach Introduction 1
1 Introduction
Corporate governance is again an area of interest. After the scandals at Enron,
Worldcom, and other firms, many authors, politicians and even practitioners
have called for regulatory changes designed to “improve” governance. Reforms
such as Sarbanes-Oxley (sox), the Cadbury recommendations, and numerous
otherproposalsemphasizetheattentionthatcorporategovernancehasreceived
inthepublicpolicyarena. Yet,theissueisinfactaveryoldone;ifSmith(1776)
didnotwriteinsuchanelegantstyle, someofhisWealth of Nations couldhave
comefromarecentissueofFortune orBusiness Week.1 Thatcomplaintsabout
corporate governance being “ineffective” have been heard since the beginnings
of the corporate form suggest that corporate governance is not easily “fixed.”
Muchoftheconfusionconcerningcorporategovernancelikelyarisesbecause
discussion of the issues typically, but implicitly, assumes governance is “out of
equilibrium.” That is, unlike other economic activity, commentators talk as if
the invisible hand has yet to guide governance to an equilibrium point. With
such a mind set, “reforms,” which consist of requiring all firms to adopt what
seems to be a good idea or has been shown historically to be a trait associated
with good-performing firms, can seem a sensible course of action. For example,
the sox reform requires a powerful audit committee on the board, and height-
enedpersonalconsequencesfordirectorsifthefirmengagesinfinancial“miscon-
duct.” Yet, the consequences of firms voluntarily adopting these measures are
likely to be quite different from the involuntary imposition of these measures
on firms. Just as the labor-market equilibrium is quite different when firms
voluntarilyraisewagesasopposedtowhenwagesrisebecauseofagovernment-
imposed minimum wage, the resulting “improvement” in governance from a
regulatory-imposed change could be very different from a voluntarily adopted
change.
ThepapertakesaCoasian(Coase,1960)perspective,insofarasweviewgov-
ernance arrangements as constrained-optimal contracts within the firm. Given
this view, “reforms” are simply restrictions on these contracts imposed by an
outside authority. In other words, governance reforms are just a special case of
contract regulation. We therefore begin our analysis with a review of the con-
tracttheoryliteratureonregulationofcontracts. Thisliteratureidentifiesthree
conditions under which restrictions on contracts can be welfare improving. In
particular, for externally imposed governance reforms to have to the potential
to improve welfare, there must be asymmetric information at the time of con-
tracting, or externalities on a third party, or access by the regulator (state) to
penalties or other contractual provisions that are not available to private par-
ties,orsomecombinationoftheseconditions. Thisinsightfromcontracttheory
provides a framework for understanding when governance regulations have the
1“The directors of [joint stock] companies, however, being the managers rather of other
people’s money than of their own, it cannot well be expected, that they should watch over
it with the same anxious vigilance [as owners] ... Negligence and profusion, therefore, must
always prevail, more of less, in the management of the affairs of such a company” (Smith,
1776,p.700).
Draft 2/6/2006 Version 11

HermalinandWeisbach Implications of Contract Theory 2
potential to improve welfare, and as such, potentially provide guidance to both
academics wishing to understand governance, and to policy-makers wishing to
improve practice.
We illustrate this principle with two models designed to study the effect of
potentialregulatoryreformssimilartothoserecentlyadoptedinSarbanes-Oxley
andotherregulations. Eachstartswithamodelofwhatgovernancewouldlook
like in the absence of regulations and derives the implications of alternative
regulatory regimes. In each model, governance is derived endogenously, so that
changes in the regulatory environment can be traced through the governance
structure to their impact on real decisions made by firms. In each case, the
models illustrate the usefulness of the contract theory framework that derives
which types of reforms could potentially (but not necessarily) lead to welfare
improvements.
WefirstextendHermalinandWeisbach(1998)andHermalin’s(2005)adap-
tation of Holmstrom’s (1999) career-concerns model to consider the question of
optimal transparency. Sections 3 through 5 lay out the basics of this model,
in which the company chooses the “quality” of the performance measure that
directors use to assess the CEO’s ability. The CEO can exert effort at distort-
ing this information.2 In this setup, a reform that increases transparency can
be thought of as increasing the minimum acceptable level of reporting quality.
We show that the consequence of such a reform will be to actually increase the
ceo’s incentives to distort information about the firm. In addition, it will also
lead to an increase in the probability that the ceo will be fired and, because
of both these consequences, an increase in the ceo’s compensation. Moreover,
the combination of these effects can actually be to decrease expected profits.
Thus, the model implies that regulations stipulating better disclosure decreases
efficiency, despite the fact that the improved information is put to good use in
employing better quality ceos on average.
InSection6,weconsiderreformsthatraisethecosttotheceoofconcealing
information about the firm. This version of the model is intended to capture
the provision of the Sarbanes-Oxley act that makes the ceo personally liable
for accounting misrepresentations. This type of reform can increase welfare if
the penalties for misreporting are sufficiently high. We view this finding as
consistent with the overall framework, since the state has access to penalties
(e.g., incarceration) that are not available to private parties.
We conclude in Section 7.
2Inderst and Mueller (2005), Singh (2004), and Goldman and Slezak (in press) are three
other recent papers concerned with the ceo’s incentives to distort information. Like us, the
first is concerned with the board’s making inferences about the ceo’s ability. Inderst and
Mueller’sapproachdiffersinsofarastheyassumetheceopossessesinformationnotavailable
to the board, which the board needs to induce the ceo to reveal. There is no uncertainly
about the ceo’s ability in Singh’s model; he is focused on the board’s obtaining accurate
signalsabouttheceo’sactions. GoldmanandSlezakareconcernedprimarilywiththedesign
ofstock-basedcompensation.
Draft 2/6/2006 Version 11