NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INVESTMENT TAXES AND EQUITY RETURNS
Clemens Sialm
Working Paper 12146
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12146
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2006
I thank Gene Amromin, Long Chen, Dhammika Dharmapala, Bob Dittmar, Ken French, Michelle Hanlon,
Jim Hines, Li Jin, Marcin Kacperczyk, Gautam Kaul, Nellie Liang, Roni Michaely, Lubos Pastor, Monika
Piazzesi, Jim Poterba, Steve Sharpe, John Shoven, Joel Slemrod, Moto Yogo, Lu Zheng, and seminar
participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the University of Michigan, and Wharton for helpful
comments and suggestions. I am grateful to Zhuo Wang for outstanding research assistance and to the Mitsui
Life Center at the University of Michigan for financial support. The paper was previously circulated under
the title “Tax Changes and Asset Pricing: Cross-Sectional Evidence." Address: Stephen M. Ross School of
Business; University of Michigan; 701 Tappan Street; Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234; Phone: (734) 764-3196;
Fax: (734) 936-0274; E-mail: sialm@umich.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Clemens Sialm. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Investment Taxes and Equity Returns
Clemens Sialm
NBER Working Paper No. 12146
March 2006
JEL No. G12, H20, E44
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates whether investors are compensated for the tax burden of equity securities.
Effective tax rates on equity securities vary due to frequent tax reforms and due to persistent
differences in propensities to pay dividends. The paper finds an economically and statistically
significant relationship between risk-adjusted stock returns and effective personal tax rates using a
new data set covering tax burdens on a cross-section of equity securities between 1927 and 2004.
Consistent with tax capitalization, stocks facing higher effective tax rates tend to compensate taxable
investors by generating higher before-tax returns.
Clemens Sialm
Stephen M. Ross Business School
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
sialm@umich.edu

1 Introduction
Ifthemarginalinvestorissubjecttotaxes, thenbefore-taxassetreturnsshouldreflect
the tax burden in equilibrium. In particular, assets facing higher tax burdens should
offer higher risk-adjusted returns than less highly taxed assets. On the other hand,
taxes should not be related to asset returns if the marginal investor is effectively tax-
exempt, as first discussed by Miller and Scholes (1978). This study tests empirically
whether before-tax equity returns are related to their effective tax rates using a new
data set covering personal tax burdens on a cross-section of equity securities between
1927 and 2004.
McGrattan and Prescott (2005) derive the quantitative impact of tax and regu-
latory changes on aggregate equity values using a growth theory model. They show
that regulatory changes can explain the large secular movements in corporate equity
values relative to GDP. McGrattan and Prescott (2005) base their inferences on a
carefully calibrated growth model. However, they do not perform an econometric
analysis of the relationship between tax rates and asset valuations and they do not
investigate the cross-sectional implications of taxes.
My paper demonstrates that effective tax burdens vary substantially over time
and cross-sectionally. Based on the average marginal tax rates derived by Poterba
(1987b), I compute effective tax rates on equity securities. The aggregate tax bur-
den on equity securities has declined over the last couple of decades as tax reforms
reduced the statutory tax rates on dividends and capital gains. Furthermore, corpo-
rations replaced a significant fraction of relatively highly taxed dividends with share
repurchases. For example, effective tax rates on the market portfolio of common
stocks exceeded 25 percent in 1950 and declined to less than 5 percent in 2004. In
addition to the time-series variation in tax burdens, there is also a significant cross-
sectional variation in tax burdens. Due to differences in the taxation of dividends
1

and capital gains, stocks that distribute a larger fraction of their total returns as div-
idends tend to be taxed more heavily than stocks that distribute a smaller fraction
of dividends. Dividend paying stocks faced, on average, an effective tax rate that is
almost three times higher than the effective tax rate of non-dividend paying stocks.
The empirical test presented in this paper uses the time-series and the cross-
sectional variation in tax burdens to determine whether the average returns of differ-
ent equity securities depend on their tax burden. To obtain the effective tax burdens,
I sort all publicly traded common stocks in the U.S. into portfolios according to the
lagged annual dividend yield and compute effective tax rates on these portfolios. The
results indicate that the average returns of these stock portfolios are positively related
to their effective tax rates even after controlling for size, book-to-market, and mo-
mentum effects. Adjusting for common factors in stock returns is important because
dividend yields can capture risk effects (e.g., Fama and French (1992)) or mispricing
due to behavioral biases (e.g., Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994)).
The impact of taxes on asset returns is economically and statistically significant.
A one percentage point increase in the effective tax of an equity portfolio increases
the average return of the portfolio by 1.54 percentage points after adjusting for the
common factors of Carhart (1997). Numerous additional tests indicate that this
relationship is robust over several sub-periods, using various measures of the effective
tax rate, and using different econometric specifications.
Although the dividend yield is highly correlated with the effective tax rate, I
demonstrate that the effective tax burden and not the dividend yield is the driv-
ing force behind the higher expected returns. In particular, regressing the abnormal
Carhart returns on the dividend yield and on the interaction term between the div-
idend yield and the dividend tax rate results in a significantly positive coefficient
on the interaction term and in an insignificantly negative coefficient on the dividend
yield. Thus, stocks paying high dividend yields tend to have relatively high risk-
2