NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SCARCITY RENTS IN CAR RETAILING: EVIDENCE
FROM INVENTORY FLUCTUATIONS AT DEALERSHIPS
Florian Zettelmeyer
Fiona Scott Morton
Jorge Silva-Risso
Working Paper 12177
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12177
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2006
We are grateful for helpful comments from Severin Borenstein, Dennis Carlton, Jose Silva, Candi Yano,
participants at the NBER IO Program Meeting, the Marketing in Israel Conference, seminar participants at
UC Berkeley, and at the University of East Anglia. We are especially grateful to Meghan Busse for extensive
comments and to Thomas Hubbard for the suggestion to look into inventories. In an early draft this paper was
titled “Inventory Fluctuations and Price Discrimination: The Determinants of Price Variation in Car
Retailing.” Addresses for correspondence: School of Management, Yale University, PO Box 208200, New
Haven CT 06520-8200; Haas School of Business, UC Berkeley, Berkeley CA 94720-1900; Anderson
Graduate School of Management, UC Riverside, Riverside, CA 92521. E-mail: florian@haas.berkeley.edu,
fiona.scottmorton@yale.edu, jorge.silva-risso@ucr.edu.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Florian Zettelmeyer, Fiona Scott Morton and Jorge Silva-Risso. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Scarcity Rents in Car Retailing: Evidence from Inventory Fluctuations at Dealerships
Florian Zettelmeyer, Fiona Scott Morton and Jorge Silva-Risso
NBER Working Paper No. 12177
April 2006
JEL No. L0, L1
ABSTRACT
Price variation for identical cars at the same dealership is commonly assumed to arise because
dealers with market power are able to price discriminate among their customers. In this paper we
show that while price discrimination may be one element of price variation, price variation also
arises from inventory fluctuations. Inventory fluctuations create scarcity rents for cars that are in
short supply. The price variation due to inventory fluctuations thus functions to efficiently allocate
particular cars that are in restricted supply to those customers who value them most highly. Our
empirical results show that a dealership moving from a situation of inventory shortage to an average
inventory level lowers transaction prices by about 1% ceteris paribus, corresponding to 15% of
dealers' average per vehicle profit margin or $250 on the average car. Shorter resupply times also
decrease transaction prices for cars in high demand. For traditional dealerships, inventory explains
49% of the combined inventory and demographic components of the predicted price. For so-called
'no-haggle' dealerships, the percentage explained by inventory increases to 74%.
Florian Zettelmeyer
Haas School of Business
UC, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
florian@haas.berkeley.edu
Fiona Scott Morton
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520
fiona.scottmorton@yale.edu
Jorge Silva-Risso
Anderson Hall 11
University of California
Riverside, CA 92521
jorge.silva-risso@ucr.edu

1 Introduction
Why do identical cars at the same dealership sell for different prices to different customers?
At a superficial level, the reason is that prices are individually negotiated between dealers and
customers. The obvious follow-up question is, why are retail automobile prices individually
negotiated? A common answer is that negotiation is a way for dealers with market power to
price discriminate among their customers. Given the high price of a new car, it would not
be surprising if the cost of gaining information about a consumer’s willingness to pay is, in
comparison, small enough to make the dealer’s effort to assess a consumer’s valuation and
negotiate individual prices more profitable than posting a fixed price.
In this paper we argue that price discrimination is not the only reason why car prices are
negotiated. Because car supply is restricted in the short term to the inventory on a dealer’s lot,
and demand is volatile, the opportunity cost of selling a car of a specific make, model, options,
and color is constantly changing with demand for that particular car within the geographic
market. Evenifinter-dealervehicletradesmeanthatsupplyisnotabsolutelyfixed,thistrading
is limited because of the transaction cost of bartering with other dealers and thin markets due
to the large variety of cars. Thus there are effectively new, dealer-level optimal prices each
day - or perhaps more frequently - for each car. Not posting a price, and instead negotiating
with the consumer, allows the dealer to incorporate the latest information on inventory levels
into the offered price. As a result, the opportunity cost to the dealer of selling a car—and
therefore the transaction price—is likely to vary across two consumers who purchase the same
carondifferentdays, evenwithoutdifferencesbetweentheminwillingnesstopayorbargaining
ability. This explanation for price variation differs importantly from the price discrimination
explanation because it does not imply that there is market power. Indeed, under the inventory
explanation, price differences are the result of scarcity rents, and function to efficiently allocate
particular cars that are in restricted supply to those customers who value them most highly.
While these two explanations are very different, they are also not mutually exclusive. For
example, there is no reason that a dealer with market power would not vary its price both
according to the willingness to pay of individual customers and according to the opportunity
costofthevehicleinducedbyinventoryscarcity(seeBorensteinandRose(1994)foranexample
of this behavior in the airline industry). The purpose of this paper is to argue that inventory
scarcity may be an important but neglected component of price variation, and to estimate the
extenttowhichinventoryconcernscanexplainthevariationinpricesinretailautomobilesales.
We construct a simple dynamic model of a car dealer’s pricing problem as a function of
inventory. Solving this model for particular parameter values, we find that the price a dealer
charges should vary with two factors: the amount of inventory of that specific car in his lot
2

and the number of days remaining until a shipment of new inventory arrives.
The intuition behind the effect of inventory on prices is as follows. If a dealer’s inventory of
particularcarisincreased,withnochangeintheresupplyschedule,thedealer’sopportunitycost
from selling that vehicle has decreased because the car is now less scarce relative to expected
future demand. In contrast, any sale when inventory is very low has a higher opportunity
cost because the dealer may not be able to sell to a future high-valuation consumer who could
arriveafterthelastcarissoldbutbeforethenewinventoryarrives. Tounderstandtheintuition
behindtheeffectofresupplytimeonprices,consideradealerwhoisapproachingthedatewhen
anewshipmentofaparticularcarwillarrive. Asthedatenears, theopportunitycostofselling
theremainingcarsonhislotfallsconditional on the inventory level,becausesoonthedealerwill
be restocked. Thus, as days to resupply falls, the dealer will be more willing to discount the car
to a consumer with a low valuation. As we will show later, the price effect of inventory occurs
despite the fact that the dealer is correct about the distribution from which the reservation
prices of buyers are drawn; the dealer is not updating his expectation or “learning” about the
underlying level of demand.
Our model is related to a known class of models in the operations research literature which
relate prices to inventory in a monopoly pricing environment (see Yano and Gilbert (2003) for
a detailed review of this literature). Our model shows that it is possible for these results to
carry over to a negotiated price environment.
The empirical section of the paper provides evidence for the relationship of prices to both
inventorylevelsandresupplytimes. Adealershipmovingfromasituationofinventoryshortage
to anaverage inventory level lowers transactionprices byabout 1% ceteris paribus, correspond-
ingto15%ofdealers’averagepervehicleprofitmarginor$250ontheaveragecar. Additionally,
shorter resupply times decrease transaction prices for cars in high demand. We consider the
potential endogeneity of prices and inventory levels due to, for example, a temporary demand
shock that raises the price of a model and lowers inventory levels. We use a series of fixed
effects specifications as well as instrumental variables to control for this potential problem.
Our results remain robust to these approaches, as well as to alternative definitions of inventory.
We present some extensions of our results showing that local inventory also affects transaction
prices and that the effect of inventory is stronger for car models in high demand. Finally, we
use our estimates to calculate that the share of the price variation attributable to either inven-
tory or demographics that is due to inventory is 49% in our sample. For so-called “no-haggle”
dealerships, inventory explains 74% of the combined inventory and demographic components
of the price variation.
Wearenotawareofanyempiricalworkineconomicsthatdiscussesinventoryfluctuationsas
3