NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PAY FOR SHORT-TERM PERFORMANCE:
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION IN SPECULATIVE MARKETS
Patrick Bolton
Jose Scheinkman
Wei Xiong
Working Paper 12107
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12107
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2006
We would like to thank Lucian Bebchuk, Jeffrey Gordon and Bengt Holmstrom for helpful comments.
Scheinkman is grateful to the National Science Foundation grant SES 0350770 for financial support. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Patrick Bolton, Jose Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Pay for Short-Term Performance: Executive Compensation in Speculative Markets
Patrick Bolton, Jose Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 12107
March 2006
JEL No. G1, G3
ABSTRACT
We argue that the root cause behind the recent corporate scandals associated with CEO pay is the
technology bubble of the latter half of the 1990s. Far from rejecting the optimal incentive contracting
theory of executive compensation, the recent evidence on executive pay can be reconciled with
classical agency theory once one expands the framework to allow for speculative stock markets.
Patrick Bolton
Columbia Business School
804 Uris Hall
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
pb2208@columbia.edu
Jose Scheinkman
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
joses@princeton.edu
Wei Xiong
Princeton University
Bendheim Center for Finance
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08450
and NBER
wxiong@princeton.edu

Pay for Short-Term Performance: Executive Compensation
in Speculative Markets
Patrick Bolton, José Scheinkman, & Wei Xiong*
ABSTRACT
We argue that the root cause behind the recent corporate scandals associated with
CEO pay is the technology bubble of the latter half of the 1990s. Far from rejecting the
optimal incentive contracting theory of executive compensation, the recent evidence on
executive pay can be reconciled with classical agency theory once one expands the
framework to allow for speculative stock markets.
I. INTRODUCTION
In early September 2002 the news broke that “HealthSouth Corporation’s chairman
sold 94 percent of his company stock just weeks before the nation’s biggest chain of
rehabilitation hospitals revealed regulatory concerns that battered its stock price.”1 By
that date such announcements were hardly news, given that several major company
failures had already been widely covered in the financial press, the high drama
congressional hearings on Enron, Global Crossing, WorldCom, and Adelphia had taken
place, and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act had been signed into law. But, perhaps better than any
previous headlines, this announcement epitomized what most commentators found so
troubling about the reality of executive compensation: CEOs were able to secure high
rewards early, in spite of their companies’ subsequent dismal performances.2
As Bebchuk and Fried underline in the preface to their new book, Pay without
Performance,
[the] wave of corporate scandals that began in late 2001 shook confidence in
the performance of public company boards and drew attention to potential
flaws in their executive compensation practices. There is now recognition that
many boards have employed compensation arrangements that do not serve
* We would like to thank Lucian Bebchuk, Jeffrey Gordon and Bengt Holmstrom for helpful comments.
Scheinkman is grateful to the National Science Foundation grant SES 0350770 for financial support.
1. CNNMoney.com, HealthSouth Chair’s Iffy Stock Sale, Sept. 6, 2002, http://money.cnn.com/2002/
09/06/ news/ companies/ healthsouth/.
2. In the summer of 2002 The Financial Times published a survey of the 25 largest financially distressed
firms since January 2001, and found that top executives in these firms walked away with a total of $3.3 billion
by selling their stock holdings early. Len Chang, Survivors Who Laughed All the Way to the Bank: Barons of
Bankruptcy Part I, THE FINANCIAL TIMES, July 31, 2002 at 10. These executives managed to build personal
fortunes on the misfortune of their shareholders and employees. Id. The survey reveals, among other findings,
that Kenneth Lay, the CEO of Enron, received total compensation of $247 million, Jeffrey Skilling, the former
CEO and President of Enron, received $89 million, and Gary Winnick, the CEO of Global Crossing, received
$512 million in total cumulative compensation. Id.
1

shareholders’ interests. But there is still substantial disagreement about the
scope and source of such problems and, not surprisingly, about how to address
them.3
Their well-informed and timely book deals with two broad and related corporate
governance issues: (1) the flaws in the executive compensation process, and (2) the lack
of accountability and excessive insulation of corporate boards. Our article deals only with
the first issue. While we share many of their concerns about the deficiencies of boards of
directors, we differ in our assessment of executive compensation: whether executives are
overpaid, the role of managerial power, and why executive compensation has risen so
much over the last 15 years.
Bebchuk and Fried’s main argument is that CEOs have essentially been able to set
their own pay through captured boards and remuneration committees. One central
regulatory and social constraint CEOs face, however, in setting their pay is mandatory
disclosure of their remuneration and the potential “outrage” of outsiders on the
announcement of egregiously inflated compensation. CEOs, therefore, try to elude
outsider wrath by “camouflaging” their high pay as highly complex and hard to value
incentive pay. Another form of camouflage CEOs can engage in is to grant themselves
inflated pension plans, life insurance contracts, and golden parachutes.
Bebchuk and Fried argue that, upon closer inspection, what superficially looks like
an optimal financial incentive contract is in reality just a sham. The “official view,”
which sees executive compensation contracts as optimal incentive contracts, has little
basis in reality and can only be seen as a clever CEO sales pitch for their “rent
extraction.” As perspicacious as Bebchuk and Fried’s observations may be, an obvious
concern with their theory of camouflage of executive compensation is that it may not
always live up to the basic Popperian test of falsifiability. Since they do not articulate
precisely how to distinguish the reported forms of camouflaged compensation from forms
of compensation that are consistent with optimal incentive contracting, it is not possible
to determine which disclosed compensation contracts in reality might be inconsistent
with their theory.4
But this is more of an academic quibble than our main critique to their theory.
Rather, our main reservation is that, while they rightly point to important ways in which
the reality of executive pay negotiations is far from the idealized arm’s-length bargaining
situation of the principal-agent paradigm, they do not provide a compelling explanation
for how and why both the level of pay and the sensitivity to stock price performance have
risen so much over the 1990s. They do point to a trend towards higher pay driven by the
practice of benchmarking CEO compensation at or above the average pay in peer group
companies. That is, they argue that the outrage constraint was gradually relaxed during
the 1990s, as CEO pay was rising across the board in all companies. True, they also
allude to the bull market and the growing importance of stock options, as we emphasize,
but it is not clear how the rise in stock valuations fits into their managerial power theory
of executive compensation. What is the mechanism that links the two phenomena? Have
3. LUCIAN BEBCHUK & JESSE FRIED, PAY WITHOUT PERFORMANCE ix (2004).
4. Other parts of their theory are more easily tested, however, such as their prediction that other things
equal, the level of CEO compensation is rising with CEO power vis-a-vis boards and shareholders, or that
hidden forms of compensation will be performance insensitive.
2