NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RECONCILING THE RETURN PREDICTABILITY EVIDENCE
Martin Lettau
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Working Paper 12109
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12109
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2006
Lettau: Department of Finance, Stern School of Business, New York University, 44 W. 4th Street, New York,
NY 10012; mlettau@stern.nyu.edu; Tel: (212) 998-0378; http://www.stern.nyu.edu/(cid:1)mlettau. Van
Nieuwerburgh: Department of Finance, Stern School of Business, New York University, 44 W. 4th Street,
New York, NY 10012; svnieuwe@stern.nyu.edu; Tel: (212) 998-0673; http://www.stern.nyu.edu/(cid:1)svnieuwe.
We thank an anonymous referee, the editor, Yakov Amihud, John Campbell, Kenneth French, Sydney
Ludvigson, Eli Ofek, Matthew Richardson, Ivo Welch, Robert Whitelaw and the seminar participants at NYU
and McGill University for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Martin Lettau and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Reconciling the Return Predictability Evidence
Martin Lettau and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
NBER Working Paper No. 12109
March 2006
JEL No. G1, G12, G11, C53
ABSTRACT
Evidence of stock return predictability by financial ratios is still controversial, as documented by
inconsistent results for in-sample and out-of-sample regressions and by substantial parameter
instability. This paper shows that these seemingly incompatible results can be reconciled if the
assumption of a fixed steady-state mean of the economy is relaxed. We find strong empirical
evidence in support of shifts in the steady-state and propose simple methods to adjust financial ratios
for such shifts. The forecasting relationship of adjusted price ratios and future returns is statistically
significant and stable over time. We also show that shifts in the steady-state are responsible for the
parameter instability and poor out-of-sample performance of unadjusted price ratios that are found
in the data. Our conclusions hold for a variety of financial ratios and are robust to changes in the
econometric technique used to estimate shifts in the steady-state.
Martin Lettau
Stern School of Business
Department of Finance
44. W. 4th St., Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
mlettau@stern.nyu.edu
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Stern School of Business
Department of Finance
44. W. 4th St., Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012
svnieuwe@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
The question of whether stock returns are predictable has received an enormous amount of
attention. This is not surprising because the existence of return predictability is not only
of interest to practitioners but also has important implications for financial models of risk
and return. One branch of the literature asserts that expected returns contain a time-varying
component that implies predictability of future returns. Due to its persistence, the predictive
component is stronger over longer horizons than over short horizons. Classic predictive variables
are financial ratios, such as the dividend-price ratio, the earnings-price ratio, and the book-to-
market ratio (Rozeff (1984), Fama and French (1988), Campbell and Shiller (1988), Cochrane
(1991), Goetzman and Jorion (1993), Hodrick (1992), Lewellen (2004), and others), but other
variables have also been found to be powerful predictors of long-horizon returns (e.g., Lettau
and Ludvigson (2001), Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2005a), Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi
(2004), Piazzesi, Schneider, and Tuzel (2004)). Moreover, these studies conclude that growth
rates of fundamentals, such as dividends or earnings, are much less forecastable than returns,
suggesting that most of the variation of financial ratios is due to variations in expected returns.
These conclusions are controversial because the forecasting relationship of financial ratios
and future stock returns exhibits a number of disconcerting features. First, correct inference is
problematic because financial ratios are extremely persistent; in fact, standard tests leave the
possibility of unit roots open. Nelson and Kim (1993), Stambaugh (1999), Ang and Bekaert
(2001), Ferson, Sarkissian, and Simin (2003), and Valkanov (2003) conclude that the statistical
evidence of forecastability is weaker once tests are adjusted for high persistence. Second, finan-
cial ratios have poor out-of-sample forecasting power, as shown in Bossaerts and Hillion (1999)
and Goyal and Welch (2003, 2004), but see Campbell and Thompson (2005) for a different
interpretations of the out-of-sample evidence. Third, and related to the poor out-of-sample evi-
dence, the forecasting relationship of returns and financial ratios exhibits significant instability
overtime. Forexample, inrolling30-yearregressionsofannuallogCRSPvalue-weightedreturns
on lagged log dividend-price ratios, the ordinary least squares (OLS) regression coefficient varies
between zero and 0.5 and the associated R2 ranges from close to zero to 30% depending on
the subsample. Not surprisingly, the hypothesis of a constant regression coefficient is routinely
rejected (Viceira (1996), Paye and Timmermann (2003)).
In addition to concerns that return forecastability might be spurious, the benchmark model
of time-varying expected returns faces additional challenges. The extreme persistence of price
ratios implies that expected returns have to be extremely persistent as well. But if shocks to
expectedreturnshaveahalf-lifeofmanyyearsorevendecades,asimpliedbythehighpersistence
of financial ratios, they are unlikely to be linked to many plausible economic risk factors, such
as those linked to business cycles. Instead, researchers have to identify slow-moving factors that
2

are primary determinants of equity risk. In addition, the extraordinary valuation ratios in the
late 1990s represent a significant challenge for the benchmark model. Given the historical record
of returns, fundamentals, and prices, it is exceedingly unlikely that persistent stationary shocks
to expected returns are capable of explaining price multiples like those seen in 1999 or 2000.
How can models with time-varying expected returns be reconciled with these serious chal-
lenges? In this paper, we propose an explanation for the puzzling empirical patterns; namely,
the possibility that changes in the steady-state mean of financial ratios are caused, for example,
by changes of the steady-state growth rate of economic fundamentals and/or expected return of
equity. Why might we expect the steady-state to change over time? Some possibilities include
permanent technological innovations that change the long-term growth rate of the economy or
improved risk sharing, changes in stock market participation, changes in the tax code, or lower
macroeconomic volatility that decrease the long-term expected return of equity.
Changes in the steady-state have dramatic effects on the relationship of returns and price
ratios because they cause the mean of the price ratios to change permanently. In particular,
predictability regressions are affected because price ratio regressors would be non-stationary.
However, as we show below, deviations of the price ratios from their steady-state values are
stationary. Thus, the appropriate return forecasting specifications do not include non-stationary
price ratios themselves but only stationary deviations from steady-states. Our empirical results
conclude that such “adjusted(cid:1) price ratios have favorable properties compared to unadjusted
price ratios. For example, in the full sample forecasting relationships of returns with lagged
adjusted price ratios are much more stable over time than with unadjusted price ratios. In real
time, however, the changes in the steady-state are not only difficult to detect but also estimated
with significant uncertainty, making the return forecastability hard to exploit. Out-of-sample
tests performed in real time reflect this difficulty. While adjusted price ratios have superior out-
of-sample forecasting power relative to their unadjusted counterparts, they do not outperform
the simple random walk model.
These results show that seemingly incompatible views of the forecasting relationship of stock
returns and price ratios can be reconciled if the assumption of a fixed steady-state of price
ratios is relaxed. In this sense, the branch of the literature that finds supportive evidence for
return predictability and the branch that emphasizes the instability and poor out-of-sample
forecastability are both correct. We find that returns are indeed forecastable, but low-frequency
shifts in the mean of the price ratios cause the forecasting relationship to be unstable and
reduce the out-of-sample forecasting power if financial ratios are not adjusted for the presence
of permanent shifts in its mean.
Several papers have explored the impact of structural breaks on return predictability. For
example, Viceira (1996) and Paye and Timmermann (2003) reported evidence in favor of breaks
3