NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INSTITUTIONAL WEAKNESS AND STOCK PRICE VOLATILITY
Galina Hale
Assaf Razin
Hui Tong
Working Paper 12127
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12127
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2006
We thank Paul De Grauwe and Yin-Wong Cheung for helpful comments. Yale University. Hale thanks
Stanford Center for International Development for hospitality and financial support during work on this
project. Tel-Aviv University and Cornell University, CEPR, NBER and CESifo. Razin thanks the Bank of
England for hospitality during work on this project. Bank of England. This paper represents the views of
the authors and should not be thought to represent those of the Bank of England. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2006 by Galina Hale, Assaf Razin, and Hui Tong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Institutional Weakness and Stock Price Volatility
Galina Hale, Assaf Razin, and Hui Tong
NBER Working Paper No. 12127
March 2006
JEL No. F3, G3
ABSTRACT
We find an empirical regularity that stronger creditor protection reduces the volatility of stock market
prices. We analyze two distinct mechanisms that characterize equity price volatility: government
guarantees and creditor protection. Using a Tobin q model, we demonstrate that weak creditor
protection that gives rise to government guarantees and tightens credit constraints, increases stock
price volatility. Empirically, accounting for the probability of financial crises, we find that
government guarantees and weak institutions that tighten credit constraints increase aggregated stock
price volatility.
Galina Hale
Department of Economics
Yale University
Box 208268
New Haven, CT 06520-8268
galina.hale@gmail.com
Assaf Razin
Department of Economics
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14583
and NBER
razin@post.tau.ac.il
Hui Tong
Bank of England
Threadneedle Street
London EC2R 8AH
UNITED KINGDDOM
hui.tong@bankofengland.co.uk

1 Introduction
The paper addresses links between cross-country differences in institutional strength and macroeconomic
performance. Specifically, we ask how creditor protection and government guarantees affect the volatility of
stock market prices.
Aseriesofworkshavestudiedtheimpactofcreditorprotectiononthefirm’sexternalfinanceavailability.
LaPortaet. al. (1997)examineasampleof49countriesandfindthatcountrieswithpoorcreditorprotection
have, on average, smaller debt markets. Levine (2004) confirms these findings after including a variety of
additional control variables. Djankov, McLiesh, and Shleifer (2005) expand the external finance volatility
analysis to 129 countries. Again, they find that creditor protection is associated with higher ratio of private
credit to GDP. Better creditor protection has also been shown to lower the firm’s borrowing cost. La Porta
et al. (2000) find that the cost of capital is higher, and the firm valuation lower, in countries with weak
property rights. Bae and Goyal (2003) use data from 37 countries to examine how creditor rights affect loan
spreads(overtheLIBORortheprimerate)ininternationalbankloans. Theyfindthatbankschargehigher
loan spreads when property rights are weak.
Creditor protection affects also other aspects of the economy. Nenova et al. (2000) analyze more than
11,000firmsin46countriesandfindthatstrongercreditorrightsreducethecash-flowrisk,operatingincome
variability, and the operating leverage. Galindo (2001) studies the impact of creditor rights on the credit
cycle. He finds that creditor rights play an important role, by exacerbating credit risk in countries where
creditor rights are weakly protected, and hence inducing an over-reaction of credit markets to exogenous
shocks. Burger and Warnock (2004) examine foreign participation in 49 local bond markets, and find that
countries with strong creditor rights have on average more developed local bond markets, and they also rely
lessonforeign-currency-denominatedbonds. Moreover,moredevelopedbondmarketshaveadistributionof
returns characterized by high variance and negative skewness, factors eschewed by U.S. investors. Shleifer
(2003) further argues that for sovereign debt market to survive, the rights of creditors need to be protected
effectively.
However, most of these studies focus on the credit market and much less on the stock market. In this
paper,wetrytofillagapbylookingathowcreditorrightsandgovernmentguaranteesaffectthestockreturn
volatility for market aggregates. As a theoretical rationale behind the empirical link between institutional
features and asset price volatility, we analyze two distinct mechanisms. First, we consider government
2

guarantees that lead to moral hazard. Such moral hazard may increase stock price volatility. Second, we
arguethatcreditorprotectionthatmayrelaxcreditconstraintsisalsoassociatedwithequitypricevolatility,
andtheinstitutionalweaknessinthecreditmarketexacerbatesthevolatility. Therehavebeenearlierstudies
on how corporate control affects the dispersion of stock prices with a market. For example, Morck, Yeung
and Yu (2000) look at the stock price co-movement within a country. They find that co-movement is more
pronounced in poor economies than in rich economies, which they contribute to cross-country differences in
propertyrights. Ourworkisnot concernedwith theidiosyncratic dispersion ofstockprices, but ratherwith
the instability in the aggregate. We expect that better creditor protection could reduce market volatility.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 examines empirical regularities associated with the link
between creditor rights and stock market volatility. Section 3 analyzes two candidate mechanisms behind
the empirical regularities: government guarantees and institutional features which affect credit constraints.
Section 4 attempts to empirically separate these two mechanisms in the data. Section 5 concludes.
2 Empirical Regularities
2.1 Data
In this section, we look at the correlation between creditor rights, stock price volatility and credit growth
volatility . Our creditor protection index comes from La Porta, et al. (1998).1 The creditor rights index
ranges from 0 to 4 and is formed by adding one when the country imposes restrictions, such as creditor
consent or minimum dividends to file for reorganization. In addition when secured creditors are able to gain
possession of their security once the reorganization petition has been approved (no automatic stay); secured
creditors are ranked first in the distribution of the proceeds that result from the disposition of the assets of
a bankrupt firm; and the debtor does not retain the administration of its property pending the resolution of
the reorganization. Therefore, higher creditor rights index is associated with better protection for creditors.
In some analysis we also use the index of shareholder rights from La Porta et al. (2000). This index
ranges from zero to six and is formed by adding one when: the country allows shareholders to mail their
proxyvotetothefirm;shareholdersarenotrequiredtodeposittheirsharespriortotheGeneralShareholders
Meeting; cumulative voting or proportional representation of minorities in the board of directors is allowed;
1Seehttp://post.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/shleifer/Data/l&fweb.xls
3