NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
POLITICAL RISK VERSUS MARKET RISK IN SOCIAL SECURITY
John B. Shoven
Sita N. Slavov
Working Paper 12135
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12135
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2006
This research was supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration through grant #10-P-98363-2 to the
National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the SSA Retirement Research Consortium. The findings
and conclusions expressed are solely those of the author(s) and do not represent the views of SSA, any
agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER. The authors would like to thank Gopi Shah, Colleen
Flaherty, Eugene Kim, and Sanjee Singla for superb research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by John B. Shoven and Sita N. Slavov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Political Risk Versus Market Risk in Social Security
John B. Shoven and Sita N. Slavov
NBER Working Paper No. 12135
March 2006
JEL No.
ABSTRACT
Pay-as-you-go Social Security is typically characterized as a universal defined benefit pension
program. Implicit in this characterization is a sense that the participant’s investment in future
benefits is somehow guaranteed, or safe from risk. This study develops the concept of “political risk”
as the possibility that some future legislature will be forced to change the tax and benefit provisions
of pay-as-you-go social security programs, when there are changes in the demographic and
macroeconomic variables that support it. Thus there is a “political risk” to participants that might
be compared to the “market risk” in a personal accounts retirement scheme. In this paper, we carry
out a detailed quantitative analysis of political risk in the U.S. Social Security system, as well as an
overview of policy reforms in several European countries that demonstrate political risk more
broadly across social security systems. For the U.S., we compute the internal rates of return (IRRs)
from Social Security for various age groups and income levels, using the existing law in effect each
year since 1939. We find considerable variation in IRRs through time for any birth cohort.
Participants experienced significant declines in IRRs as a result of adjustments made to restore the
system’s solvency in 1983 and 1994. If the system were brought into actuarial balance in 2005,
younger cohorts would experience another significant decline in their lifetime IRR. Our review of
other countries demonstrates political risk in other social security systems as well. Law changes
necessitated by actuarial imbalances pass demographic risk on to participants. The debate over
personal accounts, therefore, is not one of “safe” versus “risky” benefits, but one of portfolio choice.
John G. Shoven
Department of Economics
Landau Economics Building
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
shoven@leland.stanford.edu
Sita N. Slavov
Sita Nataraj Slavov
Department of Economics
Occidental College
1600 Campus Road
Los Angeles, CA 90041
sslavov@oxy.edu

I. Introduction
Pay-as-you-go Social Security is typically characterized as a universal defined
benefit (DB) pension. With this characterization, the debate surrounding the creation of
personal accounts then becomes a choice between a safe DB plan and a risky defined
contribution (DC) one. While no one can argue against the fact that stock and bond
returns are risky, the long-run rate of return from traditional Social Security depends on
the future course of fertility rates, immigration rates, mortality rates and the growth rate
of real wages. There is considerable uncertainty about all four of these variables and
hence traditional Social Security cannot be considered a safe asset. The three
demographic variables, for instance, produced a number of surprises in the last half of the
twentieth century (the baby boom, the baby bust, the uneven pace of mortality
improvement, etc.). Shifts in demographics and macroeconomic variables render
traditional Social Security vulnerable to political risk because legislated changes in taxes
and benefits are required to restore actuarial balance. Such adjustments undermine the
“safe” benefits promised by traditional Social Security.
We will argue that the characterization of traditional Social Security as a defined
benefit retirement program is inappropriate. An essential element of defined benefit
pension programs is that the participants do not bear the funding risk. That is, if the fund
becomes underfunded (due to poor returns or a deviation between what actually happens
and the actuarial assumptions), the funding inadequacy is not borne by the participants,
but by the employer or an insurance entity. The risks are transferred from the participants
to others, leaving the workers with a safe benefit. Of course, this is a characterization of
DB plans; reality is somewhat different. DB benefits remain risky because they are not
indexed for inflation and because the risk transfer is incomplete. The point here is that
the funding risk (or at least most of the funding risk) is not borne by participants.
Social Security doesn’t even approximate a DB plan. The funding risk is borne
by participants. It isn’t transferred to anyone else. In fact, since it is a nearly universal
plan, it is impossible to think of who could insure the benefits for the participants. What
we are calling political risk in this paper could be thought of as funding risk. The
fundamental risks of Social Security are not being generated by politicians; they are
1

being generated by the demographic and economic factors affecting funding. The
politicians are simply an intermediary in the transmission of underlying risks.
There exist several studies that have attempted to study and quantify various
aspects of political risk. Harris, Meyerson, and Smith (2001) and CBO (2001) study the
impact of demographic and wage-growth risk on the trust fund balances. Harris,
Myerson, and Smith also do a comparative analysis of the risks of traditional Social
Security and systems in which part or all of the trust fund assets are invested in private
securities. How the variability in the system’s finances translates into risk for individual
participants is a more difficult question. In our earlier work on this topic (Nataraj and
Shoven 2003), we assumed that the Social Security system is run on a purely PAYGO
basis, in which the payroll tax rate is fixed and all its proceeds are distributed in a lump-
sum fashion to the current elderly. Within this framework, we ask whether individuals
are better off with a pure PAYGO Social Security system (which is subject to political or
funding risk because benefits are adjusted to reflect revenue), a pure defined contribution
funded plan (which is subject to financial risk), or some combination of the two.
Elementary portfolio theory suggests that “some of each” is the right answer. Indeed, this
is what we conclude: even very risk-averse participants desire a system with an
individual accounts component.
In reality, however, the Social Security system is not a pure PAYGO system.
Both benefits and taxes are legislated for the indefinite future, with any excess revenue
going into a trust fund. We have argued (Nataraj and Shoven 2003) that the presence of a
trust fund cannot serve as an effective smoothing device for individual returns – that is,
the full impact of demographic and wage-growth risk must ultimately be borne by the
system’s participants. A persistent trust fund deficit will force policymakers to raise
taxes or cut benefits. The U.S. has already effectively cut promised benefits several
times (e.g., by raising the normal retirement age and making part of benefits taxable) and
similar adjustments have been necessary in many countries (e.g., Germany has increased
the retirement age). However, in order to understand the nature of political risk, it is
important to investigate how governments respond to a divergence between assets and
liabilities, and how this response passes demographic risk on to the system’s participants.
2