NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TESTING FOR ASYMMETRIC INFORMATION USING 'UNUSED OBSERVABLES' IN INSURANCE MARKETS:
EVIDENCE FROM THE U.K. ANNUITY MARKET
Amy Finkelstein
James Poterba
Working Paper 12112
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12112
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2006
We thank Jeff Brown, Edmund Cannon, Pierre-Andre Chiappori, Keith Crocker, Richard Disney, Liran
Einav, Carl Emmerson, Michael Orszag, Casey Rothschild, Ian Tonks, Michael Wadsworth, Jonathan
Zinman, and an anonymous referee for helpful discussions, Hui Shan for outstanding research assistance
and the National Institute of Aging and the National Science Foundation (Poterba) for financial support.
We are particularly grateful to the generous and patient employees at the firm that provided the data
underlying our analysis. Poterba is a trustee of the College Retirement Equity Fund (CREF) and of
the TIAA-CREF mutual funds, which sell retirement products including annuities. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2006 by Amy Finkelstein and James Poterba. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Testing for Asymmetric Information Using 'Unused Observables' in Insurance Markets: Evidence
from the U.K. Annuity Market
Amy Finkelstein and James Poterba
NBER Working Paper No. 12112
March 2006, Revised July 2013
JEL No. D82,G22
ABSTRACT
This paper tests for asymmetric information in the U.K. annuity market of the 1990s by trying to identify
'unused observables,' attributes of individual insurance buyers that are correlated both with subsequent
claims experience and with insurance demand but that insurance companies did not use to set insurance
prices. Unlike the widely-used positive correlation test for asymmetric information, which searches
for a positive correlation between insurance demand and risk experience, the unused observables test is
not confounded by heterogeneity in individual preference parameters that may affect insurance demand.
We identify residential location as an unused observable in the U.K. annuity market of this period,
and show that this variable was correlated both with annuity demand and with prospective mortality.
Thus even though residential location was observed by all market participants, the decision not to
condition prices on it created the same types of market inefficiencies that arise when annuity buyers
have private information about mortality risk. Our findings raise interesting questions about how
insurance companies select the set of buyer attributes that they use in setting policy prices. In the decade
following the period that we study, U.K. insurance companies changed their pricing practices and
began to condition annuity prices on a buyer's postcode.
Amy Finkelstein
Department of Economics
MIT E52-383B
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
afink@mit.edu
James Poterba
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-350
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
poterba@nber.org

Asymmetric information is widely recognized as hindering the efficient operation of insurance
markets, but whether it is present in specific markets remains a subject of active research. In recent years,
numerous studies have tested for asymmetric information in a variety of different insurance markets. This
work has been largely based on the "positive correlation" test described by Chiappori and Salanie (2000).
This test rejects the null hypothesis of symmetric information when there is a positive correlation between
insurance purchases and risk occurrence, conditional on the buyer characteristics that are used to set
insurance prices.
A limitation of the positive correlation test, noted by Finkelstein and McGarry (2006) and Chiappori
et al. (2006), is that it breaks down when individuals have private information about characteristics other
than risk type, such as risk preferences, and when these other characteristics affect insurance demand. A
number of studies, reviewed by Cutler, Finkelstein, and McGarry (2008) and by Einav, Finkelstein, and
Levin (2010), suggest that this type of preference heterogeneity plays an empirically important role in
many insurance markets.
This paper illustrates an alternative, and quite straightforward, test for asymmetric information that is
robust to the existence of preference heterogeneity in insurance demand. When some attributes of
insurance buyers that are correlated with insurance demand and subsequent risk experience are not used
to price insurance policies, then insurance buyers effectively have private information about their risk
type. This may occur even when insurance companies observe, or could observe, the relevant individual
characteristics, but choose not to use them in pricing. We refer to this situation as one of “asymmetrically
used” information to distinguish it from the more classic “asymmetric information” that results when
features of the contracting environment make it impossible for the insurer to observe risk-relevant
characteristics of consumers. Asymmetrically used information has similar implications for market
equilibrium and market efficiency as the more classic “asymmetric information.”
We test for asymmetrically used information by asking if we can identify individual characteristics
that are risk-relevant and correlated with insurance demand, but that are not used by insurance companies
1

in designing the contract menus facing individuals. We refer to this as the “unused observables” test.
Regulation can be one source of “asymmetric use” of information in insurance markets. When
insurance companies are prevented from using some individual characteristics in pricing insurance
policies, buyers who know these characteristics and their relationship to risk type can exploit this
information. In many insurance markets, however, asymmetrically used information occurs because
insurance companies voluntarily choose not to price on the basis of risk-related buyer information that
they collect, or could collect. We explore this ostensible puzzle in more detail below. We suggest that
concerns about regulatory response and consumer backlash may contribute to this behavior, but we stop
short of providing any evidence to support this conjecture.
We illustrate the use of the unused observables test in the retirement annuity market in the United
Kingdom in the 1990s. In the U.K., those who saved for retirement through tax-preferred savings
vehicles – the equivalent of IRA’s or 401(k)’s in the United States – were, until 2011, required to
purchase annuities. Even when annuitization was compulsory, annuity buyers nevertheless had
substantial flexibility with regard to their contract choice, and we test for whether asymmetric information
appears to affect these choices.
Understanding the nature of the information structure in retirement annuity markets is of substantial
interest in its own right. Annuity markets have attracted attention in light of Social Security reform
proposals in various countries to partly or fully replacing government-provided defined benefit, pay-as-
you-go retirement systems with defined contribution systems in which individuals would accumulate
assets in individual accounts. Whether the government should require individuals to annuitize some or all
of their balance, and whether it should allow choice over the type of annuity product purchased, are two
important policy design issues. The relative attractiveness of these various options can depend critically
on the information structure in the private annuity market.
We implement the unused observables test with a data set containing information on the annuity
policies sold by a large U.K. insurance company in the late 1980s and the 1990s. During the time period
we study, the company collected information on the annuitant’s place of residence but did not use this
2