NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY DO IPO AUCTIONS FAIL?
Ravi Jagannathan
Ann E. Sherman
Working Paper 12151
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12151
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2006
© 2006 by Ravi Jagannathan and Ann E. Sherman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Why Do IPO Auctions Fail?
Ravi Jagannathan and Ann E. Sherman
NBER Working Paper No. 12151
April 2006, Revised November 2006
JEL No. G24,G28,G32
ABSTRACT
We document a somewhat surprising regularity: of the many countries that have used IPO auctions,
virtually all have abandoned them. The common explanations given for the lack of popularity of the
auction method in the US, viz., issuer reluctance to try a new experimental method, and underwriter
pressure towards methods that lead to higher fees, do not fit the evidence. We examine why auctions
have failed and verify, to the extent possible, that they are consistent with what academic theory predicts.
Both uniform price and discriminatory auctions are plagued by unexpectedly large fluctuations in
the number of participants. The free rider problem and the winner's curse hamper price discovery
and discourage investors from participating in auctions. Calculating the optimal bids in large multi-unit
common value auctions with endogenous entry imposes a huge computational burden. With IPOs
taking place sporadically, and each firm being different, auctions are likely to end up being unstable.
Ravi Jagannathan
J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of Management
2001 Sheridan Road
Leverone/Anderson Complex
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
rjaganna@northwestern.edu
Ann E. Sherman
University of Notre Dame
Department of Finance
P.O. Box 399
Notre Dame, IN 46556-0399

"Improbable as it is, all other explanations are more improbable still."
Sherlock Holmes in "Sliver Blaze," 1892, by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle
Book building is the primary method through which initial public offerings (IPOs) are
brought to the market in the United States (US). An ongoing debate in the academic literature
explores the advantages and disadvantages of the book building method, relative to sealed bid
auctions. On the one hand, the greater control and flexibility of book building provides
substantial benefits to issuers.1 On the other hand, the book building procedure necessarily
gives the underwriter substantial discretion over allocations. When agents are given discretion,
there is always the potential for abuse, and the scandals following the internet bubble suggest
that at least some abuses have occurred in practice2. Moreover, there is a general agency
problem between underwriters and issuers that has not yet been fully explored for IPOs.3 Thus
there are both advantages and disadvantages to the flexibility offered by book building.
In the search for an alternative, much of the focus has been on auctions, which have
been extremely successful in a wide range of alternative settings. With sealed bid auctions,
theory also offers trade-offs – auction theory predicts that sealed bid auctions will lead to very
accurate pricing under some circumstances but to substantial problems under others. In this
case, the theoretical differences are in the underlying assumptions regarding information
structures and the determinants of entry. If information is endowed (i.e. costless) and bidder
entry is predictable, auctions should be relatively efficient. But if accurate estimates of IPO
share values are difficult to produce and entry is uncoordinated, theory predicts that auction
outcomes may be far less desirable (see Sherman, 2005).
Because theory predicts varying outcomes for both auction and book building IPOs, it is
worth examining the available evidence regarding the track records of each method. In this
paper we offer evidence on overall usage patterns for many countries – the ‘market test’ - and
then examine IPO auction outcomes in more detail. We find that, when standard auctions have
1 As first shown by Benveniste and Spindt (1989) and Benveniste and Wilhelm (1990). Ritter and Welch (2002),
Ljungqvist (2004) and Wilhelm (2005) offer reviews of the academic IPO literature.
2 See Loughran and Ritter (2004) for discussion of the scandals and overall trends in IPO underwriting.
3 with the notable except of Biais, Bossaerts and Rochet (2002), for the French regulatory regime.

2
had to compete with another method - either with fixed price public offers4 or with book
building - auctions have been driven out.
The lack of popularity of auctions cannot be explained by either lack of familiarity or
by differences in underwriting fees. The fees for fixed price public offers in most countries
have been the same as those for auctions, leaving investment banks with no incentive to favor
one method over the other based on fees. In spite of that, when issuers have been allowed to
choose between fixed price public offers and auctions, the former method has prevailed and
auctions have lost out5. And when fixed price public offers later were faced with competition
from book building, the fixed price public offer method has generally lost out, although not as
completely as the auction method.
The observation that auctions have consistently lost out to other methods is an
important piece of evidence but is not, by itself, sufficient to conclude that the predictions of
auction theory are correct. We therefore examine the reasons why auctions have failed and
verify, to the extent possible, that they are consistent with auction theory in an IPO setting.
The auction method is old and well established, and has been particularly successful for
the largest security issue markets – those for government debt, particularly US Treasury
securities; and auctions have been frequently used for new preferred stock issues in the United
Kingdom (UK), particularly for government-owned utilities6. Treasury auctions are held
frequently at regular time intervals, with a core of regular participants. Further, close
substitutes to the securities being issued are already trading actively in the market, making
valuation relatively easy and precise7. Preferred stocks of regulated utilities are relatively easy
to value since they resemble high quality bonds. In contrast, IPOs occur less frequently, at
sporadic intervals, and their value is difficult to determine. Each issue is different and may
4 With fixed price public offers, the price is set before any information on demand is received, as shown by
Loughran, Ritter and Rydqvist (1994, Table 2). With book building (a term coined in the 1990s), the underwriter
arranges for investors to attend a road show and then collects indications of interest, which are used to fill (build)
the order book. The offering price is set only after the order book is full, giving the underwriter some idea of
demand. With standard auctions, pricing and allocation are based on bids, using pre-established rules. Sherman
(2005) argues that the main difference between the methods, from a regulatory standpoint, is the underwriter’s
discretion over allocations with book building. With either fixed price public offers or sealed bid auctions,
underwriters may, and sometimes do, hold road shows before the offer price is set. They are allowed to ask for
feedback but, without control over allocations, they cannot give investors an incentive to offer reliable feedback.
5 The only exception that we know of is France, which used a unique auction method that discouraged free riders.
6 In the six month period from Oct. 1, 1974 to March 31, 1975, all seven preferred stock issues in the UK used
"Offers for Sale by Tender", i.e. auctions. The issuers were all local waterworks or water companies.
7 Nevertheless, Goldreich (2005) shows that even uniform price Treasury auctions lead to underpricing.