NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TAXES AND GROWTH IN A
FINANCIALLY UNDERDEVELOPED COUNTRY:
EVIDENCE FROM THE CHILEAN INVESTMENT BOOM
Chang-Tai Hsieh
Jonathan A. Parker
Working Paper 12104
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12104
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2006
We thank Daron Acemoglu, Robert Barro, Ben Bernanke, Bruce Preston, Ricardo Caballero, Angus Deaton,
J. Bradford DeLong, Erica Field, Christian Julliard, Peter Klenow, Jose Scheinkman, Fabio Schiantarelli,
Christopher Sims, James Tybout, and Rodrigo Valdes for helpful comments. We thank Dani Rodrik’s project
on analytical country studies on economic growth for partial funding. Parker acknowledges the Sloan
Foundation and NSF grant SES-0096076 for financial support. Hsieh thanks the research committee of the
World Bank for financial support. Erica Field provided excellent research assistance. This paper formerly
circulated as “Taxes and Growth in a Financially Underdeveloped Country: Explaining the Chilean
Investment Boom.” The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Chang-Tai Hsieh and Jonathan A. Parker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Taxes and Growth in a Financially Underdeveloped Country: Evidence from the Chilean
Investment Boom
Chang-Tai Hsieh and Jonathan A. Parker
NBER Working Paper No. 12104
March 2006
JEL No. H32, E22, D92, O54, O16
ABSTRACT
This paper argues that taxation of retained profits is particularly distortionary in an economy with
good growth prospects and poorly developed financial markets because it primarily reduces the
investment of financially constrained firms, investment that has marginal product greater than the
after-tax market real interest rate. Contrarily, taxes on distributed profits or capital gains primarily
reduce the investment of financially unconstrained firms. Chile experienced a banking crisis over
the period from 1982 to 1986 and in 1984 reduced its tax rate on retained profits from 50 percent to
10 percent. We show that, consistent with our theory, there was a large increase in aggregate
investment after the reform which was entirely funded by an increase in retained profits. Further, we
show that investment grew by more in industries that depend more on external financing, according
to the Rajan and Zingales (1998) measure. Finally, we present some weak evidence from
comparisons of investment rates across firms for several different measures of their likelihood of
being financially constrained.
Chang-Tai Hsieh
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
549 Evans Hall, #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
chsieh@econ.berkeley.edu
Jonathan A. Parker
Department of Economics
416 Robertson Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
jparker@princeton.edu

1 Introduction
The performance of the Chilean economy since the mid 1980s has been extraordinary:
Chile’s GDP per capita grew at an average rate of 4.5 percent per year during the decade
following 1983 (Figure 1a). While not as impressive as the growth miracles of the Asian
developing economies during the postwar period, Chile’s strong economic performance is
unique among the developing economies in the Western hemisphere. As is well known,
an important part of Chile’s impressive growth is a saving and investment boom on the
order of ten percent of GDP (Figure 1b). In this paper, we present evidence that a main
cause of this investment and growth boom was a corporate tax reform that cut the tax
rate on retained profits fromnearly 50 percent to 10 percent over the period 1984 to 1986.
From economic theory, we argue that this reform could have large effects. When firms
face credit constraints, taxation of retained profits is more distortionary than taxation of
dividendsorhouseholdcapital gains. Bydefinition, thereturntothemarginal investment
of a constrained firm is (weakly) greater than the after-tax real interest rate. Taxation
of retained profits reduces precisely this potentially highly productive investment, since
it reduces internal funds and therefore reduces the investment of constrained firms by the
amount of the tax. Unconstrained firms can largely avoid retaining profits and are able
to fund investment through other means. Thus, in an economy with poorly developed
financial markets, but otherwise favorable macroeconomic policies and conditions, such
as Chile in the mid 1980s, taxing retained earnings is potentially quite harmful.1 The
0
1984 tax reform, by reducing the tax rate on retained earnings, increased the internal
funds of many credit constrained firms and so may have been responsible for the increase
in aggregate investment.
We present three types of evidence to assess the importance of our theory.
First, we show that the timing of aggregate saving and investment boom and its
composition are both consistent with the reduction in the taxation of retained profits
being a major cause of the investment boom. Investment increased by 4.5 percent of
GDP in the first year of the reform and had increased by over 10 percent of GDP by
1These‘favorablemacroeconomicpolicies’representotherimportantcausesofgrowththatwediscuss
subsequently.
1

five years after the reform, reaching 25 percent of GDP. The tax reform occurred at
the beginning of the investment boom while other reforms such as trade liberalization
and the privatization of the public pension system significantly predate the boom. More
importantly, the increase in investment was entirely funded by business saving, that is,
by retained profits. Private saving and public saving remained largely unchanged.
Second, the cross-industry pattern of investment is also consistent with our theory.
UsinganannualChileansurveyofplantsthatcoversallChileanmanufacturingplantswith
more than 10 employees, we show that investment rates rose after the reform primarily in
industries that are heavily dependent on external finance. Industries classified by Rajan
and Zingales (1998) as dependent on external finance had larger increases in investment
in 1985, 1986 and 1987, although not in the first year of the reform, 1984.
Finally, despite not having clean measures of financial constraints at the firm level,
we present the results of comparing the investment rates of plants that are plausibly
constrained to those that are plausibly unconstrained using the measures we do have.
That is, we divide plants into those that are owned by firms that are more and less likely
to face financing constraints and compare the investment behavior of plants owned by
these different types of firms through the tax reform. Here, the evidence on our theory
is weaker and more mixed. Specifically, we find that the plants owned by firms that
exhibited a high correlation of cash flow and investment before the reform increased their
investment significantly more in the reform and to some extent following the reform as
compared to similar plants that had low prior correlations of cash flow and investment.
Wealsofindsomeevidencethatplantsownedbyfirmsthatpreviouslyhadlowshort-term
reserves increased their investment more during and to some extent following the reforms.
However, we find no evidence that plants owned either by firms that pay rent or by firms
that are smaller benefitted disproportionately from the reform, but we also note that the
small firm versus large firm distinction is less likely to measure the degree of financial
constraints facing a firm in Chile, as compared to the United States.
This paper is primarily related to two literatures. First, our analysis adds to the
literature on the impact of tax policies on investment and the importance of financial
2