NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FLIGHT TO QUALITY AND COLLECTIVE RISK MANAGEMENT
Ricardo J. Caballero
Arvind Krishnamurthy
Working Paper 12136
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12136
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2006
Respectively: MIT and NBER; Northwestern University. E-mails: caball@mit.edu,
a-krishnamurthy@northwestern.edu. We are grateful to Marios Angeletos, Olivier Blanchard, Phil Bond,
Jon Faust, Xavier Gabaix, Jordi Gali, Michael Golosov, William Hawkins, Burton Hollifield, Bengt
Holmstrom, Dimitri Vayanos, Ivan Werning and seminar participants at Columbia, DePaul, Imperial College,
LBS, Northwestern, MIT, Wharton, NY Fed Liquidity Conference, NBER MIDM Conference, UBC Summer
Conference, Bank of England, and the Central Bank of Chile for their comments. David Lucca and Alp
Simsek provided excellent research assistance. Caballero thanks the NSF for financial support. This paper
covers the same substantive issues as (and hence replaces) “Financial System Risk and Flight to Quality,”
NBER WP # 11996 (2005) with a simpler but more abstract model. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Ricardo J. Caballero and Arvind Krishnamurthy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Flight to Quality and Collective Risk Management
Ricardo J. Caballero and Arvind Krishnamurthy
NBER Working Paper No. 12136
March 2006
JEL No. E30, E44, E5, F34, G1, G22, G28
ABSTRACT
We present a model of flight to quality episodes that emphasizes systemic risk and the Knightian
uncertainty surrounding these episodes. Agents make risk management decisions with incomplete
knowledge. They understand their own shocks, but are uncertain of how correlated their shocks are
with systemwide shocks. Aversion to this uncertainty leads them to question whether their private
risk management decisions are robust to aggregate events, generating conservatism and excessive
demand for safety. We show that agents’ actions lock-up the capital of the financial system in a
manner that is wasteful in the aggregate and can trigger and amplify a financial accelerator. The
scenario that the collective of conservative agents are guarding against is impossible, and known to
be so even given agents’ incomplete knowledge. A lender of last resort, even if less knowledgeable
than private agents about individual shocks, does not suffer from this collective bias and finds that
pledging intervention in extreme events is valuable. The benefit of such intervention exceeds its
direct value because it unlocks private capital markets.
Ricardo J. Caballero
MIT Department of Economics
Room E52-252a
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
caball@mit.edu
Arvind Krishnamurthy
Kellogg Graduate School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
a-krishnamurthy@northwestern.edu

1 Introduction
“... Policypractitionersoperatingunderarisk-managementparadigmmay,attimes,beledto
undertake actions intended to provide insurance against especially adverse outcomes...... When
confronted with uncertainty, especially Knightian uncertainty, human beings invariably attempt
to disengage from medium to long-term commitments in favor of safety and liquidity.... The
immediateresponseonthepartofthecentralbanktosuchfinancialimplosionsmustbetoinject
large quantities of liquidity...” Alan Greenspan (2004).
Flight to quality episodes are an important source of financial and macroeconomic instability. Modern
examples of these episodes in the US include the Penn Central default of 1970; the stock market crash of
1987;theeventsoftheFallof1998beginningwiththeRussiandefaultandendingwiththebailoutofLTCM;
as well as the events that followed the attacks of 9/11. Behind each of these episodes lies the specter of a
meltdown that may lead to a prolonged slowdown as in Japan during the 1990s, or even a catastrophe like
the Great Depression.1 In each of them, as hinted by Greenspan, the Fed intervened early and stood ready
to intervene “as much as needed” to prevent a meltdown.
Two questions immediately arise when considering these examples and Greenspan’s comments on flight
to quality episodes. First, how can events that appear small relative to US private wealth create so much
havoc? Second, how can interventions by the Fed, that also appear small relative to US wealth, be effective
in preventing a meltdown? In this paper we develop a model to address these questions. In short, our
answers are that during flight to quality episodes private capital becomes locked up, and much of the power
of intervention derives from its ability to unlock this capital.
Ourmodelbuildsontwoobservationsaboutflighttoqualityevents. First,atabasicleveltheseepisodes
are about an increase in perceived “risk.” However, the risk does not circumscribe a purely fundamental
shock, and instead centers around the nerve center of the economy, the financial system. For example, the
Russian default in the summer of 1998 eliminated a small fraction of the trillions of dollars of US wealth.
Although small, the default created circumstances that severely strained the financial sector. As prices of
illiquid assets fell, losses grew in commercial banks, investment banks, and hedge funds, leading investors
to question the safety of the financial sector. Investors withdrew risk-capital from the affected markets and
institutions and moved into short-term and liquid assets. Bottlenecks in the movement of capital emerged
as sophisticated parts of the financial system were compromised while other sectors of the economy were
relatively unaffected. The primary risk during this episode was financial system risk.
1See Table 1 (part A) in Barro (2005) for a comprehensive list of extreme events in developed economies during the 20th
century.
2

Second,the“risk”intheseepisodesisofanextremenature. Mostepisodesaretriggeredbyanunexpected
event that causes agents to re-evaluate their models of the world. In the Fall of 1998, the comovement of
Russian government bond spreads, Brazilian spreads, and U.S. Treasury bond spreads was a surprise to
even sophisticated market participants. These high correlations rendered standard risk management models
obsolete, leaving financial market participants searching for new models. Agents responded by making
decisions using “worst-case” scenarios and “stress-testing” models, in a manner suggestive of Knightian
uncertainty. Indeed, the extreme disengagement from risky activities that Greenspan highlights suggests
that agents respond to more than just risk.
Our model focuses on agents’ perceptions regarding the ability of financial intermediaries to deliver on
theirfinancialcontracts. Agentscontractwithfinancialintermediariestocoverliquidityshocksthatmayarise
intheirmarkets. Theseriskmanagementdecisionsaremadewithincompleteknowledge. Agentsunderstand
their own shocks, but are uncertain about the probability model describing shocks in markets different from
theirs and treat this uncertainty as Knightian. If financial intermediaries have limited resources, agents
grow concerned that shocks may arise in other markets that will deplete the resources of intermediaries and
compromisetheirabilitytodeliverontheirfinancialcontracts. Suchriskinessriseseitherthroughanincrease
in Knightian uncertainty or a fall in intermediaries’ assets. Thus our model combines the financial system
risk as well as the Knightian uncertainty that underlies flight to quality episodes.
The model captures two important aspects of flight to quality episodes. First, the increase in perceived
riskiness generates conservatism and demand for safety. Second, we show that Knightian agents respond to
their uncertainty regarding other markets by requiring financial intermediaries to lock-up some capital to
devotetotheirownmarkets’shocks,regardlessofwhathappensinothermarkets. Byforcingintermediaries
to dedicate capital to cover their own shocks, agents ensure that their shocks are covered regardless of who
else receives shocks. However, once locked-up, intermediaries’ capital is not free to move across markets in
response to shocks, resulting in bottlenecks and market segmentation.
The capital bottlenecks have macroeconomic consequences, and lend support to Greenspan’s call for
central bank action during flight to quality. While each Knightian agent covers himself against an extreme
shock, collectively these actions prevent intermediaries from moving capital across markets to expediently
offset shocks as they arrive. We show that this inflexibility leaves the economy overexposed to (moderate)
aggregate shocks that are manageable by the private sector in the absence of flight to quality. Moreover,
the scenario that the collective of conservative agents are guarding against is impossible, and known to be
so even given agents’ incomplete knowledge. Collectively, agents make poor risk management decisions that
lead to avoidable losses.
In this context, a lender of last resort, even if less informed than private agents about each agent’s
own market, can unlock private capital and stabilize the economy during moderate shocks. It does so
3