NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXECUTION RISK
Robert Engle
Robert Ferstenberg
Working Paper 12165
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12165
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2006
The authors are indebted to Lasse Pedersen and participants in the Morgan Stanley Market Microstructure
conference, Goldman Sachs Asset Management, Rotman School at University of Toronto and NYU QFE
Seminar for helpful comments. This paper is the private opinion of the authors and does not necessarily
reflect policy or research of Morgan Stanley. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Robert Engle and Robert Ferstenberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Execution Risk
Robert Engle and Robert Ferstenberg
NBER Working Paper No. 12165
April 2006
JEL No. G2
ABSTRACT
Transaction costs in trading involve both risk and return. The return is associated with the cost of
immediate execution and the risk is a result of price movements during a more gradual trading. The
paper shows that the trade-off between risk and return in optimal execution should reflect the same
risk preferences as in ordinary investment. The paper develops models of the joint optimization of
positions and trades, and shows conditions under which optimal execution does not depend upon the
other holdings in the portfolio. Optimal execution however may involve trades in assets other than
those listed in the order; these can hedge the trading risks. The implications of the model for trading
with reversals and continuations are developed. The model implies a natural measure of liquidity
risk.
Robert Engle
Department of Finance, Stern School of Business
New York University, Salomon Center
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-160
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
rengle@stern.nyu.edu
Robert Ferstenberg
Morgan Stanley
1585 Broadway
New York, NY 10036
Robert.Ferstenberg@morganstanley.com

The trade-off between risk and return is the central feature of both academic and
practitioner finance. Financial managers must decide which risks to take and how much
to take. This involves measuring the risks and modeling the relation between risk and
return. This setting is the classic framework for optimal portfolio construction pioneered
by Markowitz(1952) and now incorporated in all textbooks.
Although much attention has been paid to the cost of trading, little has been
devoted to the risks of trading. Analysis has typically focused on the costs of executing
a single trade or, in some cases, a sequence of trades. In a series of papers, Almgren and
Chriss(1999)(2000) and Almgren(2003) and Grinold and Kahn (1999), and most recently
Obizhaeva and Wang(2005) developed models to focus on the risk of as well the mean
cost of execution.
What is this risk? There are many ways to execute a trade and these have
different outcomes. For example, a small buy order submitted as a market order will
most likely execute at the asking price. If it is submitted as a limit order at a lower price
the execution will be uncertain. If it does not execute and is converted to a market order
at a later time or to another limit order the ultimate price at which the order is executed
will be a random variable. This random variable can be thought of as having both a mean
and a confidence interval. In a mean variance framework, often we consider the mean to
be the expected cost while the variance is the measure of the risk of this transaction.
More generally for large trades, the customer can either execute these
immediately by sending them to a block desk or other intermediary who will take on the
risk, or executing a sequence of smaller trades. These might be planned and executed by
a floor broker, by an in-house trader, an institutional trader, or by an algorithmic trading
system. The ultimate execution will be a random variable primarily because some
portions of the trade will be executed after prices have moved. The delay in trading
introduces price risk due to price movements beyond that which can be anticipated as a
natural response to the trade itself. Different trading strategies will have different
probability distributions of the costs and thus customers will need to choose the trading
strategy that is optimal for them.
- 2 -

This paper addresses the relation between the risk return trade-off that is well
understood for investment and the risk return trade-off that arises in execution. For
example, would it be sensible to trade in a risk neutral fashion when a portfolio is
managed very conservatively? Will execution risk on different names and at different
times, average out to zero? Should the transaction strategy depend on what else is in the
portfolio? Should execution risks be hedged?
In this paper we will integrate the portfolio decision and the execution decision
into a single problem to show how to optimize these choices jointly. In this way we will
answer the four questions posed above and many others.
The paper initially introduces the theoretical optimization problems in section II
and synthesizes them into one problem in section III. Section IV discusses the
implications of trading strategy on the Sharpe Ratio. A specific assumption is made on
price dynamics in Section V leading to specific solutions for the optimal trades. This
section also shows the role of non-traded assets. Section VI introduces more
sophisticated dynamics allowing reversals. Section VII uses this apparatus to discuss
measures of liquidity risk and section VIII concludes.
II. TWO PROBLEMS
A. Portfolio Optimization
The classic portfolio problem in its simplest form seeks portfolios with minimum
variances that attain at least a specific expected return. If y is the portfolio value, the
problem is simply stated as:
min V(y) (1)
s.t.E(y)‡m
0
In this expression, the mechanism for creating the portfolio is not explicitly indicated, nor
is the time period specified. Let us suppose that the portfolio is evaluated over the period
(0,T) and that we define the dollar returns on each period t=0,1,…,T. The dollar return
on the full period is the sum of the dollar returns on the individual periods. Furthermore,
the variance of the sum is the sum of the variances of the individual periods, at least if
there is no autocorrelation in returns. The problem can then be formulated as
- 3 -