NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE PRIVATE VALUE OF SOFTWARE PATENTS
Bronwyn H. Hall
Megan MacGarvie
Working Paper 12195
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12195
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2006
This is a revision of a paper written in April 2005. We thank Anne Layne-Farrar and LECG for the
use of the Corptech data, and we thank Jim Bessen for helpful suggestions and for supplying us with
the list of software patents used in Bessen and Hunt (2003). We are also grateful to two anonymous
referees and to Stu Graham, Bala Iyer, Michael Salinger, Lucia Silva, numerous participants in the
Empirical Patent Research Conference, St. Helena, California, February 2005, the IIOC, Atlanta, April
2005, the ZEW Conference on Patents and Innovation in Mannheim, September 2005, the Seventh
CEPR Conference on Applied Industrial Organization, Madeira, May 2006, the NBER Summer Institute
2006, the First Annual EPIP Conference, Munich, September 2006, and seminars at UCSD, University
of Kansas, University of Michigan, University of Maastricht, LMU-Muenchen, and RIETI, Tokyo
for extremely helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Bronwyn H. Hall and Megan MacGarvie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Private Value of Software Patents
Bronwyn H. Hall and Megan MacGarvie
NBER Working Paper No. 12195
May 2006, Revised January 2010
JEL No. O34,L63,L86
ABSTRACT
We investigate the value creation or destruction associated with the introduction of software patents
in the United States in two ways. The first looks at the cumulative abnormal returns to Information
and Communication Technology (ICT) firms around the time of important court decisions that impacted
software patents, and the second analyzes the relationship between firms’ stock market value, the sector
in which they operate, and their holdings of software patents. We conclude that the market evaluated
software patents as a negative development ex ante. Ex post, a greater number of firms in all ICT sectors
invested in these patents, and these firms had slightly higher market values than those with no software
patents. However, while we obtain clear evidence that the technological importance or quality of patented
innovation mattered for the market value of hardware firms both before and after the legal changes,
it is less clear that the marginal patent right per se was associated with increases in market value, and
there are no significant valuation effects associated with patents for pure software firms after the change.
Bronwyn H. Hall
Dept. of Economics
549 Evans Hall
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
bhhall@nber.org
Megan MacGarvie
Boston University
School of Management
595 Commonwealth Avenue, Room 522H
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
mmacgarv@bu.edu

Hall and MacGarvie December 2009
The Private Value of Software Patents
Bronwyn H. Hall and Megan MacGarvie2
December 2009
1. Introduction
Ever since software became generally patentable in the United States in 1995, the
wisdom of such a change has been widely debated. Proponents of the change argue that there is
no statutory reason to exclude software (or computer-implemented) inventions from
patentability, and also that patenting software has social benefits from disclosure and from the
fact that it enables software components to be reused by others (Cohen and Lemley 2001).
Critics, who are numerous, base their arguments on a series of considerations: that such patents
have often been of low quality, that they discourage rather than encourage innovation, and that
they have a negative effect on the growing open source model of innovation (Kasdan 1994;
Barton 2000, 2002; Hunt 2001; Bakels and Hugenholtz 2002; Lunney 2001; Dreyfuss 2000,
2001; Meurer 2002). In a recent article in PC magazine, the columnist John Dvorak argued that
software patenting is even bad for Microsoft, the largest patent holder among the pure software
firms (Dvorak 2005). In Europe, patentability of software is still being debated, with no clear
conclusion emerging (Blind et al. 2001; European Commission 2002; Spindler 2003).
The economic view of the patent system sees this debate as an inevitable one, given the
nature of patents: with a patent grant we trade off short term exclusive (monopoly) rights to the
2 UC Berkeley, University of Maastricht, NBER, and IFS London; Boston University and NBER.
2

Hall and MacGarvie December 2009
use of an invention in return for two things: 1) an incentive to create the innovation; and 2) early
publication of information about the innovation and its enablement. The argument is that without
the patent system, fewer innovations would be produced, and those that were produced would be
kept secret as much as possible to protect their returns from appropriation by others. In
considering the economic impacts of a subject matter extension to software and business
methods, the tradeoff between these benefits and the welfare cost of the grant of a monopoly
right are at least as important as they are in any other technological arena.
Recent analysis also says that although competition may suffer when we grant a
monopoly right to an inventor, it will benefit if this right facilitates entry into the industry by new
and innovative firms (Hall 2003)3. Second, innovation will benefit from the incentive created by
a patent but may suffer if patents discourage the combining and recombining of inventions to
make new products and processes (Scotchmer 1991, 1996; Heller and Eisenberg 1998). There
are several reasons to think that facilitating entry (the benefit of patents for competition) and
discouraging recombination of elements (the cost of patents for innovation) may be particularly
salient factors when considering the effects of patentability on the software industry. The
software sector is characterized by low tangible assets and high intangible assets, which means
that it is more important to have intellectual property rights in order to secure funding for
investment. Software itself is typically cumulative and composed of a number of components
which may come from a number of different sources, and where interoperability standards are
3 Cockburn and MacGarvie (2006) find evidence that firms holding patents are more likely to enter
software markets. However, increases in the extent of patenting by other firms in the market reduce the rate of entry.
Hall (2005) finds that firms in the ICT sector that enter the publicly traded sector after changes in patenting behavior
in this sector in the mid-1980s have much higher patent valuations than those that enter earlier.
3