NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STOCK AND BOND RETURNS WITH MOODY INVESTORS
Geert Bekaert
Eric Engstrom
Steven R. Grenadier
Working Paper 12247
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12247
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2006
Bekaert, Corresponding author: Columbia Business School, 802 Uris Hall, 3022 Broadway, New York New
York, 10027; ph: (212)-854-9156; fx: (212)-662-8474; gb241@columbia.edu. We thank Pietro Veronesi,
John Campbell, and participants at the NBER Summer Institute 2004 for useful comments. All remaining
errors are the sole responsibility of the authors. This work does not necessarily reflect the views of the
Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Geert Bekaert, Eric Engstrom and Steven R. Grenadier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Stock and Bond Returns with Moody Investors
Geert Bekaert, Eric Engstrom and Steven R. Grenadier
NBER Working Paper No. 12247
May 2006
JEL No. G12, G15, E44
ABSTRACT
We present a tractable, linear model for the simultaneous pricing of stock and bond returns that
incorporates stochastic risk aversion. In this model, analytic solutions for endogenous stock and bond
prices and returns are readily calculated. After estimating the parameters of the model by the general
method of moments, we investigate a series of classic puzzles of the empirical asset pricing
literature. In particular, our model is shown to jointly accommodate the mean and volatility of equity
and long term bond risk premia as well as salient features of the nominal short rate, the dividend
yield, and the term spread. Also, the model matches the evidence for predictability of excess stock
and bond returns. However, the stock-bond return correlation implied by the model is somewhat
higher than in the data.
Geert Bekaert
Columbia Business School
802 Uris Hall
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
gb241@columbia.edu
Eric Engstrom
Mail Stop 89
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Washington, DC 20551
eric.c.engstrom@frb.gov
Steven R. Grenadier
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
sgren@stanford.edu

1 Introduction
Campbell and Cochrane (1999) identify slow countercyclical risk premiums as the key to explaining
awidevarietyofdynamicassetpricingphenomenawithinthecontextofaconsumption-basedasset-
pricing model. They generate such risk premiums by adding a slow moving external habit to the
standard power utility framework. Essentially, as we clarify below, their model generates counter-
cyclical risk aversion. This idea has surfaced elsewhere as well. Sharpe (1990) and practitioners
such as Persaud (see, forinstance, Kumar and Persaud2002) developed models of time-varying risk
appetites to make sense of dramatic stock market movements.
Thefirstcontributionofthisarticleistopresentaverytractable,linearmodelthatincorporates
stochasticriskaversion. Becauseofthemodel’stractability,itbecomesparticularlysimpletoaddress
a wider set of empirical puzzles than those considered by Campbell and Cochrane. Campbell and
Cochrane match salient features of equity returns, including the equity premium, excess return
variability and the variability of the price dividend ratio. They do so in a model where the risk free
rateisconstant. Instead,weembedafullystochastictermstructureintoourmodel,andinvestigate
whether the model can fit salient features of bond and stock returns simultaneously. Such over-
identification is important, because previous models that match equity return moments often do so
byincreasingthevariabilityofmarginalratesofsubstitutiontothepointthatasatisfactoryfitwith
bond market data and risk free rates is no longer possible. Using the General Method of Moments
(GMM), we find that our model can rather successfully fit many features of bond and stock return
data together with important properties of the fundamentals, including a low correlation between
fundamentals and returns.
The NBER Working Paper version of Campbell and Cochrane also considered a specification
with a stochastic interest rate. While that model matched some salient features of interest rate
data, being a one-factor model, it necessarily could not provide a fully satisfactory fit of term
structure data. Moreover, the one shock nature of the model imposes too strong of a link between
bondandstockreturns,anissuenotexaminedinCampbellandCochrane. TheresultsinCampbell
and Cochrane (1995) were nevertheless suggestive that a joint modeling of bond and stock returns
within their or a related framework might prove successful. In our model, stochastic risk aversion
is not perfectly negatively correlated with consumption growth as in Campbell and Cochrane, but
the perfect correlation case represents a testable restriction of our model.
1

Once we model bond and stock returns jointly, a series of classic empirical puzzles becomes
testable. First, ShillerandBeltratti(1992) point out thatpresent valuemodels with aconstant risk
premiumimplya negligible correlation between stock and bond returns in contrast tothe moderate
positive correlation in the data. We expand on the present value approach by allowing for an
endogenously determined stochastic risk premium. Second, Fama and French (1989) and Keim
and Stambaugh (1986) find common predictable components in bond and equity returns. After
estimating the parameters of the model to match the salient features of bond and stock returns
alluded to above, we test how well the model fares with respect to these puzzles. Our model
generates a bond-stock return correlation that is somewhat too high relative to the data but it
matches the predictability evidence.
Third, to convert frommodel output to the data, we use inflation as a state variable, but ensure
that inflation is neutral: that is the Fisher hypothesis holds in our economy. This is important in
interpreting our empirical results on the joint properties of bond and stock returns. More realistic
modeling of the inflation process is a prime candidate for resolving the remaining failures of the
model.
Ourmodelalsofitsintoalongseriesofrecentattemptstobreakthetightlinkbetweenconsump-
tiongrowthandthepricingkernelthatisthemainreasonforthefailureofthestandardconsumption
— based asset pricing models. Santos and Veronesi (2005) add the consumption/labor income ratio
as a second factor to the kernel, Wei (2003) adds leisure services to the pricing kernel and models
human capital formation, Piazessi, Schneider and Tuzel (2003) and Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh
(2003) model the housing market to increase the dimensionality of the pricing kernel.
The remainder of the article is organized as follows. Section 1 presents the model. Section 2
derivesclosed-formexpressionsforbondpricesandequityreturns. Section3outlinesourestimation
procedure whereas Section 4 analyzes the estimation results, and the implications of the model at
the estimated parameters. Section 5 tests how the model fares with respect to the interaction of
bond and stock returns. In the conclusions, we summarize the implications of our work for future
research and we discuss some recent papers that have also considered the joint modeling of bond
and stock returns.
2