NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECT OF DIVIDENDS ON CONSUMPTION
Malcolm Baker
Stefan Nagel
Jeffrey Wurgler
Working Paper 12288
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12288
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2006
We thank Yakov Amihud, John Campbell, Alok Kumar, Erik Hurst, Martin Lettau, Enrichetta Ravina, Hersh
Shefrin, and workshop participants at University of British Columbia, University of Colorado, NBER
Behavioral Finance, NYU Stern School of Business, and Stanford Graduate School of Business for helpful
comments. We thank Terrance Odean for providing data. Baker gratefully acknowledges financial support
from the Division of Research of the Harvard Business School. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Malcolm Baker, Stefan Nagel and Jeffrey Wurgler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Dividends on Consumption
Malcolm Baker, Stefan Nagel and Jeffrey Wurgler
NBER Working Paper No. 12288
June 2006
JEL No. E2, G3, D1
ABSTRACT
Classical models predict that the division of stock returns into dividends and capital appreciation
does not affect investor consumption patterns, while mental accounting and other economic frictions
predict that investors have a higher propensity to consume from stock returns in the form of
dividends. Using two micro data sets, we show that investors are indeed far more likely to consume
from dividends than capital gains. In the Consumer Expenditure Survey, household consumption
increases with dividend income, controlling for total wealth, total portfolio returns, and other sources
of income. In a sample of household investment accounts data from a brokerage, net withdrawals
from the accounts increase one-for-one with ordinary dividends of moderate size, controlling for
total portfolio returns, and also increase with mutual fund and special dividends. We comment on
several potential explanations for the results.
Malcolm Baker
Baker Library 261
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mbaker@hbs.edu
Stefan Nagel
Stanford University
Graduate School of Business
518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
nagel_stefan@gsb.stanford.edu
Jeffrey Wurgler
Stern School of Business, Suite 9-190
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
jwurgler@stern.nyu.edu

I. Introduction
Microsoft’s $32 billion cash dividend of December 2004 was the largest corporate payout
ever. Classical models of finance and consumption-savings decisions predict that this dividend
will have little effect on the consumption of Microsoft investors. Under the assumptions of
Miller and Modigliani (1961), for example, investors can always reinvest unwanted dividends, or
sell shares to create homemade dividends, and thereby insulate their preferred consumption
stream from corporate dividend policies. Thus, in traditional models, the division of stock returns
into dividends and capital gains is a financial decision of the firm that has no “real” consequence
for investor consumption patterns.
Yet there are a number of reasons to think that dividend policy, and dividends more
generally, may indeed affect consumption. Most obviously, the popular advice to “consume
income, not principal” suggests a potentially widespread mental accounting practice—discussed
in detail in Thaler and Shefrin (1981), Shefrin and Statman (1984), and Shefrin and Thaler
(1988)—in which investors do not view dividends and capital gains as fungible, as in the
homemade dividends story and traditional theories of consumption, but rather place them into
different mental accounts from which they have different propensities to consume. Less exotic
but equally realistic frictions, such as transactions costs (of making homemade dividends) and
taxes, can also lead an investor to favor consuming dividends before capital appreciation.
Although the dividends-consumption link is a potentially fundamental link between
corporate finance and the real economy, little empirical research has pursued the issue. This is
probably because the most easily available data on consumption and dividends is aggregate time-
series data, which have several limitations. Among other challenges, such data require one to
identify the effect of a smooth aggregate dividend series using a small number of data points;
1

such data combine investors and non-investors; and such data face an essentially prohibitive
endogeneity problem: omitted third variables such as business conditions will jointly affect
consumption, dividends, and capital appreciation, making it difficult to establish the causality
behind any correlations.
In this paper, we study the effect of dividends on investor consumption using two micro
data sets that provide powerful cross-sectional variation in dividend receipts and capital gains.
The first is the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX), which is a repeated cross-section with
expenditure measures and self-reported dividend income and capital gains (or losses). Our CEX
sample includes several hundred households per year between 1988 and 2001. The second data
set was introduced by Barber and Odean (2000) and includes the trading records of tens of
thousands of households with accounts at a large discount brokerage between 1991 and 1996.
While these portfolio data do not contain an explicit expenditure measure, they complement the
CEX by allowing us to accurately measure net withdrawals from the portfolio, a novel dependent
variable in its own right and a precursor to expenditure. The data set also allows us to measure
the withdrawal rates of different types of dividend income, including ordinary, special, and
mutual fund dividends, which allows for finer comparisons.
We start with an analysis of the CEX data. Our most basic approach is to regress
consumption on realized dividend income, controlling for total returns including dividends. The
coefficient on dividend income thus captures differences between the consumption responses to
dividends and capital gains. We find that the coefficient on realized dividend income for total
consumption expenditure is large, positive, and significant. This basic result is robust to a variety
of control variables and estimation techniques, including specifications in first differences. It
suggests that, contrary to classical models, the form of returns does matter for consumption.
2