NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERNET RETAIL DEMAND: TAXES, GEOGRAPHY,
AND ONLINE-OFFLINE COMPETITION
Glenn Ellison
Sara Fisher Ellison
Working Paper 12242
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12242
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2006
We would like to thank Nathan Barczi, Eric Moos, and Andrew Sweeting for excellent research assistance,
Patrick Goebel and Steve Ellison for assistance with data issues, and Austan Goolsbee and John Morgan for
helpful comments. We also thank the Center for Advanced Studies in the Behavioral Sciences, the Hoover
Institute, the Institute for Advanced Study, the Toulouse Network for Information Technology, and the
National Science Foundation (SES-0219205) for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Glenn Ellison and Sara Fisher Ellison. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Internet Retail Demand: Taxes, Geography, and Online-Offline Competition
Glenn Ellison and Sara Fisher Ellison
NBER Working Paper No. 12242
May 2006
JEL No. L8, D1, H2
ABSTRACT
Data on sales of memory modules are used to explore several aspects of e-retail demand. There is
a strong relationship between e-retail sales to a given state and sales tax rates that apply to purchases
from online retailers. This suggests that there is substantial substitution between online and online
retail, and tax avoidance may be an important contributor to e-retail activity. Geography matters in
two ways: we find some evidence that consumers prefer purchasing from firms in nearby states to
benefit from faster shipping times as well as evidence of a separate preference for buying from
in-state firms. Consumers appear fairly rational in some ways, but boundedly rational in others.
Glenn Ellison
MIT Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
gellison@mit.edu
Sara Fisher Ellison
MIT Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
sellison@mit.edu

1 Introduction
The recent growth of Internet retail (e-retail) has attracted a great deal of attention in the
academic literature and popular press.1 While we have learned a lot about the structure
of these markets the past few years, the remarkable swings in the market value of e-retail
companies provides ample evidence that our understanding of the industry’s future is quite
limited.2 This future of e-retail is of interest for both intellectual and practical reasons.
Intellectually, e-retail is a great case study: it provides an opportunity to reexamine our
understanding of consumer and firm behavior and suggests new questions. Practically, e-
retail could have significant effects on the economy. It will not remain small for long at
its current growth rate: it has grown steadily at about 25% per year since the collapse
of the dot-com “bubble.” And even a small e-retail industry could have a substantial
impactontraditionalretail,whichemploysasmanyAmericansallmanufacturingindustries
combined.3
In this paper we investigate aspects of consumer behavior that will have a substantial
impact on the future of Internet and traditional retail. We focus on three issues. First,
we examine substitution betweeen Internet and traditional retail. It is not clear whether
e-retail or traditional retail will prove more efficient in the long run. Whether the two are
close substitutes, though, will have a dramatic impact on the future of the less efficient
channel. Second, we examine the extent to which the success e-retail has had is due to
the de facto tax-free status of most e-retail purchases in the U.S.4 This bears on the rel-
ative efficiency of e-retail, and is important to understanding what may happen if states
are able to tax online sales, with the Internet Tax Nondiscrimination Act set to expire in
1See,forexample,Goolsbee(2000),Smith(2001),ChevalierandGoolsbee(2003),andEllisonandEllison
(2005).
2Amazon’s market value, for example, grew from $2 billion at the start of 1998 to $35 billion in the
middle of 1999, and fell back to $3 billion in 2001 before reaching $25 billion for a second time in 2003.
3U.S. e-retail sales are now approximately $100 billion per year, which is 3% of total retail sales.
4FortyfiveU.S.stateslevysalestaxesontraditionalretailpurchases. Eachofthesestatesalsohaslaws
assessing “use taxes” on purchases that its residents make from out-of-state firms. However, the Supreme
Court ruled in Quill vs. North Dakota (1992) that absent new federal law, a state could not compel a firm
withoutsubstantialphysical“nexus”inthatstatetocollectusetaxesonitsbehalf. The1998InternetTax
NondiscriminationActmakesexplicitthatwebpresencealonedoesnotconstitutenexus. Whileconsumers
are obligated to self-report use-tax liability, few do in practice. Note that states are able to collect sales
taxes on e-retailers’ in-state sales.
1

2007.5 Third, we examine the geography of e-retail. It is commonly supposed that geo-
graphic differentiation is an important factor allowing traditional retail stores to maintain
the markups over marginal cost they need to survive. Branding, obfuscation, or other fac-
tors may allow e-retailers to survive even without geographic differentiation, but knowing
whether geographic differentiation is really eliminated is also important for understanding
what market structure might evolve.6
Althougheverythingwestudyisinthecontextofe-retail,thispapercanalsobethought
ofmoregenerallyasanempiricalanalysisofconsumerinformednessandsophistication. The
standard fully-informed, rational analysis would make a number of simple predictions, e.g.
consumers should compare firms on the basis of the tax-inclusive prices and make decisions
on the basis of the prices charged at the time when the purchase is made (as opposed
to at other times). Alternate predictions could be obtained in a number of ways. For
instance, one could use rational models with information acquisition costs, rational models
with information processing costs, or models with “irrational” consumers. We find that
several of the standard predictions appear not to hold in our data and discuss what this
suggests about the form of our consumers’ bounded rationality.7
The environment we study is that examined in Ellison and Ellison (2004): we look
at consumers shopping for computer memory modules using the Pricewatch.com search
engine. For a period of approximately one year, we have hourly data on the twelve lowest
prices listed on Pricewatch for each of several products. We know the state in which the
e-retailer listing each price is located. Our quantity data is unusually good in one respect
and unusually bad in another. The bad part is that we only observe purchases from two of
the listed websites (both located in California), so we do not know how many consumers
purchased from other websites (or from traditional retailers). The good part is that the
5There are two ways in which the de facto tax-free status of Internet purchases in the U.S. might be
threatened in the near future. The expiration of the Internet Tax Nondiscrimination Act in 2007 could
have implications for the legal definition of nexus. In addition, eighteen states have joined the Streamlined
Sales Tax Project in an attempt to simplify and harmonize their sales tax laws. The Project’s goals are to
encourageonlineretailerstoagreetocollectusetaxesforsalesmadeinthoseeighteenstatesand,eventually,
to pave the way to federal legislation requiring collection of use taxes.
6See Brynjolfsson and Smith (2001), Chevalier and Goolsbee (2003), Baye and Morgan (2004), Ellison
(2005), and Ellison and Ellison (2004).
7Hossain and Morgan (2006)’s analysis of bidding on eBay provides compelling evidence of limitations
in consumer rationality in that environment.
2