NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MEASURING INTERNATIONAL TRADE IN SERVICES
Robert E. Lipsey
Working Paper 12271
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12271
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2006
I am indebted to Jing Sun for assistance in all phases of the research, and to Dave Richardson for comments
and suggestions at the Conference, some of which are incorporated here. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Robert E. Lipsey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Measuring International Trade in Services
Robert E. Lipsey
NBER Working Paper No. 12271
May 2006
JEL No. F10, F23, F30, F40
ABSTRACT
World trade in services has recently been a little under $US2 trillion, about a quarter of world
trade in goods. That ratio does not appear to have changed much in the last 50 years. For the US,
exports of services have recently been over 40% and imports about 20% of exports and imports of
goods, a return, for exports to the ratios of the early 1800s. Imports of services are now increasing
more rapidly than exports, but not faster than goods imports.
Because measures of service trade are not anchored in any observation of physical movement,
they are dependent on definitions of residence. An example of that dependence and the ambiguities
it creates is exports of educational services, a domestic activity that becomes an export because
students are defined as foreign residents. Since many students later become US residents, the
supposedly exported service never leaves the US, or returns to the US unobserved and uncounted.
A particularly serious problem of measurement is the growing transfer of intangible US
corporate assets to foreign affiliates of US firms, some of which use virtually no foreign factors of
production. These transfers, mainly for tax saving purposes, give rise to phantom flows of services
from the foreign affiliates to the US and to other countries and remove the exports from the U.S.
balance of payments. They make the meaning of measures of the current balances and GDP
ambiguous. One possible solution to the measurement problems would be to use measures assigning
at least intangible assets to countries of ownership, rather than nominal residence.
Robert E. Lipsey
National Bureau of Economic Research
365 5th Avenue, Suite 5318
New York, NY 10016-4309
rlipsey@gc.cuny.edu

Measuring International Trade in Services
Robert E. Lipsey∗
Introduction
Most of the literature on international trade that has accumulated over the last 300 years
has dealt with trade in goods, and almost every country has had in place for many years a system
of collecting information on such trade. In the mercantilist era, a surplus of exports over imports
of goods was sought as a way of acquiring gold, and imports of goods were carefully watched
and counted as a source of tax revenue. As a result, there has been an apparatus in place for
measuring the inflow and outflow of goods in every country for centuries, based on counting and
appraising the value of goods as they crossed the country’s borders. Trade in goods among
regions of a country is often studied by trying to approximate the movement of goods across
regional, provincial, or state borders. Only recently, with the establishment of the single market
in the European Union, have some major trading countries moved away from the traditional
reliance on customs declarations at borders and been forced to invent other ways of measuring
trade in goods (OECD, 2001, p. 3). The collection of data on trade in goods is governed by
recommendations set forth in United Nations (2004), which translates for compilers of trade data
the methodological guidelines adopted by the United Nations Statistical Commission. One of the
principal recommendations is that countries use “…crossing the border rather than change of
ownership as the basic principle for compilation of trade statistics…” (P. 5). The geographical
basis of the data is emphasized by the recommendation that the data should “Record all goods
which add to or subtract from the stock of natural resources of a country by entering (imports) or
∗ I am indebted to Jing Sun for assistance in all phases of the research, and to Dave Richardson
for comments and suggestions at the Conference, some of which are incorporated here.
1

leaving (exports) its economic territory (p. 74), and by the definition of the partner in terms of
the “statistical territory of its trading partners” or, when free zones are involved, the economic
territory if the reporting country uses “the strict version of the special system of trade.” The
definitions are all based on geography rather than ownership.
The measurement of trade in goods for the balance of payments has a different objective.
That is the measurement of changes in the ownership of goods between residents and non-
residents of a country. Since the great majority of such changes in ownership take place in
connection with the physical movement of the goods, the measures are quantitatively close, and
the balance of payments measures are mainly dependent on the data for the physical movement
of goods and very close to them. However, since imports are reported on a c.i.f. basis in the
goods trade data, and the balance of payments concept separates freight and insurance costs
from the value of the physical commodities, one adjustment that is required is to peel off those
costs and transfer them to the trade in services account.
Most of the differences between trade statistics and balance-of-payments measures for
trade in goods involve the dependence of the balance of payments accounts on change of
ownership rather than physical movement. Thus, the trade statistics include, and the balance of
payments data exclude, goods purchased by travelers and brought home, because there is no
change of ownership, while there is a change in location. Trade data include, but balance of
payments figures exclude, goods imported for projects by non-resident construction enterprises
and the major item on the export side, exports transferred under U.S. military agency sales
contracts. The trade figures exclude, but the balance of payments figures include, Bunkers,
Goods for repair and Goods entering or leaving a country illegally. Other adjustments involve,
2