NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MANAGING BANK LIQUIDITY RISK: HOW DEPOSIT-
LOAN SYNERGIES VARY WITH MARKET CONDITIONS
Evan Gatev
Til Schuermann
Philip E. Strahan
Working Paper 12234
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12234
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2006
We would like to thank the FDIC Center for Financial Research for financial support, as well as for helpful
comments on the research. We would also like to thank seminar participants at Boston College, Ohio
University, Tilburg University, and the University of Amsterdam. Kristin Wilson assisted with preparation
of the data. Any views expressed represent those of the authors only and not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. Corresponding author: Strahan is at Boston
College, 140 Commonwealth Avenue, Chestnut Hill MA, 02467, Philip.strahan@bc.edu, 617-552-6430. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Evan Gatev, Til Schuermann and Philip E. Strahan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Managing Bank Liquidity Risk: How Deposit-Loan Synergies Vary with Market Conditions
Evan Gatev, Til Schuermann and Philip E. Strahan
NBER Working Paper No. 12234
May 2006
JEL No. G18, G21
ABSTRACT
Liquidity risk in banking has been attributed to transactions deposits and their potential to spark runs
or panics. We show instead that transactions deposits help banks hedge liquidity risk from unused
loan commitments. Bank stock-return volatility increases with unused commitments, but the increase
is smaller for banks with high levels of transactions deposits. This deposit-lending risk management
synergy becomes more powerful during periods of tight liquidity, when nervous investors move
funds into their banks. Our results reverse the standard notion of liquidity risk at banks, where runs
from depositors had been seen as the cause of trouble.
Til Schuermann
Banking Studies Function
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
schuermann@ny.frb.org
Philip E. Strahan
Carroll School of Management
324B Fulton Hall
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
strahan@bc.edu

I. Introduction
Banks have traditionally provided liquidity on demand, both to borrowers with
open lines of credit and un-drawn loan commitments (we use these terms
interchangeably), and to depositors in the form of checking and other transactions
accounts. Both contracts allow customers to receive cash on short notice. In fact, the
combination of these two products in a single firm constitutes a reasonable working
definition of a ‘bank’. The liquidity insurance role of banks, however, exposes them to
the risk that they will have insufficient cash to meet random demands from their
depositors and borrowers. In this paper, we show that combining these two products
actually reduces risk and can thus help explain the traditional structure of banks.1
There is a large theoretical literature that attempts to understand banks’ role in
liquidity production. This literature initially emphasized the risks associated with
demand deposits that expose banks to the possibility of a catastrophic run. Diamond and
Dybvig (1983) explain the structure of banks by arguing that by pooling their funds in an
intermediary, agents can insure against idiosyncratic liquidity shocks while still investing
most of their wealth in high-return but illiquid projects. This structure, however, leads to
the potential for a self-fulfilling bank run and sets up a policy rationale for deposit
insurance. More recent theoretical and empirical studies have focused on liquidity risk
1 Previous research identifies several other reasons why banks combine deposits and loans. For example,
Fama (1985) suggests that information stemming from the business checking account could give banks an
advantage in lending over other financial intermediaries; for recent empirical evidence, see Mester,
Nakamura, and Renault (2002). Berlin and Mester (1999) argue that banks’ access to inelastically supplied
funds (core deposits) allows them to offer borrowers insurance against credit shocks. Other studies suggest
that because bank loans are illiquid, and thus make “bad” collateral against which to borrow, the optimal
capital structure is one characterized by very liquid (or short-term) liabilities that subject the bank to the
possibility of a run (e.g., Calomiris and Kahn (1991), Flannery (1994), and Diamond and Rajan (2001)).
For a summary of empirical evidence, see Strahan (2005).
1

coming from the asset side of the bank’s balance sheet.2 Banks that make commitments
to lend are exposed to the risk of unexpected liquidity demands from their borrowers.
This paper presents a systematic empirical analysis of liquidity risk stemming
from both sides of bank balance sheets. We study how deposit taking and commitment
lending interact. We find that asset-side and liability-side liquidity risks are offsetting
rather than reinforcing, meaning that combining deposits and commitment lending
provide a liquidity-risk hedge for banks.
Our point of departure is the model presented by Kashyap, Rajan and Stein
(2002), hereafter KRS, who explain why banks tend to combine transactions deposits
with loan commitments based on a risk-management motivation: as long as the demand
for liquidity from depositors through the checking account is not highly correlated with
liquidity demands from borrowers, an intermediary will be able to reduce its need to hold
cash by serving both customers. Thus, their model yields a diversification synergy
between demand deposits (or transactions deposits more generally) and loan
commitments. As evidence, KRS report a robust correlation across banks between
unused loan commitments and transactions deposits. The correlation is robust to
variations in the definition of loan commitments, to bank size, and is also consistent
across time. However, KRS do not test the key idea in their model – the idea that by
exposing themselves to asset-side and liability-side liquidity risks simultaneously, banks
can actually enjoy a diversification, or risk reducing, synergy.
In this paper, we test the basic premise of the KRS model – that liquidity risks
2
For example, Berger and Bouwman (2005) document the importance of banks in liquidity production and
show that this role has grown sharply over time. There is also a growing literature showing the liquidity-
risk management or liquidity shocks to banks affect loan supply. See Paravisini (2004), Kwaja and Mian
(2005), Loutskina (2005) and Loutskina and Strahan (2006).
2