NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INPUT AND TECHNOLOGY CHOICES IN REGULATED
INDUSTRIES: EVIDENCE FROM THE HEALTH CARE SECTOR
Daron Acemoglu
Amy Finkelstein
Working Paper 12254
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12254
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2006
We are grateful to David Autor, David Cutler, Jon Gruber, Jerry Hausman, Rob Huckman, Paul Joskow,
Nolan Miller, Joe Newhouse, Joshua Rauh, Nancy Rose, Catherine Wolfram, and seminar participants at the
MIT public finance and industrial organization lunches, the NBER Productivity conference, the NBER IO
conference, the International Industrial Organization Conference, the Harvard-MIT-BU health seminar, and
Chicago GSB for helpful comments. We also thank Adam Block, Amanda Kowalski, Matthew Notowidigdo,
Erin Strumpf, and Heidi Williams for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Daron Acemoglu and Amy Finkelstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Input and Technology Choices in Regulated Industries: Evidence From the Health Care Sector
Daron Acemoglu and Amy Finkelstein
NBER Working Paper No. 12254
May 2006
JEL No. H51, I18, L50, L51, O31, O33
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the implications of regulatory change for the input mix and technology choices
of regulated industries. We present a simple neoclassical framework that emphasizes the change in
relative factor prices associated with the regulatory change from full cost to partial cost
(cid:1)
reimbursement, and investigate how this a ects firms’ technology choices through substitution of
(capital embodied) technologies for tasks previously performed by labor. We examine these
implications empirically by studying the change from full cost to partial cost reimbursement under
the Medicare Prospective Payment System (PPS) reform, which increased the relative price of labor
faced by U.S. hospitals. Using the interaction of hospitals’ pre-PPS Medicare share of patient days
with the introduction of these regulatory changes, we document a substantial increase in capital-labor
ratios and a large decline in labor inputs associated with PPS. Most interestingly, we find that the
PPS reform seems to have encouraged the adoption of a range of new medical technologies. We also
show that the reform was associated with an increase in the skill composition of these hospitals,
which is consistent with technology-skill or capital-skill complementarities.
Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-380B
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
daron@mit.edu
Amy Finkelstein
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-262F
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge MA 02142
and NBER
afink@mit.edu

1 Introduction
There is broad agreement that differences in technology are essential for understanding pro-
ductivity differences across nations, industries and firms. Despite this agreement, we know rel-
atively little about the empirical determinants of technology choices and of adoption of capital
goods embodying new technologies. The lack of empirical knowledge is even more pronounced
when we turn to regulated industries, such as health care, electricity and telecommunications,
whicharenotonlyimportantfortheirsizablecontributionstototalGDP,buthavebeenatthe
forefront of technological advances over the past several decades. In this paper, we investigate
how input and technology choices respond to changes in regulation regime.
Starting in the mid-1980s, a number of different industries in a variety of countries expe-
rienced a change in regulation regime away from full cost reimbursement towards some type
of “price cap”.1 These new regulation regimes often entailed a mixture of “partial cost reim-
bursement” and “partial price cap”. Under this mixed regime–which we refer to hereafter as
“partialcostreimbursement”–onlyexpendituresoncapitalinputsarereimbursed, whilelabor
expensesaresupposedtobecoveredbythefixedpricepaidperunitofoutput. Consequently,a
change from full cost to partial cost reimbursement increases the relative price of labor inputs,
among other things.
Despite many examples of this type of partial cost reimbursement, including the Medicare
Prospective Payment System (PPS) reform in the United States which we study in this paper,
partial cost reimbursement has received little theoretical or empirical attention. For example,
in his recent survey, Joskow (2005, p. 36) notes:
“Although it is not discussed too much in the empirical literature, the development of
the parameters of price cap mechanisms .... have typically focused primarily on operating
costsonly,withcapitalcostallowancesestablishedthroughmoretraditionalutilityplanning
and cost-of-service regulatory accounting methods”.
To investigate the implications of changes in regulation away from full cost reimbursement,
we develop a simple neoclassical model of firm behavior under regulation. The most common
approaches to regulation are the optimal regulation models, for example as in Laffont and
1ExamplesincludethetelecommunicationssectorintheUnitedStatesandUnitedKingdom,gas,electricand
water utilities in the United Kingdom, New Zealand, Australia, and parts of Latin America (see, for example,
Laffont and Tirole 1993, Armstrong, Cowen and Vickers, 1994, Joskow, 2005) and the Medicare Prospective
Payment System for US hosptials which is the focus of this paper.
1

Tirole (1993), and the rate of return regulation of Averch and Johnson (1962) and Baumol
and Klevorick (1970). Neither is appropriate as a framework for guiding empirical work in this
setting, however, foratleasttworeasons. First,costreimbursementregulation,bothingeneral
and in the health care sector in particular, does not have the screening structure posited in the
optimal regulation models, nor does cost reimbursement in the health care sector regulate the
rate of return on capital as in the Averch and Johnson model. Second, neither of these two
approaches provides a framework for analyzing the impact of regulation regime on technology
adoption (though it may be possible to extend these approaches to do so).
Our neoclassical framework is similar to Averch and Johnson, but focuses on cost reim-
bursement rather than rate of return regulation. It links the input and technology choices of
firms to the relative factor prices they face, which are themselves determined by the regulation
regime.2 We show that under fairly mild assumptions, a change in regulation regime from full
cost to partial cost reimbursement will be associated with an increase in capital-labor ratios.
The implications of the change in regulation for the overall level of labor and capital inputs
(and the scale of activity) are ambiguous and depend on the generosity of the partial price
cap that replaces cost reimbursement. In the context of the Medicare PPS reform, existing
qualitativeandempiricalevidencesuggestsarelativelylowpricecap. Wepresentevidencethat
the reform is associated with a decline in overall labor inputs and in the Medicare share of
hospitalactivity,bothofwhichwouldbepredictedbyourframeworkifthelevelofthepricecap
issufficientlylow. Despitethedeclineinlaborinputs, oursimpleframeworkshowsthatcapital
expenditures can increase, and perhaps more surprisingly, the firm may be induced to adopt
moreadvancedtechnologies. Thisconfigurationismorelikelywhentherearedecreasingreturns
to capital and labor (or technology and labor) and the elasticity of substitution between these
factors is high. Intuitively, the increased relative price of labor induces the firm to substitute
technology and capital embodying new technologies for tasks previously performed by labor.
This result also has implications for the famous labor push theory of innovation suggested
by Hicks (1932) and Habakkuk (1962), which claims that higher wages encourage innovation.
Although this result is not possible under competitive markets and constant returns to capital
and labor, we derive conditions under which such a result might obtain.3
The bulk of the paper empirically investigates the impact of the Medicare Prospective
2In contrast, in the Averch and Johnson model, as in the modified model we present in Appendix B, input
choicesarenotdirectlyaffectedbyrelativeprices,butarechoseninordertosatisfyvariousregulatoryconstraints
faced by firms.
3Strictly speaking, the labor push theory of innovation refers to the case in which the only change is an
increase in the price of labor. In the theory section, we derive the conditions under which such a change in the
priceoflaborwillencouragetechnologyadoption(orcapitaldeepening). However,inourempiricalsetting,the
introduction of PPS is associated with both an increase in the price of labor and some increase in the price of
output (increased reimbursement for health services provided to Medicare patients). Our empirical results on
the effect of PPS on technology adoption therefore do not provide direct evidence for the labor push theory.
2