NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE VARIABILITY OF IPO INITIAL RETURNS
Michelle Lowry
Micah S. Officer
G. William Schwert
Working Paper 12295
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12295
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2006
We are indebted to Jay Ritter for the use of his data. We received valuable comments from Campbell
Harvey (the editor), Harry DeAngelo, Craig Dunbar, Robert Engle, Laura Field, Ravi Jagannathan,
Jay Ritter, Ann Sherman, Ivo Welch, Donghang Zhang, Jerry Zimmerman, and two anonymous referees.
We also received valuable comments from the participants in seminars at Boston College, Indiana
University, New York University, Penn State University, the University of Arizona, the University
of Rochester, the University of Southern California, the University of Toronto, and the University
of Western Ontario, and from participants at the Duke-UNC Corporate Finance Conference and at
the Harvard Business School Entrepreneurship, Venture Capital and Initial Public Offerings Conference.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Michelle Lowry, Micah S. Officer, and G. William Schwert. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Variability of IPO Initial Returns
Michelle Lowry, Micah S. Officer, and G. William Schwert
NBER Working Paper No. 12295
June 2006, Revised November 2008
JEL No. G32,G24,G14
ABSTRACT
The monthly volatility of IPO initial returns is substantial, fluctuates dramatically over time, and is
considerably larger during "hot" IPO markets. Consistent with IPO theory, the volatility of initial returns
is higher among firms whose value is more difficult to estimate, i.e., among firms with higher information
asymmetry. Our findings highlight underwriters' difficulty in valuing companies characterized by high
uncertainty, and, as a result, raise serious questions about the efficacy of the traditional firm commitment
underwritten IPO process. One implication of our results is that alternate mechanisms, such as auctions,
may be beneficial, particularly for firms that value price discovery over the auxiliary services provided
by underwriters.
Michelle Lowry G. William Schwert
Smeal College of Business William E. Simon Graduate School of Business Admin
Penn State University University of Rochester
312 Business Building Rochester, NY 14627
University Park, PA 16802 and NBER
mlowry@psu.edu Schwert@schwert.ssb.rochester.edu
Micah S. Officer
702F HOH, Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089-1427
officer@marshall.usc.edu

1. Introduction
Initial public offerings (IPOs) are underpriced on average: the secondary market trading price of
the stock is on average much higher than the IPO price. A number of academic papers note that the
equity in private companies with uncertain prospects is inherently difficult to value, and they posit that
underpricing is an efficient response to the complexity of this valuation problem.1 In contrast, others have
questioned whether the IPO price-setting process results in excess underpricing of IPO stocks.
This paper proposes a new metric for evaluating the pricing of IPOs in traditional firm
commitment underwritten offerings: the volatility of initial returns to IPO stocks. We find that there is
considerable volatility in initial returns. To the extent that the IPO price is a forecast of the secondary
market price for the stock, these forecasts are not only biased downward (underpricing), but the range of
the forecast (or pricing) errors is huge. While underpricing2 averages 22% between 1965 and 2005, a
relatively small portion of offerings have underpricing that is close to this average: only about 5 percent
of the initial returns are between 20% and 25%. Moreover, nearly one-third of the initial returns are
negative. The standard deviation of these initial returns over the 1965-2005 period is 55 percent.
If one considers IPO initial return volatility to be a metric for the difficulty of pricing IPOs, then
one could reasonably expect this volatility to change over time with changes in the complexity of the
pricing problem. Consistent with this intuition, we find that the volatility of initial returns fluctuates
greatly over time. While prior literature has shown the existence of hot IPO markets characterized by
extremely high initial returns (see, e.g., Ibbotson, Sindelar, and Ritter (1988, 1994)), we find that these
hot markets are also characterized by an extraordinarily high variability of initial returns. That is, there is
a strong positive correlation between the mean and the volatility of initial returns over time.
1 See, e.g., Rock (1986), Beatty and Ritter (1986), Welch (1986), and Benveniste and Spindt (1989), among others.
2 As discussed in more detail later, to avoid the effects of price support we measure initial returns as the percent
change from the offer price to the closing price on the twenty-first day of trading.

These descriptive statistics suggest that the level of uncertainty surrounding IPO firms and,
correspondingly, underwriters’ ability to value these firms, varies over time. The pricing of an IPO is a
complex process. Although the issuer and its investment bank know considerably more about the firm’s
own prospects than any single market participant does, market participants as a whole know more than
the firm about one critical input to the IPO pricing process: the aggregate demand for the firm’s shares
(see, e.g., Rock (1986)). Aggregate demand uncertainty is one of the principal problems facing issuers
and their investment banks when attempting to price an IPO. By definition, the initiation of trading
resolves this information asymmetry between the issuing firm and the market, i.e., trading resolves the
firm’s uncertainty about the market’s aggregate demand. At this point, the information of all market
participants becomes incorporated into the price.
Uncertainty about aggregate demand for IPO stocks varies in both the time series (it is higher at
some points in time than others) and the cross section (it is higher for some types of firms than others).
To understand these effects, we examine both variation in the types of firms going public and variation in
market-wide conditions.
To the extent that the complexity of the pricing problem is greater for certain types of firms than
others, one would expect greater pricing errors when the sample of firms going public contains a larger
fraction of highly uncertain firms. A number of theories support this intuition and predict that an
investment bank’s pricing of an offering should be related to the level of information asymmetry
surrounding the company. For example, Beatty and Ritter’s (1986) extension of Rock (1986) predicts
that companies characterized by higher information asymmetry will tend to be more underpriced on
average, a prediction that has received considerable empirical support (see, e.g., Michaely and Shaw
(1994)). As noted by Ritter (1984a) and Sherman and Titman (2002), information asymmetry should also
affect the precision of the price-setting process. Specifically, it should be more difficult to estimate
precisely the value of a firm that is characterized by high information asymmetry: firms with higher
uncertainty should have a higher volatility of initial returns. Our results are consistent with these models:
we find that IPO initial return variability is considerably higher when the fraction of difficult-to-value
2