NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE INDUSTRY LIFE CYCLE, ACQUISITIONS AND
INVESTMENT: DOES FIRM ORGANIZATION MATTER?
Vojislav Maksimovic
Gordon Phillips
Working Paper 12297
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12297
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2006
University of Maryland and University of Maryland and NBER respectively. Maksimovic can be reached
at vmax@rhsmith.umd.edu and Phillips can be reached at gphillips@rhsmith.umd.edu. This research was
supported by the NSF. We would like to thank Mike Lemmon, Harold Mulherin, Sheri Tice, Bernie Yeung,
CES staff and seminar participants at the American Finance Association meetings, Duke-UNC corporate
finance conference, Financial Economics and Accounting conference at USC, 2005 Frontiers in Finance
Conference, George Washington, HKUST, Minnesota, NYU, Pittsburg, Tanaka School, Texas, UBC, UCLA
and Wharton. The research in this paper was conducted while the authors were Special Sworn Status
researchers of the U.S. Census Bureau at the Center for Economic Studies. Research results and conclusions
expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Census Bureau. This paper
has been screened to insure that no confidential data are revealed. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Vojislav Maksimovic and Gordon Phillips. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Industry Life Cycle and Acquisitions and Investment: Does Firm Organization Matter?
Vojislav Maksimovic and Gordon Phillips
NBER Working Paper No. 12297
June 2006
JEL No. G0, G2, G3
ABSTRACT
We examine the effect of financial dependence on acquisition and investment within existing
industries by single-segment and conglomerate firms for industries undergoing different long run
changes in industry conditions. Conglomerates and single-segment firms differ more in rates of
within-industry acquisitions than in capital expenditure rates, which are similar across organizational
type. In particular, 36 percent of within-industry growth by conglomerate firms in growth industries
is from intra-industry acquisitions, compared to nine percent for single segment firms. Financial
dependence, a deficit in a segment’s internal financing, decreases the likelihood of within-industry
acquisitions and opening new plants, especially for single-segment firms. These effects are mitigated
for conglomerates in growth industries. The findings persist after controlling for firm size and
segment productivity. Acquisitions lead to increased efficiency as plants acquired by conglomerate
firms in growth industries increase in productivity post acquisition. The results are consistent with
the comparative advantages of different firm organizations differing across long-run industry
conditions.
Vojislav Maksimovic
Robert H. Smith School of Business
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
vmax@rhsmith.umd.edu
Gordon M. Phillips
R.H. Smith School of Management
Van Munching Hall
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
gphillips@rhsmith.umd.edu

The Industry Life Cycle, Acquisitions and Investment: Does Firm Organization
Matter?
1 Introduction
Aninfluentialbodyofresearchhasarguedthatindustriesgothroughlife-cyclestagesandthatthese stages
arecharacterizedbymarkeddifferencesininvestmentandrestructuringactivity(GortandKlepper(1982),
Jovanovic (1982), Klepper and Grady (1990), Klepper (1996)). The evidence suggests that changes in the
number of firms in an industry occur at times of transition in an industry’s life cycle when the competitive
advantage among producers is changing. However it is not known whether and how firm organization is
associated with firm performance for industries that experience different changes in long-run conditions.
Inthis paper we examine whether long-termchangesin industry conditionsaffect investment by single-
industry firms and divisions of conglomerate (multi-segment) firms differently. We focus on two factors
that have been identified in the literature as giving multi-division firms an advantage in some competitive
environments: access to internal capital markets and the ability to restructure stemming from a greater
propensity to participate in the market for mergers and acquisitions. Specifically we ask:
Does firm organization affect capital intra-industry acquisitions, plant births and deaths?
(cid:127)
Doestheeffectoforganizationalstructureonfirms’investmentdecisionsdependonlong-runindustry
(cid:127)
conditions?
Dodifferencesinfirmorganizationandindustryconditionsaffectwhetherfirms’ investmentdecisions
(cid:127)
depend on shortfalls in cash flows from operations?
In studying firm organization, we distinguish between single-segment firms and conglomerate firms
operating in multiple industries. These two types of firms are likely to have different access to financial
resources (public markets and internal capital markets) and different types of monitoring (within firm
hierarchiesversus monitoringby external providers of capital). Moreover, the categorizationbuildsonpre-
vious research that has established the importance of a division’s position within its firm on its investment
policy, efficiency, extent of internal monitoring, and access to internal capital markets.1
1Early authorsincludeLang and Stulz (1994) and Bergerand Ofek (1995). Wediscusstheotherpapers in thisliterature
that are related to this paper in Section 2.
1

We classify industries into four different long-run categories: (1.) Growth industries in which the
long-run industry shipments and the long-run number of firms are increasing and with changes for each of
these factors both above the median industry change, (2.) Consolidating industries in which the change
in the long-run shipments is above the median industry change but the change in the number of firms is
below the median. (3.) Technological change industries in which the change in long-run demand is below
the median industry change but the change in the number of firms is above, (4.) Declining industries
in which the change in long-run demand and the long-run number of firms are both below the median
industry change. The industry categories differ in the amount of restructuring (closings and acquisitions
of business segments) and growth opportunities.
We find the within-industry acquisition behavior of conglomerate segments differs sharply from that
of single-segment firms, even controlling for the productivity, public firm status, and the size of the pur-
chaser. Segments of conglomerate firms are two to three times more likely to acquire plants within their
existing industries than are single-segment firms. In particular, 36 percent of within-industry growth
by conglomerate firms in growth industries is from intra-industry acquisitions compared to nine percent
for single-segment firms. Acquisition rates also significantly differ across long-run industry conditions.
Within-industry acquisitions by conglomerate segments in Growth industries represent a much higher per-
centage (ten percentage points higher) of total firm growth than acquisitions in Declining industries. In
contrast to these findings, capital expenditures, which are typically the focus the prior research, vary less
across organizational types and industry conditions.
We examine whether the differences in within-industry acquisition rates and investment by different
types of firm organizations are related to financial dependence. We define as financially dependent those
business segments (single-segment firms or segments of conglomerates) that spend more than their cash
flowfromoperationsoncapitalexpenditures.2 Wetestwhethertheeffectoffinancialdependenceonacqui-
sitions and investment differs for conglomerates and single-segment firms. We control for the endogeneity
of organizational form and financial dependence. To control for potential endogeneity between capital
expenditures and realized the cash flow from operations, in our empirical tests we examine how segments
respond to predicted financial dependence rather than observed financial dependence.
We find financially dependent segments tend to fall into two categories: segments that are less pro-
ductive compared to other segments in their industries and very productive segments in high growth
industries.3 We have three major findings that show how financial dependence and organizational form
2Thus, a segment that has an internal financial deficit in a year must rely on cash flows from outside the segment or on
theliquidation of its assets to fund capitalexpenditures at the plants it owns.
3The term productive is defined below and refers to firms ability to produce revenue from inputs at the segment level.
2