NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SENSATION SEEKING, OVERCONFIDENCE, AND TRADING ACTIVITY
Mark Grinblatt
Matti Keloharju
Working Paper 12223
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12223
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2006
We would like to thank the Finnish Vehicle Administration, the Finnish Armed Forces, the Finnish Central
Securities Depository, and the Finnish Tax Administration for providing access to the data, as well as the
Office of the Data Protection Ombudsman for recognizing the value of this project to the research
community. Our appreciation also extends to Antti Lehtinen and Juan Prajogo, who provided superb research
assistance, and to Ivo Welch, Samuli Knüpfer, Juhani Linnainmaa, Tyler Shumway, and seminar participants
at the University of Illinois, the University of Michigan, the University of Texas, and the University of
Mannheim, who generated many insights that benefited this paper. We also thank Seppo Ikäheimo for his
help in obtaining the data and Markku Kaustia, Samuli Knüpfer, Lauri Pietarinen, and Elias Rantapuska for
participating in the analysis of the Finnish Central Securities Depository data. Financial support from the
Academy of Finland, the Foundation for Economic Education, and the Paulo Foundation is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Mark Grinblatt and Matti Keloharju. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Sensation Seeking, Overconfidence, and Trading Activity
Mark Grinblatt and Matti Keloharju
NBER Working Paper No. 12223
May 2006
JEL No. G10, G11
ABSTRACT
This study analyzes the role that two psychological attributes—sensation seeking and
overconfidence—play in the tendency of investors to trade stocks. Equity trading data are combined
with data from an investor’s tax filings, driving record, and psychological profile. We use the data
to construct measures of overconfidence and sensation seeking tendencies. Controlling for a host of
variables, including wealth, income, age, number of stocks owned, marital status, and occupation,
we find that overconfident investors and those investors most prone to sensation seeking trade more
frequently.
Mark Grinblatt
UCLA
Anderson School of Management
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
mark.grinblatt@anderson.ucla.edu
Matti Keloharju
Helsinki School of Economics
Department of Accounting and Finance
Runeberginkatu 22-24
FIN-00100 Helsinki
FINLAND
matti.kaloharju@hse.fi

1. Introduction
The extraordinarily high volume of equity trading that takes place on stock exchanges
represents one of the greatest puzzles in finance.1 The classic asset pricing models suggest
that investors should optimally buy a single risky portfolio and hold it in perpetuity.
Rebalancing motivations generate only negligible trading for most plausible return generating
processes, even when the motive is a proper asset allocation between cash and risky assets.
Researchers have offered a variety of explanations for why trading volume is so large,
but these are not fully satisfactory. The obvious candidate, heterogeneous information, does
not immediately generate rational trading. Milgrom and Stokey (1982) argued that in the
presence of common knowledge, there is no rational trade, even with heterogeneous
information signals. Models with disagreement require noise trading to generate trading
volume.2 Without a satisfactory explanation of what drives the noise trading and a calibration
that accounts for observed trading, trading volume remains a puzzle.
As a consequence of the failure of traditional models to explain trading, empiricists
have begun to study and document how behavioral factors might explain trade. Odean
(1999), Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001), and Grinblatt and Han (2005) argue that trading can
arise as a consequence of a disposition effect. Odean (1998, 1999) suggests that
overconfidence may drive excessive trading. Barber and Odean (2001) find that gender is
related to trading—the portfolios of males exhibit greater turnover—and that this is due to
their greater overconfidence. Gervais and Odean (2001) develop a model in which successful
chance experiences can generate overconfidence and lead to excessive trading. Graham,
Harvey, and Huang (2005) contend that competence drives trading.
1 See, for example, Odean (1999) and Barber and Odean (2000, 2002).
2 See Weiss (1979), Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), and Pfleiderer (1984).
1

This paper employs data on the psychological traits of each investor to show that
trading may be driven by two emotional considerations: The first is sensation seeking, which
is the search for novel, intense, and varied experiences generally associated with real or
imagined physical, social, and financial risks; the second is overconfidence, which is the
tendency to place an irrationally excessive degree of confidence in one’s abilities and beliefs.
Using a comprehensive dataset from Finland, which offers a remarkable number of control
variables, we show that investors who are most prone to sensation seeking and those who are
most overconfident trade the most. To our best knowledge, this is the first study to
specifically focus on sensation seeking as a motivation for trade and the first that employs
comprehensive data to directly measure overconfidence and study its relationship to trading.
A potential link between sensation seeking and trading activity should be apparent to
anyone who has spent time in a casino. Gambling, which the psychology literature has tied to
sensation seeking,3 is a worldwide industry, generating over $2 trillion in revenues each year.4
There also is widespread unreported and often illegal gambling activity that most everyone is
acquainted with and which frequently is reported on in the popular press. Given the
consumptive utility enjoyed in all sorts of activities where an element of risk and thrill is
involved, it would truly be surprising if some consumers did not enjoy the thrill from trading
in the stock market. A recent paper by Kumar (2005) concludes that investor-types with
characteristics associated with an attraction to gambling prefer lottery-like stocks.
A link between overconfidence and trading activity is also plausible, as recent
literature has noted.5 When one’s private valuation of a stock differs from that of the market,
3 For a review of the literature, see Raylu and Oei (2002).
4 Source: BBC News World Edition August 22, 2005 reporting on “Place Your Bets, Part 3.”
5 Barber and Odean (2001) test whether overconfidence drives trading using gender as a proxy for
overconfidence. Glaser and Weber (2004), using data on 215 online investors who responded to a survey, find
that the better than average effect is related to trading frequency. Using experimental data, Deaves et al. (2003)
2