NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO FOREIGNERS INVEST LESS IN POORLY GOVERNED FIRMS?
Christian Leuz
Karl V. Lins
Francis E. Warnock
Working Paper 12222
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12222
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2006
Email addresses: leuz@wharton.upenn.edu, finkvl@business.utah.edu, and WarnockF@darden.virginia.edu.
We thank Jillian Faucette, Sara Holland, Ivalina Kalcheva, and Alex Rothenberg for valuable research
assistance. We are grateful for helpful comments from Anup Agrawal, Robert Bushman, Alexander Dyck,
Robert Heinkel, Dale Henderson, Helena Isidro, Andrew Karolyi, Leora Klapper, Mike Lemmon, Darius
Miller, René Stulz, Rohan Williamson, Luigi Zingales, and participants at the 2004 NYSE Conference on
Global Equity Markets, the Tenth Annual Assurant/Georgia Tech International Finance Conference, the 2005
Shanghai Conference on Corporate Governance in Asia and China, the 2005 Maryland Finance Symposium,
the 2005 Bank of Canada Workshop at UBC, the 2006 Darden/World Bank Emerging Markets Conference,
the 2006 Corporate Governance and Capital Markets Conference sponsored by CEMAF and ISCTE in
Lisbon, and seminars at Indiana University, Ohio State University, the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, and the University of Oklahoma. The statistical analysis of security-level data on U.S. investors’
holdings reported in this study was conducted at the International Finance Division of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System under arrangements that maintained legal confidentiality
requirements. The views in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be
interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or of any other
person associated with the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Christian Leuz, Karl V. Lins and Francis E. Warnock. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Do Foreigners Invest Less in Poorly Governed Firms?
Christian Leuz, Karl V. Lins and Francis E. Warnock
NBER Working Paper No. 12222
May 2006
JEL No. G3, F3
ABSTRACT
As domestic sources of outside finance are limited in many countries around the world, it is
important to understand the factors that influence whether foreign outside investors provide capital
to a country’s firms. This study examines whether and why investor concern about corporate
governance results in fewer foreign holdings. We use a comprehensive set of foreign holdings by
U.S. investors as a proxy for foreign investment and analyze a sample of 4,411 firms from 29
emerging market and developed economies. We find that foreigners invest significantly less in firms
that are poorly governed, i.e., firms that have ownership structures that are more conducive to outside
investor expropriation. Interestingly, this finding is not simply a matter of a country’s economic
development but appears to be directly related to a country’s information rules and legal institutions.
We therefore argue that information problems faced by foreign investors play an important role in
this result. Supporting this explanation, we show that foreign investment is lower in firms that appear
to engage in more earnings management.
Christian Leuz
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2315 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
Karl V. Lins
David Eccles School of Business
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112-9303
Francis E. Warnock
Darden Business School
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
and NBER
warnockf@darden.virginia.edu

“The fundamental issue for everyone involved in financial markets today, regardless of company
or country, must be to maintain high standards – legal, regulatory, and ethical – that breed trust
and confidence. ….. Capital will flee environments that are unstable or unpredictable – whether
that's a function of lax corporate governance, ineffective accounting standards, a lack of
transparency, or a weak enforcement regime. Investors must see for themselves that companies
are living up to their obligations and embracing the spirit underpinning all securities laws.”
[William Donaldson, Chairman of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2005].
1. Introduction
Domestic sources of outside finance are limited in many countries around the world
[Giannetti and Koskinen (2004)]. In response, many capital markets have been liberalized, and
foreign capital has become an increasingly important source of finance, particularly for firms
from emerging markets [Karolyi (1998)]. For instance, in the mid-1990s Asian firms raised $1
in foreign equity markets for every $3 they raised domestically [Bekaert, Harvey and Lumsdaine
(2002)]. Given the growing significance of foreign financing, and the fact that access to foreign
capital may well be uneven across firms and countries, it is important to understand more fully
the factors that can cause investors to shy away from providing capital to foreign firms.
Poor firm-level corporate governance is one factor that draws considerable attention from
outside investors and regulators, but has rarely been investigated in large-scale academic studies.
Institutional investors frequently claim that they avoid foreign firms that are poorly governed,
particularly when it comes to investments in emerging markets.1 Similarly, as the quote above
makes clear, government officials and securities regulators often express concerns that poor
governance hinders foreign investment and may thus impede financial development. However,
outside investors that fear governance problems and expropriation by insiders are likely to
1 A 2002 McKinsey and Company global investor survey shows that corporate governance considerations dominate
decisions about which firms in Latin American and East Asia receive investment whereas for North American firms
financial statement considerations dominate. The survey also reports that “more than 60% of investors state that
governance considerations might lead them to avoid individual companies with poor governance.” Similarly, when
discussing investment criteria, the long-time manager of the $1.2 billion Templeton Developing Markets Trust,
Mark Mobius, states that “corporate governance is not improving, so why fight it?” [Karmin (2000)].

reduce the price they are willing to pay for a firm’s shares. As a result of price protection, even
poorly governed firms should offer an adequate return, raising the questions of whether and why
governance concerns could manifest themselves in fewer foreign holdings.
Our study is an attempt to shed some light on these questions examining a sample of
4,411 firms from 29 countries in which U.S investors are the “foreign” investors. We show that
U.S. investors, which comprise about half of all foreign investment worldwide, do in fact hold
fewer shares in non-U.S. firms with ownership structures that are more conducive to governance
problems and expropriation by controlling insiders. We also provide evidence that information
problems faced by U.S. investors play a central role in this result.
It is commonly argued that foreign investors are at an informational disadvantage relative
to local investors [Brennan and Cao (1997), Kang and Stulz (1997), and Choe, Kho, and Stulz
(2005)]. In this paper, we argue that information asymmetries between foreign and local
investors are particularly pronounced with respect to the evaluation of a firm’s governance
structures. In many countries – constituting both emerging and developed markets – business
transactions, financing arrangements, and, ultimately, corporate governance are shaped not by
arm’s length dealings, but by relationships among a tightly knit group of controlling families and
managers. Understanding these insider relationships (and their implications for outside investor
expropriation) requires an intricate social knowledge of political connections, banking
connections, private gatherings of the business elite, and so forth, which foreigners are less likely
to have. Additionally, it seems plausible that foreign investors are more likely to shy away from
particular firms with expected insider expropriation problems when a country’s governance and
information regulations are relatively weak, because poor country-level institutions make the
evaluation of firms’ governance structures more important and costly.
2