NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY DOES THE LAW OF ONE PRICE FAIL? AN EXPERIMENT ON INDEX MUTUAL
FUNDS
James J. Choi
David Laibson
Brigitte C. Madrian
Working Paper 12261
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12261
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2006
We are indebted to Anna Blank, David Borden, Carlos Caro, Ananya Chakravarti, Keith Ericson, Christina
Jenq, Shih En Lu, Dina Mishra, Kelly Shue, Dmitry Taubinsky, Chelsea Zhang, Fan Zhang, and Eric
Zwick for their excellent research assistance. We are grateful to Sally Zeckhauser, John W. Nolan,
Ken Toy, and Thomas E. Vautin for facilitating the experiment with Harvard staff. We thank Jeff Brown,
Gideon Saar, and seminar participants at the Boston Fed, NBER, University of Connecticut, University
of Maryland, University of Pennsylvania, and Yale for helpful comments. We acknowledge individual
and collective financial support from the National Institute on Aging (grants R01-AG021650 and T32-AG00186)
and the U.S. Social Security Administration through grant #10- P-98363-2 to the National Bureau
of Economic Research as part of the SSA Retirement Research Consortium. The findings and conclusions
expressed are solely those of the authors and do not represent the views of NIA, SSA, any other agency
of the Federal Government, or the NBER. Choi acknowledges financial support from the Mustard
Seed Foundation.
© 2006 by James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Why Does the Law of One Price Fail? An Experiment on Index Mutual Funds
James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian
NBER Working Paper No. 12261
May 2006, Revised April 2008
JEL No. D14,D18,D43,D83
ABSTRACT
Experimental subjects allocate $10,000 across four S&P 500 index funds. Subject rewards depend
on the chosen portfolio’s subsequent return. Because the investments are not actually intermediated
by the fund companies, portfolio returns are unbundled from non-portfolio services. The optimal portfolio
therefore invests 100% in the lowest-cost fund. Nonetheless, subjects overwhelmingly fail to minimize
fees. When we make fees transparent and salient, portfolios shift towards cheaper funds, but fees are
still not minimized. Instead, subjects place high weight on normatively irrelevant historical returns.
Subjects who choose high-cost index funds are relatively much less confident about their asset allocation
choices.
James J. Choi Brigitte C. Madrian
Yale School of Management John F. Kennedy School of Government
135 Prospect Street Harvard University
P.O. Box 208200 79 JFK Street
New Haven, CT 06520-8200 Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER and NBER
james.choi@yale.edu Brigitte_Madrian@Harvard.edu
David Laibson
Department of Economics
Littauer M-14
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dlaibson@harvard.edu

“S&P 500 index funds are mutual funds whose goal is to mirror the return of the
S&P 500 index. The underlying portfolios of these funds are similar to
commodities because they hold essentially identical portfolios of securities.
However, like many other end-products that are based on commodities, S&P 500
index funds themselves are not commodities. These funds differ from one another
through the services that are packaged with their securities portfolios and through
other characteristics. Differences in services and characteristics allow mutual
funds to appeal to the needs of a wide range of investors.”
Sean Collins, Investment Company Institute (2005, p. 2)
Mutual fund fees vary by an order of magnitude across firms, even though the industry
has hundreds of competing providers. There is, however, scant evidence that more expensive
funds pick securities well enough to offset their higher fees (e.g. Carhart, 1997; Gruber, 1996).
Some authors have argued that investors should not choose high-fee funds, particularly in the
index fund market, where the underlying portfolio is a commodity (Elton, Gruber, and Busse,
2004). Industry trade groups have responded by arguing that variation in non-portfolio services,
such as financial advice or complementary investment instruments, explains the variation in fees
(Collins, 2005). Academic economists have explained the demand for high-fee funds with search
cost models (Sirri and Tufano, 1998) and models that combine search costs and services
(Hortaçsu and Syverson, 2004).
We report the results of a set of experiments that shed light on these theories of the
demand for high-fee mutual funds. In these experiments, we gave 730 subjects four S&P 500
index fund prospectuses and asked them to allocate $10,000 among these funds. To make
choices incentive-compatible, subjects’ expected payments depended on the profits of their
portfolios over a specified time period after the experimental session. We offered especially large
incentives to 391 of the subjects; for them, the cost of the most expensive portfolio exceeded the
cost of the least expensive portfolio by $94. Because the investments were intermediated by the
experimenters (and not by the fund companies themselves), subjects’ returns were completely
unbundled from any fund services. Thus, we are able to identify the effect of varying fees while
holding services constant—an identification that would be extremely difficult to achieve in a
non-laboratory setting. In the absence of such service effects, the optimal portfolio allocates the
entire investment to the lowest-cost index fund.
3

Our experimental subjects may be better-equipped than most investors to make
sophisticated investment decisions. Our largest subject group (which received the largest
incentives) consists of Harvard staff members, who on average have many years of experience
managing their personal finances. Furthermore, 88% have at least a college degree, and 60%
have some graduate school education as well. Our next largest group of participants consists of
MBA students from Wharton. The remaining subjects are college students recruited on the
Harvard campus. Our MBA subjects reported an average combined SAT score of 1453, which is
at the 98th percentile nationally, and our college subjects reported an average score of 1499,
which is at the 99th percentile.1 When we measure financial literacy directly, we find that all
three subject groups are more knowledgeable than the typical American investor.
Despite removing variation in fund services, we find that almost none of the subjects who
received only the prospectuses minimized fees. We test the role of search costs in this failure to
minimize fees by eliminating them in one of our experimental conditions. In this treatment,
subjects received the four fund prospectuses as well as a one-page sheet that summarized the
funds’ front-end loads and expense ratios (reproduced in Appendix B).
In another treatment, we study what happens when we eliminate search costs for
historical returns, as some mutual fund advertising strives to do (Jain and Wu, 2000; Sapp and
Tiwari, 2004; Cronqvist, 2004; Mullainathan and Shleifer, 2005). Subjects in this condition
received the four prospectuses and a summary sheet that showed each fund’s historical
annualized return over the longest period reported in its prospectus—usually the fund’s return
since inception (Appendix C). The dates over which these long-horizon historical returns are
calculated differ across funds due to varying fund inception dates and prospectus publishing
cycles. Thus, returns since inception should be ignored when predicting across-fund variation in
future index fund returns. In fact, we constructed our fund menus so that long-horizon historical
returns are positively correlated with fees; as a result, chasing past returns lowers future expected
returns.
Finally, we study a third treatment, administered only to the Harvard staff sample, in
which subjects received the four prospectuses and one page of answers to frequently asked
questions (FAQs) about S&P 500 index funds (Appendix D). In particular, subjects were told
1 These averages are consistent with the school-wide statistics publicly reported by the universities. See
www.collegeboard.com/prod_downloads/about/news_info/cbsenior/yr2005/02_v&m_composite_percentile_ranks_0
4