NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FLIGHT-TO-QUALITY OR FLIGHT-TO-LIQUIDITY?
EVIDENCE FROM THE EURO-AREA BOND MARKET
Alessandro Beber
Michael W. Brandt
Kenneth A. Kavajecz
Working Paper 12376
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12376
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2006
Beber is at HEC, University of Lausanne, Brandt is at the Fuqua School of Business, Duke University and
is also affiliated with the NBER, and Kavajecz is at the School of Business, University of Wisconsin -
Madison. We gratefully acknowledge the helpful comments from seminar participants at Notre Dame
University, University of North Carolina, and the University of Wisconsin. We have also benefitted greatly
from the comments of Shane Corwin, Joel Hasbrouck, Paul Schultz and Richard Sheehan. All remaining
errors are our own. Address correspondence to Kenneth Kavajecz, School of Business, University of
Wisconsin – Madison, 975 University Avenue, Madison, Wisconsin 53706. Phone: (608) 265-3494 or
kkavajecz@bus.wisc.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Alessandro Beber, Michael W. Brandt and Kenneth A. Kavajecz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Flight-to-Quality or Flight-to-Liquidity? Evidence From the Euro-Area Bond Market
Alessandro Beber, Michael W. Brandt and Kenneth A. Kavajecz
NBER Working Paper No. 12376
July 2006
JEL No. G0, G12
ABSTRACT
Do bond investors demand credit quality or liquidity? The answer is both, but at different times and
for different reasons. Using data on the Euro-area government bond market, which features a unique
negative correlation between credit quality and liquidity across countries, we show that the bulk of
sovereign yield spreads is explained by differences in credit quality, though liquidity plays a
non-trivial role especially for low credit risk countries and during times of heightened market
uncertainty. In contrast, the destination of large flows into the bond market is determined almost
exclusively by liquidity. We conclude that credit quality matters for bond valuation but that, in times
of market stress, investors chase liquidity, not credit quality.
Michael W. Brandt
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
Box 90120
One Towerview Drive
Durham, NC 27708
mbrandt@duke.edu

1. Introduction
In times of economic distress, we often observe investors rebalance their portfolios toward less
risky and more liquid securities, especially in fixed income markets. This phenomenon is
commonly referred to as a flight-to-quality and a flight-to-liquidity, respectively. While the
economic motives of these two phenomena are clearly distinct from each other, empirically
disentangling a flight-to-quality from a flight-to-liquidity is difficult because, as Ericsson and
Renault (2006) show in the context of the U.S. corporate bond market, these two attributes of a
fixed income security (credit quality and liquidity) are usually positively correlated. For
example, U.S. Treasuries have less credit risk and are more liquid than corporate bonds. When
we observe investors reduce their corporate bond holdings and increase their Treasury holdings it
is therefore unclear whether they do so because of credit or liquidity concerns.
The goal of our paper is to determine empirically the extent to which investors are
concerned about credit quality and liquidity unconditionally, as well as conditional on times of
heightened market uncertainty or rebalancing activity. We accomplish this by studying yield
spreads and orderflow in the Euro-area government bond market which exhibits a strong and
unique negative relation between credit quality and liquidity, as opposed to the strong positive
association found in U.S. debt markets. To appreciate this difference, consider that the credit
quality of sovereign debt increases with a country’s fiscal discipline (i.e., lower deficit/debt to
GDP ratio). At the same time the liquidity of sovereign bonds depends on the quantity of
outstanding debt which, holding the size of the economy constant, decreases with a country’s
fiscal discipline. Italy’s sovereign debt, for example, is among the most liquid but also most
risky in the Euro-area government bond market. This negative association between credit quality
and liquidity is the key aspect of our data that allows us to empirically disentangle flights-to-
quality and flights-to-liquidity.
More specifically, we study the yield spreads (relative to a common Euro-LIBOR yield
curve) and orderflow for 10 Euro-area countries with active sovereign debt markets. We use the
MTS interdealer fixed income securities data, a relatively new dataset containing Euro-area
government security wholesale transactions and limit order books.1 These data have two
advantages. First, all the fixed income securities therein are based on the actions of the same
1 The MTS data are essentially the European equivalent of the U.S. GovPX data.
1

European Central Bank, thereby isolating the credit quality and liquidity differences across
countries. Second, as will become apparent later, we can construct precise measures of liquidity
for these data, in contrast to what is generally possible to obtain for fixed income securities. In
addition to the MTS data, we utilize data from the sovereign credit default swap (CDS) market to
obtain an exogenous estimate of credit quality for each of the countries in the sample.
Our main empirical finding is that investors care about both credit quality and liquidity,
but they do so at different times and for different reasons. We document that the bulk of
sovereign yield spreads is explained by differences in credit quality, though liquidity plays a
non-trivial role especially for low credit risk countries and during times of heightened market
uncertainty. When we investigate flights directly, we find that the destination of large flows into
(as well as out of) the bond market is determined almost exclusively by liquidity. Furthermore,
when we condition on periods of large flows into or out of the bond market, liquidity explains a
substantially greater proportion of sovereign yield spreads, consistent with a heightened impact
of order flow on bond prices. We conclude from this evidence that, while credit quality matters
for bond valuation, in times of market stress, investors chase liquidity, not credit quality.2
The question of whether investors are more concerned with credit quality or liquidity is
crucial for academics, practitioners, and policy makers alike. For academics, our results point to
specific avenues that are likely to be fruitful in improving our current term structure models by
providing a better understanding of cross-market dynamics and the sources of risk premia. For
practitioners, understanding the implications of credit quality and liquidity on fixed income
securities aid in both firm-level issuance decisions as well as trading strategies of fixed income
portfolio managers. Finally, our work is important to policy makers, whose objective is the
viability of the markets, because it suggests ways to mitigate ‘peak-load’ problems induced by
flights into and out of financial markets as was seen during the Russian debt crisis in 1998.
Section 2 discusses the related literature. Section 3 describes our data and methodology.
Section 4 reports our empirical results and Section 5 concludes.
2 It is important to note that our analysis of flights is specific to the choice of securities within a single asset class –
Euro area government bonds, and does not necessarily apply to movements across asset classes. We restrict our
analysis to the government bond market because we cannot empirically characterize with the same level of detail the
rebalancing activities across asset classes.
2