NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE CATASTROPHIC EFFECTS OF NATURAL
DISASTERS ON INSURANCE MARKETS
W. Kip Viscusi
Patricia Born
Working Paper 12348
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12348
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2006
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by W. Kip Viscusi and Patricia Born. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Catastrophic Effects of Natural Disasters on Insurance Markets
W. Kip Viscusi and Patricia Born
NBER Working Paper No. 12348
June 2006
JEL No. D8, G22, K13
ABSTRACT
Natural catastrophes often have catastrophic risks on insurance companies as well as on the insured.
Using a very large dataset on homeowners’ insurance coverage by state, by firm, and by year for the
1984 to 2004 period, this paper documents the positive effect on losses and loss ratios of both
unexpected catastrophes as well as large events that the authors term “blockbuster catastrophes.”
Insurers adapt to these catastrophic risks by raising insurance rates, leading to lower loss ratios after
the catastrophic event. There is a widespread event of unexpected catastrophes and blockbuster
catastrophes that reduces total premiums earned in the state, reduces the total number writing
insurance coverage in the state, and leads to the exit of firms from the state. Firms with low levels
of homeowners’ premiums are most adversely affected by the catastrophes.
W. Kip Viscusi
Vanderbilt Law School
131 21st Avenue South
Nashville, TN 37203
and NBER
kip.viscusi@vanderbilt.edu
Patricia Born
Department of Finance, Real Estate & Insurance
College of Business and Economics
California State University – Northridge
18111 Nordhoff Street
Northridge, CA 91330-8379
patricia.born@csun.edu

In conventional insurance markets, such as for automobile insurance, the insurer faces a
large number of independent risks that tend to follow a fairly predictable pattern across time. By
charging premiums that the firm can invest and earn a return on before paying off the losses, the
firm will be able to run a profitable insurance business.
Catastrophic losses caused by natural disasters are much more problematic from an
insurance standpoint. Rather than a large number of risks that on average follow a quite
predictable year-to-year pattern, catastrophic losses tend to be lumpy. In fact, the situation
parallels that in an automobile insurance case in which there is not a large number of
independent trials but rather a single draw for highly correlated risks so that either every auto or
no autos are involved in an accident that year.
Catastrophic risks consequently pose a variety of problems for insurers. First, because
the losses arise from a small number of lumpy events, the insurer may not have sufficient
resources to cover the losses. Less dramatically, the firm may suffer losses well in excess of the
value of the premiums that it charged for the coverage. In the absence of adequate reinsurance,
the firm may go bankrupt or may choose to exit a state in which there is a substantial exposure to
such catastrophic risks. In response to losses incurred following Hurricane Katrina, which
accounted for over $38 billion in insured losses last year, one major insurer, Allstate, has exited
several coastal states while another, State Farm, has chosen not to renew some policies in these
areas.1 The fourth-largest personal insurer in Florida, Poe Financial, went bankrupt.2
The second ramification of catastrophic losses is that they will influence the rate structure
even for firms that remain quite viable in the presence of natural disasters. Suppose that an
insurer is writing coverage in a very high-risk state that experiences a major disaster once every
1 “The Price of Sunshine,” The Economist, June 8, 2006, p. 76.
2 Ibid. More specifically, the article concluded: “In April Poe Financial, Florida’s fourth-largest personal insurer,
collapsed, leaving 316,000 policyholders in need of coverage.”
2

decade. In that disaster year, the firm will suffer losses well in excess of premiums. For it to be
profitable for the insurer to write coverage in the state, it will consequently have to charge more
for insurance in the other years in which there are no catastrophes than it would if there were not
the threat of catastrophic risks. Thus, one would expect to observe very high loss ratios in the
catastrophic risk states in years in which a catastrophe has occurred and expect especially low
loss ratios in the non-catastrophe years as compared to the loss ratios in states not subject to such
catastrophic risks.
A third phenomenon linked to natural disasters is that of learning about the risks over
time. The distribution of losses due to catastrophes may change over time for a variety of
reasons. Locational patterns may have shifted over time, as reflected in increased construction in
high-risk beach front locales. There also may be shifts in weather patterns, as evidenced in the
recent speculation that catastrophic losses from Hurricane Katrina are likely to increase in the
presence of global warming. The hurricane season in the period 1995-2005 averaged 15 named
storms per year, up from an average of 8.5 named storms from 1971-1994.3 To the extent that
insurers are rational Bayesian decision makers, one would expect them to update their risk
beliefs over time when writing insurance coverage.
Somewhat surprisingly, there is no econometric analysis whatsoever that addresses these
and other fundamental aspects of how catastrophic risks affect insurance markets. There have, of
course, been extensive discussions of a conceptual nature as well as analyses of the potential role
of reinsurance, but there has been no empirical examination of how catastrophic risks affect
insurance company behavior.4
3 National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (2006).
4 Examples of previous treatments of the insurance of catastrophic risks include special issues of the Journal of Risk
and Insurance (December 1996) and the Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance (April 1997). Representative
articles are those by Grace, Klein and Kleindorfer (2004), Angbazo and Narayanan (1996), Gollier (1997), Kleffner
3