NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INFLATION BAND TARGETING AND OPTIMAL INFLATION CONTRACTS
Frederic S. Mishkin
Niklas J. Westelius
Working Paper 12384
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12384
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2006
We would like to thank Roc Armenter, Lars Svensson, Carl Walsh, Michael Woodford, John Williams and
participants in seminars at Columbia University, Duke University, the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, the New York Area Workshop on Monetary Policy, the International Monetary Fund and
the National Bureau of Economic Research. Any views expressed in this paper are those of the authors only
and not those of Columbia The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Frederic S. Mishkin and Niklas J. Westelius. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Inflation Band Targeting and Optimal Inflation Contracts
Frederic S. Mishkin and Niklas J. Westelius
NBER Working Paper No. 12384
July 2006
JEL No. E52, E58
ABSTRACT
In this paper we examine how target ranges work in the context of a Barro-Gordon (1983) type
model, in which the time-inconsistency problem stems from political pressures from the government.
We show that target ranges turn out to be an excellent way to cope with the time-inconsistency
problem, and achieve many of the benefits that arise under practically less attractive solutions such
as the conservative central banker and optimal inflation contracts. Our theoretical model also shows
how an inflation targeting range should be set and how it should respond to changes in the nature
of shocks to the economy.
Frederic S. Mishkin
Graduate School of Business
Uris Hall 817
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
fsm3@columbia.edu
Niklas J. Westelius
Department of Economics
Hunter College, CUNY
695 Park Avenue
New York, NY 10021
niklas.westlius@hunter.cuny.edu

1. Introduction
With the development of the literature on the time-inconsistency problem in Kydland
and Prescott (1977), Calvo (1978) and Barro and Gordon (1983), there has been an
increasing recognition both by policymakers and the academic literature that solving the
time-inconsistency problem is crucial to the successful conduct of monetary policy. The
time-inconsistency problem arises because there are incentives for the monetary policymaker
to try to exploit the short-run tradeoff between employment and inflation to pursue short-run
employment objectives using expansionary monetary policy, although the result is poor long-
run outcomes – higher inflation, with no benefit on the output front.
Two approaches have been suggested in the literature to cope with the time-
inconsistency problem: appointment of a conservative central banker (Rogoff, 1985) or
adoption of optimal contracts for monetary policymakers (Walsh, 1995). Although both
these approaches have attractive theoretical properties, they are difficult to implement in
practice. It is likely to be quite difficult to find a central banker with the “right” preferences
and it is hard to believe that politicians would naturally want to appoint central bankers with
different preferences than theirs. Also, an opportunistic government would also be unlikely
to appoint a conservative central banker, so that a regime based on having a conservative
central banker is unlikely to be stable over time.
Optimal inflation contracts, usually thought of as pecuniary contracts between the
government and the monetary authorities, are also unattractive because central bankers are
not paid very highly, and this is particularly true in the United States, where the chairman of
the Board of Governors is paid far less than many economics professors. Thus, it is highly
unlikely that governments would be willing to write an inflation contract that would give a
central banker sufficient incentives to produce optimal policy. Furthermore, public officials
are almost never paid on the basis of their performance and we know of no central banker
anywhere in the world that has performance-based pay. It also seems politically untenable
to write an explicit inflation contract in which the central bank is rewarded for undershooting
the optimal inflation rate.1 Finally, in order for the inflation contract to be optimal it requires
1 Svensson (1997) also points out that if a low inflation level is associated with high unemployment, then an
inflation contract may be politically difficult to implement since it rewards a central banker when inflation is
low.
3

that we know how much the central banker values his office and that the monetary costs
inflicted on the central baker would have to be translatable into utility units. This feature
seems unappealing from a practical standpoint.
This paper argues that inflation band targeting, in which the central bank is assigned a
target range and bears some cost if inflation goes outside the range, presents an alternative
and more feasible approach to address the time-inconsistency problem. Indeed, inflation band
targeting has already been adopted by many central banks. For example, the Reserve Bank of
New Zealand is required to keep inflation within the range of 1-3% and in case of failure the
Governor is subject to dismissal. Bank of England has a target range of plus/minus one
percent around a 2% inflation target, and if it fails the Governor is required to write a public
letter to the government explaining why. We show that inflation band targeting regimes
belong to a specific subclass of inflation contracts characterized by a particularly simple
form, making them easy to adopt.2 In fact, we are not arguing against the feasibility of
inflation contracts in general, but rather the infeasibility of an optimal inflation contract as
discussed above.
Note that our model only focuses on how inflation targeting can effectively deal with
distortions arising from the time-inconsistency problem.3 This, however, is only one aspect
of inflation targeting and does not exclude additional benefits such as better management of
expectations through improved communication and policy transparency, nor does it preclude
a view of inflation targeting as a commitment mechanism to optimal policy inertia as
emphasized by Giannoni and Woodford (2003).
Inflation band targeting has several advantages relative to either appointment of a
conservative central banker or optimal inflation contracts. First it eliminates the problem of
finding the perfect central banker with the right preferences. Second, the framework is likely
to be stable over time once the government has agreed to it. Third the target range provides
added flexibility to the inflation targeting regime that is more palatable to politicians. Fourth,
it is a simple framework that is easily implemented, and in contrast to optimal inflation
contracts it does not require knowledge of how much the central banker values his office.
2 Inflation band targeting regimes are also closely related to a dismissal rule as discussed by Walsh (2002).
3 We do not address the stabilization bias that the time-inconsistency problem gives rise to in a New Keynesian
framework (e.g Clarida et al, 1999). Instead our analysis focuses on the case where the objectives of the central
bank deviate from what is socially optimal due to political pressure.
4