NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY HAS CEO PAY INCREASED SO MUCH?
Xavier Gabaix
Augustin Landier
Working Paper 12365
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12365
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2006
xgabaix@princeton.edu, alandier@stern.nyu.edu. We thank Hae Jin Chung, Sean Klein and Chen Zhao for
excellent research assistance. For helpful comments, we thank Daron Acemoglu, Lucian Bebchuk, Olivier
Blanchard, Alex Edmans, Bengt Holmstrom, Hongyi Li, Kevin J. Murphy, Eric Rasmusen, Emmanuel Saez,
Andrei Shleifer, David Yermack, Frank Levy and Jeremy Stein and seminar participants at University of
Chicago, London School of Economics, MIT and the University of Southern California. We thank Carola
Frydman and Kevin J. Murphy for their data. XG thanks the NSF for financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2006 by Xavier Gabaix and Augustin Landier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Why Has CEO Pay Increased So Much?
Xavier Gabaix and Augustin Landier
NBER Working Paper No. 12365
July 2006
JEL No. D2, D3, G34, J3
ABSTRACT
This paper develops a simple equilibrium model of CEO pay. CEOs have different talents and are
matched to firms in a competitive assignment model. In market equilibrium, a CEO’s pay changes
one for one with aggregate firm size, while changing much less with the size of his own firm. The
model determines the level of CEO pay across firms and over time, offering a benchmark for
calibratable corporate finance. The sixfold increase of CEO pay between 1980 and 2003 can be fully
attributed to the six-fold increase in market capitalization of large US companies during that period.
We find a very small dispersion in CEO talent, which nonetheless justifies large pay differences. The
data broadly support the model. The size of large firms explains many of the patterns in CEO pay,
across firms, over time, and between countries.
Xavier Gabaix
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
26 Prospect Ave, #211
Princeton, NJ 08540-5296
and NBER
xgabaix@princeton.edu
Augustin Landier
New York University
Stern School of Business
Finance Department
44 West Fourth Street
New York, NY 10012-1126
alandier@stern.nyu.edu

This paper proposes a simple competitive model of CEO compensation. It is tractable
and calibratable. CEOs have different levels of managerial talent and are matched to firms
competitively. The marginal impact of a CEO’s talent is assumed to increase with the value
of the firm under his control. The model generates testable predictions about CEO pay across
firms, over time, and between countries. Moreover, the model demonstrates that the recent
rise in CEO compensation may be an efficient equilibrium response to the increase in the
market value of firms, rather than resulting from agency issues.
In our equilibrium model, the best CEOs manage the largest firms, as this maximizes
their impact. The paper extends earlier work (e.g., Lucas 1978, Rosen 1981, 1982, 1992,
Tervio 2003), by drawing fromextreme value theory to obtain general functional forms for the
spacings in the distribution of talents. This allows us to solve for the variables of interest in
closedformwithoutlossofgenerality, andgenerateconcretepredictions. Ourcentral equation
predicts that a CEO’s pay is increasing in both the size of his firm and the size of the average
firm in the economy. The cross-sectional relationship between firm size and compensation has
been well documented empirically. Moreover, the role of average firm size provides a novel
explanation of the rapid surge in US CEO pay since 1980. While previous papers attribute
this trend to incentive concerns or managerial entrenchment, we showthat it can be explained
by the scarcity of CEO talent, competitive forces and the six-fold increase in firm size over
the same period.
Ourmodelalsoshedslightoncross-countryandcross-industrydifferencesincompensation.
It predicts that countries experiencing a lower rise in firm value than the US should also have
experiencedlowerexecutivecompensationgrowth, whichisconsistentwithEuropeanevidence
(e.g. Conyon and Murphy 2000). We show that a large fraction in cross-country differences in
the level of CEO compensation can be explained by differences in firm size. Within the US,
both firm size and the size of a benchmark firm within the industry are significant predictors
of CEO compensation.
Finally, we offer a calibration of the model, which could be useful to guide future quan-
titative models of corporate finance. The main surprise is that the dispersion of CEO talent
distribution appeared to be extremely small at the top. If we rank CEOs by talent, and
replace the top CEO by CEO number 250, the value of his firm will decrease by only 0.016%.
However, these very small talent differences translate into considerable compensation differ-
entials, as they are magnified by firm size. The same calibration delivers that CEO number 1
is paid over 500% more than CEO number 250.
2

The rise in executive compensation has triggered a large amount of public controversy and
academic research. Our theory is to be compared with the three types of economic arguments
that have been proposed to explain this phenomenon.
The first explanation attributes the increase in CEO compensation to the widespread
adoption of compensation packages with high-powered incentives since the late 1980s. Both
academics and shareholder activists have been pushing throughout the 1990s for stronger
and more market-based managerial incentives (e.g. Jensen and Murphy 1990). According
to Inderst and Mueller (2005) and Dow and Raposo (2005), higher incentives have become
optimal due to increased volatility in the business environment faced by firms. Accordingly,
Cuñat and Guadalupe (2005) document a causal link between increased competition and
higher pay-to-performance sensitivity in US CEO compensation.
In the presence of limited liability and/or risk-aversion, increasing performance sensitivity
requires a rise in the dollar value of compensation to maintain his participation. Holmstrom
andKaplan(2001, 2003)linktheriseofcompensationvaluetotheriseinstock-basedcompen-
sation following the “leveraged buyout revolution” of the 1980s. However, this link between
the level and the “slope” of compensation has not been extensively calibrated1. Given the
substantial cash-based compensation of top CEOs, it is unclear why increased incentives have
not been implemented through exchanging salary for securities, keeping total pay constant.
Similarly, CEOs’ large stocks of existing wealth likely lead to low risk aversion, and thus only
small increases in total compensation are required for them to accept a higher performance-
basedelement. Our model explainsthe level of total compensationwithoutappealingtoeffort
considerations. Incentiveswoulddetermine, inasecondandsubordinatestep, therelativemix
of total pay between salaries and incentives. This way, we derive a simple benchmark for the
pay-sensitivity estimates that have caused much academic discussion (Jensen and Murphy
1990, Hall and Liebman 1998, Murphy 1999, Bebchuk and Fried 2003).
Following the wave of corporate scandals and the public focus on the limits of the US
corporategovernancesystem,a“skimming”viewofCEOcompensationhasgainedmomentum
(Bertrand and Mullainathan 2001, Bebchuk and Fried 2003, 2004). The proponents of the
skimming view explain the rise of CEO compensation simply by an increase in managerial
entrenchment. “When changing circumstances create an opportunity to extract additional
rents–either by changing outrage costs and constraints or by giving rise to a new means of
camouflage–managers will seek to take full advantage of it and will push firms toward an
1AnexceptionisGayleandMiller(2005)whoestimateastructuralmodelofexecutivecompensationunder
moral hazard.
3