NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE LENDING CHANNEL IN EMERGING ECONOMIES:
ARE FOREIGN BANKS DIFFERENT?
Marco Arena
Carment Reinhart
Francisco Vázquez
Working Paper 12340
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12340
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2006
The authors thank, without implicating, Gastón Gelos, Meral Karasulu, Liliana Rojas-Suárez, John Shea,
Roland Straub, and participants at the Second Meeting of the Latin American Financial Network. The views
expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research, the International Monetary Fund, or the World Bank. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2006 by Marco Arena, Carmen Reinhart and Francisco Vázquez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Lending Channel in Emerging Economics: Are Foreign Banks Different?
Marco Arena, Carmen Reinhart and Francisco Vázquez
NBER Working Paper No. 12340
June 2006
JEL No. E51, G21
ABSTRACT
This paper assembles a dataset comprising 1,565 banks in 20 Asian and Latin American countries
during 1989-2001 and compares the response of the volume of loans, deposits, and bank-specific
interest rates on loans and deposits, to various measures of monetary conditions, across domestic and
foreign banks. It also looks for systematic differences in the behavior of domestic and foreign banks
during periods of financial distress and tranquil times. Using differences in bank ownership as a
proxy for financial constraints on banks, the paper finds weak evidence that foreign banks have a
lower sensitivity of credit to monetary conditions relative to their domestic competitors, with the
differences driven by banks with lower asset liquidity and/or capitalization. At the same time, the
lending and deposit rates of foreign banks tend to be smoother during periods of financial distress,
albeit the differences with domestic banks do not appear to be strong. These results provide weak
support to the existence of supply-side effects in credit markets and suggest that foreign bank entry
in emerging economies may have contributed somewhat to stability in credit markets.
Carmen M. Reinhart
University of Maryland
School of Public Policy
Department of Economic
4105 Van Munching Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
creinhar@umd.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
Foreign bank entry into emerging market economies has become an important component of
financial globalization since the mid-nineties. Facilitated by financial liberalization and the need
to recapitalize banking systems in the aftermath of financial crises, the volume of cross-border
mergers and acquisitions (M&As) targeting banks in emerging markets surged from about US$6
billion between 1990-1996, to almost US$50 billion—roughly one-third of the global amount—
between 1997-2000 (BIS 2004). The increase in foreign bank presence in emerging markets has
been uneven, entailing significant changes in the structure of bank ownership in many recipient
countries such as Mexico, where the share of banking system assets controlled by foreign
institutions increased from 2 percent in 1990 to 82 percent in 2004.
The speed and depth of foreign bank entry has potentially important implications for financial
and macroeconomic stability in recipient countries, and arguments have been made in both
directions. On the one hand, it has been argued that foreign banks could play a stabilizing role on
the supply of credit and deposits through upstream financing from their mother companies and
reputation effects, particularly during periods of financial distress. On the other, foreign banks
might be quick to pull out from emerging markets and could transmit external shocks into host
countries. Empirical evidence on the implications of foreign bank entry for financial and
macroeconomic stability in emerging markets, however, is limited to a paper by Dages,
Goldberg, and Kinney (2000) analyzing the behavior of domestic and foreign banks in Mexico
and Argentina during the Tequila crisis, and a paper by Detragiache and Gupta (2004), using
data for Malaysia during the Asian crisis. Overall, these two papers find mild support to the first
view. On the other hand, evidence from the 2002 crisis in Argentina seems to be more mixed,
2

with some foreign banks opting to exit in the context of a broader international asset relocation,
and others reducing their lending activities in line with the behavior of domestic banks.
At a more general level, the view that banks may play a non-trivial role in the transmission of
shocks into credit markets, via supply-side effects, has received considerable attention in the
literature of monetary policy transmission. Early work includes Bernanke and Blinder (1988),
Kashyap, et al. (1993), Bernanke and Gertler (1995), Kashyap and Stein (1995). The basic idea is
that financial constraints on banks impair their ability to offset negative shocks to deposits with
alternative financing sources, generating supply-side effects in credit markets, and amplifying
economic fluctuations. While the evidence seems to be broadly consistent with this proposal,
identifying suitable proxies for unobserved financial constraints on banks has been a key
challenge.
This paper builds on the idea that differences in bank ownership can serve as a proxy for
unobserved financial constraints on banks, and combined with other observable bank
characteristics (such as asset liquidity and capitalization) to identify changes in credit supply. To
implement this, it uses a panel dataset of 1,565 banks in 20 Asian and Latin American countries
during 1989-2001 and tests for systematic differences in the sensitivity of loans, deposits, and
bank-specific lending and deposit rates, to various measures of monetary conditions, across
domestic and foreign banks. It also looks for systematic differences in the behavior of domestic
and foreign banks during tranquil times and periods of financial distress, exploiting various
definitions of banking and currency crises available in the literature. The regions studied here are
relevant to the issues at hand, as they endured several financial crisis during the 1990s. In
3