NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT BALANCE SHEET MANAGEMENT
Wilson Au-Yeung
Jason McDonald
Amanda Sayegh
Working Paper 12302
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12302
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2006
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Wilson Au-Yeung, Jason McDonald and Amanda Sayegh. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Australian Government Balance Sheet Management
Wilson Au-Yeung, Jason McDonald and Amanda Sayegh
NBER Working Paper No. 12302
June 2006
JEL No. H5, H6
ABSTRACT
Since almost eliminating net debt, the Australian Government’s attention has turned to the
financing of broader balance sheet liabilities, such as public sector superannuation. Australia will
be developing a significant financial asset portfolio in the ‘Future Fund’ to smooth the financing of
expenses through time. This raises the significant policy question of how best to manage the
government balance sheet to reduce risk.
This paper provides a framework for optimal balance sheet management. The major
conclusions are that:
– fiscal sustainability depends on both the expected path of future taxation and the risks around that
path;
– optimal balance sheet management requires knowledge of how risks affect the balance sheet (and
therefore volatility in tax rates); and
– the government’s financial investment strategy should reduce the risk to government finances from
macroeconomic shocks that permanently affect the budget.
Based on this framework, we find that a Future Fund portfolio that included (amongst other
potential investments) domestic nominal securities and equities of selected countries would reduce
overall balance sheet risk.
Wilson Au-Yeung
Australian Treasury
Langton Crescent
Canberra ACT 2600
AUSTRALIA
ayw@treasury.gov.au
Jason McDonald
Australian Treasury
Langton Crescent
Canberra ACT 2600
AUSTRALIA
jmcdonald@treasury.gov.au
Amanda Sayegh
Australian Treasury
Langton Crescent
Canberra ACT 2600
AUSTRALIA
azs@treasury.gov.au

AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT BALANCE SHEET MANAGEMENT
Wilson Au-Yeung, Jason McDonald and Amanda Sayegh
1. INTRODUCTION
The Australian Government has taken steps over the past decade to improve the sustainability of
government finances. In particular, the Government has significantly reduced its debt liabilities,
avoiding many of the risks associated with high debt levels.
Having achieved a low level of debt, the Government’s attention has turned to the financing of
broader balance sheet liabilities, such as superannuation obligations to its employees. The
Government has announced that it will establish a Future Fund to finance public sector
superannuation liabilities.1 This will assist in relieving future generations of some of the
financing burden associated with other intergenerational fiscal pressures which are expected to
emerge over the medium term.
The creation of the Future Fund raises the significant policy question of how best to structure
the Government’s balance sheet to reduce overall financial risk. This paper sets out a
framework for optimal government balance sheet management and presents some preliminary
estimates of the types of financial assets and liabilities that would reduce overall financial risk.2
1 These liabilities relate to public sector employees only, not broader social insurance obligations found in
many OECD countries.
2 The paper does not discuss the appropriate size of government expenditure, the level or composition of
taxation necessary to fund it or the optimal size of a net asset portfolio (Future Fund) through time.

2. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT BALANCE SHEET
The Australian Government’s Charter of Budget Honesty Act 1998 (the Charter) highlights the
need for governments to manage balance sheet risks. The purpose of the Charter is to improve
fiscal policy outcomes by requiring the fiscal strategy to be based on principles of sound fiscal
management and by facilitating public scrutiny of fiscal policy and performance.
The Charter facilitates optimal balance sheet management in two ways. First, the Charter
requires governments to make regular financial reports that comply with external reporting
standards, including the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) Government Finance Statistics
(GFS) and Australian Accounting Standards (AAS). This means the government balance sheet
is comparable across entities and jurisdictions. Second, the Charter requires the ‘prudent’
management of financial risks, including those relating to the broader government balance sheet
(such as risks relating to the tax base). By requiring transparent presentation of the balance
sheet and effective management of financial risks, the Charter allows the community to hold the
government accountable for its financial performance.
2.1 The balance sheet
The Australian Government general government sector has published a balance sheet in the
budget papers since 1999-2000 consistent with international reporting standards.3 The balance
sheet reported in the 2003-04 Final Budget Outlook is reproduced below.
3 The Charter requires a balance sheet to be published as part of the budget papers (usually produced in May),
the mid-year economic and fiscal outlook (by the end of January in each year, or within six months after the
last budget, whichever is later) and at the final budget outcome (up to 3 months after the end of the financial
year). The Charter requires the balance sheet to be on both the ABS GFS and AAS basis. However, the
primary budget statements (and therefore all references in this paper) are on a GFS basis.
5