NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAPITAL GAINS TAXES AND ASSET PRICES:
CAPITALIZATION OR LOCK-IN?
Zhonglan Dai
Edward Maydew
Douglas A. Shackelford
Harold H. Zhang
Working Paper 12342
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12342
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2006
We thank Ashiq Ali, Robert Kieschnick, Suresh Radhakrishnan, Scott Weisbenner, Yexiao Xu, the associate
editor, an anonymous referee, and seminar participants at the 2006 NBER Behavioral Response to
Taxation/Public Economics Program Meeting, the 2006 UNC Tax Symposium, and the University of Texas
at Dallas for helpful comments. Zhonglan Dai is at the School of Management, University of Texas at Dallas,
Richardson, TX 75083, zdai@utdallas.edu, Edward Maydew is at the Kenan-Flagler Business School,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, Edward_Maydew@unc.edu, Douglas A. Shackelford
is at the Kenan-Flagler Business School, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599,
Douglas_Shackelford@kenan-flagler.unc.edu, Harold H. Zhang is at the School of Management, University
of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX 75083, harold.zhang@utdallas.edu. All errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2006 by Zhonglan Dai, Edward Maydew, Douglas A. Shackelford and Harold H. Zhang. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Capital Gains Taxes and Asset Prices: Capitalization or Lock-In?
Zhonglan Dai, Edward Maydew, Douglas A. Shackelford and Harold H. Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 12342
June 2006
JEL No. H2, G1, D4, M4
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the impact on asset prices from a reduction in the long-term capital gains tax
rate using an equilibrium approach that considers both demand and supply responses. We
demonstrate that the equilibrium impact of capital gains taxes reflects both the capitalization effect
(i.e., capital gains taxes decrease demand) and the lock-in effect (i.e., capital gains taxes decrease
supply). Depending on time periods and stock characteristics, either effect may dominate. Using the
Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 as our event, we find evidence supporting a dominant capitalization
effect in the week following news that sharply increased the probability of a reduction in the capital
gains tax rate and a dominant lock-in effect in the week after the rate reduction became effective.
Nondividend paying stocks (whose shareholders only face capital gains taxes) experience higher
average returns during the week the capitalization effect dominates and stocks with large embedded
capital gains and high tax sensitive investor ownership exhibit lower average returns during the week
the lock-in effect dominates. We also find that the tax cut increases the trading volume during the
week immediately before and after the tax cut becomes effective and in stocks with large embedded
capital gains and high tax sensitive ownership during the dominant lock-in week.
Zhonglan Dai Douglas A. Shackelford
School of Management Kenan-Flagler Business School
University of Texas at Dallas University of North Carolina
Richardson, TX 75083 Chapel Hill, NC 27599
zdai@utdallas.edu and NBER
doug_shack@unc.edu
Edward Maydew
Kenan-Flagler Business School Harold H. Zhang
University of North Carolina School of Management
Chapel Hill, NC 27599 University of Texas at Dallas
edward_maydew@unc.edu Richardson, TX 75083
harold.zhang@utdallas.edu

Capital Gains Taxes and Asset Prices: Capitalization or Lock-in?
I. Introduction
This paper jointly tests two effects of capital gains taxation on equity trading: a
demand-side capitalization effect and a supply-side lock-in effect. Previous studies have
tested these effects separately, but, to our knowledge, this is the first study to evaluate
them jointly and empirically document the relative dominance of each effect surrounding
an event of a tax rate change. Employing an equilibrium approach, we show that in
general their net tax effect on asset prices is ambiguous. Evaluating returns and trading
volume around the 1997 reduction in the capital gains tax rate, we find evidence of the
capitalization and the lock-in effects jointly affecting trading. In particular, the
capitalization effect dominates the lock-in effect in the week following an increase in the
probability of a reduction in the capital gains tax rate, as buyers respond to information
that future capital gains tax rates will be lower. The lock-in effect, on the other hand,
dominates the capitalization effect after the rate reduction actually became effective.
Taxation is one of the most prevalent market frictions in financial markets. It
affects investors’ decisions and distorts the valuation of assets. Capital gains taxes, in
particular, play an important role in determining an investor’s trading strategies and
ultimately can affect asset prices. Because investors endogenously respond to the
imposition of capital gains taxes, the tax effect on asset prices can be complicated and
difficult to measure. In his review of taxes in the finance literature, Graham (2003)
concludes that “Though intriguing in theory, the profession has made only modest
progress in documenting whether investor taxes affect asset prices…we need more
evidence about the importance of personal taxes affecting asset prices…” To date,
research on the effects of investor level capital gains taxes on asset prices has produced
conflicting results. Several studies report that the presence of capital gains tax reduces
stock price and current stock return (see Guenther and Willenborg (1999), Lang and
Shackelford (2000), Ayers, Lefanowicz, and Robinson, (2003), among others), while
other studies document that imposing capital gains tax increases stock price and current
stock return (see Feldstein, Slemrod, and Yitzhaki, (1980), Landsman and Shackelford
(1995), Reese (1998), Poterba and Weisbenner (2001), Klein (2001), Blouin, Raedy, and
2

Shackelford (2003), Jin (2006), Ellis, Li, and Robinson (2006), among others). The
former is referred to as the capitalization effect of taxes and is often justified by the
argument that investors would demand a lower price to buy the assets if they have to pay
capital gains taxes in the future. The latter is referred to as the lock-in effect and is
attributed to investors requiring higher prices to sell assets if they have to pay taxes on
selling them. Recognizing that the two effects work in opposite directions, the purpose of
this paper is to understand the interaction of the two effects and the circumstances under
which one effect dominates the other surrounding a tax rate change.
Theoretical studies on taxes and asset pricing have been scarce and often focus on
trading strategies for investors to avoid paying capital gains taxes and their impact on
asset prices when investors face embedded capital gains on their asset holdings. For
example, Constantinides (1983) shows that investors can rebalance their portfolios
without triggering capital gains taxes if they are allowed to sell short assets in which they
have embedded gains. This allows investors to separate their optimal liquidation of assets
from their optimal consumption and investment policies. Klein (1999) introduces a
general equilibrium model of asset pricing with capital gains taxes when investors face
short sale constraints so that they cannot rebalance their portfolio without triggering
capital gains taxes liability. He makes predictions about the effects of capital gains taxes
on asset prices without explicitly solving for the equilibrium price. Viard (2000) analyzes
the dynamic asset pricing effects and incidence of realization-based capital gains taxes.
Under the assumption of small realization taxes, he derives the first-order conditions for
equilibrium asset prices. To obtain the first-order effects, he linearizes the first-order
conditions around the no-tax equilibrium. He finds that asset prices are increased by the
current realization tax, to partly offset the sale disincentive associated with the tax,
consistent with the lock-in effect. Shackelford and Verrecchia (2002) develop a trading
model where the long-term and short-term capital gains tax rates differential creates a
trade-off between optimal risk-sharing and optimal tax-related trading strategy. They
show that sellers are reluctant to sell appreciated assets sooner because they are subject to
higher capital gains taxes. To entice sellers, buyers must provide compensation in the
form of higher sales prices.
3