NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AGENCY CONFLICTS, ASSET SUBSTITUTION, AND SECURITIZATION
Yingjin Hila Gan
Christopher Mayer
Working Paper 12359
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12359
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2006
The authors would like to thank Steve Drucker, Larry Glosten, Joe Gyourko, Charles Jones, Brigitte Madrian,
Matt Rhodes-Kropf, Neng Wang, Matt White, Joel Waldfogel, and seminar participants at Harvard Business
School, NYU Stern School, the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, and Columbia Business
School for helpful comments. We are especially grateful to Trepp for providing critical data used in this
paper. The Paul Milstein Center for Real Estate at Columbia Business School provided financial support for
this research. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Yingjin Hila Gan and Christopher Mayer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Agency Conflicts, Asset Substitution, and Securitization
Yingjin Hila Gan and Christopher Mayer
NBER Working Paper No. 12359
July 2006
JEL No. D8, G2, G3, L2
ABSTRACT
Asset-backed securities represent one of the largest and fastest growing financial markets. Under
securitization, agents perform functions (for fees) that would alternatively be performed by a
vertically integrated lender with ownership of a whole loan. We examine how outsourcing impacts
performance using data on 357 commercial mortgage-backed securities deals with over 46,000
individual loans. To alleviate agency conflicts in managing troubled loans, underwriters often sell
the first-loss position to the special servicer, the party who is charged with handling delinquencies
and defaults. When holding the first-loss position, special servicers appear to behave more
efficiently, making fewer costly transfers of delinquent loans to special servicing, but liquidating a
higher percentage of loans that are referred to special servicing. Special servicers are also more likely
to own the first loss position in deals that require additional effort (deals with higher delinquencies).
Market pricing reflects the existence of agency costs. Despite the apparent reduction of agency costs,
the first-loss position is increasingly owned by a party other than the special servicer. We pose a
number of explanations, including conflicts between junior and senior securities holders (the asset
substitution problem) and risk aversion among special servicers. Consistent with asset substitution,
we show that special servicers delay liquidation when they hold the first-loss position in deals with
more severe delinquency problems.
Christopher J. Mayer
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall #808
New York, NY 10025
and NBER
cm310@columbia.edu
Yingjin Hila Gan
Lehman Brothers Inc.
745 Seventh Ave. 15th Floor
New York, NY 10019
yingjin.gan@lehman.com

Asset-backed securities are one of the most important financial innovations in recent decades.
According to the Federal Reserve, as of the end of 2005, the value of outstanding of mortgage-
and other asset-backed securities was $6.7 trillion, about $1.7 trillion larger than outstanding
amount of non-ABS corporate bonds. About one-half of mortgages, one-third of trade
receivables, and one-fourth of consumer credit are securitized in the US.1 The asset-backed
securities (ABS) market has developed along many dimensions. Once dominated by residential
mortgages, this market now includes securities backed by loans on cars, manufactured homes,
credit cards, trade receivables, commercial real estate, leases, franchise debt, student loans, and
even securities from previous securitizations (CDOs).
In a typical securitization, a large numbers of assets are grouped together in a single pool.
Claims to the cash flows from the pooled loans are sold as securities, where the economic claims
to cash flows are divided (or “tranched”) based on a strict priority system. Parties pay a
premium to buy the most senior tranches, whose capital is protected by the existence of more
junior securities that absorb initial losses. This structure is similar to that of dividing up claims
to a firm’s cash flows between equity holders, junior creditors, and senior creditors. Equity
holders are paid only after the claims of all the creditors are satisfied. If the firm’s assets do not
generate enough cash flow to pay-off its debt, the equity position is wiped out. Similarly, senior
creditors are paid in full before junior creditors receive any cash flow. Some securitizations may
have as many as twenty separate tranches in their capital structure.
The growth of ABS has resulted from a series of economic, legal, and regulatory developments.
ABS are publicly-traded and rated by independent rating agencies, resulting in the generation of
1 Flow of Fund Tables L1, L4, L125, L126, L212, for 4Q, 2005, Federal Reserve Board, released March 9, 2006.

a great deal of public information about the performance and valuation of the underlying assets
and the traded securities. Regulators give insurance companies highly preferential capital
treatment when they hold investment grade ABS instead of less transparent whole loans.2 The
legal system also provides relatively strict protection for the cash flow priorities inherent in the
bankruptcy-remote entities that are a fundamental part of securitization. 3 In addition, the
creation of a wide variety of claims to debt securities has helped to complete capital markets,
allowing investors to purchase positions all along the risk/return frontier.4 Specialized parties
have emerged to perform many functions that were previously performed by vertically integrated
lenders, possibly allowing for increased efficiency and specialization. Finally, ABS are typically
more liquid than whole loans.
Yet securitization also creates important (and previously unexplored) organizational costs
associated with the separation of ownership and control of assets and the parsing of equity
interests into a large number of relatively thin ownership tranches. Traditionally, a bank or an
insurance company would own and manage all of the loans it originated, collecting payments
and making all decisions in the event of delinquency and default.5 With securitization, a third-
party (the special servicer) takes over responsibility for managing troubled loans. Special
servicers usually receive a fixed fee for monitoring the entire pool of loans, plus a percentage of
the outstanding balance of any loans that are in special servicing. These fees are paid before
investors receive the proceeds from a workout or foreclosure of a troubled loan.
2 See Kopcke (1996), for example. Previous papers reject the hypothesis that securitization has grown purely due to
regulatory arbitrage in residential mortgages (Ambrose et. al. 2006) and credit cards (Calomiris and Mason 2004).
3 Ayotte and Gaon (2005) point out that strict payout rules are obscured in bankruptcy, but that the bankruptcy
remote structure used in ABS typically ensures that the strict prioritization of cash flows holds for financial firms.
4 Gaur, et., al, (2003) for a further discussion of pricing securities in incomplete markets.
5 For larger loans, a lender might syndicate a portion of a loan to multiple parties, but retain control of servicing. Of
course, problems might still arise when originators sell loans to less-informed parties. (See Ciochetti, et. al. 2003)
2