NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAN CENTRAL BANKS TARGET BOND PRICES?
Kenneth N. Kuttner
Working Paper 12454
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12454
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2006
I am grateful to Toshiki Jinushi for helpful discussions; to Ehung Gi Baek, Ben Friedman, Brian Sack and
Ellis Tallman for detailed comments on an earlier draft; and to my former colleagues at the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, especially Tony Rodrigues, for ideas that contributed to this paper. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2006 by Kenneth N. Kuttner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Can Central Banks Target Bond Prices?
Kenneth N. Kuttner
NBER Working Paper No. 12454
August 2006
JEL No. E43, E58, E63
ABSTRACT
This paper addresses the possible role of bond prices as operating or intermediate targets for
monetary policy. The paper begins with a brief review of the mechanisms through which a central
bank could, in theory, influence long-term interest rates, and continues with a brief narrative
overview of debt management policies in the U.S., tracing their effects on the maturity distribution
of outstanding publicly-held Treasury debt and the composition of the assets held by the Federal
Reserve System. The empirical section presents new econometric evidence on the effects of these
policies on expected excess holding returns (“term premia”), demonstrating that changes in the Fed’s
holdings of long-term securities have had statistically significant and economically meaningful
effects on the term premia associated with Treasury securities with maturities in the two- to five-year
range.
Kenneth Kuttner
Oberlin College
Economics Department
10 North Professor Street, Rice Hall
Oberlin, OH 44074
and NBER
kenneth.kuttner@oberlin.edu

Can Central Banks Target Bond Prices?
Kenneth N. Kuttner
1. Introduction
The perennial curse of the policymaker is to have more policy objectives than
policy tools. Nowhere is this truer than in central banking, where the monetary authority
is, at a minimum, called upon to keep inflation low while stabilizing real output
variability. In addition, the central bank is expected to guarantee financial stability, and
is often also called upon to manage the exchange rate. The pursuit of all these objectives
with a single policy instrument—the short-term nominal interest rate—inevitably
presents uncomfortable tradeoffs.
The “instrument shortage” problem becomes especially relevant in low inflation
environments, like those experienced in many industrialized countries in recent years.
The reasons are fourfold. The most obvious is that, when the zero lower bound (ZLB) on
the short-term nominal interest rate is binding, the central bank loses its primary,
conventional policy tool. But other issues arise even before the policy rate reaches zero.
One is that the possibility of a binding ZLB at some point in the future—and the absence
of any alternative policy instruments—could (and should) affect the optimal conduct of
policy.1 Thus, in assessing the importance of the ZLB, it is important to understand the
efficacy of instruments other than the short-term policy rate. In addition, because near-
zero interest rates can interfere with certain aspects of the financial system, e.g., by
increasing the likelihood of “fails” in the repo market or by suppressing interbank funds
trading, central banks bay be loath to lower the short-term interest rate too far.2 Finally,
at very low rates of interest, the impact of reductions in the short-term interest rate on the
longer term interest rates relevant for policy transmission may be attenuated by the
“optionality” inherent in those long-term rates, a point first noted by Black (1995).
In light of these complications, it is not surprising that central banks have over the
years sought additional independent, or quasi-independent, policy instruments. The most
1 This point has been made in a number of studies, such as Orphanides and Wieland (2000).
2 These concerns raised by economists and policymakers at the Bank of Japan. For a discussion of some of
these issues, see Baba et al. (2005), pp. 82-92.
1

obvious of these is, of course, the exchange rate; McCallum (2000) and Svensson (2003)
have forcefully made the case for exchange rate management or outright targeting in a
low inflation environment. The objective of these proposals is to cause an expansionary
depreciation of the currency, either through aggressive foreign exchange intervention, or
with a commitment to a crawling peg. (The latter, as Svensson emphasizes, would also
have the advantage in a deflationary environment of raising inflation expectations).
It is fair to say that the possibility of central bank intervention in the bond market
has received much less attention in recent years than proposals designed to influence the
exchange rate. In fact, the idea of intentionally using Fed policy to raise or lower bond
yields had been ignored almost completely until Bernanke (2002) proposed operations
involving long-dated Treasury securities as a means of dealing with the threat of
deflation. As it turns out, the U.S. economy’s recovery, which was already officially
under way when Bernanke made his proposal, obviated the need for this sort of
“unconventional” monetary policy. Nonetheless, Bernanke’s remarks are a reminder that
targeting—or at least managing—long-term interest rates is another possible tactic for the
implementation of monetary policy.
Indeed, there is a rich earlier literature discussing the ways in which monetary and
debt management policies might affect long-term interest rates, and how these policies
might be designed to further macroeconomic objectives. Tobin (1963), for one,
envisioned an active coordination between monetary and debt management policies,
arguing that “The government—comprising both the Federal Reserve and the Treasury—
should continuously adjust the maturity structure of the debt, seeking to minimize its net
cost, while achieving the required restraint on aggregate demand” (p. 211).3 This view
pervaded policymaking in the 1950s and 1960s; in fact, according to Volcker (2002),
during this period “debt management was considered to be an active ‘third leg’ of
policy.” Tobin’s perspective on monetary policy and debt management has been revived
in a recent paper by Andrés et al. (2004), who construct a general equilibrium model in
which the changes in the relative supplies of outstanding debt constitute a distinct—and
3 Rolph (1957) proposed a criterion for optimal debt management very similar to Tobin’s, namely
minimizing the cost of debt service while creating the desired level of monetary stimulus or restraint.
Roley (1979) formalized Tobin’s principles using mean-variance portfolio theory.
2