NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REACHING FOR THE STARS: WHO PAYS FOR
TALENT IN INNOVATIVE INDUSTRIES?
Frederik Andersson
Matthew Freedman
John Haltiwanger
Julia Lane
Kathryn Shaw
Working Paper 12435
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12435
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2006
Thanks to Tim Bresnahan, Charlie Brown, Ben Campbell, Erica Groshen, Phil Hardiman, Edward Lazear, Alex Mas,
Paul Oyer, Julie Wulf and seminar participants at Stanford University, Washington State University, UC Santa Barbara,
the Society of Labor Economics meetings, for their helpful comments. This document reports the results of research and
analysis undertaken by the U.S. Census Bureau staff. It has undergone a Census Bureau review more limited in scope
than that given to official Census Bureau publications. This document is released to inform interested parties of research
and to encourage discussion. This research is a part of the U.S. Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Employer-Household
Dynamics Program (LEHD), which is partially supported by the National Science Foundation Grants SES-9978093 and
SES-0427889 to Cornell University (Cornell Institute for Social and Economic Research), the National Institute on Aging
Grant R01~AG018854-02, and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. The views expressed on statistical issues are those of
the author(s) and not necessarily those of the U.S. Census Bureau, its program sponsors or data providers. Some or all
of the data used in this paper are confidential data from the LEHD Program. The U.S. Census Bureau supports external
researchers’ use of these data through the Research Data Centers (see www.ces.census.gov). For other questions
regarding the data, please contact Jeremy S. Wu, Program Manager, U.S. Census Bureau, LEHD Program, Demographic
Surveys Division, FOB 3, Room 2138, 4700 Silver Hill Rd., Suitland, MD 20233, USA. (Jeremy.S.Wu@census.gov
http://lehd.dsd.census.gov). The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Frederik Andersson, Matthew Freedman, John Haltiwanger, Julia Lane and Kathryn Shaw. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Reaching for the Stars: Who Pays For Talent in Innovative Industries?
Frederik Andersson, Matthew Freedman, John Haltiwanger, Julia Lane and Kathryn Shaw
NBER Working Paper No. 12435
August 2006
JEL No. J24, J31, L2, L86
ABSTRACT
Innovation in the U.S. economy is about employing and rewarding highly talented workers to
produce new products. Using unique longitudinal matched employer-employee data, this paper
makes a key connection between talent and firms in markets with risky product innovations. We
show that software firms that operate in product markets with highly skewed returns to innovation,
or high variance payoffs, are more likely to attract and pay for star workers. Thus, firms in high
variance product markets pay more up-front—in starting salaries—to attract and motivate star
employees, because if these star workers produce home-run innovations, the firm’s winnings will
be huge. However, we also find these same firms pay highly for loyalty: star workers that stay with
a firm have much higher earnings in firms with high variance product market payoffs. The large
effects on earnings are robust to the inclusion of a wide range of controls for both workers and firm
characteristics. One key control is that we also show that in firms that have actually hit home runs,
with high revenues, the rewards for star talent are even greater. We also find that the dispersion of
earnings is higher within firms with high variance product payoffs.
Frederik Andersson Julia Lane
Cornell University University of Chicago NORC
fda3@cornell.edu lane-julia@norc.uchicago.edu
Matthew Freedman Kathryn L. Shaw
University of Maryland GSB, Littlefield 339
freedman@econ.umd.edu Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
John C. Haltiwanger and NBER
Department of Economics kathryns@gsb.stanford.edu
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
haltiwan@econ.umd.edu

2
1. Introduction
Innovation occurs because firms employ and reward highly talented workers to produce
new products. Yet innovation is inherently risky – particularly in the production of information
goods and services. This paper makes a key connection between the riskiness of the product
markets in which firms operate and the distribution of earnings for workers. It also finds that
firms in high risk markets pay highly for loyalty: employees that stay with a firm have much
higher earnings in firms with high variance product market payoffs.
The basic insight of our approach is that we recognize that cost of developing a new
information product is very high in both time and worker skill. If the new product is widely
adopted, the payoff to the firm can be enormous, but if the new product languishes with little use,
the loss can be commensurately large. Software products are the poster child for this
phenomenon. Video games are at or near the top of the list for high stakes product development:
the latest release of Grand Theft Auto (Vice City) has had more than $200 million in revenues,
while many games make much less. By contrast, in the same industry, business applications
software (e.g., database software) is much less risky: once applications have been adopted,
software producers have an installed client base that provides a degree of stability for future
product development. Our approach examines how these very different potential payoffs in the
product market translate into how firms hire and retain “star” software developers.
Our focus is to investigate the link between the differential payoff distribution for
different types of products and the earnings distribution of workers in the software industry. We
examine how firms in a product line where “home run” products matter, attract, motivate, and
retain star employees. We do this using a rich new longitudinal matched employer-employee
data source that permits tracking of outcomes for both firms and workers in the software industry
over time. On the firm side, we have rich information about the detailed product mix and revenue
outcomes for each firm so that we can measure both its actual payoff and its potential payoff
distribution based upon its product mix. On the worker side, we measure both earnings levels
(including the contribution of exercised stock options and bonuses) and earnings growth due to
both within firm pay increases and job-hopping between firms. We use this rich data source to
investigate the connection between the payoff to high stakes products and the rewards to stars in
the software industry.

3
The theoretical motivation for the empirical analysis begins with the assumption that all
innovative firms want workers who are good at designing or picking new projects. The key
insight of the model is that some firms value this talent much more than other firms do (Lazear
2005). If the firm is operating in a product market in which innovation is rarely rewarded, or in
which even a great project has little return, then the payoff distribution is low variance and the
value of talent is low. On the other hand, if the firm is operating in a product market in which
the payoff distribution has a high variance, as it does in the video game example above, then the
firm values talent highly because talented workers who pick projects well can win the most in
markets where there are huge potential payoffs. The prediction is that those firms operating in
high variance payoff markets will hire more talent, and that they will therefore pay higher wages.
Our unique microeconomic data enable us to look inside firms and observe what
innovative high potential payoff firms do to attract and reward star talent. First, we show that the
high potential payoff firms pay more in starting salaries than other firms. These firms select star
software workers who themselves have a history of prior success (i.e., selecting workers who
have a personal history of high wage levels and high wage growth rates). Second, we show that
high potential payoff firms reward workers for loyalty; that is, they reward workers for staying
with the firm. Our findings show that star software workers, who achieve the highest pay levels,
do so through loyalty – these workers stay with their firm and receive higher levels of
performance pay. There is also an institutional side that produces this loyalty – firms in the
software industry tie workers with deferred pay in the form of stock options that fully vest after
four years.
It has been rare for researchers to have data that link the product market strategy of the
firm to the compensation or human resource management practices of the firm. This has been
done largely in the literature on CEO pay, where data are available, and the literature documents
CEO pay-for-performance as a function of firm size or underlying strategies. There have been
isolated instances in which researchers have done “insider” studies in some firms in which they
have documented a link between strategy and performance (Baker and Hubbard 2003; Stern
2004; Wulf 2002, 2005; Garicano and Hubbard 2005), or have used survey data to do so
(MacLeod and Parent 1999). There has also been some research on workers in the information
industry, as it has become an increasingly dominant part of the U.S. economy (Chevalier and
Ellison 1999, Garicano and Hubbard 2005, Fallick et al. 2005, Lerner and Wulf 2005). Typically,