NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CROSS-BORDER ACQUISITIONS AND TARGET FIRMS’
PERFORMANCE: EVIDENCE FROM JAPANESE FIRM-LEVEL DATA
Kyoji Fukao
Keiko Ito
Hyeog Ug Kwon
Miho Takizawa
Working Paper 12422
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12422
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2006
This paper was presented at the NBER Seventeenth Annual East Asian Seminar on Economics, International
Financial Issues around the Pacific-Rim, June 22-24, 2006, Hawaii, USA. Financial support from the Japan
Securities Scholarship Foundation and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Kyoji Fukao, Keiko Ito, Hyeog Ug Kwon and Miho Takizawa. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Cross-Border Acquisitions and Target Firms’ Performance: Evidence From Japanese Firm-Level
Data
Kyoji Fukao, Keiko Ito, Hyeog Ug Kwon and Miho Takizawa
NBER Working Paper No. 12422
August 2006
JEL No. C14, D24, F21, F23
ABSTRACT
Using Japanese firm-level data for the period from 1994-2002, this paper examines whether
a firm is chosen as an acquisition target based on its productivity level, profitability and other
characteristics and whether the performance of Japanese firms that were acquired by foreign firms
improves after the acquisition. In our previous study for the Japanese manufacturing sector, we found
that M&As by foreigners brought a larger and quicker improvement in total factor productivity (TFP)
and profit rates than M&As by domestic firms. However, it may argued that firms acquired by
foreign firms showed better performance simply because foreign investors acquired more promising
Japanese firms than Japanese investors did. In order to address this potential problem of selection
bias problem, in this study we combine a difference-in-differences approach with propensity score
matching. The basic idea of matching is that we look for firms that were not acquired by foreign
firms but had similar characteristics to firms that were acquired by foreigners. Using these firms as
control subjects and comparing the acquired firms and the control subjects, we examine whether
firms acquired by foreigners show a greater improvement in performance than firms not acquired
by foreigners. Both results from unmatched samples and matched samples show that foreign
acquisitions improved target firms’ productivity and profitability significantly more and quicker than
acquisitions by domestic firms.
Moreover, we find that there is no positive impact on target firms’ profitability in the case
of both within-group in-in acquisitions and in-in acquisitions by domestic outsiders. In fact, in the
manufacturing sector, the return on assets even deteriorated one year and two years after
within-group in-in acquisition, while the TFP growth rate was higher after within-group in-in
acquisitions than after in-in acquisitions by outsiders. Our results imply that in the case of
within-group in-in acquisitions, parent firms may be trying to quickly restructure acquired firms even
at the cost of deteriorating profitability.
Kyoji Fukao Hyeog Ug Kwon
Institute of Economics Research College of Economics
Hitotsubashi Unviersity Nihon University
2-1 Naka, Kunitachi 1-3-2 Misaki-cho, Chiyoda-ku
Tokyo 186-8603 Tokyo 102-8360
JAPAN JAPAN
k.fukao@srv.cc.hit-u.ac.jp kwon@eco.nihon-u.ac.jp
Keiko Ito Miho Takizawa
School of Economics Graduate School of Economics
Senshu University Hitotsubashi University
2-1-1 Higashi-mita, Tama-ku 2-1 Naka, Kunitachi
Kawasaki, Kanagawa 214-8580 Tokyo 186-8603
JAPAN JAPAN
keiko-i@isc.senshu-u.ac.jp miho-takizawa@k2.dion.ne.jp

1. Introduction
The flow of inward foreign direct investments (FDI) to Japan has increased dramatically
since the latter half of the 1990s. According to Japan’s international-investment-position statistics,
the stock of inward FDI in Japan rose 3.4-fold to 10.1 trillion yen during the six years from 1998
to 2004. Although Japan’s inward FDI stock/GDP ratio (2.0% in 2004) is only about one seventh
of the corresponding value of the U.S. (14.1% in 2003), employment in foreign affiliates as a
share of total employment is 2.75%, which is equivalent to about half of the corresponding value,
5.61%, for the U.S. (Table 1.1).
Insert Table 1.1
Despite the importance of the subject, there are few meaningful empirical studies on the
implications of the increase in inward FDI for the Japanese economy. In fact, some observers
have argued that Japan does not need more FDI. Like FDI in other developed economies, the
largest part of recent inflows to Japan took the form of mergers and acquisitions (M&As). The
critics fear that inward M&As are dominated by “vulture” funds seeking to reap quick profits by
taking advantage of troubled firms (Nihon Keizai Shinbun 2003). Another argument is that some
inward M&As are in fact aimed at acquiring advanced technologies (Werner 2003) rather than at
transferring and employing intangible assets in Japan.
According to quantitative studies on corporate performance in Japan, such as Kimura and
Kiyota (2004) and Fukao and Murakami (2005), foreign-owned firms tend to show higher
productivity than domestically-owned firms. However, the positive correlation between foreign
ownership and productivity does not necessarily mean that Japanese firms that were acquired by
foreign firms receive new technologies and management skills from their foreign owners and that
2

this transfer of intangible assets is responsible for their higher TFP (the technology-transfer
effect). There is another possible theoretical explanation for the positive correlation:
Foreign-owned firms enjoy greater productivity because foreign firms choose firms with higher
TFP as their M&A targets (the selection effect).
In order to determine which one of the two effects is responsible for the positive
correlation between foreign ownership and productivity, in a previous study (Fukao, Ito and
Kwon, 2005), we conducted two empirical tests using firm-level data for Japan’s manufacturing
industry. In that study, we first estimated a Probit model explaining whether a firm is chosen as
an M&A target based on its TFP level and other characteristics. Second, we tested whether the
TFP of Japanese firms that were acquired by foreign firms improved after the investment.1
Estimating a Probit model, we found that foreign firms acquired Japanese firms enjoyed higher
TFP levels and higher profit rates. In contrast, in-in M&As seemed to have the characteristics of
rescue missions as they tended to target small firms with a higher total liability/total asset ratio.
Estimating the dynamic effects of M&As on target firms, we found that out-in M&As improved
target firms’ TFP level and current profit/sales ratio. Compared with in-in M&As, out-in M&As
brought a larger and quicker improvement in TFP and profit rates but no increase in target firms’
employment two years after the acquisition. Based on these results, we concluded that both the
selection effect and the technology-transfer effect play a role in explaining the positive
correlation between foreign ownership and productivity.
Our previous study has several limitations, which this paper seeks to overcome. First,
although our study found that in-in M&As had the characteristics of rescue missions, this result
1 Although the majority of FDI in developed economies has taken the form of cross-border
acquisitions, to our knowledge, there are only two empirical studies on this issue, Conyon et al.
(2002) and Fukao, Ito and Kwon (2005). Conyon et al. (2002) conducted an empirical analysis
on the impact of foreign ownership on productivity in the United Kingdom for the period
1989-1994. By observing productivity before and after the event of acquisition, they showed that
firms that were acquired by foreign firms exhibited an increase in labor productivity of 13%.
3