NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EMPLOYMENT AND ADVERSE SELECTION IN HEALTH INSURANCE
Jayanta Bhattacharya
William B. Vogt
Working Paper 12430
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12430
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2006
We thank the ERIU for grant support. In addition, we thank participants at two ERIU conferences, at the
November 2003 NBER health care program meeting, at the 2005 NBER summer institute. We also thank
seminar participants at Washington University in St Louis and at RAND. All errors remain the authors’. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Jayanta Bhattacharya and William B. Vogt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Employment and Adverse Selection in Health Insurance
Jayanta Bhattacharya and William B. Vogt
NBER Working Paper No. 12430
August 2006
JEL No. I1, J10, J33
ABSTRACT
We construct and test a new model of employer-provided health insurance provision in the presence
of adverse selection in the health insurance market. In our model, employers cannot observe the
health of their employees, but can decide whether to offer insurance. Employees sort themselves
among employers who do and do not offer insurance on the basis of their current health status and
the probability distribution over future health status changes. We show that there exists a pooling
equilibrium in which both sick and healthy employees are covered as long as the costs of job
switching are higher than the persistence of health status. We test and verify some of the key
implications of our model using data from the Current Population Survey, linked to information
provided by the U.S. Department of Labor about the job-specific human capital requirements of jobs.
Jay Bhattacharya
Stanford University
117 Encina Commons
Stanford, CA 94205-6019
and NBER
jay@stanford.edu
William B. Vogt
H. John Heinz III School of Public Policy and
Management
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
wilibear@andrew.cmu.edu

1 Introduction
Understanding the connection between health insurance provision and the labor market is impor-
tant. The labor market is the principal source for the private provision of health insurance in the
United States, presumably because of the large subsidy for it in the tax code.1 A common justifica-
tion for this system is that employer provision ameliorates the adverse selection problem in health
insurance provision. A job is a place where people come together for reasons other than health
insurance.2 Thoughthisisawidelyheldpositionamongeconomists,3 therehasbeenverylittlethe-
oretical work delineating the conditions under which the labor market solves the adverse selection
problem in health insurance, and very little applied work measuring its empirical importance.
Here, we develop a simple theoretical model of adverse selection where employees can choose
between employers that do and do not provide health insurance. In our theory, employers choose
whether to provide health insurance without knowing whether workers are sick or healthy. Work-
ers, knowing their current health status and the distribution over future health status changes,
allocate themselves among employers. As workers transition among health states, they may change
insurance status by switching among employers. However, friction (caused by the development of
job-specific human capital) induces stickiness in the employment relationship, and creates costs for
employees who want to switch jobs. Under certain conditions, there is a pooling equilibrium in
which both sick and well workers choose jobs with insurance. The main conclusion from the theory
is that the labor market solves the adverse selection problem if jobs are stickier than is health
status.
In our empirics, we use the Current Population Survey (CPS) in conjunction with data from
the U.S. Census and O*NET, a survey collected by the Dept of Labor, to explore the determinants
of employer provided health insurance and to test our theory. We find that workers in industries
characterized by fluid labor markets and lower requirements for job-specific human capital are
less likely to have employer-provided health insurance. On the other hand, employees working
1The favorable tax treatment of employer health insurance provision results in an annual subsidy of over $100
billiondollars(Gruber,2001). Approximately80%oftheunder-65populationwhoareinsuredreceivetheirinsurance
throughemployers(their ownor their spouse’s). (Authors’ calculations using CensusBureau (2003), Table 152). Of
the 41 million uninsured, about three fifths are employed adults.
2We thank David Balan (repeating George Deltas) for this formulation.
3For example, the leading health economics text says ”group purchase by employers addresses the problem of
adverse selection,” (Folland et al., 2004). This sentiment is repeated in many places (Cutler, 2002; Gruber and
Levitt, 2000; Buchmueller et al., 2002).
1

in industries characterized by higher requirements for general human capital are no more likely
than other employees to receive health insurance through their employers. Finally, job-specific
human capital predicts employer-provided health insurance coverage only for healthy employees,
not for unhealthy employees. These findings are consistent with the predictions of model and
the combination of findings is difficult to explain without our model. Quantitatively, we find
that adverse selection plays a small role in explaining why some employers do not provide health
insurance to their workers.
2 Background
Many economists believe that adverse selection in health insurance leads to uninsurance. However,
such equilibrium uninsurance is not consistent with traditional models of adverse selection (Roth-
schild and Stiglitz, 1976; Wilson, 1977). When equilibria exist in the traditional models, they call
for separating equilibria in which both low and high risk types are insured, and low risk types are
underinsured.
Because uninsurance is such an important phenomenon in health insurance markets and be-
cause traditional models do not accommodate uninsurance, we specify a model that is capable of
generating uninsurance. Our theory differs from the traditional approach in our assumption of
fixed insurance characteristics. Insurers are not permitted to offer less generous insurance: they
may offer either full insurance or no insurance at all.
In fact, there is only limited heterogeneity in the financial characteristics of health insurance
offerings, thatisindeductibles, copayments, coinsurance, diseasecoverageexclusions, outofpocket
maxima, and lifetime limits (Cutler and Zeckhauser, 2000). Furthermore, the plans that are most
generous in financial characteristics are health maintenance organizations (HMOs), which are ex-
tensively documented to receive favorable selection (see Cutler and Zeckhauser, 1998).
There are several reasons for this limited heterogeneity. First, in order to qualify for favorable
tax treatment, employers are limited in their ability to offer different health benefits to different
employees (Gruber, 2001). Second, there is both federal and state legislation mandating the cov-
erage of various conditions and procedures (Kaestner and Simon, 2002; Gruber, 1994). Finally,
courts frequently fail to enforce exclusions in coverage (Epstein, 2000).
ThemodelofadverseselectionoursismostsimilartoisthatofCutlerandZeckhauser(2000). In
2