NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PARALLEL IMPORTS AND PRICE CONTROLS
Gene M. Grossman
Edwin L.-C. Lai
Working Paper 12423
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12423
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2006
The authors are grateful to the U.S. National Science Foundation (grant nos. SES 0211748 and SES
0451712), the Hong Kong Research Grants Council (project no. CityU 1476/05H), the Department of
Economics and Finance at City University of Hong Kong, and the International Economics Section at
Princeton University for financial support. We thank Pol Antràs, Joan Costa-Font, Stefan Szymanski, and
Tommaso Valletti for comments on an earlier draft. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Science Foundation or any other organization. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Gene M. Grossman and Edwin L.-C. Lai. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Parallel Imports and Price Controls
Gene M. Grossman and Edwin C.-L. Lai
NBER Working Paper No. 12423
August 2006
JEL No. O34, F13
ABSTRACT
Price controls create opportunities for international arbitrage. Many have argued that such arbitrage,
if tolerated, will undermine intellectual property rights and dull the incentives for investment in
research-intensive industries such as pharmaceuticals. We challenge this orthodox view and show,
to the contrary, that the pace of innovation often is faster in a world with international exhaustion
of intellectual property rights than in one with national exhaustion. The key to our conclusion is to
recognize that governments will make different choices of price controls when parallel imports are
allowed by their trade partners than they will when they are not.
Gene M. Grossman
International Economics Section
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
grossman@princeton.edu
Edwin L.-C. Lai
Department of Economics and Finance
City University of Hong Kong
83 Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon
HONG KONG
edwin.lai@cityu.edu.hk

1 Introduction
Parallel trade occurs when a good protected by a patent, copyright, or trademark, having
beenlegallypurchasedinonecountry,isexportedtoanotherwithouttheauthorizationofthe
local owner of the intellectual property rights in the importing market (see Maskus, 2000b).
Parallel trade represents a form of arbitrage whereby a legitimate product is shipped from
the market intended by the intellectual property rights holder to another where it commands
a higher price. Like other forms of arbitrage, parallel imports (also known as “grey-market
imports”or “reimports”) respond to international price di¤erences that result from retailer
price discrimination, vertical pricing restraints, or national di¤erences in government price
controls.
Theproprietyofparalleltradeisamatterofintensepolicydebateinanumberofcountries
and in the World Trade Organization (WTO). At present, WTO provisions allow member
countries to establish their own rules for the “exhaustion”of intellectual property rights
(IPR).1 If a country opts for national exhaustion of IPR, a rights holder there may exclude
parallelimports, becauseintellectualpropertyrightscontinueuntilsuchatimeasaprotected
product is …rst sold in that market. If a country instead chooses international exhaustion
of IPR, parallel imports cannot be blocked, because the rights of the patent, copyright or
trademarkholderexpirewhenaprotectedproductissoldanywhereintheworld. TheUnited
States practices national exhaustion for patents and copyrights, but permits parallel imports
of trademarked goods unless the trademark owner can show that the imports are of di¤erent
quality from goods sold locally or otherwise might cause confusion for consumers. The Eu-
ropean Union provides for regional exhaustion of IPR whereby goods circulate freely within
the trading bloc but parallel imports are banned from non-member countries. Japanese
commercial law permits parallel imports except when such trade is explicitly excluded by
contract provisions or when the original sale is made subject to foreign price controls.2
Publicdebateaboutparallelimportshasbeenespeciallyheatedintheareaofprescription
drugs. In the United States, where consumers, public health o¢ cials, and politicians have
become increasingly concerned about the high and rising cost of medicine, bills that would
introduce international exhaustion of patent rights for prescription drugs have been intro-
duced in one or both houses of Congress in each of the last three sessions. In fact, in 2000,
Congress passed a bill to permit reimportation of medicines. Although President Clinton
1Article6oftheAgreementonTrade-RelatedAspectsofIntellectualPropertyRights(TRIPS)statesthat:
ForthepurposesofdisputesettlementunderthisAgreement,subjecttotheprovisionsofArticles
3 and 4, nothing in this Agreement shall be used to address the issue of the exhaustion of
intellectual property rights.
2Di¤erent national regimes of IPR exhaustion are described in more detail in Maskus (2000a, 2000b) and
Arfwedson (2004).
1

signed the bill into law, his administration ultimately declined to implement it, citing con-
cerns about consumer safety. New legislation was introduced to Congress in 2004 that would
have forced deregulation of parallel imports of pharmaceuticals. In each case, the impetus
for Congressional action came from public pressures to step up imports from Canada, where
regulations and price controls have generated prices for prescription drugs signi…cantly lower
than those across the border.3 Despite the continuing legal impediments to parallel imports,
reimportation has been a growing source of pharmaceuticals supply in the United States due
to increased personal tra¢ cking and the proliferation of Internet purchases. By one estimate,
parallelimportsofprescriptiondrugsfromCanadaamountedto$1.1billionin2004, orabout
0.5% of the U.S. market (Cambridge Pharma Consultancy, 2004).
Parallel trade in pharmaceuticals features prominently in Europe as well, where it is
the source of ongoing controversy. Di¤erences in price regulations have resulted in signi…-
cant variation in pharmaceutical prices across member countries of the European Union and
the European Free Trade Association (Arfwedson, 2004; Kanavos and Costa-Font, 2005).
Kanavos and Costa-Font, for example, report price di¤erences for many products and coun-
trypairsofbetween100%and300%. Pricesarehighestinthecountrieswithfreeorrelatively
free prices, which are Germany, the United Kingdom, Sweden, the Netherlands, and Den-
mark. These countries all have witnessed substantial growth in parallel importing, with
reimports accounting for between seven and twenty percent of their national expenditures on
prescription drugs in 2002. The parallel exporters include Spain, France, Greece, Italy, and
Portugal, all of which are countries with controlled prices or explicit price caps (Ganslandt
and Maskus, 2004).
Opponents of parallel trade—of which there are many—are concerned that such trade
undermines manufacturers’intellectual property rights.4 The prevailing wisdom, expressed
for example by Bar…eld and Groombridge (1998,1999), Chard and Mellor (1989), Danzon
(1997, 1998), and Danzon and Towse (2003), is that parallel trade impedes the ability of
research-intensive …rms such as those in the pharmaceuticals industry to reap an adequate
return on their investments in new technologies. Their arguments seem to …nd support in
more formal analyses, which o¤er only a few minor caveats. For example, Li and Maskus
(2006) develop a model in which parallel trade creates competition in the home market
between a manufacturer and its own distributor in a foreign market. They …nd that the
distortions associated with parallel imports reduce the manufacturer’s incentive to invest in
cost reducing innovation at a prior stage. Szymanski and Valletti (2005) model an industry
3Maskus (2001) compares prices for similar doses of 18 drugs and …nds lower prices in Canada than in the
United States in 17 cases. The average price for these drugs in Canada was 63 percent of that in the United
States.
4Asidefromanypotentialdynamice¤ects,paralleltradethatunderminesthird-degreepricediscrimination
canreduceworldwelfarebyreallocatingsalesfrommarketswithlowdemandelasticitiestomarketswithhigh
demand elasticities; see Malueg and Schwartz (1994).
2