NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MORAL HAZARD, ADVERSE SELECTION AND HEALTH
EXPENDITURES: A SEMIPARAMETRIC ANALYSIS
Patrick Bajari
Han Hong
Ahmed Khwaja
Working Paper 12445
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12445
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2006
We have benefited from the comments of Amy Finkelstein and participants of the Conference on Structural
Models in Labor, Aging and Health, and the Seventeenth Annual Health Economics Conference. We
acknowledge excellent research assistance from Ivan Shaliastovich, and especially Alvin Murphy. Bajari and
Hong would like to thank the National Science Foundation for generous research support. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2006 by Patrick Bajari, Han Hong and Ahmed Khwaja. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Moral Hazard, Adverse Selection and Health Expenditures: A Semiparametric Analysis
Patrick Bajari, Han Hong, Ahmed Khwaja
NBER Working Paper No. 12445
August 2006
JEL No. C14, D82, I11
ABSTRACT
Theoretical models predict asymmetric information in health insurance markets may generate
inefficient outcomes due to adverse selection and moral hazard. However, previous empirical
research has found it difficult to disentangle adverse selection from moral hazard in health care. We
empirically study this question by using data from the Health and Retirement Study to estimate a
structural model of the demand for health insurance and medical care. Using a two-step
semi-parametric estimation strategy we find significant evidence of moral hazard, but not of adverse
selection.
Patrick Bajari
University of Minnesota
1035 Heller Hall
271 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
bajari@umich.edu
Han Hong
Department of Economics
Duke University
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
han.hong@duke.edu
Ahmed Khwaja
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
Box 90120
Durham, NC 27708
ahmed.khwaja@duke.edu

I. Introduction
There is a large theoretical literature that predicts that asymmetric information in
insurance markets may generate inefficient outcomes due to adverse selection and moral
hazard (see e.g., Arrow 1963, Pauly 1968, Akerlof 1970, Zeckhauser 1970, Spence and
Zeckhauser 1971, Spence 1973, Pauly 1974, Rothschild and Stiglitz 1976, Wilson 1977,
1980). Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976) develop a model in which adverse selection is
present because individuals have private information about their health status. They
demonstrate that insurers may inefficiently ration health care by capping benefits for the
healthiest consumers. Similarly Pauly (1968) shows that moral hazard may be present in
health insurance markets because consumers do not bear the full cost of health care
expenditures.1
The predictions of theoretical models of insurance markets can depend quite
delicately on whether adverse selection or moral hazard is more important. Because of
the complexity of insurance markets, theoretical models frequently emphasize one of
these distortions at the expense of the other. Furthermore, optimal policy depends
crucially on which of these distortions is most important. Thus, empirically assessing
whether moral hazard or adverse selection is important is useful for guiding both theory
and public policy.
It is well recognized that it is empirically difficult to distinguish between moral
hazard and adverse selection and consequently there is little consensus on which of these
1 The empirical evidence on the existence of asymmetric information in insurance markets is mixed. For
example, recent work by Cawley and Philipson (1999) for life insurance markets; Cardon and Hendel
(2001) for health insurance markets; and Chiappori and Salanie (2000) for automobile insurance markets,
finds no evidence of asymmetric information. On the other hand, Finkelstein and Poterba (2004) find such
evidence in annuity markets. In the context of health insurance, Cutler and Zeckhauser (2000) review an
extensive literature that finds evidence of adverse selection based on the positive correlation between
generosity of the insurance contract and adverse outcomes, and moral hazard based on the coinsurance
elasticity of the demand for medical care.
- 2 -

two sources of inefficiency is more important. A common method to detect asymmetric
information is to examine the correlation between risk outcomes and a measure of the
generosity of a contract. However, as pointed out by Chiappori and Salanié (2003),
among others, under moral hazard the generosity of the contract will lead to adverse risk
outcomes while under adverse selection the causality is reversed, leading to observational
equivalence between the two hypotheses.2 Abbring, Chiappori, Heckman and Pinquet
(2003) have suggested that one could exploit the dynamic consequences of experience
rating in insurance markets to distinguish between adverse selection and moral hazard.
However, U.S. health insurance markets are regulated to restrict experience rating, which
precludes this proposed empirical strategy.3
In this paper, we propose an alternative approach to the assessing the importance
of moral hazard and adverse selection in health insurance markets. Our approach is
based on estimating a structural model of consumer demand for health insurance and
medical utilization. The structural model is consistent with the theoretical models
proposed by Spence and Zeckhauser (1971) and Blomqvist (1997) and allows for both
adverse selection and moral hazard. In the model, risk averse agents have preferences
over a composite commodity and health status, and maximize utility subject to a budget
2 A test of asymmetric information based on the positive correlation between the generosity of the contract
and adverse risk outcomes may also breakdown if there is heterogeneity in risk preferences (De Meza and
Webb 2001). For example, if individuals who are highly risk averse also put more effort in to lowering
their risk, and vice versa those who are less risk averse take fewer precautions, then there could be a
negative correlation between the generosity of the contract and risk outcomes. Evidence of heterogeneity in
risk preferences has been found by Finkelstein and McGarry (forthcoming) in the long term care insurance
market and Cohen and Einav (2005) in the automobile insurance market. Chiappori, Jullien, Salanié and
Salanié (forthcoming) develop a non parametric test to detect the presence of asymmetric information
based on the correlation between the generosity of the contract and risk outcomes that addresses this
limitation. However their test does not distinguish between adverse selection and moral hazard. Finkelstein
and Poterba (2006) develop a test for adverse selection that avoids the limitation of heterogeneity in risk
preferences. Their test is based on using data on observable characteristics of individuals that are correlated
with the outcomes but are not used by insurers in pricing contracts.
3Another alternative would be to use field experiments to investigate the presence of asymmetric
information. Karlan and Zinman (2005) provide an example of such an experiment in credit markets in
South Africa. However the feasibility of implementing such experiments in the context of health insurance,
especially in the U.S., is questionable.
- 3 -