NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNDERSTANDING INTERNATIONAL PORTFOLIO
DIVERSIFICATION AND TURNOVER RATES
Amir A. Amadi
Paul R. Bergin
Working Paper 12473
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12473
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2006
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Amir A. Amadi and Paul R. Bergin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Understanding International Portfolio Diversification and Turnover Rates
Amir A. Amadi and Paul R. Bergin
NBER Working Paper No. 12473
August 2006
JEL No. F36
ABSTRACT
This paper argues that fixed trading costs in international asset markets help explain equity home
bias. This contrasts with explanations prevalent in international macroeconomics, which tend to be
based on trading frictions instead in international goods markets, such as nontraded goods or
transportation costs. While the stylized fact of high trading turnover in foreign holdings has been
interpreted as evidence against international asset trading costs, we show that this argument only
applies to costs that are proportional to trade, and not to fixed costs of entering the foreign market.
After documenting that the home bias and turnover stylized facts remain valid in recent data, the
paper constructs a very simple portfolio allocation model with various configurations of trading costs
and with heterogeneous types of traders. A configuration with per unit costs heterogeneous among
agents and a homogeneous fixed cost is found to replicate the pair of stylized facts. Intuitively, the
lower trading costs that characterize larger and more efficient traders have two implications: firstly,
these traders find it more profitable to enter foreign markets; secondly, their lower trading costs
encourage a higher rate of trading turnover. Since holdings of international equities are
disproportionately dominated by this class of larger and more efficient traders, average trading
turnover is higher among international holdings.
Amir A. Amadi
Department of Economics
UC, Davis
One Shields Ave.
Davis, CA 95616
aaamadi@ucdavis.edu
Paul Bergin
Department of Economics
UC, Davis
One Shields Ave.
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
prbergin@ucdavis.edu

1. Introduction
Data on international equity markets suggest a pair of stylized facts that have
proved difficult to reconcile. One is home bias: despite the potentially significant gains
from foreign diversification, investors hold a disproportionately small amount of foreign
equity.1 A second observation is that the turnover rate, the share of holdings bought or
resold in a period of time, surprisingly is higher for assets held in a foreign market than for
domestic assets.
One intuitively appealing explanation for home bias raised initially in the literature
is the presence of international transactions costs associated with purchasing an asset in a
foreign market. But if transactions costs were the explanation for small foreign holdings, it
should also lower turnover among foreign assets. Since the opposite appears to be true, the
literature moved on to other types of explanations. Research within the open economy
macroeconomics literature has focused on transactions costs in the international goods
market, which limit the ability to reap the benefits of asset diversification.2 Research
within the finance literature has focused on information asymmetry between countries.3
However, while high foreign turnover might argue against trading costs of the usual
proportional type, it does not rule out the presence of costs of a fixed type, that is, costs that
are not proportional to the volume of trading. Recent research in the field of international
trade theory has found that fixed costs of entry can be very useful in understanding aspects
of international trade in goods markets.4 This paper studies theoretically if such fixed costs
1 See French and Poterba (1991) and Tesar and Werner (1995).
2 See Tesar (1993) and Pesenti and van Wincoop (2002) for examples of nontraded goods arguments. See
van Wincoop (1994) and Aizenman (1999) for preferences. See Obstfeld and Rogoff (2001) and Engel and
Matsumoto (2004) for various types of goods market imperfections. Rowland and Tesar (2004) investigate
the role of multinational firms as a substitute for portfolio diversification.
3 See Ahearne, Griever, and Warnock (2004) for example.
4 See Bernard and Jensen (2004) for example.
1

can be useful in understanding the puzzling aspects of international trade in equities
markets, and what characteristics these costs would need to possess.
Interpretations of these fixed costs could include various types of establishment
costs, like the need to deal with foreign languages and legal codes, or the costs of accessing
information on a foreign firm. Amadi (2004a) finds empirical support for the idea that
common language, distance and immigrant populations affect foreign investment.
In the context of a very simple portfolio allocation model, we find that a particular
combination of fixed and proportional costs is able to generate the combination of stylized
facts. The model includes proportional trading costs that are not heterogeneous between
foreign and domestic assets, like those dismissed above, but instead are heterogeneous
among agents within a country. Some agents have a cost advantage in executing financial
trades, be it due to larger size, better technology, or expertise. In combination with uniform
fixed costs of entering a foreign market, only efficient agents with low per unit costs find it
profitable to enter. Therefore high cost agents remain solely in the domestic market,
thereby resulting in a home bias. In addition, the agents with lower costs of trading
naturally adjust their portfolio more often, resulting in a higher turnover rate. And since
these agents are the only home-country agents active in the foreign market, this results in a
relatively higher turnover rate in foreign investments.
The paper also presents basic empirical work, arguing that despite recent increases
in international diversification and despite measurement issues raised in Warnock (2002),
the stylized facts are still broadly relevant in recent data. We also compare our explanation
for the puzzle to that in Rowland (1999), which notes that the volume of trade between
home and foreign equities is high when agents are in the initial stages of diversifying.
2