NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GLOBALIZATION AND RISK SHARING
Fernando A. Broner
Jaume Ventura
Working Paper 12482
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12482
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2006
We thank Sergi Lanau for excellent research assistance. We received valuable comments from Ricardo
Caballero, Martín Uribe, Mark Wright, Andrei Levchenko, Fabrizio Perri, Felipe Meza, and participants at
presentations held at the CEPR Analysis of International Capital Markets Meeting, CREI and Universitat
Pompeu Fabra, Foundation Banque de France, IMF, the NBER Summer Institute, the Northwestern
University-European University Institute Conference, ESSIM, the World Bank-CREI conference on
macroeconomic volatility, and the Fundación Areces-CREI conference on the effects of globalization. We
are grateful for generous financial support from Foundation Banque de France as part of the grant “Managing
Financial Integration.” We also acknowledge financial support from the Spanish Ministry of Education and
Sciences (grant SEC2002-03816), the Generalitat de Catalunya (DURSI, SGR2005 0049), and
CREA-Barcelona Economics. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Fernando A. Broner and Jaume Ventura. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Globalization and Risk Sharing
Fernando A. Broner and Jaume Ventura
NBER Working Paper No. 12482
August 2006
JEL No. E24, F34, F36, G15
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a theoretical study of the effects of globalization on risk sharing and welfare. We
model globalization as a gradual and exogenous increase in the fraction of goods that are tradable.
In the absence of frictions, globalization opens new goods markets and raises welfare. We assume,
however, that countries cannot commit to pay their debts. Unlike the previous literature, and
motivated by changes in the institutional setup of emerging-market borrowing, we also assume that
countries cannot discriminate between domestic and foreign creditors when paying their debts.
Although globalization still opens new goods markets, we find that it can also open or close some
asset markets. The net effect on risk sharing and welfare of this process of creation and destruction
of markets might be either positive or negative depending on a variety of factors that the theory
highlights.
Fernando A. Broner
Centre de Recerca en Economia Internacional
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
08005 Barcelona
SPAIN
fernando.broner@upf.edu
Jaume Ventura
Centre de Recerca en Economia Internacional
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
08005 Barcelona
SPAIN
and NBER
jaume.ventura@upf.edu

Thispaperpresentsatheoreticalstudyofthee¤ectsofglobalizationonrisksharingandwelfare.
We model globalization as a gradual and exogenous increase in the fraction of goods that are
tradable. In the absence of frictions, globalization opens new goods markets and raises welfare. We
assume, however, that countries cannot commit to pay their debts. Unlike the previous literature,
and motivated by changes in the institutional setup of emerging-market borrowing, we also assume
thatcountriescannotdiscriminatebetweendomesticandforeigncreditorswhenpayingtheirdebts.
Although globalization still opens new goods markets, we …nd that it can also open or close some
asset markets. The net e¤ect on risk sharing and welfare of this process of creation and destruction
of markets might be either positive or negative depending on a variety of factors that the theory
highlights.1;2
We study a world with two regions. The basic setup also has two periods, youth and old age,
although sometimes we re-interpret it as a many-period model with an overlapping-generations
structure. During youth, all individuals have identical preferences and own an ex-ante identical
project that delivers output during old age. The return to this project is random and leads to
ex-post di¤erences in production bundles during old age. This provides a role for markets to help
individualspoolorshareproductionrisks. Goodsmarketsopenduringoldageandallowindividuals
totradecommoditiesorgoods,whileassetmarketsopenduringyouthandallowindividualstotrade
promises or assets. Naturally, asset markets can only open if governments enforce during old age
the trades agreed upon during youth. We assume that governments choose enforcement policy so
as to maximize the utility of the average or representative individual of their region. As usual, this
leads governments to prefer di¤erent enforcement policies over time. During youth, governments
would like to commit to enforce all payments during old age and allow domestic residents to reap
all the gains from trade. But during old age, governments prefer not to enforce payments to foreign
residents because they lower domestic consumption and welfare. This time-inconsistency problem
is also known as sovereign risk in international economics.
There are two polar cases that deliver well-known results in this setup. The …rst one is the per-
fect commitment model. If governments can credibly commit during youth to enforce all payments
1Whether globalization improves or worsens risk sharing is an old question in international economics. Newbery
and Stiglitz (1984) provided a famous example in which asset markets are missing and globalization can reduce risk
sharingandwelfare. However,Dixit(1987,1989a,and1989b)showedthatthiscannothappeniftheabsenceofasset
markets,insteadofsimplyassumed,isendogenouslyderivedbyintroducingprivateinformation. Hereweendogenize
the absence of asset markets by introducing sovereign risk. We …nd that the result of Newbery and Stiglitz that
globalization can reduce risk sharing and welfare still holds. Moreover, our result is even stronger since we also
show that globalization can destroy asset markets. See also Levchenko (2005) and Rappoport (2005) for alternative
approaches to this question.
2Ontheempiricalside,thereissubstantialevidencethatconsumptionvolatilityinemergingmarketshasincreased
(relativetooutputvolatility)duringthelastdecades,andthatmuchofthisincreasecanbeattributedtoglobalization.
(See Kose, Prasad, and Terrones (2003a and 2003b) and Prasad, Rogo¤, Wei, and Kose (2003)). There is no hard
evidence that we know of about consumption volatility at the individual level.
1

during old age, they will always choose to do so. In this case, asset markets are always open and
there is perfect domestic sharing of all goods and perfect international sharing of tradable goods.
Globalization is welfare-improving because it increases the fraction of goods that can be shared
internationally. The other polar case is the perfect discrimination model without commitment. If
governments choose during old age which payments to enforce, they will choose a discriminatory
policy that enforces payments between domestic residents but does not enforce payments from
domestic residents to foreign ones.3 In this case, asset markets are also open but geographically
segmented. As a result, there is perfect domestic sharing of all goods but only imperfect interna-
tional sharing of tradable goods. Globalization is welfare-improving again because it increases the
fraction of goods that are shared internationally, even if imperfectly.4
Wethinkthatthesepolarcasesleavebehindthemostinterestinge¤ectsofglobalization,namely,
those on the workings of asset markets. To show this, we study here a third polar case in which
governments have neither commitment nor the ability to discriminate between domestic and for-
eign creditors when enforcing payments. In this situation, asset markets are never geographically
segmentedifopen, butsomeassetmarketsmightbeclosed. Thisistheresultofgovernmentsfacing
a trade-o¤when deciding whether to enforce payments that is absent in the other two polar cases.
On the one hand, enforcement increases payments from domestic to foreign residents that lower
domestic consumption and welfare. On the other hand, enforcement increases payments between
domestic residents that contribute to domestic sharing of goods and therefore raise welfare. This
trade-o¤determines the states of nature in which governments choose to enforce payments during
old age and, therefore, the set of assets that can be traded during youth. In states of nature in
which asset markets are open, there is perfect domestic sharing of all goods and perfect interna-
tional sharing of tradable goods. In states of nature in which asset markets are closed, there is not
only imperfect international sharing of tradable goods but also imperfect domestic sharing of all
goods.
This enforcement trade-o¤provides a theory of asset market incompleteness based on sovereign
risk that we exploit to study the e¤ects of globalization. The most novel aspect of our analysis is
that we show how globalization a¤ects the degree of asset market incompleteness. In particular,
globalization can either lead to the opening or closure of asset markets depending on its e¤ect
on the relative importance of domestic and international payments. Naturally, the opening of
markets improves domestic sharing of all goods and international sharing of tradable goods, while
3Why would governments want to enforce payments between domestic residents? In equilibrium, payments are
made by individualsthathave a low marginalutility ofconsumption to individualsthathave a high marginalutility
of consumption and therefore raise the average utility of the region.
4International sharing of tradable goods is imperfect since it only takes place in goods markets. During old age,
regionssellthosetradablegoodsthatarerelativelyabundantintheirbundleandbuythosethatarerelativelyscarce.
2