NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE BOND MARKET'S Q
Thomas Philippon
Working Paper 12462
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12462
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2006
This paper was first circulated under the title "The y-theory of investment". I thank Daron Acemoglu,
Mark Aguiar, Manuel Amador, Luca Benzoni, Olivier Blanchard, Xavier Gabaix, Mark Gertler, Simon
Gilchrist, Bob Hall, Guido Lorenzoni, Sydney Ludvigson, Pete Kyle, Lasse Pedersen, Christina Romer,
David Romer, Ivan Werning, Toni Whited, Jeff Wurgler, Egon Zakrajsek and seminar participants
at NYU, MIT, the SED 2007, London Business School, Ente Einaudi (Rome), University of Salerno,
Toulouse University, Duke University, and the NBER Summer Institutes 2006 and 2007.
© 2006 by Thomas Philippon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Bond Market's q
Thomas Philippon
NBER Working Paper No. 12462
August 2006, Revised February 2008
JEL No. E0,E44,G31
ABSTRACT
I propose an implementation of the q-theory of investment using bond prices instead of equity prices.
Credit risk makes corporate bond prices sensitive to future asset values, and q can be inferred from
bond prices. The bond market's q performs much better than the usual measure in standard investment
equations. With aggregate data, the fit is three times better, cash flows are driven out and the implied
adjustment costs are reduced by more than an order of magnitude. The new measure also improves
firm level investment equations.
Thomas Philippon
NYU Stern School of Business
Department of Finance
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
tphilipp@stern.nyu.edu

In his 1969 article, James Tobin argued that “the rate of investment — the speed at
which investors wish to increase the capital stock — should be related, if to anything, to q,
the value of capital relative to its replacement cost.1” Tobin also recognized, however, that
q must depend on “expectations, estimates of risk, attitudes towards risk, and a host of
other factors,” and he concluded that “it is not to be expected that the essential impact
of [..] financial events will be easy to measure in the absence of direct observation of the
relevant variables (q in the models).” The quest for an observable proxy for q was therefore
recognized as a crucial objective from the very beginning.
Subsequent research succeeded in integrating Tobin’s approach with the neoclassical
investment theory of Jorgenson (1963). Lucas and Prescott (1971) proposed a dynamic
model of investment with convex adjustment costs, and Abel (1979) showed that the rate of
investmentisoptimalwhenthemarginalcostofinstallmentisequaltoq 1. Finally,Hayashi
−
(1982) showed that, under perfect competition and constant returns to scale, marginal
q (the market value of an additional unit of capital divided by its replacement cost) is
equal to average q (the market value of existing capital divided by its replacement cost).
Since average q is observable, the theory became empirically relevant. Unfortunately, its
implementation proved disappointing. The investment equation fits poorly, leaves large
unexplained residuals correlated with cash flows, and implies implausible parameters for
the adjustment cost function (see Summers (1981) for an early contribution, and Hassett
and Hubbard (1997) and Caballero (1999) for recent literature reviews).
Several theories have been proposed to explain this failure. Firms could have market
power, and might not operate under constant returns to scale. Adjustment costs might
not be convex (Dixit and Pindyck (1994), Caballero and Engle (1999)). Firms might be
credit constrained (Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988), Bernanke and Gertler (1989)).
Finally, there could be measurement errors and aggregation biases in the capital stock or
the rate of investment.
None of these explanations is fully satisfactory, however. The evidence for constant
returnsandpricetakingseemsquitestrong(Hall(2003)). Adjustmentcostsarecertainlynot
convex at the plant level, but it is not clear that it really matters in the aggregate (Thomas
(2002), Hall (2004)), although this is still a controversial issue (Bachmann, Caballero, and
1Tobin (1969), page 21.
2

Engel(2006)). Gomes(2001)showsthatTobin’sq cancapturemostofinvestmentdynamics
evenwhentherearecreditconstraints. Heterogeneityandaggregationdonotseemtocreate
strong biases (Hall (2004)).
In fact, an intriguing message comes out of the more recent empirical research: the
market value of equity seems to be the culprit for the empirical failure of the investment
equation. GilchristandHimmelberg(1995),followingAbelandBlanchard(1986),useVARs
to forecast cash flows and to construct q, and they find that it performs better than the
traditionalmeasurebasedonequityprices. Cumins, Hasset, andOliner(2006)useanalysts’
forecasts instead of VAR forecasts, and reach similar conclusions. Erickson and Whited
(2000) and Erickson and Whited (2006) use GMM estimators to purge q from measurement
errors. They find that only 40 percent of observed variations are due to fundamental
changes, and, once again, that market values contain large ‘measurement errors’.
Applied research has therefore reached an uncomfortable situation, where the bench-
mark investment equation appears to be successful only when market prices are not used
to construct q. This is unfortunate, since Tobin’s insight was precisely to link observed
quantities and market prices. The contribution of this paper is to show that a market-
based measure of q can be constructed from corporate bond prices, and that this measure
performs much better than the traditional one.
Why would the bond market’s q perform better than the usual measure? There are
several possible explanations. First, the bond market might be less susceptible to bubbles
than the equity market. In fact, there is empirical and theoretical support for the idea that
mispricingismorelikelytohappenwhenreturnsarepositivelyskewed. BarberisandHuang
(2007) show that cumulative prospect theory predicts that a positively skewed security can
be overpriced. Brunnermeier, Gollier, and Parker (2007) argue that preference for skewness
arises endogenously because investors chooses to be optimistic about the states associated
with the most skewed Arrow-Debreu securities. Empirically, Mitton and Vorkink (2007)
document that under-diversification is largely explained by the fact that investors sacrifice
mean-variance efficiency for higher skewness exposure. Purely rational explanations can
also be proposed. These explanations typically involve different degrees of asymmetric
information, market segmentation, and heterogeneity in adjustment costs and stochastic
3