NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REGULATORY EXPLOITATION AND THE
MARKET FOR CORPORATE CONTROL
Leemore Dafny
David Dranove
Working Paper 12438
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12438
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2006
We thank Tom Hubbard, Ilyana Kuziemko, Michael Mazzeo, Tomas Philipson, Douglas Staiger, Scott Stern,
Robert Town, William White, and participants at various conferences and seminars for helpful comments.
We are grateful to Laurence Baker for sharing his data with us, and to Feng Susan Lu, Michael Loquercio,
and Subramaniam Ramanarayanan for expert research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Leemore Dafny and David Dranove. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Regulatory Exploitation and the Market for Corporate Control
Leemore Dafny and David Dranove
NBER Working Paper No. 12438
August 2006
JEL No. G3, H51, I11
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates whether managers who fail to exploit regulatory loopholes are vulnerable to
replacement. We use the U.S. hospital industry in 1985-1996 as a case study. A 1988 change in
Medicare rules widened a pre-existing loophole in the Medicare payment system, presenting
hospitals with an opportunity to increase operating margins by five or more percentage points simply
by “upcoding” patients to more lucrative codes. We find that “room to upcode” is a statistically and
economically significant predictor of whether a hospital replaces its management with a new team
of for-profit managers. We also find that hospitals replacing their management subsequently upcode
more than a sample of similar hospitals that did not, as identified by propensity scores.
Leemore Dafny
Department of Management and Strategy
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
l-dafny@kellogg.northwestern.edu
David Dranove
Department of Management and Strategy
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
d-dranove@kellogg.northwestern.edu

1. Introduction
When the market for corporate control is efficient, owners or managers who “leave money
on the table” will be replaced. Whether such ousters (or the threat thereof) increase social
welfare clearly depends on the source of unrealized profits. In this paper, we examine
changes in corporate control resulting from managers’ failure to exploit regulatory
loopholes. As compared to managerial changes prompted by a failure to deploy productive
assets efficiently, these shifts in corporate control need not increase social welfare. We find
empirical evidence for such managerial changes using panel data on the U.S. hospital
industry between 1985 and 1996.
The U.S. hospital industry is highly regulated at both the state and federal level, and
opportunities for exploiting regulatory loopholes abound. Our analysis is based on an
unexpected change in the payment system used by Medicare to reimburse hospitals for
inpatient care. This change widened a pre-existing loophole in the system, presenting
hospitals with an opportunity to increase operating margins by five percentage points simply
by reclassifying patients to more lucrative codes, a practice known as “upcoding.” Given
typical operating margins of less than two percentage points during this time period, this is a
substantial figure.
The exact amount of the potential increase in Medicare payments depends on the mix of
patients in each hospital and the extent to which the hospital was exploiting the loophole
prior to the regulatory change. Dafny (2005) finds evidence that hospitals upcoded
significantly more following the increase in the incentive to do so. The response of for-
profit hospitals was dramatically larger than that of nonprofit or government-owned
hospitals, indicating a greater willingness or ability of for-profit managers to exploit this
1

opportunity. This paper defines a hospital-specific, time-varying measure called “room to
upcode” (RTU), and examines whether independent hospitals with greater RTU following
the 1988 reform were more likely to switch to management by for-profit systems.1
We compare the predictors of joining a for-profit system in 1985-1987 (the “pre-
period”), 1989-1992 (the “treatment” period), and 1993-1996 (the “post period”, during
which there was a massive federal crackdown on Medicare fraud).2 In addition to RTU, we
also examine whether poor operating performance precipitates a switch to for-profit system
management. We contrast our findings with the predictors of joining a nonprofit system
during each of these periods.
We obtain three main results: (1) during the period immediately following the
implementation of the new Medicare rules, RTU was a statistically and economically
significant predictor of whether an independent hospital joined a for-profit system; (2)
hospitals that joined for-profit systems during this period subsequently increased their
upcoding relative to a matched sample of similar hospitals that did not join for-profit
systems; and (3) RTU is not associated with joining a for-profit system before 1988 or after
1992, nor with joining a nonprofit system at any time.
Our results suggest that a well-functioning market for corporate control intensifies the
agency problems that arise between regulators and the firms they regulate. In this setting,
Medicare is a principal acting on behalf of an insured population, and hospitals serve as
Medicare’s agents. Medicare bases payments on diagnostic conditions, and these rules are
enforced in a second-best world: hospitals must report diagnostic information that is to some
1 As we discuss below, most hospitals joining for-profit systems were not acquired outright; rather, these
hospitals outsourced the management function to for-profit “contract management organizations.”
2 The “pre period” is one year shorter than the other periods because the data are not available prior to 1985.
2