NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE ASSIGNMENT OF PROPERTY RIGHTS ON THE WESTERN FRONTIER:
LESSONS FOR CONTEMPORARY ENVIRONMENTAL AND RESOURCE POLICY
Gary D. Libecap
Working Paper 12598
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12598
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2006
Prepared as the Presidential Address for the Economic History Association Meetings, September 14-17,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Helpful comments were provided by Lee Alston, Terry Anderson, Bob Deacon,
Charlie Kolstad, and Zeynep Hansen. Support for this research was provided by National Science
Foundation Grant 0317375, the Hoover Institution, and the Earhart Foundation. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2006 by Gary D. Libecap. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Assignment of Property Rights on the Western Frontier: Lessons for Contemporary Environmental
and Resource Policy
Gary D. Libecap
NBER Working Paper No. 12598
October 2006
JEL No. K11,N21,N22,N5,Q15,Q2,Q27,Q28,Q3,Q32
ABSTRACT
In addressing environmental and natural resource problems, there is a move away from primary reliance
upon centralized regulation toward assignment of property rights to mitigate the losses of open-access.
I examine the assignment of private property rights during the 19th and early 20th centuries to five
natural resources, mineral land, timberland, grazing and farm land, and water on federal government
lands in the Far West. The region was richly endowed with natural resources, but assigning property
rights to them required adaptation from established, eastern practices as defined by the federal land
laws. The property rights that emerged and their long-term welfare effects provide a laboratory for
examining current questions of institutional design to address over-fishing, excessive air pollution,
and other natural resource and environmental problems. A major lesson is that property rights allocations
based on local conditions, prior use, and unconstrained by outside government mandates were most
effective in addressing not only the immediate threat of open-access, but in providing a longer-term
basis for production, investment, and trade. Another lesson is how hard it is to repair initial faulty
property allocations. Accordingly, path dependencies in property rules are real, and they have dominated
the economic history of resource use in the West.
Gary D. Libecap
Bren School of Environmental Science
and Management and Economics Department
University of California, Santa Barbara; and Hoover Institution
Bren Hall 4412
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-5131
and NBER
glibecap@bren.ucsb.edu

“This is what stretched westward from the 100th meridian, this complex, misunderstood
two fifths of the continental United States where men had come before law arrived and
where before there were adequate maps there were warring interests, white against
Indian, cattleman against sheepman and both against nester, open range notions against
the use of the newly invented barbed wire, Gentile against Mormon, land rights against
water rights, appropriation rights to water against riparian rights to water, legitimate
small settler against speculator and land-grabber. The public domain as Powell knew it
was all of these, its only unity the unity of little rain.” (Wallace Stegner, 1954, Beyond
the 100th Meridian: John Wesley Powell and the Second Opening of the West, 218).
I. Introduction.
In addressing environmental and natural resource problems, there is a move away
from primary reliance upon centralized regulation toward assignment of property rights
of some sort to mitigate the losses of the “Tragedy of the Commons.”1 For instance, a
recent survey worldwide found that tradable use permits were used in 9 applications in air
pollution control, 75 in fisheries management, 3 in water allocation, and 5 in land use
regulation.2 These institutional innovations have taken place as the resources have
become more valuable, as they have faced growing open-access or common-pool losses,
and as dissatisfaction has increased with existing regulatory policies.3
The advantages of property rights arrangements include better alignment of
incentives for investment in the resource, provision of collateral for accessing capital for
investment, more flexible exchange, greater information generation, and improved cost
savings in meeting conservation or environmental objectives.4 The more complete are
property rights, the more the private and social net benefits of resource use coincide,
reducing externalities and the associated losses of the common pool.5
1

Despite the attractions of property rights to address some resource and
environmental problems, they remain controversial, limiting or slowing their adoption.
Allocation especially is contentious because of the assignment of wealth and political
influence associated with exclusive property rights. Property rights are political
institutions and the underlying negotiations determine the nature of the rights
arrangements that ultimately emerge, their timing, and effectiveness.6 As emphasized by
Coase (1960), allocation rules are always important for distribution and they affect output
possibilities in the presence of transaction costs.
Contemporary policy discussions about crafting responses to the common pool
can receive guidance from research in American economic history on the development of
property institutions on the frontier. I examine the assignment of private property rights
during the 19th and early 20th centuries to five natural resources, mineral land, timberland,
grazing and farm land, and water on federal government lands in the Far West. The
region was richly endowed with natural resources, but assigning property rights to them
required adaptation from established, eastern practices as defined by the federal land
laws. The property rights that emerged and their long-term welfare effects provide a
laboratory for examining current questions of institutional design to address over-fishing,
excessive air pollution, and other natural resource and environmental problems.
As the above quote suggests and as we will see, western institutions encountered
many of the same information, political, and planning problems that are encountered
today. Some were successful, whereas others were not. A major lesson is that property
rights allocations based on local conditions, prior use, and unconstrained by outside
government mandates were most effective in addressing not only the immediate threat of
2