NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHEN KNOWLEDGE IS AN ASSET:
EXPLAINING THE ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE OF LARGE LAW FIRMS
James B. Rebitzer
Lowell J. Taylor
Working Paper 12583
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12583
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2006
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by James B. Rebitzer and Lowell J. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

When Knowledge is an Asset: Explaining the Organizational Structure of Large Law Firms
James B. Rebitzer and Lowell J. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 12583
October 2006
JEL No. J4,L2,M5
ABSTRACT
We study the economics of employment relationships through theoretical and empirical analysis of
an unusual set of firms, large law firms. Our point of departure is the "property rights" approach that
emphasizes the centrality of ownership's legal rights to control important, non-human assets of the
enterprise. From this perspective, large law firms are an interesting and potentially important object
of study because the most valuable assets of these firms take the form of knowledge - particularly
knowledge of the needs and interests of clients. We argue that the two most distinctive organizational
features of large law firms, the use of "up or out" promotion contests and the practice of having winners
become residual claimants in the firm, emerge naturally in this setting. In addition to explaining otherwise
anomalous features of the up-or-out partnership system, this paper suggests a general framework for
analyzing organizations where assets reside in the brains of employees.
James B. Rebitzer
Carlton Professor and Chair of Economics Dept.
Case's Weatherhead School of Management
11119 Bellflower Rd
Cleveland, OH 44106-7235
NBER, Levy Economics Institute, and IZA, Institute for the Study of Labor
james.rebitzer@case.edu
Lowell J. Taylor
The Heinz School
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890
lt20@andrew.cmu.edu

I. Introduction
In his seminal essay on the theory of the firm, Ronald Coase observed that employment
relationships are difficult to reconcile with conventional notions of economic transactions:
In economic theory we find that the allocation of factors of production between
different uses is determined by the price mechanism… Yet in the real world, we
find that there are many areas where this does not apply. If a workman moves from
department Y to department X, he does not go because of a change in relative
prices, but because he is ordered to do so (Coase, 1937, p. 387).
Coase’s contrast between command relationships and the price mechanism poses two
interrelated questions for economic theory. First, what empowers a firm to effectively command
employees? Second, does the “command” observed in employment relationships differ from that
found in other commercial transactions? When an employer tells an employee what to do, is
authority exercised in a manner any different than a consumer who tells a retailer what products
she wants the retailer to carry (Alchain and Demsetz, 1972)?
Economic theorists from Karl Marx (1967) to Oliver Hart (1989) have suggested that
workplace authority derives from a system of property rights that gives the owners of the firm
control over the disposition of the non-human capital of the enterprise. This “property rights”
position is stated most clearly in Sanford Grossman and Hart’s (1986) analysis of investments in
“relationship specific assets” and in the subsequent work of Hart and John Moore (1990).
Relationship specific assets are assets that achieve their greatest value when used by specific
parties. The important innovation of the Grossman and Hart and Hart and Moore analyses is the
demonstration that in dynamic environments, in which enforceable contracts cannot be written
covering all contingencies, property rights over relationship-specific assets will affect the ex post
distribution of the surplus, and that this, in turn, requires modifications to the ex ante agreements
between parties in economic relationships.
This property rights theory provides a simple way to fill the gap in economic theory
identified by Coase. Employment relationships will appear whenever the expected net benefits
arising from control over physical assets in ex post bargaining exceeds the net benefits of

2
contracting for labor services from a contractor (or consultant) who owns his or her own capital.
The employment relationships that emerge in this framework will typically be those in which
employers, by virtue of their property rights, exercise greater influence over employees than
would otherwise be possible. Thus employment relationships will be characterized by more
“command” than would be observed in other economic transactions.
This paper offers an examination of the property rights explanation of employment
relationships and firm organization. Our approach is to analyze employment relationships in
firms where ownership is not associated with clear rights to control the disposition of the key
assets of the enterprise. If, as the property rights perspective suggests, control over the assets of
the enterprise is important for establishing authority within firms, then the owners of these
unusual firms should find it difficult to sustain employment relations found in conventional
firms. Instead, we would anticipate the emergence within these firms of unconventional
personnel policies—policies the firms can use to sustain employment relationships in the absence
clear property rights to key firm assets.
The object of our investigation is the organizational structure of large law firms. These
firms are typically structured as partnerships. Attorneys become partners via up-or-out
promotion contests. In these contests, employers hire attorneys as “associates” for a pre-
determined time period. At the end of this time period, associates are either invited to become
equity partners—firm owners—or are fired. The practice of giving firm ownership to senior
employees certainly differs from typical firms, and the policy of dismissing associates who are
not invited to partnership would seem on the surface to be irrational. After all, elite law firms
devote substantial resources to recruiting the best legal talent, and the firms’ partners readily
admit many of the associates they fire are talented and able. Law firms that avoid the expense of
firing experienced attorneys and replacing them with inexperienced new hires would appear to
enjoy a significant competitive advantage.
Given its apparent inefficiencies, the survival of the up-or-out system over most of the
past century poses an anomaly for the economics of organizations. We resolve this anomaly by