NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCIALLY CONSTRAINED STOCK RETURNS
Dmitry Livdan
Horacio Sapriza
Lu Zhang
Working Paper 12555
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12555
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2006
We acknowledge helpful suggestions from Joao Gomes, Leonid Kogan, Martin Schneider (AFA discussant),
Amir Yaron, and participants at the American Finance Association Annual Meetings for 2005 in Philadelphia.
Most of this work was completed while Lu Zhang was on the faculty of University of Rochester's
Simon School of Business, whose support is gratefully acknowledged. This paper supersedes our working
paper previously circulated under the title "A neoclassical model of financially constrained stock returns.''
All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Dmitry Livdan, Horacio Sapriza, and Lu Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Financially Constrained Stock Returns
Dmitry Livdan, Horacio Sapriza, and Lu Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 12555
October 2006
JEL No. G12,G31,G32
ABSTRACT
More financially constrained firms are riskier and earn higher expected returns than less financially
constrained firms, although this effect can be subsumed by size and book-to-market. Further, because
the stochastic discount factor makes capital investment more procyclical, financial constraints are
more binding in economic booms. These insights arise from two dynamic models. In Model 1, firms
face dividend nonnegativity constraints without any access to external funds. In Model 2, firms can
retain earnings, raise debt and equity, but face collateral constraints on debt capacity. Despite their
diverse structures, the two models share largely similar predictions.
Dmitry Livdan Lu Zhang
Mays School of Business Associate Professor of Finance
Texas A&M University Stephen M. Ross School of Business
351-J Wehner Hall University of Michigan
College Station, TX 77843-4218 701 Tappan Street, ER 7605 Bus Ad
DLivdan@mays.tamu.edu Ann Arbor MI, 48109-1234
and NBER
Horacio Sapriza zhanglu@bus.umich.edu
Department of Finance and Economics
Rutgers Business School - Newark
and New Brunswick
111 Washington Street
MEC Building, Room 122
Neward NJ 07102
hsapriza@andromeda.rutgers.edu

1 Introduction
Corporate finance and macroeconomics have studied in depth the effects of financial constraints on
firm value, capital investment, and business cycles.1 A small but growing asset pricing literature
asks how these constraints affect risk and expected returns. Using the Kaplan and Zingales (1997)
index of financial constraints, Lamont, Polk, and Sa´a-Requejo (2001) reporta puzzling findingthat
more constrained firms earn lower average returns than less constrained firms. However, using an
alternative index estimated from investment Euler equation, Whited and Wu (2006) findthat more
constrained firms earn higher average returns than less constrained firms, although the difference
is insignificant. Finally, Gomes, Yaron, and Zhang (2006) find that financial constraints provide
a common factor for the cross section of returns, but somewhat surprisingly, the shadow price of
external funds is procyclical, so that financial constraints are more binding in economic booms.
We use neoclassical economics to study the structural relations between financial constraints,
stock returns, and economic fluctuations. Conflicting evidence and competing interpretations are
difficult to evaluate without models that tie the characteristics in question to risk and expected
returns. We try to fill this gap using two dynamic models. In Model 1, firms face dividend nonneg-
ativity constraints without access to external equity or debt. Model 2 is more realistic as firms can
retain earnings, raise debt and equity, but face collateral constraints that limit their debt capacity.
Despite their diverse structures,these two models sharelargely similar predictions. Smallfirms,
less profitable firms, and firms already in debt are more likely to be constrained. More important,
more constrained firms are riskier and earn higher expected returns than less constrained firms.
However, this effect can largely be subsumed quantitatively by market capitalization and book-to-
market equity. Further, financialconstraints are morebindingin economic booms,a pattern driven
by the stochastic discount factor that makes capital investment more sensitive to aggregate shocks.
1An incomplete list of this voluminous literature includes Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988), Bernanke and
Gertler (1989), Whited (1992), Bond and Meghir (1994), Gertler and Gilchrist (1994), Kaplan and Zingales (1997),
KiyotakiandMoore(1997), Bernanke,Gertler,andGilchrist(1999), Gomes(2001), Hennessy(2004),Moyen(2004),
Almeida and Campello (2005), and Henessy and Whited (2006).
2

Our explicitly-solved models provide rich insights on the precise economic mechanisms driving
the model predictions. Intuitively, the shadow price of new funds for a given firm is determined
by its financial gap, the difference between its investment demand and internal funds. The higher
the gap, the more financially constrained the firm will be. For small firms with small scale of
production,internalfundsarelow,butinvestmentdemandsarehighbecauseofdecreasingreturnto
scale. Moreover, allelseequal,firmswithmoredebthavelessinternalfundsavailableforinvestment
becauseof debtpayments. Accordingly, smallfirmsandfirmsalready in debtaremoreconstrained.
Aggregate and firm-specific productivity shocks have two offsetting effects on the financial gap.
A positive shock raises internal funds, but it also raises investment demands because the shock
increases the conditional mean of productivity. For firm-specificshocks, the effect on internal funds
dominates, therefore more profitable firms are less constrained. For aggregate shocks, the effect on
investment demands dominates, therefore firms are more constrained in economic booms.
Our first contribution concerns the role of the stochastic discount factor in driving the pro-
cyclical shadow price of external funds. Unlike firm-specific shocks, aggregate shocks can affect the
stochastic discount factor, which provides a discount-rate channel through which aggregate shocks
can impact capital investment. Specifically, when a positive aggregate shock hits a firm, its real
investment increases because its capital stock becomes more productive (the cash-flow channel).
But the positive aggregate shock also causes the aggregate discount rate to fall, which in turn
causes the net present value of an additional unit of investment to go up, stimulating investment
even further (the discount-rate channel). The increase in investment demands exceeds the increase
in internal funds, generating a higher financial gap after the positive aggregate shock.
Our analysis explains why traditional, partial equilibrium investment models cannot generate
procyclical financial constraints. These models typically assume constant discount factors. Aggre-
gate and firm-specific shocks affect investment symmetrically, therefore firms are more constrained
in bad times for the same reason why less profitable firms are more constrained. Our analysis
also suggests that procyclical financial constraints should appear in general equilibrium models
3