NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND FINANCE UNDER THE TWO HEGEMONS:
COMPLEMENTARIES IN THE UNITED KINGDOM 1870-1913 AND THE UNITED STATES 1920-30
Alan M. Taylor
Janine L. F. Wilson
Working Paper 12543
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12543
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2006
Taylor gratefully acknowledges the support of a fellowship awarded by the John Simon Guggenheim
Memorial Foundation.
© 2006 by Alan M. Taylor and Janine L. F. Wilson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

International Trade and Finance under the Two Hegemons: Complementaries in the United
Kingdom 1870-1913 and the United States 1920-30
Alan M. Taylor and Janine L. F. Wilson
NBER Working Paper No. 12543
September 2006
JEL No. F10,F30,F40,N10,N20,N70
ABSTRACT
Do international trade and finance flow together? In theory, trade and finance can be substitutes or
complements, so the matter must be resolved empirically. We study trade and financial flows from
the United Kingdom from 1870 to 1913 and the United States in the interwar years. Trade and finance
are robustly correlated, even after allowing for simultaneity. Evidence from the British Empire casts
doubt on the idea that trade is a punishment device in the event of a default.
Alan M. Taylor
Department of Economics
University of California
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
amtaylor@ucdavis.edu
Janine L. F. Wilson
Department of Economics
University of Caifornia
Davis, CA 95616
jlflathmann@ucdavis.edu

Recent research on economic globalization, both in its present form and its past incarnations, has
vastly expanded our understanding of the evolution of the global economy and the empirical
contours of its long run development. Studies of international markets in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries tell a story of two globalizations and broader analytic narratives embed these
phenomena in a discussion of political economy forces and shifting constraints on national
economic policymakers (see, e.g., Eichengreen 1996; O’Rourke and Williamson 1999; Bordo,
Taylor, and Williamson 2003; Obstfeld and Taylor 2004).
Although this research agenda has expanded our knowledge of the integration and
disintegration of goods and factor markets across time and space, one less studied dimension is
the interrelationships between all of the different facets of globalization that have ebbed and
flowed together at various times. One might ask the question: is economic globalization a
collection of disparate and disjoint phenomena in various markets that happen to coincide, or
does it reflect, in whole or in part, the actions of deeper structural forces that work in concert to
stimulate greater economic interdependence? In this paper we make a first step toward a
historical understanding of one such linkage as we examine whether trade and financial
integration evolve as distinct processes, or whether they bear some symbiotic relationship to one
another. In other words, we ask: do countries that trade more with one another also tend to be
countries with larger bilateral financial flows?
The gross features of the data over the last century or two can motivate the question
further and strongly hint at some kind of simultaneity. Figure 1(a) shows the ratio of
international trade (exports plus imports) to world GDP from 1800 to 2000 based on various
standard sources. Figure 1(b) shows, for the same period, the ratio of international investment
(foreign asset stocks) to world GDP. The correlation of the two time series is striking, and
1

conforms to the conventional wisdom: in the long run globalization has proceeded in a nonlinear
fashion in both goods and capital markets, with periods of globalization 1800–1914 and
1945–present punctuated by an era of deglobalization during the turbulent interwar years
1914–45. So what? Although these gross correlations are interesting on a heuristic level, such
coarse data can offer only the weakest prima facie evidence of simultaneity.
Our paper will therefore have to call upon better data and econometric techniques to
answer the question: “do trade and finance flow together?” We attempt the first unified
systematic study of both pre–1914 and interwar financial flows from the two main creditor
countries in each period: the United Kingdom from 1870 to 1914 and the United States in the
interwar years. Britain and the United States were also major trading nations in the respective
periods, and therefore form a natural test case. As such, we focus our attention on the two
hegemons—the most influential lenders and the center countries in the world capital market in
each epoch. Kindleberger (1984) famously noted the loss of hegemonic power by Britain and
traced it to the burdens of World War One; he also noted the reluctance with which the United
States assumed the mantle of leadership in the 1920s. He and others have supplied ample
narrative evidence for this shift. Our study can address several questions related to the much
debated transfer of hegemonic power from London to New York, as leadership passed from one
financial center to another.1
Our paper will also speak to the question of whether the correlation of trade and financial
flows merely stems from a common factor, or omitted variable. Several candidates come to mind
1 Quantitative evidence on the hegemonic transfer is hard to come by, and meaningful
hypotheses difficult to formulate, but Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor (2004) find that after
1914 the benchmark “base” interest rate for countries pegging to the gold standard was
increasingly the United States (and possibly France) rather than the rate in the British money
market.
2