NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL FLOWS AND U.S. INTEREST RATES
Francis E. Warnock
Veronica Cacdac Warnock
Working Paper 12560
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12560
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2006
This is a revised version of International Finance Discussion Paper #840. Some of F. Warnock's work
on this project occurred when he was a Senior Economist at the Board of Governors. The authors are
indebted to Brian Sack for advice on an earlier draft. The authors also thank for helpful comments
Joe Gagnon, Philip Lane, Jay Shambaugh, Grace Wong, and seminar participants at Darden's Financial
Economics Workshop, Freddie Mac, IIIS at Trinity College Dublin, UVA Economics, UVA School
of Architecture's Faculty Research Symposium III, and the International AREUEA conference in Los
Cabos. E-mail addresses for the authors are warnockf@darden.virginia.edu and vwarnock@virginia.edu.
F. Warnock thanks the Darden School Foundation for generous support. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2006 by Francis E. Warnock and Veronica Cacdac Warnock. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

International Capital Flows and U.S. Interest Rates
Francis E. Warnock and Veronica Cacdac Warnock
NBER Working Paper No. 12560
October 2006
JEL No. E43,E44,F21
ABSTRACT
Foreign official purchases of U.S. government bonds have an economically large and statistically significant
impact on long-term interest rates. Federal Reserve credibility, as evidenced by dramatic reductions
in both long-term inflation expectations and the volatility of long rates, contributed much to the decline
of long rates in the 1990s. More recently, however, foreign flows have become important. Controlling
for various factors given by a standard macroeconomic model, we estimate that had there been no
foreign official flows into U.S. government bonds over the past year, the 10-year Treasury yield would
currently be 90 basis points higher. Our results are robust to a number of alternative specifications.
Francis E. Warnock
Darden Business School
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
and NBER
warnockf@darden.virginia.edu
Veronica Cacdac Warnock
School of Architecture
P.O. Box 400122
Charlottesville VA 22904-4122
vwarnock@virginia.edu

I. Introduction
For emerging market economies, there is a burgeoning literature on the impact of
international capital flows. For example, we have learned in recent years that in
emerging markets foreign flows can result in a reduction in systematic risk (Chari and
Henry, 2004) and an increase in both physical investment (Henry 2000, 2003) and
economic growth (Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad, 2005). These positive aspects of
capital flows are tempered by the role of foreign flows in spreading crises.1
In contrast, much less is known about the impact of capital flows on the larger
economies of the world. To be sure, we know that even in the largest countries foreign
flows can cause disruption—witness the ERM crisis of the early 1990s (Eichengreen,
2000)—but outside of extreme situations, evidence of any meaningful impact of capital
flows on large economies is scarce. Indeed, until recently many market participants held
the view that capital flows could not possibly impact interest rates in the United States.2
In this paper we present evidence that international capital flows have an
economically important effect on the most important price in the largest economy in the
world, that of the ten-year U.S. Treasury bond. Specifically, we ascertain the extent to
which foreign flows into U.S. government bond markets can help explain movements in
long-term Treasury yields. We address this issue at an important time. Not long ago, in
the summer of 2003, short-term interest rates were very low and inflation was well
contained. Over the course of 2004, the Federal Reserve began a well advertised
1 See, for example, Boyer, Kumagai, and Yuan (2005) and the substantial literature on sudden stops
(among many others, Calvo (1998) and Mendoza and Smith (2006)).
2 For example, as reported in “Their Money, Our Strength” (Wall Street Journal, August 5, 2004), David
Malprass, Chief Economist of Bear Stearns, stated that “U.S. bond yields…have fluctuated over a wide
range in response to many factors…but foreign buying…ha(s) simply not had much impact. Foreigners
don’t have much influence…” Many others made similar statements (although perhaps less forcefully).

tightening cycle that raised short rates while economic growth strengthened and inflation
picked up, and many market observers predicted an increase in long-term U.S. interest
rates that would result in substantial losses on bond positions (see, for example, Roach
(2005a)). However, long-term interest rates remained quite low, puzzling market
participants, financial economists, and policymakers.
We make three contributions to the literature. First, we provide a straightforward
empirical presentation of the interest rate implications of the standard IS/LM model. Our
second, and main, contribution is to show—by extending the empirical model—that
foreign flows have had a statistically and economically significant impact on U.S. long-
term rates. Our third contribution is ancillary but nevertheless important. Although the
use of capital flows data has skyrocketed in recent years in both practitioner and
academic circles, there is considerable confusion about such data. We address this by
first highlighting some less-than-desirable features of reported capital flows data and then
presenting alternative measures designed to address the deficiencies.
We begin by estimating a standard model without foreign flows. The standard
model illustrates two important points. First, the most important factor contributing to
the decline in nominal long-term interest rates from 9 percent in 1987 to roughly 5
percent by the end of the 1990s is the improved credibility of Fed policy (as measured by
reductions in both long-term inflation expectations and the volatility of long rates).3 A
sharp improvement in the fiscal situation also helped for a period, although most of those
gains later evaporated. Second, at times rates seem to deviate substantially from the
3 This is consistent with the view that the fixing of policy and inflation expectations was a crowning
accomplishment of the Greenspan Fed (Poole, 2005). On the importance of fixing expectations when
conducting monetary policy, see Eggertsson and Woodford (2003a, 2003b), Svensson (2001, 2003), and
Krugman (1998).
2