NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE CORPORATE GOVERNANCE ROLE OF
THE MEDIA: EVIDENCE FROM RUSSIA
Alexander Dyck
Natalya Volchkova
Luigi Zingales
Working Paper 12525
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12525
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2006
Alexander Dyck thanks the Gamma Foundation, the Division of Research, Harvard Business School, and the
Rotman School of Management for financial support. Luigi Zingales thanks the Gamma Foundation, the
CRSP center, and the George Stigler Center at the University of Chicago for financial support. We thank
Beatriz Armendariz, Stefano della Vigna. Andrei Shleifer, Andrei Simonov and participants and seminars
at Dartmouth, Harvard, Stockholm School of Economics and the NBER for very useful comments. We thank
Mehmet Beceren and Victor Xin for their research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Alexander Dyck, Natalya Volchkova and Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Corporate Governance Role of the Media: Evidence from Russia
Alexander Dyck, Natalya Volchkova and Luigi Zingales
NBER Working Paper No. 12525
September 2006
JEL No. G3, O16
ABSTRACT
We study the effect of media coverage on corporate governance by focusing on Russia in the period
1999-2002. This setting offers us three ideal conditions for such a study: plenty of corporate
governance violations, no alternative mechanisms to address them, and the presence of an investment
fund (the Hermitage) that actively lobbies the international press to shame companies perpetrating
those violations. We find that Hermitage’s lobbying is effective in increasing the coverage of
corporate governance violations in the Anglo-American press. We also find that coverage in the
Anglo-American press increases the probability that a corporate governance violation is reversed.
This effect is present even when we instrument coverage with an exogenous determinant, i.e. the
Hermitage’s portfolio composition at the beginning of the period. The Hermitage’s strategy seems
to work in part by impacting Russian companies’ reputation abroad and in part by forcing regulators
into action.
Alexander Dyck Luigi Zingales
University of Toronto Harvard University
Joseph L. Rotman School of Management Littauer Center
University of Toronto Cambridge, MA 02138
105 St. George Street and NBER
Toronto, Ontario luigi.zingales@gsb.uchicago.edu
CANADA M5S 3E6
adyck@rotman.utoronto.ca
Natalya Volchkova
Nakhimovsky pr., 47, Office 720
117418 Moscow
RUSSIA
nvolchkova@cefir.ru

In recent years, hedge fundshave emerged as some of the most powerful players
in corporate governance worldwide. From the dismissal of Deutsche Boerse’s CEO
Seifert to McDonalds spin-off of major assets in an IPO, hedge funds have played a
crucial role. The Wall Street Journal labeled them the “new leader” on the “list of
bogeymen haunting the corporate boardroom.”1 Among the many tactics hedge funds
managers use, the most prominent one is to focus public attention on an underperforming
company and shame the CEO to either resign or change policy (Kahan and Rock, 2006).
It is hard to tell, however, whether this public relations campaign is just a
smokescreen for more important maneuvers that take place behind the scene or is a
crucial ingredient of their battle. Can hedge funds (or shareholders in general) increase
the level of coverage received by certain news/companies? And if so, does this coverage
have any effect on corporate governance outcomes? These questions are hard to address
using U.S. data. On the one hand, most hedge funds trade in and out of companies very
quickly. So it is hard to disentangle whether they are simply good at recognizing that the
situation is ripe for change or whether they are indeed an actor of change. On the other
hand, hedge funds in the United States (and in most of Europe) have access to an array of
options to address bad corporate governance (from shareholder’s suits to calling an
extraordinary general meeting). So it is hard to tell whether they succeed because of their
public relations campaign or because of the power of their legal rights.
To overcome these problems we study shareholders’ ability to influence coverage
and the impact of this coverage on corporate governance by looking at Russia. Russia
presents a useful laboratory setting for this analysis for several reasons. First, during the
late 1990s, corporate governance violations in Russia were very extreme, very common,
and very visible, providing a wide field of inquiry. Second, in Russia, the standard
mechanisms to readdress these violations were either non-existent or completely
ineffective (for example, courts were easily corruptible), allowing us to identify whether
media have an independent effect on outcomes. Third, and most important, in Russia,
there exists an investment fund (the Hermitage Fund), with extremely low turnover, that
1
Alan Murray “Hedge Funds Are New Sheriffs of Boardroom,” Wall Street Journal, 14 December 2005,
pg A2.
2

consciously played a media strategy after the 1998 Russian crisis. In the words of its
chairman: “Our basic approach is to thoroughly research and understand where the
corporate malfeasance is taking place and then go to great pains to simplify the story so
the average person can understand what is going on.…. We then share the stories with the
press. By doing so, we want to inflict real consequences – business, reputational and
financial” (Dyck, 2002). Since the Hermitage fund spends resources only when it has
money at stake, we can use the Hermitage’s portfolio composition as an instrument for
news coverage. To avoid any possible reverse causality, we use Hermitage portfolio’s
composition at the beginning of the period, before the corporate governance violations
take place.
To identify a sample of potential corporate governance violations we exploit the
fact that a prominent Russian investment bank, Troika Dialog, produced a weekly
publication, between 1998 and 2002, that highlighted all the corporate actions that, in
their view, have the potential to severely impact outside investors’ rights. This definition
of potential violation does not necessarily imply that any Russian law was infringed.2
How to judge, for instance, Tomskneft’s dilutive equity issue in 1999? The issue was
approved by shareholders present at the meeting. But very few were able to be present
because the day of the meeting the company announced that the venue had been
transferred to a new distant location that shareholders couldn’t possibly reach in time to
vote on the proposal.
We refine this list by eliminating repeated events and minor violations (like a delay
in financial reporting). We then study how much coverage each of these violations
received and whether they were stopped or somehow readdressed.
Not surprisingly, we find that the magnitude of the violation (which we proxy by
the potential loss caused by the announced decision) increases the extent it is covered in
the Anglo-American media. We also find that, controlling for the severity of the
violation, companies receiving more coverage in normal periods (and thus more
newsworthy) command more attention. Even controlling for these factors, however, we
2 When discussing governance violations we focus on the distributional impact. It is harder to make any
overall welfare assessment. Even actions that have an extremely negative distributional impact (such as
pure theft) can have a positive efficiency effect, because the consolidation of cash flow rights in one hand
3