NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LOCAL CURRENCY BOND MARKETS
John D. Burger
Francis E. Warnock
Working Paper 12552
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12552
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2006
Burger is Associate Professor at the Sellinger School of Business and Management at Loyola College in
Maryland. Warnock is Associate Professor at the Darden Graduate School of Business at the University of
Virginia. The authors thank Thomas Jans and Denis Petre for invaluable assistance with data and Jillian
Faucette, Sara Holland, and Alex Rothenberg for research assistance. We also thank for helpful comments
an anonymous referee, Morris Goldstein, Bill Helkie, Olivier Jeanne, Steve Kamin, Ross Levine, Ugo
Panizza, Vincent Reinhart, Charles Thomas, Joachim Voth, Jon Wongswan, and seminar participants at
Berkeley Workshop on Global Balances and Asian Financial Markets, CEPR/Gerzensee Conference on
International Capital Flows, Darden Conference on Investing in Emerging Markets, IF Monday Workshop,
IMF Research Seminar, Loyola College, Towson University, Trinity College International Bond and Debt
Market Integration Conference, and University of North Carolina. All errors are our own. John Burger
acknowledges support from the Sellinger School Junior Sabbatical Program. Warnock thanks the Darden
School Foundation for generous support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by John D. Burger and Francis E. Warnock. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Local Currency Bond Markets
John D. Burger and Francis E. Warnock
NBER Working Paper No. 12552
September 2006
JEL No. F30, G15, O16
ABSTRACT
We analyze the development of 49 local bond markets. Our main finding is that policies and laws
matter: Countries with stable inflation rates and strong creditor rights have more developed local
bond markets and rely less on foreign-currency-denominated bonds. The results suggest that
“original sin” is a misnomer. Emerging economies are not inherently dependent upon
foreign-currency debt. Rather, by improving policy performance and strengthening institutions they
may develop local currency bond markets, reduce their currency mismatch, and lessen the likelihood
of future crises.
John D. Burger
Loyola College in Maryland
4501 N. Charles Street
Baltimore MD 21210-2699
jburger@loyola.edu
Francis E. Warnock
Darden Business School
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
and NBER
warnockf@darden.virginia.edu

1. Introduction
The currency crisis literature has recently focused on the importance of developing
local currency bond markets in order to avoid the financial fragility associated with a
currency mismatch. Such a mismatch arises, for example, if a firm’s assets are in the local
currency but it borrows in a foreign currency. Absent a currency mismatch, a negative
shock in, for example, Brazil that caused investors to sell Brazilian assets would naturally
correct itself; the real would plummet and, in the normal course of events, the depreciation
would be expansionary and would improve Brazil’s external balances (as its products
became more competitive and foreign goods became expensive). But if Brazil had
borrowed heavily in foreign-currency-denominated debt—perhaps because it did not have a
local currency bond market—the depreciation would immediately and severely worsen
government and private balance sheets and greatly increase debt repayment burdens. Firms
would in turn reduce investment and push the country into a recession, generating pressure
for further currency depreciation. The link between this downward spiral of a currency
crisis and the initial currency mismatch has been emphasized in the theoretical and empirical
literature (Goldstein and Turner, 2004).1
If underdeveloped local currency markets are linked to financial instability, we
should aim to determine the source of this emerging market affliction. The extant literature
does not provide an unambiguous prescription, as bond market development is at the heart
of a current debate in academic and policy circles. Eichengreen and Hausmann (1999)
describe emerging economies as suffering from “original sin,” defined as a situation in
1 See also Krugman (1999), Jeanne and Zettelmeyer (2002), Schneider and Tornell(2004), and Aghion,
Bacchetta and Banerjee (2004). The literature on currency mismatches, as well as by extension our work, also
has a link to the vast literature on dollarization. For example, Goldstein and Turner (2004) note that a currency
mismatch could ultimately force an emerging economy to dollarize.

which the domestic currency cannot be used to borrow abroad or to borrow long term, even
domestically. The phrase “original sin” itself suggests that emerging markets cannot
overcome this problem on their own. In support of this notion, Eichengreen, Hausmann,
and Panizza (2002), henceforth EHP, find that original sin is exogenous to conditions in
developing countries (such as rule of law and past inflation performance). In contrast, La
Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (henceforth LLSV) (1997) find that debt
markets (bank debt plus nonfinancial bonds) are larger in countries with better rule of law
and creditor rights.
Are policymakers in emerging markets truly blameless for their fallen state, as the
EHP findings suggest, or, as the LLSV results imply, are there ways emerging markets can
improve their financial systems? This question is important in academic circles, as some
papers follow EHP’s lead and assume that original sin is exogenous.2 But it is more than an
academic curiosum. If original sin is exogenous, as EHP suggest, international
organizations may have an important role in the relief effort.3 In contrast, the LLSV results
imply that original sin is endogenous (and a misnomer) and that a supranational solution is
only second best; the first best solution would address the source of the problem.
We weigh in on this debate using data that are more complete than either LLSV or
EHP. Specifically, we present data on the characteristics of bond markets around the world
and analyze factors associated with local currency bond market development. Compiling
data from a number of sources, we first present information on the size and currency
2 For example, Jeanne and Zettelmeyer (2002) start from a situation of original sin and examine solutions that
involve international lending
3 For the particular global solution proposed by EHP, see the November 22, 2002 Financial Times op-ed by
Eichengreen and Hausmann, “How to Eliminate Original Financial Sin.”
2