NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE COST OF BANKING REGULATION
Luigi Guiso
Paola Sapienza
Luigi Zingales
Working Paper 12501
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12501
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2006
We are grateful to the Foundation Banque de France for funding this paper. We thank Marco Pagano and
Fabio Schiantarelli and participants at the Bank of Italy conference "Financial Structure, Product Market
Structure and Economic Performance" and the Lisbon European Banking History conference. Luigi Guiso
thanks the EEC and MURST for financial support, while Luigi Zingales thanks the Center for Security Prices
and the Stigler Center at the University of Chicago for financial support. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Luigi Guiso, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Cost of Banking Regulation
Luigi Guiso, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales
NBER Working Paper No. 12501
August 2006
JEL No. E0, G0
ABSTRACT
We use exogenous variation in the degree of restrictions to bank competition across Italian provinces
to study both the effects of bank regulation and the impact of deregulation. We find that where entry
was more restricted the cost of credit was higher and - contrary to expectations- access to credit
lower. The only benefit of these restrictions was a lower proportion of bad loans. Liberalization
brings a reduction in rates spreads and an increased access to credit at a cost of an increase in bad
loans. In provinces where restrictions to bank competition were most severe, the proportion of bad
loans after deregulation raises above the level present in more competitive markets, suggesting that
the pre-existing conditions severely impact the effect of liberalizations.
Luigi Guiso
Visiting Professor of Economics
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
lguiso@gsb.uchicago.edu
Paola Sapienza
Finance Department
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
paola-sapienza@northwestern.edu
Luigi Zingales
Harvard University
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
luigi.zingales@gsb.uchicago.edu

As Barth, Caprio and Levine (2006) exhaustively document, the banking sector is probably the most
intensely regulated sector throughout the world This is hardly surprising. If we espouse a benign view of
government regulation, there are several rationales that justify a government intervention. But the same is
true if we think government intervention is driven by political and electoral interests, rather than by the
desire to address market inefficiencies. The two views of government interventions obviously differ in their
implications: one predicts a positive effect of government regulation, the second a negative one.
In spite of the opposite predictions, these two views of regulation are hard to disentangle empirically.
According to the benign view of regulation, governments intervene more where markets fail more. Hence,
any attempt to estimate the effects of bank regulation would spuriously attribute a negative effect to bank
regulation unless the pre-existing degree of market failure is controlled for (an almost impossible task). Only
if the extent of regulation was exogenously imposed, we could hope to identify the true effect of regulation.
InthispaperweclaimthattheItalianbankinglawof1936representssuchanaturalexperiment. Introduced
aftermajorbankfailures,the1936lawhadtheobjective ofenhancingbankstabilitythroughsevererestrictions
on competition. While homogeneously imposedthroughoutthecountry, these restrictions haddifferentimpact
in different areas, because they granted a different flexibility to expand to different types of banks. Thus, an
unintendedconsequenceofthelawwasadifferentdegreeofcompetitionacrossItalianprovinces,determinedon
the basis of the conditions pre-existing the 1936 law. We exploit this exogenous variation to assess the impact
that restrictions on competition have on the structure of the banking industry. Since all these regulations
were removed duringthe 1980s, we also exploit this difference in the starting points to assess how differentially
repressed financial systems respond to liberalization.
We first establish that the 1936 banking law curtailed competition in Italian banking industry pre deregu-
lation (i.e., pre 1990s) and differentially so depending on the type of banking institutions present in 1936. In
particular, the interest rate spread (lending minus deposit rate) charged to customers in different provinces (a
measure of monopoly power) is directly related to measures of banking structure in 1936.
Then,weusealocalindicatoroftheinterestratespreadpre-deregulationasameasureoflackofcompetition
and we study the effect of this lack of competition on the functioning of the banking industry and the real
economy. Wefindthatinprovinceswheretherewasmorecompetitiontherewasmoreaccesstocredit(contrary
to whatpredicted by Petersen andRajan, 1995) for both householdsand firms,morefirms, andhigher growth.
Consistent with the goals of the 1936 Banking Law we find that provinces where there was less competition
1

experience a lower percentage of bad loans. Finally, consistent with Jayaratne and Strahan (1996), we find
that competition does not impact the quantity of loans.
Between the late 1980s and early 1990s Italy experienced several banking reforms. Entry was liberalized
(1990), the separation between short and long-term lending was removed (1993), the Savings and Loans legal
structure was transformed into a normal corporation, facilitating acquisition and mergers (1993), and starting
in 1994 all the major State-owned banks were privatized. Hence, we study the effect of deregulation as a
function of the level of competition in the banking sector before deregulation. We find that provinces that had
a less competitive banking sector during the regulation period experience a significant increase in the number
of households who have access to credit. They also experience a reduction in the cost of borrowing, but also
an increase in the percentage of bad loans. The overall effect is that after deregulation the provinces that were
more penalized by the restrictions in competition experience a higher-than-normal aggregate growth rate.
We are not the first to identify the costs of bank regulation. The closest papers to ours are Jayaratne and
Strahan (1996), Dehejia and Lleras-Muney (2003), and Guiso et al. (2004). The first two papers use the cross
sectional variation in banking regulation across U.S. states to assess the impact of financial development on
growth. Themajor difference is that U.S. states arefree to choose their own regulation. Hence, it is difficultto
disentangletheeffect ofregulation fromtheeffects ofthepolitical andeconomic conditionsthatlead regulation
to be enacted or lifted. Such problem does not exist in our sample, since the legislation is homogenous and
we use the cross sectional difference in the tightness of this regulation. As we discuss in the text, this cross
sectional difference in tightness is determined by historical accidents and is unlikely to be correlated with the
phenomena we study. As Guiso et al. (2004), we use the cross sectional variation in regulation across Italian
provinces as an instrument. That paper, however, only focuses on the effect of access to credit on aggregate
growth during the regulation period. By contrast, in this paper we measure the degree of competition across
different local markets and relate it to several characteristics of the banking industry, as well as aggregate
growth, both before and after deregulation. In so doing we are better able to study the cost and benefits of
banking regulation.
Our paper can also be seen as a within country analog of Demirgu¨c¸-Kunt, Laeven, and Levine (2003),
who study the effect of banking regulation on the cost of credit across countries. They find that regulation
increases the cost of credit but this effect disappears once they control for property rights protection, leading
them to conjecture that banking regulation may reflect broader features of a country approach to competition.
2