NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE ECONOMICS OF CONFLICTS OF INTEREST IN FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
Hamid Mehran
Rene M. Stulz
Working Paper 12695
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12695
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2006
Federal Reserve Bank of New York and The Ohio State University, NBER, and ECGI. We are grateful
for comments from Steve Buser, Harry DeAngelo, Luc Laeven, Maureen McNichols, Ross Levine,
Alexander Ljungqvist, Roger Loh, Bill Schwert, Jerome Taillard, Kent Womack, Ayako Yasuda, and
two anonymous referees. We thank Roger Loh for excellent scientific assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2006 by Hamid Mehran and Rene M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Economics of Conflicts of Interest in Financial Institutions
Hamid Mehran and Rene M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 12695
November 2006
JEL No. G14,G21,G24,G28
ABSTRACT
A conflict of interest exists when a party to a transaction could potentially make a gain from taking
actions that are detrimental to the other party in the transaction. This paper examines the economics
of conflicts of interest in financial institutions and reviews the growing empirical literature (mostly
focused on analysts) on the economic implications of these conflicts. Economic analysis shows that,
although conflicts of interest are omnipresent when contracting is costly and parties are imperfectly
informed, there are important factors that mitigate their impact and, strikingly, it is possible for customers
of financial institutions to benefit from the existence of such conflicts. The empirical literature reaches
conclusions that differ across types of conflicts of interest, but overall these conclusions are more ambivalent
and certainly more benign than the conclusions drawn by journalists and politicians from mostly anecdotal
evidence. Though much has been made of conflicts of interest arising from investment banking activities,
there is no consensus in the empirical literature supporting the view that conflicts resulting from these
activities had a systematic adverse impact on customers of financial institutions.
Hamid Mehran
33 Liberty Street
New York, New York 10045
Hamid.Mehran@ny.frb.org
Rene M. Stulz
Fisher College of Business, Ohio State University
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz_1@cob.osu.edu

Since the turn of the century, much attention has been focused on conflicts of interest in the
financial industry. A Google search (July 2006) for “conflict of interest” has more than one
hundred and fifty million hits. The front pages of major newspapers and the evening news
discussed conflicts of interest. Politicians held hearings and made speeches. Lawsuits were filed
by the bushel. Laws and regulations were changed. Books were written. The Financial Times
summarized public sentiment with the headline “Shoot all the analysts”.1 No event symbolizes
this attention better than the Global Settlement reached on April 28, 2003 between the Securities
and Exchange Commission (SEC), the National Association of Security Dealers (NASD), the
New York State attorney, the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), and state regulatory agencies
on the one hand, and ten of the most prominent financial institutions on the other hand.2 The
Global Settlement imposed penalties of more than $1.4 billion on these institutions and required
them to agree to practices presumed to limit the impact of conflicts of interest on securities
research.
For economists, the recent attention paid to conflicts of interest in the financial industry raises
many questions. Do the many mechanisms that control conflicts of interest in market economies
fail to do so? If these mechanisms fail, does it mean that the conflicts have significant
implications for the prices at which securities trade? For the efficiency of capital markets? For the
welfare of customers of financial institutions? Were conflicts worse at the turn of the century than
at other times? If they were, why? Does diversification of activities within financial institutions
make conflicts of interest worse or better? Did attempts to affect the impact of conflicts of interest
through changes in laws and regulations make the customers of financial institutions better off?
Did these changes have unintended consequences that made U.S. capital markets less efficient
and less competitive?
1 Cited in Boni and Womack (2002).
2 Two additional institutions joined the agreement in 2004.
2

In this paper, we define a conflict of interest as a situation where a party to a transaction
could potentially make a direct gain by taking actions that affect the other party adversely. For
example, in the context of sell-side analysts, a conflict of interest would arise if a financial
institution were to obtain a direct advantage, for instance, potential underwriting fees, from
offering biased research about a firm to customers of its analyst services.3 Some authors use a
much narrower definition of conflicts of interest. In particular, some define conflicts of interests
as situations in which a party with a fiduciary duty takes actions that are inconsistent with that
fiduciary duty.4 Such a definition is not useful for economic analysis because it presumes that the
existence of incentives to take actions that are inconsistent with a fiduciary duty automatically
leads the fiduciary to take such actions. This is clearly not the case. Another definition assumes
that conflicts of interest arise if one party is somehow in a position of trust.5 This definition again
seems too limiting. If one party provides a service to another, is it really clear when the provider
is in a position of trust and when she is not?
The existence of a conflict of interest within a financial institution does not mean that, in
equilibrium, the conflict will have an adverse impact on the customers of financial institutions.
Using analysts as an example, the existence of conflicts could lead institutions to provide better
forecasts so that customers benefit. Perhaps more importantly, many mechanisms help control
conflicts of interest and their impact. For instance, a financial institution’s concerns about its
reputation might lead it to control conflicts of interest so that they have no material impact on its
customers. Further, even if conflicts of interest affect the actions of financial institutions, they
may not hurt their customers because these customers can rationally take into account how these
3 Sell-side analysts are analysts who typically work for brokerage firms. Buy-side analysts work for
institutional investors. In this paper, we focus almost exclusively on sell-side analysts. Consequently, we do
not make a distinction between both types of analysts in the rest of the paper and use the term analyst to
designate a sell-side analyst.
4 West’s Encyclopedia of American Law defines conflicts of interest as “A term used to describe the
situation in which a public official or fiduciary who, contrary to the obligation and absolute duty to act for
the benefit of the public or a designated individual, exploits the relationship for personal benefit, typically
pecuniary.”
5 The on-line version of the Merriam-Webster dictionary has the following definition: “a conflict between
the private interests and the official responsibilities of a person in a position of trust”.
3