NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANKRUPTCY AND COLLATERAL IN DEBT CONSTRAINED MARKETS
Timothy J. Kehoe
David K. Levine
Working Paper 12656
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12656
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2006
This paper was prepared for presentation at the Conference in Honor of Axel Leijonhufvud held at
UCLA, 30-31 August 2006. The authors are grateful for financial support from the National Science
Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis or the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Timothy J. Kehoe and David K. Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Bankruptcy and Collateral in Debt Constrained Markets
Timothy J. Kehoe and David K. Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 12656
October 2006
JEL No. D50,D52,D61,G13
ABSTRACT
Typical models of bankruptcy and collateral rely on incomplete asset markets. In fact, bankruptcy
and collateral add contingencies to asset markets. In some models, these contingencies can be used
by consumers to achieve the same equilibrium allocations as in models with complete markets. In
particular, the equilibrium allocation in the debt constrained model of Kehoe and Levine (2001) can
be implemented in a model with bankruptcy and collateral. The equilibrium allocation is constrained
efficient. Bankruptcy occurs when consumers receive low income shocks. The implementation of
the debt constrained allocation in a model with bankruptcy and collateral is fragile in the sense of Leijonhufvud's
"corridor of stability," however: If the environment changes, the equilibrium allocation is no longer
constrained efficient.
Timothy J. Kehoe
University of Minnesota
Department of Economics
271 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
tkehoe@econ.umn.edu
David K. Levine
Washington University
Department of Economics
Campus Box 1208
St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
and NBER
david@dklevine.com

The absence of private information implies that no consumer actually goes bankrupt in
equilibrium: the credit agency will never lend so much to consumers that they will choose
bankruptcy. This is very unlike … incomplete markets bankruptcy models. (Kehoe and Levine
2001)
1. Introduction: “A foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds”1
General equilibrium models of bankruptcy have generally taken the perspective that
bankruptcy is observed in the world, and so general equilibrium models should attempt to
account for it. This point of view is very much in the spirit of the incomplete markets models on
which these models are based. The theoretical literature on equilibria with incomplete markets
and bankruptcy includes Araujo, Páscoa, and Torres-Martínez (2002), Dubey, Geanakoplos, and
Zame (1995), Dubey, Geanakoplos and Shubik (1989), Geanakoplos and Zame (2002), Kubler
and Schmedders, (2003), Orrillo (2002), and Zame (1993). Recently papers by Chatterjee,
Corbae, Nakajima, and Ríos-Rull (2004) and Livshits, MacGee, and Tertilt (2003) have
constructed models with incomplete markets and bankruptcy, calibrated them to data, and used
them to address policy issues. These models only partially address some fundamental questions:
Why should bankruptcy be allowed? What underlying economic fundamentals lead to particular
types of bankruptcy?
The enforcement constraint models of Kehoe and Levine (1993, 2001) and others attempt
to answer the question of why we observe incomplete markets for insurance. The answer given
is that not all profitable transactions can be carried out because some would violate the
individual rationality constraint that under some circumstances it would be better to “run away”
than to pay an existing debt. This links insurance possibilities to economic fundamentals.
This paper is an approach to bankruptcy and collateral based on these enforcement
constraint models. Although, as the authors observed in the quotation above, no consumer
actually runs away in equilibrium, we argue here that “running away” is not the proper
interpretation of bankruptcy. Rather, the Kehoe-Levine enforcement constraint model requires
complete contingent claims, and, in practice, these claims are implemented not through Arrow
securities, but rather through a combination of non-contingent assets and bankruptcy. With this
in mind, we reexamine the example of Kehoe and Levine (2001) and show how the efficient —
1 With the exception of this opening quotation from Ralph Waldo Emerson’s “Self Reliance,” the quotations at the
beginning of sections are all taken from Axel Leijonhufvud’s (1973b) “Life among the Econ.”
1

that is, second best — stationary equilibrium allocation can be implemented in an equilibrium
without contingent claims, but with bankruptcy and collateral.
This reinterpretation brings new economic insight. If the model has consequences for
unanticipated shocks, then the institution of bankruptcy and collateral that may be well suited for
“ordinary” shocks may break down when subject to unusual shocks. This is closely related to
Leijonhufvud’s (1973a) “corridor of stability.” Our perspective, then, is quite different from that
in the incomplete markets literature or that in the work of Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). In those
models, it is hypothesized that bankruptcy and collateral are an inefficient solution to a not
completely well-specified economic problem. Here we view bankruptcy and collateral as an
efficient solution to the problems posed by ordinary transactions. We also recognize that
solutions that may suit ordinary events well, however, may be fragile when exposed to less
ordinary events.
2. A modl “finely carved from the bones of Walras”
We start by summarizing the model of Kehoe and Levine (2001). There are an infinite
number of discrete time periods t =0,1,…. In each period there are two types of consumers,
i =1,2, and a continuum of each type of consumer. At each moment of time, one consumer has
high productivity and one has low productivity. The state η∈{1,2} at time t is the index of the
t
consumer who has high productivity at that time. This random variable follows a Markov
process characterized by a single number 0<π<1, the probability of a reversal, that is, a
transition from the state where type 1 has good productivity to the state where type 2 has good
productivity, or vice versa.
Uncertainty evolves over an uncertainty tree. The root of the tree is determined by the
fixed initial state η. A state history is a finite list s =(η,…,η) of events that have taken place
0 1 t
through time t(s), where t(s) is the length of the vector s, the time at which s occurs. The
history immediately prior to s is denoted s−1, and if the node σ follows s on the uncertainty
tree, we write σ>s. The countable set of all state histories is denoted S. The probability of a
state history is computed from the Markov transition probabilities
π = pr(η |η )pr(η |η )(cid:34)pr(η|η). (1)
s t(s) t(s)−1 t(s)−1 t(s)−2 1 0
2