NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COMPLEX OWNERSHIP STRUCTURES AND CORPORATE VALUATIONS
Luc Laeven
Ross Levine
Working Paper 12675
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12675
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2006
We thank Robert McDonald, an anonymous referee, Mike Burkart, Stijn Claessens, Armando Gomes,
Luc Renneboog, Karl Lins, Ivo Welch, Daniel Wolfenzon, and seminar participants at the University
of Minnesota and Tilburg University for helpful comments. Ying Lin provided expert research assistance.
This research was initiated while Laeven was at the World Bank. This paper's findings, interpretations,
and conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not represent the views of the International
Monetary Fund, the World Bank, their Executive Directors, or the countries they represent. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Luc Laeven and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Complex Ownership Structures and Corporate Valuations
Luc Laeven and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 12675
November 2006
JEL No. G3,G32,G34
ABSTRACT
The bulk of corporate governance theory examines the agency problems that arise from two extreme
ownership structures: 100 percent small shareholders or one large, controlling owner combined with
small shareholders. In this paper, we question the empirical validity of this dichotomy. In fact, one-third
of publicly listed firms in Europe have multiple large owners, and the market value of firms with multiple
blockholders differs from firms with a single large owner and from widely-held firms. Moreover, the
relationship between corporate valuations and the distribution of cash-flow rights across multiple large
owners is consistent with the predictions of recent theoretical models.
Luc Laeven
Senior Economist
International Monetary Fund and CEPR
700 19th Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20431
Llaeven@imf.org
Ross Levine
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
ross_levine@brown.edu

The bulk of corporate governance theory examines the agency problems that arise from two
extreme ownership structures: (1) 100 percent small shareholders or (2) one large, controlling
owner combined with many small shareholders (see Shleifer and Vishny (1997) for a review). In the
first case, each small shareholder lacks the incentives or contractual mechanisms to align the
interests of managers with those of shareholders. Consequently, managers may exert substantial
discretion over firm decisions and divert corporate resources for private gain (Jensen and Meckling,
1976; Grossman and Hart, 1980). At the other extreme, the large shareholder either directly
manages the firm or internalizes the benefits from monitoring managers, which aligns managerial
interests with those of the large shareholder. This, however, creates a different agency problem. The
controlling owner may expropriate private benefits at the expense of other shareholders (e.g.,
Shleifer and Vishny, 1986; Stulz, 1988; and Burkart et al., 1997, 1998).
In this paper, we question the empirical validity of this dichotomy and assess theories of
more complex ownership structures involving multiple large owners. We first compute the
prevalence of complex ownership structures in a sample of 1,657 publicly traded firms in Europe.
We then examine whether investors value firms with multiple blockholders differently from widely-
held firms or those with a single large owner. Finally, we evaluate the predictions from theoretical
models regarding the valuation of firms with multiple blockholders.
In particular, a handful of theoretical models investigate the association between corporate
valuations and the distribution of cash-flow rights across large owners. In Bennedsen and
Wolfenzon (2000) large owners compete to form controlling coalitions because there are private
benefits from control. If the winning coalition has small cash-flow rights, then expropriation of
corporate resources involves only a small reduction in the controlling coalition’s cash-flows (Jensen
and Meckling, 1976; Shleifer and Wolfenzon, 2002). Thus, controlling coalitions with small cash-
1

flow rights have the incentives (small cash-flow rights) and ability (sufficient voting rights) to
divert corporate resources for private gain. The model further demonstrates that when cash-flow
rights are distributed unevenly across shareholders, this increases the likelihood of a winning
coalition with small cash-flow rights. Therefore, the model predicts a negative relationship between
the dispersion of cash-flow rights across large shareholders and corporate valuations.1 Rather than
focusing on coalition formation, Pagano and Roell (1998) specify conditions under which multiple
large shareholders cross-monitor each other, reducing expropriation and boosting valuations. Bloch
and Hege (2001) further show that enhanced monitoring is less likely when ownership is unevenly
distributed, which again implies a negative relationship between cash-flow rights dispersion and
valuations.
To assess the relationship between ownership structure and corporate valuations, we
compile data on voting and cash-flow rights for a cross-section of firms in Western Europe.
Following La Porta et al. (2002), a large owner is a legal entity that directly or indirectly controls at
least 10% of the voting rights. For each large owner, we also compute the cash-flow rights, which
may differ substantively from control rights when there are indirect chains of control. Large owners
frequently structure their shareholding so that they have large control rights, but comparatively
small cash-flow rights. We find the type of each large owner, i.e., whether each large owner is a
family, a widely-held financial institution, a widely-held corporation, or the state. This allows us to
test whether the formation and operation of coalitions depends on the types of large shareholders.
1 Zwiebel (1995) presents a model in which the dispersion of ownership across large shareholders is negatively
associated with the number of blockholders sharing the benefits of control. Gomes and Novaes (2001) study the ex-post
bargaining among large shareholders and how this affects small shareholders. Winton (1993) emphasizes the free-rider
problem in monitoring with multiple blockholders.
2