NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE ECONOMICS OF EARNINGS MANIPULATION AND MANAGERIAL COMPENSATION
Keith J. Crocker
Joel Slemrod
Working Paper 12645
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12645
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2006
The authors gratefully acknowledge the helpful suggestions provided on earlier drafts by Thomas Gresik,
Arthur Snow, and seminar audiences at the Pennsylvania State University, the University of Georgia,
and the University of Notre Dame. A particular debt of gratitude is owed to an anonymous referee,
whose thoughtful advice and constructive criticism has greatly improved the quality of the final product.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Keith J. Crocker and Joel Slemrod. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Economics of Earnings Manipulation and Managerial Compensation
Keith J. Crocker and Joel Slemrod
NBER Working Paper No. 12645
October 2006
JEL No. A12
ABSTRACT
This paper examines managerial compensation in an environment where managers may take a hidden
action that affects the actual earnings of the firm. When realized, these earnings constitute hidden
information that is privately observed by the manager, who may expend resources to generate an inflated
earnings report. We characterize the optimal managerial compensation contract in this setting, and
demonstrate that contracts contingent on reported earnings cannot provide managers with the incentive
both to maximize profits, and to report those profits honestly. As a result, some degree of earnings
management must be tolerated as a necessary part of an efficient agreement.
Keith J. Crocker
Pennsylvania State University
SMEAL College of Business
Department of Insurance and Real Estate
333 Business Building
University Park, PA 16802
kcrocker@psu.edu
Joel Slemrod
University of Michigan Business School
Wyly Hall, Room 7719
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
jslemrod@umich.edu

“In [a] case against…four Qwest executives, the government
contends they rushed $34 million in revenue…on their books in
2001….Prosecutors say they did it in knowing violation of
accounting standards so they could meet quarterly targets that
they believed were essential to their bonuses and careers.”
Wall Street Journal (Young, 2004, p. C1)
1
1. Introduction
The explosive growth of performance-based executive compensation was a notable characteristic
of the late 20th century economic scene, and was for the most part applauded by economists as a way to
align the incentives of managers with the interest of the shareholders. The accounting scandals of the
early 21st century highlighted a darker side of performance-based compensation plans: they provided
managers with the incentive to misrepresent the company’s true performance. In a special report on
corporate governance, Business Week referred to this phenomenon as an example of the “law of
unintended consequences:” performance-based compensation, often received in the form of stock options
or direct stock grants, was designed to remedy the problem of widely dispersed ownership, but ended up
exacerbating it, leading to “borderline accounting and in some cases, outright fraud” (Byrne, 2002).
These scandals have caused a reconsideration of corporate governance and the role of enforcement
agencies such as the Securities and Exchange Commission, eventually leading to the Sarbanes-Oxley bill
of 2002, which is arguably the single most important piece of legislation affecting corporate governance,
financial disclosure and the practice of public accounting since the U.S. securities laws of the early 1930s.
The economics and finance literatures have developed elegant theoretical models that analyze the
optimal contract between the shareholders and the manager of a firm. In the traditional framework, as
developed in the seminal paper of Holmstrom (1979), the underlying problem is that the shareholder
(principal) cannot observe, and therefore cannot contract upon, actions taken by the manager (agent) that
1

affect profitability even though the consequences of these actions ultimately affect the shareholders’
returns. The action, which provides disutility for the agent, together with a random state of nature
determines the observable profit of the firm. The issue in contract design is to provide the agent with the
incentive to take the (privately costly) action. A risk-neutral principal could, of course, eliminate the
incentive problem by making the agent the residual claimant of the profit, but the agent is risk-averse and
so shifting the risk to her entails an efficiency cost. The optimal contract, therefore, reflects a trade-off
between the incentive benefit of conditioning the agent’s compensation on the observed level of profit
and the cost of inefficiently allocating the risk to the risk-averse party.
As the recent accounting scandals make clear, however, this standard model ignores a critical
feature of the relationship between the principal and agent: the agent may also possess private information
about the true profit of the firm and may, by incurring some cost, falsify that information in his report to
the principal. Recent experiences suggest that an optimal contract between the principal and the agent
should be designed not only to provide the agent with an incentive to take actions that enhance the actual
profitability of the firm, but also to minimize the agent’s incentive to falsify earnings reports.
There is empirical evidence linking the character of executive compensation with earnings
manipulation and fraud. With regard to earnings manipulation, Ke (2001) finds that firms whose CEOs
have relatively high amounts of equity incentives, in the form of unrestricted stock and immediately
exercisable options, are more likely to engage in earnings management by reporting small earnings
increases more than small earnings decreases, and also by reporting long strings of increasing earnings.
Gao and Shrieves (2002) find that earnings management intensity, as measured by the absolute value of
discretionary accruals, is increasing in the amount of options and bonuses and decreasing in salaries.
Cheng and Warfield (2005) find an association between the extent of stock-based compensation and the
magnitude of abnormal accruals. They also find a lower earnings coefficient in a regression equation
explaining earnings for firms that use higher stock-based compensation, suggesting that earnings are less
informative in these settings.
2