NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A SEARCH-BASED THEORY OF THE ON-THE-RUN PHENOMENON
Dimitri Vayanos
Pierre-Olivier Weill
Working Paper 12670
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12670
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2006
We thank Tobias Adrian, Yakov Amihud, Hal Cole, Darrell Duffie, Bernard Dumas, Humberto Ennis,
Mike Fleming, Nicolae Garleanu, Ed Green, Joel Hasbrouck, Terry Hendershott, Jeremy Graveline,
Narayana Kocherlakota, Anna Pavlova, Lasse Pedersen, Matt Richardson, Bill Silber, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh,
Neil Wallace, Robert Whitelaw, Randy Wright, seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, LSE, McGill, New Orleans, NY Fed, NYU, Oxford,
UCLA Anderson, UCLA Economics, USC, Penn State, and participants at the American Finance Association
2005, Caesarea Center Annual Conference 2005, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Summer Workshops
in Money, Banking and Payments 2005, NBER Asset Pricing 2005, and Society for Economic Dynamics
2005 conferences for helpful comments. We are especially grateful to Mark Fisher, Kenneth Garbade,
Tain Hsia-Schneider, and Frank Keane for discussions that greatly enhanced our understanding of
the subject. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Dimitri Vayanos and Pierre-Olivier Weill. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

A Search-Based Theory of the On-the-Run Phenomenon
Dimitri Vayanos and Pierre-Olivier Weill
NBER Working Paper No. 12670
November 2006
JEL No. D8,G1
ABSTRACT
We propose a model in which assets with identical cash flows can trade at different prices. Infinitely-lived
agents can establish long positions in a search spot market, or short positions by first borrowing an
asset in a search repo market. We show that short-sellers can endogenously concentrate in one asset
because of search externalities and the constraint that they must deliver the asset they borrowed. That
asset enjoys greater liquidity, measured by search times, and a higher lending fee ("specialness"). Liquidity
and specialness translate into price premia that are consistent with no-arbitrage. We derive closed-form
solutions for small frictions, and can generate price differentials in line with observed on-the-run premia.
Dimitri Vayanos
Department of Accounting and Finance
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A, 2AE
UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER
d.vayanos@lse.ac.uk
Pierre-Olivier Weill
UC, Los Angeles
Department of Economics
Bunche Hall 8283, Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095
poweill@econ.ucla.edu

1 Introduction
In fixed-income markets some bonds trade at lower yields than others with almost identical cash
flows. In the US, for example, just-issued (“on-the-run”) Treasury bonds trade at lower yields than
previously issued (“off-the-run”) bonds maturing on nearby dates. Warga (1992) reports that an
on-the-run portfolio returns on average 55bp below an off-the-run portfolio with matched duration.
Similar phenomena exist in other countries. In Japan, for example, one “benchmark” government
bond trades at a yield of 60bp below other bonds with comparable characteristics.1
How can the yields of bonds with almost identical cash flows differ by more than 50bp? Fi-
nancial economists have suggested two apparently distinct hypotheses. First, on-the-run bonds
are more valuable because they are significantly more liquid than their off-the-run counterparts.
Second, on-the-run bonds constitute better collateral for borrowing money in the repo market.
Namely, loans collateralized by on-the-run bonds offer lower interest rates than their off-the-run
counterparts, a phenomenon referred to as “specialness.”2 These hypotheses, however, can provide
only a partial explanation of the on-the-run phenomenon: one must still explain why assets with
almost identical cash flows can differ in liquidity and specialness.
In this paper we propose a theory of the on-the-run phenomenon. We argue that liquidity and
specialness are not independent explanations of this phenomenon, but can be explained simultane-
ously by short-selling activity. We determine liquidity and specialness endogenously, explain why
they can differ across otherwise identical assets, and study their effect on prices. A calibration of
our model for plausible parameter values can generate effects of the observed magnitude.
We consider an infinite-horizon steady-state economy with two assets paying identical cash
flows. There is a continuum of agents experiencing transitory needs to hold long or short positions.
An agent needing to be long buys an asset, and sells it later when the need disappears. Conversely,
anagentneedingtobeshortborrowsanasset, sellsit, andwhentheneeddisappearsbuystheasset
backand deliversitto the lender. Trade involvestwo markets: aspot marketto buy and sell, and a
repo market where short-sellers can borrow assets. We assume that both markets operate through
search, and model them as in the standard framework (e.g., Diamond (1982)) where agents are
1For US evidence, see also Amihud and Mendelson (1991), Krishnamurthy (2002), Goldreich, Hanke, and Nath
(2002), and Strebulaev (2002). For Japan, see Mason (1987), Boudoukh and Whitelaw (1991), and Boudoukh and
Whitelaw (1993).
2On liquidity, Sundaresan (2002) reports that trading volume of on-the-run bonds is about ten times larger than
that of off-the-run bonds, and Fleming (2002) reports that bid-ask spreads of off-the-run bills are about five times
larger than when these bills are on-the-run. Specialness is measured by comparing a bond’s repo rate, which is the
interestrateonaloancollateralizedbythebond,tothegeneralcollateralrate,whichisthehighestquotedreporate.
Duffie(1996)reportsanaveragespecialnessof66bpforon-the-runbondsand26bpfortheiroff-the-runcounterparts.
1

matched randomly over time in pairs and bargain over the terms of trade. This captures the over-
the-counter structure of government-bond markets: transactions between dealers and customers
are negotiated bilaterally over the phone, and dealers often negotiate bilaterally in the inter-dealer
market.3 Of course, the search framework is a stylized representation of government-bond markets
- but so is the Walrasian auction which assumes multilateral trading. As long as search times are
short, as is the case in our calibration, it is not obvious which model describes the markets better.
Our model has an asymmetric equilibrium in which assets trade at different prices despite the
identical cash flows. The intuition is as follows. Suppose that all short-sellers prefer to borrow
a specific asset. Because they initially sell and eventually buy the asset back, they increase the
asset’s trading volume in the spot market. This increases the asset’s liquidity by reducing search
frictions: with more volume, buyers and sellers become easier to locate. What makes short-sellers’
concentration self-fulfilling is the constraint that they must deliver the same asset they borrowed.
Thisconstraintimpliesthatashort-sellerfindsitoptimaltoborrowtheassetthatiseasiertolocate,
which is precisely the asset that other short-sellers are borrowing.4 The asset in which short-sellers
concentrate trades at a premium for two reasons. Since it has a larger pool of buyers, it is easier to
sell, and thus carries a liquidity premium. It also carries a specialness premium because its owners
can lend it to short-sellers for a fee.
Our mechanism relies critically on short-sellers: we show that in their absence, assets trade
at the same price. One could conjecture that even without short-sellers, asymmetric liquidity can
arise in a self-fulfilling manner: one asset is harder to sell because its lack of liquidity drives buyers
away. What rules out such asymmetries is that the difficulty to sell hurts sellers more than buyers
because for buyers it becomes relevant only later in time when they turn into sellers. Thus, sellers
of a less liquid asset are willing to lower the price enough to compensate buyers. But then buyers
buy both assets, implying that both are equally easy to sell and trade at the same price.
Short-sellers can introduce asymmetries because, unlike longs, they are constrained to buy
a specific asset - the one they borrowed. The mere presence of short-sellers, however, does not
guarantee asymmetries because they could borrow both assets equally. Asymmetries are possible
3Inthe US,inter-dealer tradingis conductedthroughbrokers. Some brokersoperate automated trading systems,
structured as electronic limit-order books. Other brokers, however, operate voice-based systems in which orders are
negotiatedoverthephone. Barclay,Hendershott,andKotz(2006)reportthatautomatedsystemsaccountforabout
85% of trading volume for on-the-run bonds, but the situation is reversed for off-the-run bonds. To explain this
phenomenon, they propose a search-based model.
4The delivery constraint is standard in repo markets: lenders insist on receiving back the same asset they lent
because of considerations of book-keeping, capital-gains taxes, etc. The prevalence of the delivery constraint is
illustratedbytheincidenceofshort-squeezes,wherebyshort-sellershavedifficultydeliveringtheassettheyborrowed
and the asset’s specialness in the repo market increases dramatically. For a description of short-squeezes see, for
example, Dupont and Sack (1999).
2