NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EUROPEAN PHARMACEUTICAL PRICE REGULATION, FIRM PROFITABILITY,
AND R&D SPENDING
Joseph H. Golec
John A. Vernon
Working Paper 12676
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12676
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2006
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Joseph H. Golec and John A. Vernon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

European Pharmaceutical Price Regulation, Firm Profitability, and R&D Spending
Joseph H. Golec and John A. Vernon
NBER Working Paper No. 12676
November 2006
JEL No. I11,I18,K2,O34
ABSTRACT
EU countries closely regulate pharmaceutical prices whereas the U.S. does not. This paper shows how
price constraints affect the profitability, stock returns, and R&D spending of EU and U.S. firms. Compared
to EU firms, U.S. firms are more profitable, earn higher stock returns, and spend more on research
and development (R&D). Some differences have increased over time. In 1986, EU pharmaceutical
R&D exceeded U.S. R&D by about 24 percent, but by 2004, EU R&D trailed U.S. R&D by about
15 percent. During these 19 years, U.S. R&D spending grew at a real annual compound rate of 8.8
percent, while EU R&D spending grew at a real 5.4 percent rate. Results show that EU consumers
enjoyed much lower pharmaceutical price inflation, however, at a cost of 46 fewer new medicines
introduced by EU firms and 1680 fewer EU research jobs.
Joseph H. Golec
Department of Finance
2100 Hillside Road
Storrs, CT 06269
Joseph.Golec@business.uconn.edu
John A. Vernon
University of Connecticut
Department of Finance
2100 Hillside Road
Storrs, CT 06269
and NBER
jvernon@business.uconn.edu

1. Introduction
European Union (EU) countries closely regulate pharmaceutical prices in various
ways, while the United States (U.S.) does not. EU consumers clearly benefit because they
often pay lower prices than U.S. consumers for the same medicines. But few government
agencies or academic studies examine the less apparent costs of price regulation. One
exception is Campa and Hernando (2004), who show that EU mergers of regulated firms
produce significantly less value than mergers of unregulated firms. The EU also regulates
the conditions for acceptable mergers and acquisitions. Aktas, de Bondt, Levasseur, and
Schmitt (2001) and Aktas, de Bondt, and Roll (2004) show that these conditions
negatively affect the firms involved.
Our paper studies how EU pharmaceutical price regulation affects EU firms
compared to U.S. firms, and the indirect costs to the EU. Although many pharmaceuticals
are sold worldwide, EU (U.S.) firms typically sell proportionately more in the EU (U.S.)
(see Vernon, 2005). The direct consequence of EU price regulation is that firms selling
more in the EU could be less profitable. An indirect consequence could be reduced
research and development (R&D) spending, fewer research jobs, and fewer new
medicines introduced by EU firms.
The first part of this paper illustrates the average effects of EU price regulation on
EU firms compared to U.S. firms. We show that EU pharmaceutical firms are less
profitable, spend less on R&D, and earn smaller stock returns than U.S. firms. The EU
firms’ relatively poor profitability and stock returns are consistent with Doukas and
Switzer (1992), who show that profitability and stock prices are positively associated
with R&D spending. Reduced EU R&D spending and lower stock returns are costs borne
3

by EU citizens because they imply fewer well-paid research jobs and lower wealth for
EU stockholders.
The strength of this analysis is that it illustrates the costs and potential policy
implications of EU price regulation. Although policymakers may care little about
pharmaceutical stockholders’ low returns, they may be interested in the negative effects
that lower EU R&D spending has on high-tech employment and innovation. One
weakness of this analysis is that it compares average or aggregate figures for EU and U.S.
firms. This obscures some of the effects of EU price regulations. For example, some U.S.
(EU) firms could actually be more (less) affected by EU price regulations because they
happen to sell more (less) in the EU than in the U.S. Indeed, all firms selling
pharmaceuticals in the EU are somewhat affected by EU price regulation.
The second part of the paper examines the general effects that EU regulation has
on pharmaceutical R&D spending by U.S. or EU firms. This issue could be studied easily
if most firms reported sales and R&D spending by geographic area. Unfortunately,
relatively few firms publicly report sales by geographic area, and almost none report
R&D expenses by geographic area. Our alternative approach relates each firm’s
standardized sales to pharmaceutical price indexes. These indexes capture the level of
price regulation in each geographic area over time. The relations between a firm’s sales
and these indexes capture the relative sensitivity of its sales to changes in the indexes.
Firm sensitivities are then cross-sectionally related to their average R&D spending. Firms
with greater sales sensitivity to the EU (U.S.) price index are expected to spend less
(more) on R&D.
4