NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REVEALING THE SECRETS OF THE TEMPLE:
THE VALUE OF PUBLISHING CENTRAL BANK INTEREST RATE PROJECTIONS
Glenn D. Rudebusch
John C. Williams
Working Paper 12638
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12638
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2006
For helpful comments, we thank Lars Svensson, Marvin Goodfriend, Oistein Roisland, and colleagues
throughout the Federal Reserve System. Vuong Nguyen provided excellent research assistance. The
views expressed in this paper are our own and not necessarily those of others at the Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Glenn D. Rudebusch and John C. Williams. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Revealing the Secrets of the Temple: The Value of Publishing Central Bank Interest Rate
Projections
Glenn D. Rudebusch and John C. Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 12638
October 2006
JEL No. E43,E52
ABSTRACT
The modern view of monetary policy stresses its role in shaping the entire yield curve of interest rates
in order to achieve various macroeconomic objectives. A crucial element of this process involves guiding
financial market expectations of future central bank actions. Recently, a few central banks have started
to explicitly signal their future policy intentions to the public, and two of these banks have even begun
publishing their internal interest rate projections. We examine the macroeconomic effects of direct
revelation of a central bank's expectations about the future path of the policy rate. We show that, in
an economy where private agents have imperfect information about the determination of monetary
policy, central bank communication of interest rate projections can help shape financial market expectations
and may improve macroeconomic performance.
Glenn D. Rudebusch
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Economic Research, MS 1130
101 Market Street
San Francisco, CA 94105-9967
glenn.rudebusch@sf.frb.org
John C. Williams
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Research Department
MS 1130
101 Market St.
San Francisco, CA 94105
john.c.williams@sf.frb.org

1. Introduction
The modern approach to monetary policy stresses the importance of guiding and influencing
the public’s expectations about future central bank actions. In this forward-looking view of
monetary policy, the current setting of the policy interest rate, which is an overnight or very
short-term rate, is on its own of little importance for private agents’ decisions about consump-
tion, investment, labor supply, and price setting. Instead, those decisions are more importantly
driven by expectations of future short rates, especially as embodied in longer-term interest rates
and other asset prices (along with the appropriate adjustments for risk). That is, the current
policy rate is most relevant to the extent it conveys information about future policy settings
and influences longer-maturity interest rates. Accordingly, at its core, monetary policy can be
considereda process of shapingthe entire yieldcurve of interest rates inorder to achieve various
macroeconomic objectives.
The crucial role that private sector interest rate expectations play in macroeconomic stabi-
lization naturally raises the question: How can central banks best guide private expectations of
future monetary policy actions? In the past, central bankers typically assumed that the accu-
mulated record of their past policy actions was the best means of such communication. In this
view, actions spoke louder than words, and private agents, by examining past policy behavior,
coulduncoverasystematicpolicypatternorrulethatwouldbeusefulinpredictingfuturepolicy
actions. Recently, however, there is a new appreciation of the value of good communication as
an accompaniment to good policy actions, and as a result, some central banks have started to
place more importance on signaling their intentions for future policy. In practice, much of this
central bank signaling of future policy intentions is implicit or indirect–essentially, a process
of suggesting the future policy path by revealing information other than the future policy path.
Forexample, someinflation-targetingcentralbanksprovidedescriptionsoftheirmacroeconomic
models and objectives as well as their current assessments of the state of the economy, but it
is left to the public to infer the future policy path that is consistent with this information. A
common such communication strategy is to publish an economic projection that is based on the
assumption that the policy interest rate will not change in the future from its current setting.
Private agents must then compare this constant-interest-rate projection to the announced eco-
nomic objectives in order to back out the actual expected policy rate path. For example, if,
at some future date, the published constant-interest-rate inflation projection is higher (lower)
1

than the inflation target, then, in general, private agents should infer that the policy rate is
likely to increase (decrease). This implicit signaling procedure has been criticized for supplying
a circuitous, vague, and potentially confusing expression of the central bank’s actual views of
1
the likely path of policy. Despite these criticisms, a published constant-interest-rate economic
projection remains a key component of many central bank communication strategies.
Implicit signaling remains widespread among central banks because nearly all of them are
extremely reluctant to directly reveal their views on likely future policy actions. Indeed, one
of the strongest central banking taboos is the prohibition against talking publicly about future
interest rates (Faust and Leeper 2005). This taboo largely arises from the belief that financial
markets would tend to interpret any central bank statements about the likely future path of
policyascommitments tofutureaction, as opposedtoprojectionsbasedonexistinginformation
and subject to considerable change. Thus, many central banks will at best only give indirect
hints or use coded language about policy inclinations in order to retain a plausible deniability
in case markets are disappointed as the future unfolds.
Although the expected future path of the policy rate remains a closely guarded secret at
most central banks, a few have recently provided some direct signals to the public about their
policy intentions. Notably, in 2003, the U.S. Federal Reserve, or more specifically the Federal
Open Market Committee (FOMC), started to issue statements commenting on the future path
of its policy rate. These verbal forward-looking policy inclinations, including, for example, the
famous phrase, “policyaccommodationcan be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured,”
have been considered in central banking circles unusually explicit statements about the future
path of policy, even though the phrasing is far from unambiguous. A much bolder step than
the FOMC’s direct verbal signaling has been taken by the central banks of New Zealand and
Norway (the RBNZ and the Norges Bank, respectively), which now publish numerical forecasts
of the future path of the policy interest rate. These public quantitative policy rate projections
represent a dramatic change from the past communication practices of central banks. However,
while direct signaling of policy inclinations–whether verbal or quantitative–has been more
prevalent in recent years, its future use remains quite contentious and uncertain. Indeed, as a
practical matter, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis President William Poole (2005a) has stated
that “the most important communications issue facing the FOMC currently is whether and how
1 For discussion and critiques of this communication strategy, see Rudebusch and Svensson (1999), Goodhart
(2001), Leitemo (2003), Svensson (2005b), Faust and Leeper (2005), and Woodford (2005).
2