NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHAT DO INDEPENDENT DIRECTORS KNOW? EVIDENCE FROM THEIR TRADING
Enrichetta Ravina
Paola Sapienza
Working Paper 12765
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12765
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006
We would like to thank Yakov Amihud, Patrick Bolton, Menachem Brenner, Eliezer Fich, Ilan Guedj,
Kose John, Patricia Ledesma, Debbie Lucas, Randall Morck, Holger Mueller, Bernt Odegaard, Matthew
Richardson, Ioanid Rosu, Carola Schenone, Geoffrey Tate, Michael Weisbach, David Yermack, seminar
participants at Columbia University, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Georgetown University,
New York University, Northwestern University, and participants at the 2006 WFA Annual Meeting,
the 2006 North American Summer Meeting of the Econometric Society, the 2006 SED Annual Meeting,
and the Olin Washington University 3rd Annual Conference on Corporate Finance for their comments.
We also thank Eliezer Fich for sharing his board size data with us. All remaining errors are our own.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Enrichetta Ravina and Paola Sapienza. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

What Do Independent Directors Know? Evidence from Their Trading
Enrichetta Ravina and Paola Sapienza
NBER Working Paper No. 12765
December 2006
JEL No. G34,G38
ABSTRACT
We compare the trading performance of independent directors and other officers of the firm. We find
that independent directors earn positive and substantial abnormal returns when they purchase their
company stock, and that the difference with the same firm's officers is relatively small at most horizons.
The results are robust to controlling for firm fixed effects and to using a variety of alternative specifications.
Executive officers and independent directors make higher returns in firms with weaker governance
and the gap between these two groups widens in such firms. Independent directors who sit in audit
committees earn higher return than other independent directors at the same firm. Finally, independent
directors earn significantly higher returns than the market when they sell the company stock in a window
before bad news and around a restatement announcement.
Enrichetta Ravina
New York University Stern School of Business
Department of Finance
44 West Fourth Street
New York, NY, 10012
eravina@stern.nyu.edu
Paola Sapienza
Finance Department
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
paola-sapienza@northwestern.edu

I Introduction
After recent scandals, policymakers around the world have responded by creating codes to improve
ethical standards in business (e.g. Sarbanes-OxleyAct in the U.S., and the Cadbury Report and the
Smith Report in the U.K.). A common theme in these guidelines is the independence of boards of
directors that overseecorporate managers. For example, in 2002,the New York Stock Exchangeand
NASDAQ submitted proposals that required that boards had a majority of independent directors
withnomaterialrelationshipswiththecompany. Anindependentdirectorisdefinedassomeonewho
has never worked at the company, any of its subsidiaries or consultants, is not related to any of the
key employees, and does not/did not work for a major supplier or customer.1
The rationalefor this policy recommendationis that boardmembers with close business relation-
ships with the company or personal ties with high-ranking officers may not assess its performance
and practices dispassionately, or may have vested interests in some businesses practices.
Somecriticizetheemphasisonindependentboardmembers,basedontheclaimthatwhiletheyare
independent in their scrutiny they have much less information than insiders. If the firm’s executives
wanttoactagainsttheinterestoftheshareholders,theycansimplyleaveoutsidersinthedark. Thus,
since they have very limited information, their monitoring could be extremely ineffective.2
In this paper, we take a first look at the question of whether independent directors have enough
informationtomonitorthecompany’sexecutivesbyanalyzingtheirtradingbehaviorinthecompany’s
stock. We measure indirectly the level of inside information independent directors collect while
servingonthe boardby comparingthe market-adjustedreturns associatedwith their trades to those
associated with the executive officers’ trades.
Usingacomprehensivesampleofreportedexecutives’anddirectors’transactionsinU.S.companies
from 1986-2003, we find that executive officers earn higher abnormal returns than the market, and
that so do independent directors when they make open market purchases.
We find that the difference between the returns earned by firm’s executives and independent
directors is relatively small at most of the horizons analyzed. The results are robust to the inclusion
of firm fixed effects in the regression, which allows to compare company officers and independent
directors within the same firm, and to control for time invariant firm-specific characteristics that
might affect returns, as well as individuals’ incentives and constraints. These results are robust to
using a variety of alternative specifications (e.g. controlling for the size of the transaction and stock
1Indeed, inrecent years,the percentage of independent directorsinthe boardhas increaseddramatically. Spencer
StuartcollecteddataforboardsofS&P500corporationsin2006andfoundthat81%ofdirectorsareindependent. On
190boards(39%)today,theCEOistheonlyinsider,compared with127boards(27%)in2001.
2Forexample,WarrenBuffethasoftenarguedthat“independent”non-executivedirectorsareoftenkeptinthedark
byexecutive counterparts.
1

holdings in the firm, firm’s size and book to market, and past return volatility).
Wealsostudywhetherperformanceofexecutiveofficersandindependentdirectorsdifferdepending
on the governance index of the firm using the classification of Gompers et al. (2003). We find that
the performance of executives and independent directors are similar for firms with good governance,
while independent directorsperformworsethan executives inthe firms with the weakestgovernance.
This result is consistent with the view that in better governed firms the independent directors are
more informed.
We find that independent directors benefit from sitting on the audit committee, and earn an
additional return of 3.21% at the longest horizon. We also find that independent directors earn
higher returns from open market purchases if they belong to bigger boards, possibly because more
independent directors serve on such boards.
Overall these results suggest that independent directors are informed about the firm, at least in
good times. Not only independent directors earn significant higher returns than the market when
buying their company stock, but also open market purchases by independent directors are pervasive
acrossfirmsandveryfrequent: independentdirectorsonaveragemakeasmanyopenmarketpurchases
as the officers of the firm.
To study whether independent directors are also informed in bad times, we also analyze their
trading performance when they make open marketsales. Sales are problematic because they may be
driven by diversification motives, or by the need to rebalance the portfolio after a grant, rather than
by information. In fact, consistent with the insider trading literature, we find that both independent
directorsandofficersdo notearnhigher returnsthan the marketwhenthey makeopen marketsales.
To overcomethis problem,we focus onthe returnfrom salesof company’sstock in two situations
whentradingismorelikelytobedrivenbyinformationratherthandiversificationmotives. Westudy
the trading performance of independent directors and executives from selling the stock around bad
news - events in which the firm is experiencing a substantial market-adjusted drop in stock price -
and around earning restatements. We find that, in both cases, independent directors and executives
overperform the market when selling the companies’ stocks. These results are consistent with the
hypothesis that independent directors are informed ahead of the market in critical situations.
Besides to the literature on insider trading (Jaffe, 1975; Seyhun, 1986, 1992, 1998; Rozeff and
Zaman, 1988; Jeng, Metrick and Zeckhauser, 2003), our paper is related to the literature that study
the relationshipbetween companies’financialand economic performance and the proportionof inde-
pendentdirectorsintheboard. Thisliteraturehasfoundnosolidevidencethatindependentdirectors
improvefirms’performance. Hermalinand Weisbach(1991,1998),Mehran(1995),Klein(1998),and
Bhagat and Black (2001) all report insignificant relationships between accounting performance mea-
2