NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HEALTH INSURANCE AND EX ANTE MORAL HAZARD:
EVIDENCE FROM MEDICARE
Dhaval Dave
Robert Kaestner
Working Paper 12764
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12764
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006
The authors thank Karen Conway, Lorens Helmchen, Donald Kenkel, KerryAnne McGeary, Mark
Pauly, and two anonymous referees, and seminar participants at the University of Illinois at Chicago,
University of Chicago, Lafayette College, University of New Hampshire, and NBER for helpful suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Dhaval Dave and Robert Kaestner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Health Insurance and Ex Ante Moral Hazard: Evidence from Medicare
Dhaval Dave and Robert Kaestner
NBER Working Paper No. 12764
December 2006, Revised November 2009
JEL No. I12,I18
ABSTRACT
Basic economic theory suggests that health insurance coverage may cause a reduction in prevention
activities, but empirical studies have yet to provide much evidence to support this prediction. However,
in other insurance contexts that involve adverse health events, evidence of ex ante moral hazard is
more consistent. In this paper, we extend the analysis of the effect of health insurance on health behaviors
by allowing for the possibility that health insurance has a direct (ex ante moral hazard) and indirect
effect on health behaviors. The indirect effect works through changes in health promotion information
and the probability of illness that may be a byproduct of insurance-induced greater contact with medical
professionals. We identify these two effects and in doing so identify the pure ex ante moral hazard
effect. This study exploits the plausibly exogenous variation in health insurance as a result of obtaining
Medicare coverage at age 65. We find evidence that obtaining health insurance reduces prevention
and increases unhealthy behaviors among elderly men. We also find evidence that physician counseling
is successful in changing health behaviors.
Dhaval Dave
Bentley University
Department of Economics
175 Forest Street, AAC 195
Waltham, MA 02452-4705
and NBER
ddave@bentley.edu
Robert Kaestner
Institute of Government and Public Affairs
University of Illinois
815 West Van Buren Street, Suite 525
Chicago, IL 60607
and NBER
kaestner@uic.edu

Ms. Brooks said they dropped their health coverage in July after the family
premium jumped to $989 a month from $489 a month. Business was slow, and
their previous income of $60,000 a year had fallen in half. The effect was
immediate. Mr. Brooks, 50, has stopped taking Lipitor to control high cholesterol
and has started taking over-the-counter herbal supplements. Ms. Brooks no
longer takes Singulair for asthma and has adopted an exercise program intended
to regulate her breathing. Ms. Brooks estimates they are saving $150 a month by
not using prescription drugs. “We changed our diets a lot to help the
effectiveness of the supplements, and maybe that’s a good thing,” she said.1
This vignette from the New York Times is a perfect illustration of ex ante moral
hazard—in this case, the loss of health insurance resulted in changes in health behavior that
reduced the risk or severity of illness. While ex ante moral hazard is nearly always mentioned as
a potential consequence of health insurance, it is equally as often noted that ex ante moral hazard
is unlikely to be a significant problem.
“The extent of moral hazard in terms of actions that affect health may not be
large for health insurance in most instances, since the uncompensated loss of
health itself is so consequential.” (Cutler and Zeckhauser 2000, p. 577)
“In the context of health insurance, the ex ante moral hazard problem may be
small because common forms of health insurance in fact offer very incomplete
coverage. Even if the consumer has generous coverage for the monetary
components of the loss (medical expenditures and foregone earnings), he will be
uninsured for the utility loss.” (Kenkel, 2000, p.1687)
While limited, empirical evidence on the extent of ex ante moral hazard in the health
insurance context is mostly consistent with these predictions about its importance (Kenkel 2000;
Zweifel and Manning 2000). Findings from the Rand Health Insurance Experiment (RHIE)
showed that less generous health insurance had no significant or practical effect on health
behaviors such as smoking, drinking, and exercise (Newhouse 1993). Less generous insurance
was associated with decreased use of preventive medical services (secondary prevention), which
contradicts the simple intuition that less insurance should cause an increase in prevention (Lillard
1 Broder, John. “Problem of Lost Health Benefits is Reaching into the Middle Class.” New York Times November
25, 2002.
1

et al. 1986). However, this finding is not conclusive because the consumer may engage in more
primary prevention activities (self-protection) in response to an increase in the price of
preventive medical care. Moreover, it is likely that the less generous (i.e., more cost-sharing)
insurance plans in the RHIE increased the cost of preventive care relative to curative care due to
the cap on out-of-pocket expenditures, and because these types of care are substitutes, consumers
may have substituted toward curative care.
More direct evidence also offers mixed support for the ex ante moral hazard hypothesis.
Courbage and Coulon (2004) found no evidence that private health insurance coverage reduced
prevention (smoking and exercise) activities among British Households. In contrast, Klick and
Stratman (2007) found that state mandated health insurance coverage for the treatment of
diabetes, which is linked to obesity, was associated with higher body mass index among
diabetics.
Empirical evidence in other insurance contexts is more supportive of the existence of a
substantial amount of ex ante moral hazard. In the case of automobile insurance, there appears to
be a significant reduction in prevention and an increase in accidents when the generosity of
insurance is increased (Chiappori 2000). Indeed, Cohen and Dehejia (2004) examined the effect
of compulsory auto insurance laws and found that having auto insurance was associated with an
increase in auto fatalities. Similarly, in the workers’ compensation (WC) case, increases in
benefits (insurance generosity) are associated with more workplace injuries (Ruser 1985; 1991;
Fortin and Lanoie 2000). The positive association between WC benefits and injuries is evidence
that the worker moral hazard effect—less precaution because of more generous insurance—
outweighs the countervailing incentive for firms to increase safety investments to offset higher
2