NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MONETARY POLICY CHALLENGES IN EMERGING MARKETS:
SUDDEN STOP, LIABILITY DOLLARIZATION, AND LENDER OF LAST RESORT
Guillermo A. Calvo
Working Paper 12788
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12788
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006
I am grateful to Jose De Gregorio, Marcio Garcia, Frederic Mishkin, Ugo Panizza, Andrew Powell,
Ernesto Talvi, John B. Taylor, Rodrigo Valdes, and participants in the Latin American Network of
Central Banks and Finance Ministries at the Inter-American Development Bank, Washington DC,
October 19-20, 2006, for helpful comments; and especially to Gonzalo Llosa for first-rate research
assistance and literature search, and John Smith for expert editing. The usual caveats apply. The views
expressed here do not necessarily represent those of the IDB or the Ntional Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Guillermo A. Calvo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Monetary Policy Challenges in Emerging Markets: Sudden Stop, Liability Dollarization, and
Lender of Last Resort
Guillermo A. Calvo
NBER Working Paper No. 12788
December 2006, Revised January 2007
JEL No. E52,E58,F32
ABSTRACT
The paper argues that Emerging Market economies (EMs) face financial vulnerabilities that weaken
the effectiveness of a domestic Lender of Last Resort (LOLR). As a result, monetary policy is inextricably
linked to the state of the credit market. In particular, the central bank should be ready to operate as
LOLR during Sudden Stop (of capital inflows) by releasing international reserves in an effective manner.
These conditions also impact on optimal monetary policy in normal but high-volatility periods. The
paper further argues that during those periods interest rate rules may engender excessive volatility
of exchange rates and, thus, that it may be advisable to temporarily supplement those rules by foreign
exchange market intervention or outright exchange rate pegging. At a fundamental level, the analysis
suggests that the state-of-the-art literature summarized by Woodford (2003) or even more heterodox
approaches exemplified by Stiglitz and Greenwald (2003) likely fall short of providing a satisfactory
guide for monetary policy in EMs.
Guillermo A. Calvo
Chief Economist
Inter-American Development Bank
1300 New York Ave.
Washington, DC 20005
and NBER
calvo@econ.umd.edu

I. Introduction
“A nice art collection and quiet surroundings do not a First World central bank
make” should be the motto of every central banker in Emerging Market economies
(EMs). This is especially true during tranquil times in which both the level and volatility
of interest rate spreads are low, and the central bank easily forgets its role as Lender of
Last Resort (LOLR)—thus entirely focusing on its role as guarantor of price stability in a
full-employment setting. Unfortunately, as the high-volatility episode in May/June 2006
reminded us,1 tranquil times may quickly turn into periods in which an EM central banker
looks more like a high-wire performer without a safety net than a sedate analyst whose
primary objective is to find the best specification for a Taylor Rule.
Fortunately, experienced central bankers are well aware of these facts and have
acted accordingly. Since 1998, for example, Latin America has increased its stock of
international reserves twofold, while Asia (including China) did so by a factor of three.
This followed the Asia 1997 and Russia 1998 crises, which left no doubt that a Sudden
Stop (of capital inflows) and attendant liquidity crunch can hit both saints and sinners.
However, this type of policy reaction is still less than fully incorporated into central
banks’ tool kit—which remains replete with sophisticated analyses on how to implement
Inflation Targeting, for example, with little or no reference to financial imperfections in
EMs.2
1 The expectation that the Fed would further tighten monetary policy caused a major fall in EM stock
market prices and rise in credit spreads. Interestingly, the episode carried no noticeable cost in terms of
output and employment.
2 Céspedes, Chang and Velasco (2001), and Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2005) are exceptions in which
the incidence of Liability Dollarization and Sudden Stop are explicitly taken into account. The recent book
by Mishkin (2006) offers a balanced and cogent exposition of the central issues that motivate the present
note.
1

The objective of this note is to help to redress the balance by bringing to the fore
two distinguishing characteristics of EMs, namely, Sudden Stop and Liability
Dollarization (foreign-exchange denominated debts).3 Special emphasis will be placed
on Domestic Liability Dollarization (DLD), i.e., domestic residents’ dollar debts vis-à-vis
the domestic banking system. These financial features seriously weaken the central
bank’s role as LOLR, but they have been largely ignored in the literature which, true to
form, has focused on issues relevant to mature economies.4
Section II will start by defining LOLR, arguing that EMs are likely to have a
somewhat ineffective LOLR. The discussion will then turn to the use of international
reserves during Sudden Stop. It will be argued that proper management of Sudden Stop
episodes should be high on the central bank’s agenda, because they may deteriorate long-
term growth prospects, despite the fact that those episodes are not everyday events.
Section III will discuss some aspects of monetary policy under normal conditions, but
under the assumption of a largely ineffective LOLR. Section IV concludes.
II. Lender of Last Resort in EMs
1. Lender of Last Resort (LOLR). A LOLR is an institution that is able to lend at
reasonably low rates of interest to sectors (public or private) that are seriously credit
constrained. Typically, this role is carried out by the central bank (and this will be
assumed in what follows).
3 In what follows, “dollar” will be identified with “foreign exchange.” In Eichengreen et al. (2005)
Liability Dollarization is instead called Original Sin. The expression “Original Sin” invokes the thought
that EMs may not be able to clean the slate, which is still a highly debated issue. To be fair, Liability
Dollarization is not free from semantic imprecision either (e.g., is the US Liability Dollarized?), but I will
stick with it for the present, albeit with some uneasiness.
4 For example, the expression Lender of Last Resort does not appear in the Index of Woodford (2003), a
masterful state-of-the-art exposition of monetary theory. Neither is the LOLR or related DLD issue
addressed in Stiglitz and Greenwald (2003), a book that otherwise places great emphasis on domestic
financial imperfections.
2