NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BEQUEST AND TAX PLANNING:
EVIDENCE FROM ESTATE TAX RETURNS
Wojciech Kopczuk
Working Paper 12701
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12701
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2006
I benefited from comments from anonymous referees, the editors, participants of seminars at the 2004
meeting of the National Tax Association, 2005 NBER Summer Institute, Columbia, Michigan, Wisconsin
and Virginia, as well as from discussions with David Forrer, Joel Slemrod, Till von Wachter, Karl
Scholz, Emmanuel Saez and David Joulfaian. Financial support from the Program for Economic Research
at Columbia University and the Sloan Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2006 by Wojciech Kopczuk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Bequest and Tax Planning: Evidence From Estate Tax Returns
Wojciech Kopczuk
NBER Working Paper No. 12701
November 2006
JEL No. D12,D31,D91,H2
ABSTRACT
I study bequest and wealth accumulation behavior of the wealthy (subject to the estate tax) shortly
before death. The onset of a terminal illness leads to a very significant reduction in the value of estates
reported on tax returns - 15 to 20% with illness lasting "months to years" and about 5 to 10% in case
of illness reported as lasting "days to weeks". I provide evidence suggesting that these findings cannot
be explained by real shocks to net worth such as due to medical expenses or lost income, but instead
reflect "deathbed" estate planning. The results suggest that wealthy individuals actively care about
disposition of their estates, but that this preference is dominated by the desire to hold on to their wealth
while alive.
Wojciech Kopczuk
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, Rm. 1022 IAB
MC 3323
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
wk2110@columbia.edu

1 Introduction
This paper provides empirical evidence about behavior of wealthy individuals following
the onset of a terminal illness using (publicly available) individual-level estate tax return
data(NationalArchivesandRecordsAdministration,1995)fordecedentswhosetaxreturns
were filed in 1977. This is the only publicly available dataset of this kind and one of
very few data sources allowing to study wealth holdings and behavior of the wealthy.1 I
analyze decisions of estate taxpayers shortly before their deaths. My strategy is to compare
estates of individuals who suffered terminal illnesses of different lengths. Approximately
20% of taxpayers subject to the estate tax die instantaneously. The central empirical fact
established in this paper is that their estates as reported on tax returns are 10-18% greater
thanestatesofthosewhosufferedfromalengthyillness. Thiscouldbeconsistentwithlarge
medical or long-term care expenses or with loss of income following the onset of a terminal
illness. However, based on other information from tax returns and AHEAD/HRS exit
surveys I show that these are unlikely to be the right explanations. Instead, the empirical
findings suggest that this response reflects planning for the disposition of an estate.
While the notion that the wealthy pursue tax avoidance is hardly new or surprising,
the results shed a new light on motivations behind wealth accumulation. The presence of
significant tax-motivated actions following the onset of a terminal illness reveals a desire
to control disposition of assets, but it also implies that more tax planning could have been
pursued earlier. Tax avoidance is easier and more effective if pursued early. Furthermore,
those who die instantaneously do not get a chance to make such adjustments. This suggests
thattherearerealcoststoearlyplanningthatresultinholdingontowealthwhilealiveand
that(rationalorirrational)“procrastination”inestateplanningisanimportantphenomena.
I present additional findings that are consistent with the notion that the wealthy hold on to
theirwealthuntiltheydie: incross-sectionwealthisincreasingwithageuntilthemaximum
observed age of ninety-eight. Because cross-sectional wealth profiles are potentially affected
by differential mortality, these findings do not unequivocally prove that wealth increases
with age. Still, the sample considered is more uniform than usual so that selection is less
likely to be an issue and, despite that, the gradient is steeper (estimated at approximately
3% per year) than observed in datasets representative of the full population. Together with
bequest-driven adjustments before death, these patterns cast doubt on the life-cycle motive
for wealth accumulation as the sole explanation of behavior of the wealthy.
The results suggest a need for a model that can simultaneously explain wealth accu-
mulation beyond own consumption or precautionary needs, some degree of concern about
beneficiaries and significant delays in planning despite real consequences. Holding on to
wealth until one gets terminally ill despite tax consequences suggests a “capitalistic spirit”
1Theanalysisusesindividualswithestatesofatleast$120,000in1976,correspondingtoroughly$360,000
nowadays. The group considered corresponds to approximately 6% of adult deaths. Information on more
than 29,000 high net worth tax returns is in the data vastly exceeding the coverage of this group in any
survey dataset. Sampling rates are also higher and the effective exemption level is lower than in any of the
more recent IRS samples of estate tax returns (that are not available publicly). I discuss the data in more
detail in Section 2.1.
1

or wealth in utility motive where wealth accumulation takes place because stock of wealth
provides flow of utility. The presence of active though delayed planning suggests however
that such a framework will not fit all empirical facts. An alternative is for individuals to
simultaneously value both wealth and bequests. It is natural to expect that the presence of
such a preference that’s ultimately reflected in tax-motivated actions should affect wealth
accumulation prior to the onset of a terminal illness, although results in this paper leave
open the possibility of “lexicographic” preferences under which wealth accumulation has
nothing to do with beneficiaries yet transfers to them are preferred to transfers to the IRS.
Another important possibility for explaining my findings is behavioral: individuals who
have difficulty acknowledging their own mortality may delay planning and oversave.
Other than establishing the drop in net worth, I find that the response is stronger for
younger individuals and that administrative expenses associated with the estate fall. I
also show direct evidence of increased planning: transfers before death increase, although
this response does not reflect simple direct inter vivos giving but rather it reflects more
complicated transfers that are pre-arranged but take effect only at the time of death.2 Such
transfersarelikelytobeafingerprintofmoresophisticatedavoidancestrategiesthatarenot
directly observed on the tax return. Consistent with a tax motive, I find that the response
for a subset of individuals who died in 1977, following a tax cut that took place on January
1st 1977, is much weaker.
Ifindnoevidencethatthesewealthytaxpayersexperiencedanyquantitativelyimportant
financial hardship due to lost income. I also find no evidence that debts increase suggesting
that taxpayers do not experience difficulties dealing with terminal expenses. I discuss
other evidence suggesting that while end of life expenditures are important for most of the
population, they have very low wealth elasticity and are not of major importance at the
top of the distribution. As far as I know, this is the first paper that documents low wealth
elasticity of terminal expenditures. This information is not observed on the tax returns
and therefore I rely on AHEAD/HRS surveys to shed some light on this issue. I find that
medical, funeral and related expenditures in the last two years of life for individuals who
would meet the estate filing threshold in my data (roughly $360,000 nowadays) constitute
at most 4% of estates (they are on average 45% for the full sample) and do not show a
strong gradient with respect to the length of illness. In particular, these expenditures are
much smaller than the estimated effects and thereby cannot explain the drop in net worth.
Finally, I document changes in the allocation of assets. Interestingly, I do not find a
disproportionate decrease in cash holdings perhaps reflecting no outright tax evasion, but
alsoconsistentwithincomefromsalesofotherassetsoffsettinganycashdistributions. That
cash holdings do not fall disproportionately is another argument against the relevance of
any liquidity-related problems. One indication that outright cheating may be facilitated by
a longer illness is that the category of “other assets” responds strongly for smaller estates.
Items specifically mentioned on the tax return that fall into this category are jewelry, furs,
paintings, antiques, rare books, coins and stamps and household goods: these are, likely,
2As an example, an outright transfer of a house would be an inter vivos gift, but a transfer of a house
withretainedrighttouseituntildeathisalifetimetransferandshouldbeincludedontheestatetaxreturn.
2