NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
O OPTIMAL EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION VS. MANAGERIAL POWER:
A REVIEW OF LUCIAN BEBCHUK AND JESSE FRIED'S "PAY WITHOUT PERFORMANCE:
THE UNFULFILLED PROMISE OF EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION"
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 12798
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12798
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006
I would like to thank Lucian Bebchuk and Jesse Fried for pointing out a number of mistakes in an
earlier draft of this review. In addition, many thanks go to Ben Hermalin for his substantial comments,
and more importantly, for his influence on my views on corporate governance that are reflected throughout
this review. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Optimal Executive Compensation vs. Managerial Power: A Review of Lucian Bebchuk and
Jesse Fried's "Pay without Performance: The Unfulfilled Promise of Executive Compensation"
Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 12798
December 2006
JEL No. G3,J4,K22
ABSTRACT
This essay reviews Bebchuk and Fried's "Pay without Performance: The Unfulfilled Promise of Executive
Compensation". Bebchuk and Fried criticize the standard view of executive compensation, in which
executives negotiate contracts with shareholders that provide incentives that motivate them to maximize
the shareholders' welfare. In contrast, Bebchuk and Fried argue that executive compensation is more
consistent with executives who control their own boards, and who maximize their own compensation
subject to an "outrage constraint". They provide a host of evidence consistent with this alternative
viewpoint. The book can be evaluated from both a positive and a normative perspective. From
a positive perspective, much of the evidence they present, especially about the camouflage and risk-taking
aspects of executive compensation systems, is fairly persuasive. However, from a normative perspective,
the book conveys the idea that policy changes can dramatically improve executive compensation systems
and consequently overall corporate performance. It is unclear to me how effective in practice are potential
reforms designed to achieve such changes likely to be.
Michael S. Weisbach
University Of Illinois
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 S. Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
weisbach@uiuc.edu

Over the last few years, corporate governance has become a popular topic in both the
business and academic presses. The large number of high-publicity scandals, the seemingly
enormous salaries paid to executives, and the celebrity status of CEOs has created unprecedented
public interest in corporate governance. All this attention highlights the importance of corporate
governance in a well-functioning capitalist economy. The fundamental welfare theorems that justify
competition in terms of general welfare presuppose that the internal organization of the firm is such
that the desire for profit maximization by firms’ security holders translates into efficient business
decisions. In other words, corporate governance is a crucially necessary ingredient to a capitalist
economy when the predominant form of organization is the corporation.
Thus, the attention given to corporate governance by the public at large is well-deserved, and,
in my opinion, long overdue. Not surprisingly, the public attention given governance has coincided
with an astronomical boom in research about governance by economists. To an economist, corporate
governance provides a natural subject for study, both because the issues in it are incredibly
interesting and important, and because it provides a place where our knowledge can provide guidance
to practitioners and policy-makers.
The appropriate approach to creating an economic model of governance is, however, not
obvious. An ideal model of governance would contain managers whose interests are not aligned with
shareholders, as well as shareholders who wish to maximize profits but face coordination and
information problems, and to the extent that they can exercise control, must do it through a self-
interested board of directors. This ideal model contains too many elements to be useful in most
settings; consequently, economists typically make compromises and concentrate their efforts on
some parts of it.
1

The most common approach to modeling governance is to assume away all coordination
problems between shareholders and the board entirely, and to presume that the shareholders agree on
an optimal incentive contract with the CEO. At first glance, this approach seems a natural one:
Since it is infeasible for shareholders to agree on every business decision, they delegate decision
rights to executives, through their voting for the board of directors. Principal-agent theory provides a
way of characterizing optimal contracts in this situation, which has been applied extensively in this
literature. This approach was the foundation for the calls from economists for companies to have
stronger links between pay and performance (Jensen and Murphy (1990)), and undoubtedly helped
lead to the large increase in option-based executive compensation during the 1990s.
However, it is not the case that the principal-agent approach, in which management receives
an optimal incentive contract given the underlying contracting problem, is an accurate, or even a
particularly useful way to characterize executive compensation. The principal-agent approach
presumes that observed contracts are an optimal response to the contracting environment. But what
if they are not optimal? Even a casual reading of the business press indicates that many CEOs have a
great deal of control over their boards, and thus over the process by which their own pay is
determined. An alternative approach to the principal-agent model involves explicitly recognizing
that the contracts between CEOs and their firms are not those that would occur if CEOs bargained at
arms-length with shareholders interested in maximizing profits. It is possible that the contracts we
observe in practice represent something more like what is often described in the business press, in
which managers extract enormous sums of money through their control of their own pay-setting
process.
This alternative view concerning executive compensation has been developed by Lucian
Bebchuk and Jesse Fried (sometimes with other coauthors as well) in an influential series of articles.
They recently summarized and further developed this work in a book entitled Pay without
Performance: The Unfulfilled Promise of Executive Compensation, which was published in 2004. In
2