NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LUCKY CEOS
Lucian A. Bebchuk
Yaniv Grinstein
Urs Peyer
Working Paper 12771
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12771
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006
For helpful comments and conversations, we are grateful to Nadine Baudot-Trajtenberg, Alma Cohen,
Randy Heron, Ira Kay, Erik Lie, MP Narayanan, and participants in a Harvard workshop for their
helpful comments. For financial support, we would like to thank the John M. Olin Center for Law,
Economics, and Business, the Harvard Law School Program on Corporate Governance, and the Lens
Foundation for Corporate Excellence. Because Yaniv Grinstein is a visiting academic scholar at the
Securities and Exchange Commission during 2006-2005, we should note that, as a matter of policy,
the Securities and Exchange Commission disclaims responsibility for any private publication or statement
of any SEC employee or Commissioner. This paper expresses the authors' views and does not necessarily
reflect those of the Commission, the Commissioners, other members of the SEC staff, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Lucian A. Bebchuk, Yaniv Grinstein, and Urs Peyer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Lucky CEOs
Lucian A. Bebchuk, Yaniv Grinstein, and Urs Peyer
NBER Working Paper No. 12771
December 2006
JEL No. D23,G32,G38,J33,J44,K22,M14
ABSTRACT
We study the relation between corporate governance and opportunistic timing of CEO option grants
via backdating or otherwise. Our methodology focuses on how grant date prices rank within the price
distribution of the grant month. During 1996-2005, about 12% of firms provided one or more lucky
grant -- defined as grants given at the lowest price of the month -- due to opportunistic timing. Lucky
grants were more likely when the board did not have a majority of independent directors and/or the
CEO had longer tenure -- factors associated with increased influence of the CEO on pay-setting. We
find no evidence that gains from manipulated grants served as a substitute for compensation paid through
other sources; total reported compensation from such sources was higher in firms providing lucky
grants. Finally, opportunistic timing has been widespread throughout the economy, with a significant
presence in each of the economy's twelve (Fama-French) industries.
Lucian A. Bebchuk Urs Peyer
Harvard Law School INSEAD - Finance
1545 Massachusetts Avenue Boulevard de Constance
Cambridge, MA 02138 F-77305 Fontainebleau Cedex FRANCE
and NBER urs.peyer@insead.edu
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu
Yaniv Grinstein
Johnson Graduate School of Management
Cornell University
371 Sage Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
yg33@cornell.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
The manipulation of executives’ option grants – via backdating, “spring-loading based on
the use of inside information, or other forms of opportunistic timing -- has been attracting a great
deal of attention.1 The Senate Banking and Finance committees held hearings on the subject, and
the SEC and a small army of private law firms hired by companies are investigating past grant
practices. More than 120 companies have thus far come under scrutiny, dozens of executives and
directors have been forced to resign, and dozens of companies announced that they will have to
restate their past financial statements.2
Notwithstanding the substantial attention devoted to the subject, our understanding of the
circumstances and factors that produced opportunistic timing in some companies but not in
others remains incomplete. In this paper we seek to contribute to this understanding by
identifying the relation between opportunistic timing and the characteristics of the granting firm,
the receiving CEO, and the grant itself. Our tests identify a link between opportunistic timing
and factors associated with higher influence of the CEO over directors, such as lack of board
independence and long CEO tenure. We also find that opportunistic timing was not provided as a
substitute for other forms of compensation, but rather conferred extra benefits on executives
already receiving higher pay relative to their peers. Opportunistic timing was also more likely
when the economic gain from it was higher; indeed, even for the same firm or CEO, grant
manipulation was more likely to occur in the month in which stock price volatility made
manipulation more profitable.
1 The term "manipulation" is used in this paper (as in Heron and Lie (2006b))
to encompass any form of opportunistic timing of option grants. To remove
doubt, the term as we use it should not be understood to be equivalent to
manipulation as defined by law, and we do not take in this paper any
position on the legality or illegality of any actions or practices.
2 The Wall Street Journal maintains an "Options Scorecard" at www.wsj.com with an updated list of all
the companies that have come under scrutiny in connection with backdating issues, and it counted more
than 120 such companies as of Nov. 12, 2006. For an account of the large scale of investigations of past
grants conducted by companies with the help of hired outside professionals, see James Bandler and Kara
Scannell, "In Options Probes, Private Law Firms Play Crucial Role," Wall Street Journal, October 28,
2006.
1

Prior work by financial economists on option timing has focused on the abnormality of
returns prior to or after the grant date (e.g., Yermack (1997); Lie (2005); Heron and Lie (2006a);
Narayanan and Seyhun (2006b)). Our approach focuses on the ranking of a grant date’s price in
the distribution of prices during the month of the grant. We show that the grant date
manipulation resulted in an abnormal fraction of the grants being given on days where the stock
price was at the lowest level of the month. Much (though not all) of our analysis focuses on
"lucky" grants – grants given at the lowest price of the month. We estimate that, during 1996-
2005, about 12% of our sample firms provided one or more lucky grants whose timing was the
result of manipulation. We show that lucky grants provide a useful tool for studying the
opportunistic timing of option grants including, in particular, identifying the firm and CEO
characteristics associated with manipulation and deriving estimates of the incidence and gains
from manipulation.
The universe of grants we study contains all the at-the-money, unscheduled grants
awarded to public companies' CEOs during the decade of 1996-2005. We find a clear monotonic
relation between how a trading day ranked within the price distribution of the month and the
likelihood that the day happened to be a grant date. Compared to a random assignment, a day
was most likely to be chosen if its stock price was at the lowest level, second most likely to be
chosen if its price was at the second-lowest level, and third most likely to be chosen if its price
was at the third lowest level. Similarly, dates with a stock price at the highest level of the month
were most likely to be avoided as grant dates, followed in turn by dates with the second-highest
price and then dates with the third-highest price.
Compared with a random assignment of grant dates, the excess incidence of grants is
concentrated at the lowest price of the month, that is, in the form of lucky grants. We estimate
that about 1,150 lucky grants (roughly half of all lucky grants in our sample) owe their status to
opportunistic timing rather than mere luck. This opportunistic timing was spread over a
significant number of CEOs and firms. We estimate that about 850 CEOs (about 10% of all
CEOs) and about 720 firms (about 12% of all firms) received or provided manipulated lucky
grants. In addition, about 550 additional grants at the second-lowest or third-lowest price of the
month owe their status to manipulation.
We provide evidence that backdating, and not merely "spring-loading" based on the use
of inside information, has been a major driver of the higher-than-random incidence of lucky
2