NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CRIME AND CIRCUMSTANCE:
THE EFFECTS OF INFANT HEALTH SHOCKS ON FATHERS' CRIMINAL ACTIVITY
Hope Corman
Kelly Noonan
Nancy E. Reichman
Ofira Schwartz-Soicher
Working Paper 12754
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12754
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006
This research was supported by Grants #R01-HD-45630 and #R01-HD-35301 from the National Institute
of Child Health and Human Development. We are grateful for helpful input from Jerry Bentley, Naci
Mocan, Melinda Pitts, and Joy Schneer, and for valuable assistance from Magdalena Ostatkiewicz
and Nicole Boynton. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Hope Corman, Kelly Noonan, Nancy E. Reichman, and Ofira Schwartz-Soicher. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Crime and Circumstance: The Effects of Infant Health Shocks on Fathers' Criminal Activity
Hope Corman, Kelly Noonan, Nancy E. Reichman, and Ofira Schwartz-Soicher
NBER Working Paper No. 12754
December 2006
JEL No. I1,K42
ABSTRACT
Few studies in the economics literature have linked individuals' criminal behavior to changes in their
personal circumstances. Life shocks, such as natural or personal disasters, could reduce or sever a
person's connections to his/her family, job, or community. With fewer connections, crime may become
a more attractive option. This study addresses the question of whether an exogenous shock in life circumstances
affects criminal activity. Specifically, we estimate the effects of the birth of a child with a random
and serious health problem (versus the birth of a healthy infant) on the likelihood that the child's father
becomes or remains involved in illegal activities. Controlling for the father's pre-birth criminal activity,
we find that the shock of having a child with a serious health problem increases both the father's post-birth
conviction and incarceration by 1 to 8 percentage points, depending on the measure of infant health
used.
Hope Corman Nancy E. Reichman
Department of Economics Robert Wood Johnson Medical School
Rider University University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey
Lawrenceville, NJ 08648-3099 97 Paterson St., Room 435
and NBER New Brunswick, NJ 08903
corman@rider.edu reichmne@umdnj.edu
Kelly Noonan Ofira Schwartz-Soicher
Department of Economics 18 Marvin Court
Rider University Lawrenceville, NJ 08648
2083 Lawrence Road, Room SWG 306 schwarof@umdnj.edu
Lawrenceville, NJ 08648
and NBER
knoonan@rider.edu

Expenditures for police, the criminal judicial system, and corrections exceeded $185
billion in the United States in 2003, and crime resulted in a total loss to victims of almost $16
billion in 2004 (Sedgwick 2006). Given these magnitudes, there is much interest in
understanding the causes of crime. Theoretical and empirical work in the economics literature to
date has focused on the effects of three sets of factors—criminal justice sanctions, human capital,
and labor market conditions. It is important to understand the contributions of these factors
because they all can be influenced by public policy. Very little is known, however, about the
effects of exogenous shocks in individual’s life circumstances on their propensity to commit
crime.
Recent economic research has considered the role of community and family ties,
sometimes referred to as “social capital,” as a positive force in promoting individuals to engage
in pro-social behavior, such as being law-abiding citizens who contribute to the community.
Conversely, individuals with low levels of social capital would be more likely to engage in
negative social behaviors, such as committing crimes. Akerlof (1998) and others have discussed
the difficulty of establishing causal relationships between family or social ties and crime, as it is
not plausible to assume that ties such as marriage and parenthood are exogenous.
We consider an individual-level catastrophic event that is random yet has been found to
impact the social ties of men. Catastrophic events are not rare occurrences. For example,
population estimates indicate that at least one in five individuals is exposed to one or more
natural disasters in their lifetime (Briere and Elliott 2000). Catastrophic illness and sudden death
are also not uncommon. Catastrophic events could change an individual’s propensity to commit
crimes through two channels. First, a large scale event such as a natural disaster could reduce
both legal labor market returns and expected criminal justice sanctions—factors that have been
2

studied in the crime literature. Second, the catastrophic event could also change the individual’s
propensity to commit crime by altering the person’s utility function directly—for example, by
changing the value the individual places on obeying the law or on taking risks. The latter, which
has been much less explored in the literature, would be consistent with a social capital
framework in which an exogenous event could reduce an individual’s social ties and thus
increase that person’s criminal behavior.
In this paper, we break new ground by isolating the effects of an exogenous shock in an
individual’s life circumstances on that individual’s propensity to commit crime. Specifically, we
estimate the effects of the birth of a child with a severe health problem on the likelihood that the
infant’s father becomes or remains involved in illegal activities. The shocks that we consider are
infant health conditions that are considered by the medical community to be random events with
poor long-term prognoses. The analyses contribute to the social capital literature by identifying
an exogenous proxy for family ties that may affect social behavior, and the results may have
implications for other types of shocks in life circumstances.
Background
Since pioneering work by Becker (1968) and Ehrlich (1973), many economists have
investigated individuals’ decisions to engage in criminal behavior. Most economic models treat
the decision to engage in criminal activity as a labor market choice, in which individuals weigh
the expected costs against the expected benefits. The economic literature on the determinants of
crime has focused on three sets of factors—criminal justice sanctions, human capital
characteristics (such as education), and labor market conditions. Key challenges in estimating the
effects of criminal justice sanctions on crime have been to account for the potential endogeneity
of sanctions and to disentangle the potential simultaneity between criminal justice policy and
3