MANDATORY VERSUS VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE OF PRODUCT RISKS
A. Mitchell Polinsky
Steven Shavell
WORKING PAPER 12776

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MANDATORY VERSUS VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE OF PRODUCT RISKS
A. Mitchell Polinsky
Steven Shavell
Working Paper 12776
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12776
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006
Stanford Law School and Harvard Law School, respectively. Both authors are also Research Associates
of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Polinsky's research was supported by the John M.
Olin Program in Law and Economics at Stanford Law School, and Shavell's by the John M. Olin Center
for Law, Economics, and Business at Harvard Law School. We are grateful to Andrew Daughety,
Andrew Postlewaite, Jennifer Reinganum, and Kathryn Spier for helpful comments and to David C.
Thompson for able research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by A. Mitchell Polinsky and Steven Shavell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Mandatory Versus Voluntary Disclosure of Product Risks
A. Mitchell Polinsky and Steven Shavell
NBER Working Paper No. 12776
December 2006
JEL No. D18,D62,D82,H23,K13,L15
ABSTRACT
We analyze a model in which firms are able to acquire information about product risks and may or
may not be required to disclose this information. We initially study the effect of disclosure rules assuming
that firms are not liable for the harm caused by their products. Although mandatory disclosure obviously
is superior to voluntary disclosure given the information about product risks that firms possess -- since
such information has value to consumers -- voluntary disclosure induces firms to acquire more information
about product risks because they can keep silent if the information is unfavorable. The latter effect
could lead to higher social welfare under voluntary disclosure. The same results hold if firms are liable
for harm under the negligence standard of liability. Under strict liability, however, firms are indifferent
about revealing information concerning product risk, and mandatory and voluntary disclosure rules
are equivalent.
A. Mitchell Polinsky
Stanford Law School
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
polinsky@stanford.edu
Steven Shavell
Harvard Law School
1575 Massachusetts Avenue
Hauser Hall 508
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
shavell@law.harvard.edu

Mandatory versus Voluntary Disclosure of Product Risks
A. Mitchell Polinsky and Steven Shavell
1. Introduction
Disclosure of information by firms about the risks of their products is of potential social
value because it may help consumers decide whether to purchase the products and how best to
use them. Firms, however, will not want to reveal unfavorable information about product
risks — as that would reduce demand and the prices they could charge — although they will
have an incentive to reveal favorable information. The motive of firms to suppress bad
information about product risks is countered to an extent by regulations requiring the disclosure
of information (such as those promulgated by the Food and Drug Administration, the Federal
Trade Commission, and the Consumer Product Safety Commission1) and by the threat of liability
for nondisclosure (an issue, for example, in pharmaceutical, medical device, automobile, and
tobacco litigation2). Yet as some observers have suggested, disclosure requirements and liability
for nondisclosure also have an undesirable effect — they reduce the incentive of firms to acquire
information about product risks in the first place (through research, product testing, and the
© 2006 A. Mitchell Polinsky and Steven Shavell. All Rights Reserved.
1 For example, the Food and Drug Administration requires written “safety reports” for new drug
investigations concerning “[a]ny adverse experience associated with the use of the drug that is both serious and
unexpected” or “[a]ny finding from tests in laboratory animals that suggests a significant risk for human subjects
. . .” See 21 C.F.R. § 312.32 . The Federal Trade Commission “ensures both the accuracy of safety information
provided by product sellers and that material safety information is provided.” See Petty (1995, p. 408). The
Consumer Product Safety Commission “requires hazardous household products . . . to bear labeling that alerts
consumers to the potential hazards that those products present.” See U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission,
Office of Compliance, “Requirements under the Federal Hazardous Substances Act: Labeling and Banning
Requirements for Chemicals and Other Hazardous Substances, 15 U.S.C. § 1261 and 16 C.F.R. Part 1500,” (August
2002), p. 1 (available at <http://www.cpsc.gov/businfo/ regsumfhsa.pdf>, last accessed October 5, 2006).
2 See Alex Berenson, “At Vioxx Trial, a Discrepancy Appears to Undercut Merck's Defense,” The New
York Times, July 20, 2005, section C, column 2, p. 1 (pharmaceutical litigation); Barry Meier, “Papers Show
Guidant Considered Warning Doctors of Hazards,” The New York Times, June 7, 2006, section C, column 2, p. 1
(medical device litigation); Larry Kramer, “Ford Ignored Safety, Prosecutor Says,” The Washington Post, January
16, 1980, First Section, p. A4 (automobile litigation); and David Johnston, “Federal Thrust Against Tobacco Gets
New Vigor,” The New York Times, March 18, 1996, section A, p. 1 (tobacco litigation).
- 2 -