NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ON THE MACROECONOMICS OF ASSET SHORTAGES
Ricardo J. Caballero
Working Paper 12753
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12753
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006
Correspondence: caball@mit.edu. These notes were prepared for the 4th ECB Central Banking Conference
on "The Role of Money: Money and Monetary Policy in the Twenty-first Century," Frankfurt, November
2006. I thank George-Marios Angeletos, Olivier Blanchard, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Leonid Kogan
and conference participants for their comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Ricardo J. Caballero. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

On the Macroeconomics of Asset Shortages
Ricardo J. Caballero
NBER Working Paper No. 12753
December 2006
JEL No. E3,E4,E5,F3,F41
ABSTRACT
The world has a shortage of financial assets. Asset supply is having a hard time keeping up with the
global demand for store of value and collateral by households, corporations, governments, insurance
companies, and financial intermediaries more broadly. The equilibrium response of asset prices and
valuations to these shortages has played a central role in global economic developments over the last
twenty years. The so-called "global imbalances," the recurrent emergence of speculative bubbles (which
recently have transited from emerging markets, to the dot-coms, to real estate, to gold...), the historically
low real interest rates and associated "interest-rate conundrum," and even the widespread low inflation
environment and deflationary episodes in parts of the world, all fall into place once one adopts this
asset shortage perspective.
Ricardo J. Caballero
Department of Economics
MIT
Room E52-252a
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
caball@mit.edu

1 Introduction
The world has a shortage of financial assets. Asset supply is having a hard
time keeping up with the global demand for store of value and collateral by
households, corporations, governments, insurance companies, and financial
intermediaries more broadly. In equilibrium, the value of the (relatively)
few existing assets must rise, which has important global macroeconomic
implications.
These shortages have been a perennial problem in emerging markets,
where many of their economic perils and idiosyncrasies stem from this fea-
ture. But we are now seeing a shortage on a global scale. It probably began
with the meltdown of a substantial share of Japanese assets in the early
1990s, it was exacerbated by European stagnation and the collective emerg-
ingmarketcrisesofthelate1990s, anditconsolidatedinthenewmillennium
by the fast income growth of China and commodity countries, most of which
have substantial asset demand needs but are not natural asset producers.
In addition to these macroeconomic factors, there are microeconomic factors
contributing to these shortages. In particular, the recent rapid pace of fi-
nancial development has facilitated restructuring, innovation and economic
growth, but because of their margin requirements they may well have been
a net collateral consuming activity, at least in the short run.
The equilibrium response of asset prices and valuations to these short-
ages has played a central role in global economic developments over the last
twenty years. The so-called “global imbalances,” the recurrent emergence of
speculative bubbles (which recently have transited from emerging markets,
to the dot-coms, to real estate, to gold...), the historically low real interest
ratesandassociated“interest-rateconundrum,”andeventhewidespreadlow
inflation environment and deflationary episodes in parts of the world, all fall
into place once one adopts this asset shortage perspective.
Understanding the source of these developments as asset supply short-
ages informs optimal policy responses. The policy prescriptions that follow
from this view are a mixture of conventional advice, with an emphasis on fi-
nancial development and incentive preservation in capital markets, and more
adventurous recommendations. In particular, since speculative bubbles are
a necessary evil in this environment, it is important to learn to manage
their risks rather than to obsess over choking them. By extension, the same
recommendations apply to concerns about global imbalances and over the
excess-liquidity consequences of low interest rate policies.
2

In these notes I sketch the essence of this view and of the main policy
recommendations that follow from it. However, these are largely uncharted
waters. Mydiscussionhasplentyofconjecturesanchoredbyspottyacademic
work. Much of the research needed to understand what got us to this point,
how to manage a global economy of this nature, and ultimately how to grow
out it, if this is perceived to be necessary, lies ahead.
Thisintroductionisfollowedbyfourshortsections. Section2sketchesthe
macroeconomic consequences and policy lessons of endemic asset shortages
in emerging market economies. Section 3 discusses the global counterpart,
where equilibrium considerations play a central role, and argues that low
interest rates and inflation rates, as well as high (speculative) valuations, are
all market-based mechanism to rebuild asset supply. It also warns on the
deflationary consequences of chasing bubbles, and proposes instead to focus
on the risk management of high valuation equilibria. Section 4 discusses the
role of a lender of last resort in reducing net collateral demand. Section 5
concludes and is followed by a short appendix.
2 Emerging Markets
It is useful to start the discussion with emerging markets for three reasons.
First, their experience informs the issue since their chronic asset shortage
is an integral component of their macroeconomic performance and manage-
ment. Second, there is a tendency to extrapolate directly these countries’
lessons to the current global imbalances. While this is sound in some dimen-
sions, it is not in others. It is important to understand which one is which.
Third, the coordinated crises of emerging markets in the late 1990s, as well
as their fast growth in recent years, have played a central role in generat-
ing the current worldwide shortage of assets, and hence are at the core of
understanding world equilibrium.
2.1 Asset shortages and bubbles
If we could ignore capital market frictions of all sorts, emerging market
economies would borrow massive amounts from the rest of the world, both
to build the stock of capital required to catch up with developed economies
and to smooth consumption intertemporally. However, this description does
notfittheseeconomies’reality. Notonlyistheirinternationalborrowinglim-
3