NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SECURITY ISSUE TIMING:
WHAT DO MANAGERS KNOW, AND WHEN DO THEY KNOW IT?
Dirk Jenter
Katharina Lewellen
Jerold B. Warner
Working Paper 12724
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12724
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006
We are grateful to Nittai Bergman, Christopher Hennessy, Robert McDonald, Jeremy Stein and workshop
participants at Columbia University, MIT and the University of Chicago for helpful comments and
discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Dirk Jenter, Katharina Lewellen, and Jerold B. Warner. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Security Issue Timing: What Do Managers Know, and When Do They Know It?
Dirk Jenter, Katharina Lewellen, and Jerold B. Warner
NBER Working Paper No. 12724
December 2006
JEL No. G1,G14,G3,G32,G35
ABSTRACT
We study put option sales undertaken by corporations during their repurchase programs. Put sales'
main theoretical motivation is market timing, providing an excellent framework for studying whether
security issues reflect managers' ability to identify mispricing. Our evidence is that these bets reflect
timing ability, and are not simply a result of overconfidence. In the 100 days following put option
issues, there is roughly a 5% abnormal stock price return, and the abnormal return is concentrated
around the first earnings release date following put option sales. Longer term effects are generally
not detected. Put sales also appear to reflect successful bets on the direction of stock price volatility.
Dirk Jenter
MIT Sloan School of Management
E52-446
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
djenter@mit.edu
Katharina Lewellen
Tuck School at Dartmouth
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
katharina.lewellen@tuck.dartmouth.edu
Jerold B. Warner
William E. Simon Graduate School
of Business Administration
University of Rochester
Carol Simon Hall, Wilson Boulevard
Rochester, NY 14627
warner@simon.rochester.edu

1 Introduction
This paper examines corporate put option sales undertaken by U.S. corporations
during their repurchase programs in the 1991-2004 period. Using a comprehensive, hand-
collected dataset, we study the firms and the put sale transactions. Our contribution is
two-fold. First, put sales are an interesting financial innovation in their own right, and our
study is the only large-scale empirical analysis. Second and more importantly, put option
sales provide an excellent setting to study managers’ market timing ability. Put option
sales are gambles that the firm’s stock price will rise. Market timing is the main
theoretical justification for put option sales in previous work (see Section 2), and our
main tests focus on the evidence. More broadly, our study advances an extensive
literature on the relation between corporate transactions and market timing (see Eckbo,
Masulis, and Norli, 2006 and Baker, Ruback, Wurgler, 2006 for surveys).
When the firm’s securities are mispriced and managers can identify the mispricing,
this can affect investment, financing, and other corporate decisions. For example, if
managers know that the firm’s stock is overpriced, they can take advantage by issuing
equity. Despite the extent of the literature, the importance of market timing explanations
for corporate behavior is hotly debated and still unresolved (Baker, Ruback, Wurgler,
2006).
Since there are many motives for corporate security issues, distinguishing among
alternative explanations for why they occur is problematic. Other pieces of evidence on
timing ability are not very informative. Survey evidence shows that CFOs feel that their
security transactions can time the market (Graham and Harvey, 2001), but this may
simply reflect overconfidence. Potentially informative evidence on managers’ market
timing ability could come from insider trading studies. Yet recent studies raise serious
doubts about whether there is significant market timing ability within large firms (see
Lakonishok and Lee, 2001, Jenter, 2005).
We provide direct evidence on whether key assumptions of market timing stories–
both mispricing and the ability to identify it–are empirically relevant in corporate
decisions. Our 137 sample companies are typically large, including firms such as Bank of
3

America, Boeing, IBM, MacDonald’s, Microsoft, and Proctor and Gamble. The median
firm is in the S&P 500. If put option sales reflect timing ability, it shifts our priors and
increases our confidence in the potential importance of timing explanations for a broader
cross-section of firms and a wider range of transactions. If put option sales do not reflect
timing ability, this would lend credence to alternative hypotheses, in particular that
managers do not have private information but are overconfident about their own abilities
to predict future returns. Many papers examine the implications of managerial
overconfidence, and recent empirical work suggests that there is an association between
managerial overconfidence and aggressive corporate policies (Ben-David, Graham, and
Harvey, 2006). Put sales do represent an aggressive bet, but the underlying motivation is
ultimately an empirical question.
The put option sale setting provides an experimental design with many useful
features. First, unlike debt or equity issues, put sales have no simultaneous effect on
investment activity. We argue that management’s belief that it can time the market (i.e.,
distinguish between prices and fundamental value) represents the most likely rationale.
Thus, any abnormal stock returns subsequent to these transactions cannot be attributed to
contamination from investment effects. Second, this setting could reduce errors of
inference because the typical put option issued has a maturity of only 6 months. Given
the short maturities, our timing tests can focus on the detection of short-horizon effects.
This avoids the well-known difficulties associated with long-horizon return studies (see
Fama, 1998, and Kothari and Warner, 2006 for overviews). Third, the fact that firms
issuing these options are choosing short maturities is itself of interest. It suggests that
what management thinks it knows about mispricing is short-term in nature. Whether in
fact such short term predictability exists is a question on which we provide evidence.
Finally, put option issues represent bets not only on the stock price, but on volatility. If
management has private information that volatility will be lower than what put buyers
expect, then put sales will be profitable. We examine volatility patterns to see if timing
ability and management’s information extends to higher order moments of the stock
return distribution.
We find strong evidence that managers can predict future returns on the firm’s stock.
In the 100 trading days following put option issues, there is roughly a 5% abnormal
4