NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SOVEREIGN RISK AND SECONDARY MARKETS
Fernando Broner
Alberto Martin
Jaume Ventura
Working Paper 12783
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12783
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006
We are grateful to Rui Albuquerque, Galina Hale, Jing Zhang, and seminar participants at the NBER
Summer Institute, SED Meetings in Vancouver, Toulouse, IMF, SAIS, Princeton, Harvard, MIT, Chicago
Fed, CREI and Univesitat Pompeu Fabra for their comments. We acknowledge financial support from
the Spanish Ministry of Education and Sciences (grant SEJ2005-01126), the Generalitat de Catalunya
(DURSI, SGR2005 0049), and from CREA-Barcelona Economics. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2006 by Fernando Broner, Alberto Martin, and Jaume Ventura. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Sovereign Risk and Secondary Markets
Fernando Broner, Alberto Martin, and Jaume Ventura
NBER Working Paper No. 12783
December 2006
JEL No. F34,F36,G15
ABSTRACT
Conventional wisdom says that, in the absence of sufficient default penalties, sovereign risk constrains
credit and lowers welfare. We show that this conventional wisdom rests on one implicit assumption:
that assets cannot be retraded in secondary markets. Once this assumption is relaxed, there is always
an equilibrium in which sovereign risk is stripped of its conventional effects. In such an equilibrium,
foreigners hold domestic debts and resell them to domestic residents before enforcement. In the presence
of (even arbitrarily small) default penalties, this equilibrium is shown to be unique. As a result, sovereign
risk neither constrains welfare nor lowers credit. At most, it creates some additional trade in secondary
markets. The results presented here suggest a change in perspective regarding the origins of sovereign
risk and its remedies. To argue that sovereign risk constrains credit, one must show both the insufficiency
of default penalties and the imperfect workings of secondary markets. To relax credit constraints created
by sovereign risk, one can either increase default penalties or improve the workings of secondary markets.
Fernando Broner Jaume Ventura
CREI and Universitat Pompeu Fabra CREI
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27 Universitat Pompeu Fabra
08005 Barcelona Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
Spain 08005-Barcelona SPAIN
fabroner@gmail.com and NBER
jaume.ventura@upf.edu
Alberto Martin
CREI
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
08005 Barcelona
Spain
alberto.martin@upf.edu

Consider the hypothetical situation of a country that has borrowed in the past and must now
pay back to its foreign creditors. It does not matter whether it was the private sector or the
government who borrowed in the …rst place. After all, even government debts must ultimately be
paid by taxing the private sector. The last word on whether the country pays its foreign debt must
come from the country’s government however, since nobody else holds enough power to force the
private sector to pay. The problem, of course, is that the government cares more about the private
sector than foreign creditors, and …nds it tempting not to enforce payments to foreigners. What
prevents this? Only the expectation of costly default penalties, such as the loss of collateral and
reputation, trade embargoes or even military interventions. These penalties eliminate sovereign
risk, namely, the risk that the country willingly defaults on its foreign debt.
What would happen if these penalties are absent and the government decides not to enforce
payments to foreigners? The standard answer is that foreign creditors will …nd at the time of
enforcement that the country defaults on its debt. Once this answer is accepted, one immediately
realizes that the situation being considered is hypothetical and not real. Anticipating default,
foreign creditors could not have lent to the country in the …rst place. This inability to borrow
prevents the country from taking advantage of good investment opportunities and from sustaining
its consumption during bad times. Sovereign risk therefore constrains credit and lowers welfare.
To relax this constraint, the country must make itself more vulnerable to default penalties. Only
then foreigners will feel safe enough to lend to the country. This is, we think, a fair description of
conventional wisdom.
This paper reviews the situation above and questions this conventional wisdom. Foreign credi-
torswillnotpassivelyholdtheirdebtsuntilthetimeofenforcementarrivesanddefaulttakesplace.
Instead, they will try to sell them in the secondary market and recover any value they can. Who
will buy these debts? Certainly not other foreign creditors since the government will not enforce
payments to foreigners. But the private sector will be willing to buy these debts if the government
enforces payments to domestics. Moreover, it must be the case that the private sector always has
enough funds to purchase them since otherwise foreign creditors would not have lent in the …rst
place. In fact, the main result of this paper is that there is always an equilibrium in which the
private sector buys back the debts at face value and the government chooses to enforce payments
to domestics.1 Moreover, in the presence of (even arbitrarily small) default penalties this equilib-
rium is unique. Hence, secondary markets transfer debts to those that value them most, leading
1The proof of this result is based on two observations. The …rst one is that, once the private sector has bought
backthedebt,notenforcingdomesticpaymentscanatmostredistributewealthwithintheprivatesectorbutcannot
increase its level of wealth. The second observation is that trading in the secondary market always ensures that the
redistribution that would result from not enforcing domestic payments is undesirable for the government.
1

to maximization of their value and therefore enforcement. As a result, sovereign risk neither con-
strains credit nor lowers welfare. At most, it creates some additional trade in secondary markets as
foreign creditors successfully circumvent the strategic or opportunistic behavior of the government
by selling their debts to the private sector before enforcement.
The intuition behind this result is that secondary markets create a prisoner’s dilemma situation
that forces the country to buy back or repay its debt. It would be better for the di¤erent members
of the private sector to coordinate actions and not to purchase each other’s debts from foreign
creditors. If such collusion were possible, it would lead to default and therefore to an increase in
the wealth of the country. But the capital gains or pro…ts from violating the agreement would be
enormous for a small or in…nitesimal individual who can purchase the country’s whole foreign debt
at a negligible price expecting to redeem it later at face value. Hence, the agreement is not feasible
and the country as a whole ends up repurchasing all of its foreign debt in the secondary market.
This outcome constitutes an ex-post ine¢ ciency from the viewpoint of the country, but somewhat
paradoxically ensures ex-ante e¢ ciency since it allows the country to borrow in the …rst place.
This result provides a useful theoretical benchmark because it identi…es a set of conditions
under which sovereign risk is irrelevant even in the absence of default penalties. Of course, this is
an idealized situation that requires frictionless secondary markets. Transaction costs, large agents,
government interference and other imperfections might impair the workings of these markets. We
analyze these frictions and show that, in their presence, sovereign risk still constrains credit and
lowers welfare. But the tightness of the credit constraint depends on these secondary-markets
imperfections rather than on the size of default penalties. More generally, the results presented
here suggest a change in perspective regarding the origins of sovereign risk and its remedies. To
argue that sovereign risk constrains credit, one must show both the insu¢ ciency of default penalties
and the imperfect workings of secondary markets. To relax credit constraints created by sovereign
risk, one can either increase default penalties or improve the workings of secondary markets.
There is an extensive literature on sovereign risk that mostly focuses on the role of reputational
considerations and direct penalties.2;3 One problem with these approaches, however, is that there
is not much empirical evidence supporting the view that countries su¤er losses of reputation or
2See Eaton and Gersovitz (1981), Grossman and van Huyck (1988), Bulow and Rogo¤(1989a, 1989b), Fernández
and Rosenthal (1990), Atkeson (1991), Cole, Dow, and English (1995), Cole and Kehoe (1997), Kletzer and Wright
(2000),KehoeandPerri(2002),Wright(2002),andAmador(2003). SeeEatonandFernández(1995)foranexcellent
survey.
3Tworecentpapersshowhow,evenintheabsenceofreputationalconsiderationsanddirectpenalties,governments
may enforce/and or make payments to foreigners. Broner and Ventura (2006a) show that when governments cannot
discriminatebetweendomesticandforeigncreditors,enforcingforeignpaymentsisusefulbecauseitavoidsdisrupting
domestic ones. Sandleris (2006) shows that when governments have better information than the private sector,
enforcing foreign payments is useful because it provides a good signal about the prospects of the country.
2