NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CATASTROPHE BONDS, REINSURANCE, AND THE OPTIMAL COLLATERALIZATION
OF RISK-TRANSFER
Darius Lakdawalla
George Zanjani
Working Paper 12742
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12742
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors, and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, the RAND Corporation, or
the RAND Center for Terrorism Risk Management and Policy. We thank Robert Craig, Ken Garbade,
Robert M. Hall, Thomas Holzheu, Stewart C. Myers, and seminar participants at the 2006 NBER Insurance
Project Workshop and the 2006 Risk Theory Seminar for helpful comments and discussions. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Darius Lakdawalla and George Zanjani. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Catastrophe Bonds, Reinsurance, and the Optimal Collateralization of Risk-Transfer
Darius Lakdawalla and George Zanjani
NBER Working Paper No. 12742
December 2006
JEL No. G11,G22
ABSTRACT
Catastrophe bonds feature full collateralization of the underlying risk transfer, and thus abandon the
insurance principle of economizing on collateral through diversification. We examine the theoretical
foundations beneath this paradox, finding that fully collateralized instruments have important uses
in a risk transfer market when insurers cannot contract completely over the division of assets in the
event of insolvency, and, more generally, cannot write contracts with a full menu of state-contingent
payments. In this environment, insureds have different levels of exposure to an insurer's default. When
contracting constraints limit the insurer's ability to smooth out such differences, catastrophe bonds
can be used to deliver coverage to those most exposed to default. We demonstrate how catastrophe
bonds can improve welfare in this way by mitigating differences in default exposure, which arise with:
(1) contractual incompleteness, and (2) heterogeneity among insureds, which undermines the efficiency
of the mechanical pro rata division of assets that takes place in the event of insurer insolvency.
Darius Lakdawalla
The RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
and NBER
darius@rand.org
George Zanjani
Capital Markets Function
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty St.
New York, NY 10045
george.zanjani@ny.frb.org

1 Introduction
Recent disaster experience has produced a flurry of economic inquiry into catastrophe in-
surance markets. Especially puzzling is the apparent incompleteness of catastrophe risk
transfer: The price of risk transfer seems high, risk is not spread evenly among insur-
ers in the manner suggested by Borch’s [1] groundbreaking theoretical result, and, in stark
contrast to Arrow’s well-known characterization of optimal insurance contracts, reinsurance
consumers do not purchase coverage for high layers of risk. Froot [11] documents these
puzzles and fingers various market imperfections as possible explanations.
Some view the catastrophe bond as a promising vehicle for overcoming imperfections
in the reinsurance market. In principle, the catastrophe bond opens a direct channel for
catastrophe risk to flow to the capital markets, sidestepping frictions present in the rein-
surance market and connecting those who need protection with well-funded investors eager
to provide it. On the other hand, others are skeptical that catastrophe securitization will
be a panacea. Bouriaux and Scott [2] argue that securitization terms are unlikely to be
attractive to buyers of terrorism coverage and note that the record of risk-linked capital
market instruments has not been encouraging. Indeed, catastrophe bond issuance to date
has been relatively limited, even in the aftermath of events that were expected to stimulate
issuance. It is too early to write an epitaph for the catastrophe bond, but the experience
to date raises questions about its theoretical foundations and its likely future role.
On closer inspection, the catastrophe bond seems both paradoxical and primitive. Its
current form features full collateralization and links principal forfeiture only to specific risks,
thereby retreating from the fundamental, time-tested concept of diversification that allows
insurers to protect insured value far in excess of the actual assets held as collateral. In a
world where frictional costs (e.g., due to taxes, regulations, or moral hazard) make capital
costly to hold, diversification lowers the cost of insurance. Viewed in this light, a fully
collateralized instrument seems an unlikely competitor to traditional reinsurance products.1
This paper examines this issue by developing a theory of risk collateralization. Specif-
ically, we study the efficient division of risk-bearing assets between reinsurance company
assets and catastrophe bond principal (both of which can be used to “collateralize” promises
to indemnify consumers). In a narrow sense, the analysis supports the skeptical intuition
outlined above. When reinsurance companies can write any type of contract with their
insureds and frictional costs are identical for catastrophe bonds and reinsurer assets, catas-
trophe bonds are at best redundant, and at worst welfare-reducing. If the insurer has
complete freedom to vary indemnity payments to consumers in every state of the world, it
can engineer any possible menu of pay-outs through its own contracts: Catastrophe bonds
add nothing in the absence of contracting constraints.
However, reinsurers and insurers do face contracting constraints in practice. Typical
contracts promise an indemnity payment to a policyholder who has suffered a covered loss
but do not specify rules ex ante for who gets what in the event of insurer failure. Instead,
the division of assets under bankruptcy is determined by insurance receivership laws, and
insurers either cannot or do not attempt to contractually specify how assets will be divided
in the event of bankruptcy. As a result, assets of failed companies are distributed according
1Niehaus [21] observes this paradox on Page 593.
1

to inflexible and potentially inefficient mechanical rules.
Constraints on company asset distribution under default open up a role for catastrophe
bonds (and other highly collateralized vehicles, such as reinsurance “side-cars”), even if
there are no differences in the frictional costs. When insureds are homogeneous and risk
exposures are binary (loss or no loss), optimal insurance contracts are similar, and simple
rules—e.g.,apro rata rulethatpaysallclaimantsatthesamerateonthedollarintheeventof
insurer bankruptcy—can perform well. Heterogeneity, however, exposes the shortcomings
of insurance contracts in the presence of pro rata rules, which may misallocate assets in
the bankruptcy state.2 Pro rata allocations can be suboptimal when some insureds are
more concerned about the bankruptcy state than others, and this will generally be the case.
Reinsurancebuyersholdpoliciesofdifferingqualityevenwhenpurchasingthesepoliciesfrom
the same reinsurer. Some are more exposed to default than others, and those that have
greater exposure to bankruptcy risk may desire greater collateralization of their potential
claims than can be provided under pro rata rules. This need opens up a role for catastrophe
bonds and other related instruments in the risk transfer market, which can vary the degree
of collateralization of coverage for specific insureds.
Thus, catastrophe bonds can improve welfare when reinsurers face constraints on the
distribution of assets in bankruptcy, and when they must insure a heterogeneous group of
risks. Catastrophe bonds cansmooth out allocationsmade ragged bythe riskof bankruptcy.
Put differently, reinsurance capital may weakly dominate the catastrophe bond in terms
of raising average policy quality, but such capital can be rendered a blunt instrument by
bankruptcy laws: Catastrophe bonds can improve welfare for those insureds most exposed
to bankruptcy risk.
The paper is laid out as follows. Section 2 provides some background and context on
catastrophe bonds. Section 3 then develops a concrete two-consumer example to illustrate
the intuition behind our results. Section 4 develops our results formally in the context
of a social planning problem with N consumers. Section 5 discusses other strategies for
protecting consumers against default and interprets them in the context of the model. In
particular, it considers how collateralization clauses in reinsurance policies influence the
priority of claimants under bankruptcy, and the extent to which such clauses substitute for
fully collateralized instruments such as catastrophe bonds. Section 6 concludes.
2 Background and Motivation
While structures vary, a typical catastrophe bond transaction involves a special purpose
vehicle (SPV). The SPV sells securities (catastrophe bonds) to investors, and the proceeds
from the sale are deposited in trust and invested. The SPV then provides reinsurance to
a ceding insurer or reinsurer, who pays a premium in exchange. The premium, as well
as income earned on the trust investments, funds interest payments to investors. If a
contractually-defined trigger event occurs, part or all of the bond principal is forfeited to the
2MahulandWright[17]alsonotetheinefficiencyofpro rata rulesinthecontextofamodelwithidentical
consumers but generalized loss distributions.
2