NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ENTREPRENEURIAL LEARNING, THE IPO DECISION, AND THE POST-IPO
DROP IN FIRM PROFITABILITY
Lubos Pastor
Lucian Taylor
Pietro Veronesi
Working Paper 12792
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12792
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006
All authors are at the Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago. Pastor and Veronesi are
also affiliated with the CEPR and NBER. We thank Ray Ball, Doug Diamond, Michael Halling (discussant),
John Heaton, Gene Kandel, Peter Kondor, and the audiences at the University of Chicago and the Vienna
Symposia in Asset Management for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Lubos Pastor, Lucian Taylor, and Pietro Veronesi. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Entrepreneurial Learning, the IPO Decision, and the Post-IPO Drop in Firm Profitability
Lubos Pastor, Lucian Taylor, and Pietro Veronesi
NBER Working Paper No. 12792
December 2006
JEL No. G1,G3
ABSTRACT
We develop a model in which an entrepreneur learns about the average profitability of a private firm
before deciding whether to take the firm public. In this decision, the entrepreneur trades off diversification
benefits of going public against benefits of private control. The model predicts that firm profitability
should decline after the IPO, on average, and that this decline should be larger for firms with more
volatile profitability and firms with less uncertain average profitability. These predictions are supported
empirically in a sample of 7,183 IPOs in the U.S. between 1975 and 2004.
Lubos Pastor Pietro Veronesi
Graduate School of Business Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Ave 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637 Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER and NBER
lubos.pastor@chicagogsb.edu pietro.veronesi@gsb.uchicago.edu
Lucian Taylor
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
ltaylor1@gsb.uchicago.edu

1. Introduction
Thedecisiontogo publicisoneof themost importantdecisionsmadebyprivatelyheldfirms.
This decision can have various motives, such as to diversify the entrepreneur’s holdings, to
raise capital for investment,to exploit favorable market conditions, to facilitate acquisitions,
to improvethe liquidityof the firm’s shares, to find the firm’s market value, and to make the
firmmorevisible. OnecomplicatingfactorintheIPOdecisionisthattheprivatefirm’sfuture
cash flow is highly uncertain. This uncertainty makes it difficult for both the entrepreneur
and the outside investors to value the private firm. We examinethe effect of this uncertainty
on the decision to go public and on firm profitability around the IPO.
We developa model of theoptimalIPO decisioninthepresenceof learning about average
profitability. In the model, the profitability of a private firm mean-reverts around an un-
known mean and agents learn about this mean by observing realized profits. There are two
typesofrisk-averseagents: investors,who arewelldiversified,andanentrepreneur,whoseen-
tire wealth is tied up in the private firm. The entrepreneur suffers from under-diversification
but enjoys benefits of private control. If he takes his firm public, he forfeits the private
benefits but achieves better diversification by investing the IPO proceeds in publicly-traded
stocks and bonds. It is optimal for the entrepreneur to take his firm public when the market
value of the firm (value to investors) exceeds the private value of the firm (value to the
entrepreneur). We show that an IPO is more likely for firms with higher expected and cur-
rent profitability, more volatile profitability, more uncertain average profitability, and lower
benefits of private control.
In this model, it is optimal for an IPO to take place when the firm’s expected future
profitability is sufficiently high. The entrepreneur’s benefits of private control are derived
from assets in place rather than from future growth opportunities. The firm’s private value
is therefore less sensitive to expected future profitability than the firm’s market value is.
When expected profitability rises, the market value rises faster than the private value, and
when expected profitability rises high enough, it becomes optimal for the firm to be owned
publicly (by investors) rather than privately (by the entrepreneur).
The model predicts that firm profitability should drop after the IPO, on average, and
that this drop should be larger for firms with more volatile profitability and firms with less
uncertain average profitability. These predictions follow from the endogeneity of the IPO
and from learning. For an IPO to take place, the agents’ expected profitability must go up
before the IPO, as explained in the previous paragraph. According to Bayes’ rule, agents
revisetheirexpectations upward only ifthey observerealizedprofitabilitythat is higherthan
1

expected. As a result, realized profitability exceeds expected future profitability at the time
of the IPO, and hence profitability is expected to drop after the IPO. The implications for
volatility and uncertainty also follow from the basic properties of Bayesian updating. These
results come through most clearly in the context of a toy model in Section 2.
To analyze the implications of our model, we calibrate the model and compute the ex-
pected post-IPO drop in profitability for a wide range of plausible parameter values, using
a closed-form solution for this expected drop. We incorporate the endogeneity of the IPO
by computing expectations conditional on an IPO being optimal. We also incorporate the
endogeneityof theprivate firm’sexistence,recognizingthat for somesets of parametervalues
it is not optimal for the entrepreneur to start the private firm in the first place. The results
show that the basic intuition from the toy model applies to our richer model as well.
We testthe model’spredictionsempiricallyina sample of 7,183 IPOsin theU.S.between
1975 and 2004. Our evidence supports the model. Firm profitability, measured as return
on equity (ROE), declines significantly after the IPO. The average decline in quarterly ROE
is 2.7% after one year and 4.3% after three years. A post-IPO decline in profitability has
already been reported by Degeorge and Zeckhauser (1993), Jain and Kini (1994), Mikkelson,
Partch, and Shah (1997), and Pagano, Panetta, and Zingales (1998) but our sample is much
larger.1 More important, we also find that the post-IPO decline is larger for stocks with
more volatileprofitability and firms with less uncertain average profitability. These findings,
which do not seem to appear in the literature, are consistent with our model.
While the volatility of profitability can be estimated directly from realized profits, un-
certainty about average profitability is more difficult to measure. The common proxies for
uncertainty also proxy for volatility. To separate uncertainty from volatility, we estimate
the stock price reaction to earnings announcements, which should be stronger for firms with
higher uncertainty and lower volatility. We find that firms with weaker price reactions tend
to experience larger post-IPO drops in ROE, as predicted by the model.
The model also predicts that firm profitability increases before the IPO. We do not
test this prediction due to the lack of pre-IPO data, but supporting evidence is provided
by Degeorge and Zeckhauser (1993) who study 62 reverse LBOs that went public between
1983 and 1987. They find that profitability increases sharply before LBOs return to public
ownership and decreases thereafter, consistent with our model.
1Degeorge and Zeckhauser (1993) analyze 62 reverse leveraged buyouts (LBOs) in 1983–1987, Jain and
Kini (1994) study 682 IPOs in 1976–1988,Mikkelson, Partch, and Shah (1997) examine 283 IPOs in 1980–
1983,and Pagano, Panetta, and Zingales (1998) investigate 69 Italian IPOs in 1982–1992.
2