NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TRANSPARENCY AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Benjamin E. Hermalin
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 12875
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12875
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2007
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Benjamin E. Hermalin and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Transparency and Corporate Governance
Benjamin E. Hermalin and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 12875
January 2007
JEL No. G32,G38,M41
ABSTRACT
An objective of many proposed corporate governance reforms is increased transparency. This goal
has been relatively uncontroversial, as most observers believe increased transparency to be unambiguously
good. We argue that, from a corporate governance perspective, there are likely to be both costs and
benefits to increased transparency, leading to an optimum level beyond which increasing transparency
lowers profits. This result holds even when there is no direct cost of increasing transparency and no
issue of revealing information to regulators or product-market rivals. We show that reforms that seek
to increase transparency can reduce firm profits, raise executive compensation, and inefficiently increase
the rate of CEO turnover. We further consider the possibility that executives will take actions to distort
information. We show that executives could have incentives, due to career concerns, to increase transparency
and that increases in penalties for distorting information can be profit reducing.
Benjamin E. Hermalin
Walter Haas School of Business
545 Student Services Building, #1900
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-0001
hermalin@haas.berkeley.edu
Michael S. Weisbach
University Of Illinois
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 S. Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
weisbach@uiuc.edu

Hermalin and Weisbach Introduction 1
1 Introduction
Inresponsetorecentcorporategovernancescandals,governmentshaverespondedbyadopted
a number of regulatory changes. One component of these changes has been increased dis-
closure requirements. For example, Sarbanes-Oxley (sox), adopted in response to Enron,
Worldcom, and other public governance failures, required detailed reporting of off-balance
sheet financing and special purpose entities. Additionally, sox increased the penalties to
executives for misreporting. The link between governance and transparency is clear in the
public’s (and regulators’) perceptions; transparency was increased for the purpose of im-
proving governance.
Yet, most academic discussions about transparency have nothing to do with corporate
governance. The most commonly discussed benefit of transparency is that it reduces asym-
metric information, and hence lowers the cost of trading the firm’s securities and the firm’s
cost of capital.1 To offset this benefit, commentators typically focus on the direct costs of
disclosure, as well as the competitive costs arising because the disclosure provides potentially
useful information to product-market rivals.2 While both of these factors are undoubtedly
important considerations in firms’ disclosure decisions, they are not particularly related to
corporate governance.
In this paper, we provide a framework for understanding the role of transparency in
corporate governance. We analyze the effect that disclosure has on the contractual and
monitoring relationship between the board and the ceo. We view the quality of information
the firm discloses as a choice variable that affects the contracts the firm and its managers.
Through its impact on corporate governance, higher quality disclosure both provides bene-
fits and imposes costs. The benefits reflect the fact that more accurate information about
performance allows boards to make better personnel decisions about their executives. The
costs arise because executives have to be compensated for the increased risk to their careers
implicit in higher disclosure levels, as well as for the incremental costs they incur trying to
distort information in equilibrium. These costs and benefits complement existing explana-
tions for disclosure. Moreover, because they are directly about corporate governance, they
are in line with common perceptions of why firms disclose information.
WeformalizethisideathroughanextensionofHermalinandWeisbach(1998)andHerma-
lin’s(2005)adaptationofHolmstrom’s(1999)career-concernsmodeltoconsiderthequestion
1Diamond and Verrecchia (1991) were the first to formalize this idea. For empirical evidence, see Leuz
and Verrecchia (2000), who document that firms’ cost of capital decreases when they voluntarily increase
transparency.
2SeeLeuzandWysocki(2006)forarecentsurveyofthedisclosureliterature. Felthametal.(1992),Hayes
and Lundholm (1996), and Wagenhofer (1990) provide discussions of the impact of information disclosure
on product-market competition.

Hermalin and Weisbach Model 2
of optimal transparency. Section 2 lays out the basics of this model, in which the company
chooses the “quality” of the performance measure that directors use to assess the ceo’s
ability. In this model, the optimal quality of information for the firm to reveal can be zero,
infinite, or a finite positive value depending on the parameters. When we calibrate the
model to reflect actual publicly traded large us corporations, we find that the parameters
implied by the calibration lead to a finite value for optimal disclosure quality. Thus, our
analysis suggests that disclosure requirements going beyond this optimal level are likely to
have unintended consequences and to reduce value.
Section 4 of the paper considers how the ceo could exert effort to distort this signal.3 We
consider three ways in which the ceo could potentially distort the signal. First, ceos can
take actions that increase the signal without changing the firm’s underlying profitability; we
refer to this type of action as “exaggerating effort.” In addition, ceos can take actions that
affect signal noise; we denote such actions as “obscuring effort.” Finally, we briefly consider
the possibility that ceos can conceal information.
We evaluate the implications of penalties and incentives that potentially affect the mo-
tives of ceos to distort the information coming from their firms. Measures that punish
exaggerating effort can be effective if they are sufficiently severe to curtail this effort; how-
ever, relatively minor penalties can be counterproductive. In addition, incentives for ceos
to improve the accuracy of information can harm shareholders because such incentives push
a ceo to disclose more than the value-maximizing quantity of information.
We discuss the model’s implications and conclude in Section 5. Proofs not given in the
text can be found in the appendix.
2 The Model
The focus of our model is the relationship between the ceo and the firm’s owners (alterna-
tively, between the ceo and the directors acting on behalf of the owners). The owners seek
to assess the ceo’s ability based on the information available to them, and to replace him
if the assessment is too low. The ceo has career concerns, so he is concerned about infor-
mation transmittal to the broader market. This concern provides him incentives to do what
3Inderst and Mueller (2005), Singh (2004), and Goldman and Slezak (in press) are three other recent
papers concerned with the ceo’s incentives to distort information. Like us, the first is concerned with the
board’s making inferences about the ceo’s ability. Inderst and Mueller’s approach differs insofar as they
assume the ceo possesses information not available to the board, which the board needs to induce the ceo
to reveal. There is no uncertainly about the ceo’s ability in Singh’s model; he is focused on the board’s
obtaining accurate signals about the ceo’s actions. Goldman and Slezak are concerned primarily with the
designofstock-basedcompensation. Inaddition,unlikeus,theytreatdisclosurerulesasexogenous,whereas
we derive the profit-maximizing rules endogenously.