NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A UNIFYING MODEL OF HOW THE TAX SYSTEM AND GENERALLY ACCEPTED
ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES AFFECT CORPORATE BEHAVIOR
Douglas A. Shackelford
Joel Slemrod
James M. Sallee
Working Paper 12873
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12873
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2007
We are grateful for comments from Alan Auerbach, Dhammika Dharmapala, Jana Smith Raedy, Leslie
Robinson, Terry Shevlin, Ryan Wilson and participants at the Conference on the Intersection of Financial
Accounting and Tax Policy, held in Washington, D.C. on December 6, 2006 and at the NBER in Cambridge,
MA on December 7, 2006 and the NBER pre-conference meeting held in Cambridge MA on July 27,
2006; we thank Joanne Hsu for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Douglas A. Shackelford, Joel Slemrod, and James M. Sallee. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Unifying Model of How the Tax System and Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
Affect Corporate Behavior
Douglas A. Shackelford, Joel Slemrod, and James M. Sallee
NBER Working Paper No. 12873
January 2007
JEL No. H21,H25,M41
ABSTRACT
This paper models the impact of the tax system and GAAP on the real and financial reporting decisions
of corporations. It provides a first step toward joint evaluation of taxation and financial reporting in
the standard economic analyses of corporate behavior. The key finding is that value arises from real
decisions that provide firms with discretion in their tax and financial reporting. This desire for flexibility
modifies the optimal decisions of firms, in theory, and we provide examples that illustrate this behavior
in the real world.
Douglas A. Shackelford James M. Sallee
Kenan-Flagler Business School University of Michigan Business School
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
Campus Box 3490, McColl Building jsallee@umich.edu
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3490
and NBER
doug_shack@unc.edu
Joel Slemrod
University of Michigan Business School
Wyly Hall, Room 7719
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
jslemrod@umich.edu

A Unifying Model of How the Tax System and Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles Affect Corporate Behavior
1. Introduction
This paper models the effect of the tax system and financial reporting principles
on the real and accounting decisions of corporations. Its purpose is to enhance our
understanding of the effects of taxation and accounting on corporate behavior by merging
the approach taken by economists and accountants. Economists typically study the
effects of taxes on real decisions, ignoring the role of financial reporting.1 Accountants
usually focus on the coordination of tax and accounting choices, with little attention to
real economic effects (see review in Shackelford and Shevlin, 2001).2 Both approaches
yield important insights, but neither is complete because tax and accounting decisions
interact in important ways that affect real decisions. For example, a given tax policy may
induce a real response that, in turn, facilitates advantageous financial disclosures. As a
result, studies of real choices that ignore the incentives, constraints, and interaction of
taxes and financial reporting may lead to spurious conclusions. Therefore, a unifying
framework that incorporates both tax and accounting choices is needed to interpret
corporate behavior.
This paper provides a first step toward joint evaluation of taxation and financial
reporting in the standard economic analyses of corporate behavior. It develops a
framework that formalizes the idea that the attractiveness of some real decisions is
enhanced because they provide managers with discretion over the timing of taxable
income and/or book income. The key finding is that, to the extent managers value
flexibility in their tax and financial reporting, they are more likely to make real decisions
that provide discretion. This desire for flexibility modifies the optimal decisions of firms,
in theory, and we provide examples that illustrate this behavior in the real world.
1 An extensive empirical literature in economics explores the effects of taxes on numerous real decisions.
For a sample of the work, see reviews of investment decisions in Hassett and Hubbard (2002) and Hassett
and Newmark (2006) and corporate finance in Graham (2003).
2 Slemrod’s (1992) trichotomy of behavioral responses to taxation illustrates the division between the tax
work of economists and accountants: (1) real responses—the traditional domain of economists; (2)
responses that reshuffle, relabel, or recharacterize the real activities of the taxpayer—the traditional domain
of accountants; and (3) timing responses that take advantage of changing tax rules or rates—which both
groups have studied to a limited extent.

The paper proceeds in the following manner: Section 2 covers five topics around
which we build the model. First, we discuss the fundamental role that information plays
in both taxation and financial accounting. Both tax returns and financial statements
convey inside information to outside stakeholders about the profitability of the firm, and
these information asymmetries between the insiders and the external users are central to
our modeling approach. Second, we develop the link between information and the
corporate income tax. We note the administrative efficiencies of collecting large sums of
tax from organizations with advanced information systems. However, they must be
balanced against the opportunities for tax avoidance that this information provides.
Third, we review the tax research in accounting that investigates whether firms will pay
taxes to achieve accounting goals. Fourth, we discuss the tax and financial reporting
costs associated with differences in accounting earnings and taxable income. Finally, we
review the role that book-tax conformity plays in tax and accounting decisions.
Section 3 develops our model. Our objective is to provide a framework, as well
as a vocabulary, that illustrates how accounting conventions and the tax law affect real
business decisions. Among other results, we find that value arises from real decisions
that provide firms with discretion in their tax and financial reporting.
Examples of this value follow in Section 4. Specifically, we examine how the
value of discretion can provide incentives for firms to undertake more risky investments,
to move their operations abroad, and to invest in activities with high legal and factual
ambiguity. We discuss some policy implications in Section 5, and offer some concluding
remarks in Section 6.
2