NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LUCKY DIRECTORS
Lucian A. Bebchuk
Yaniv Grinstein
Urs Peyer
Working Paper 12811
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12811
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006
For financial support, we would like to thank the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business,
the Harvard Law School Program on Corporate Governance, and the Lens Foundation for Corporate
Excellence. Because Yaniv Grinstein is a visiting academic scholar at the Securities and Exchange
Commission during 2006-2007, we should note that, as a matter of policy, the Securities and Exchange
Commission disclaims responsibility for any private publication or statement of any SEC employee
or Commissioner. This paper expresses the authors' views and does not necessarily reflect those of
the Commission, the Commissioners, other members of the SEC staff, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2006 by Lucian A. Bebchuk, Yaniv Grinstein, and Urs Peyer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Lucky Directors
Lucian A. Bebchuk, Yaniv Grinstein, and Urs Peyer
NBER Working Paper No. 12811
December 2006
JEL No. D23,G32,G38,J33,J44,K22,M14
ABSTRACT
While prior empirical work and much public attention have focused on the opportunistic timing of
executives' grants, we provide in this paper evidence that outside directors' option grants have also
been favorably timed to an extent that cannot be fully explained by sheer luck. Examining events in
which public firms granted options to outside directors during 1996-2005, we find that 9% were "lucky
grant events" falling on days with a stock price equal to a monthly low. We estimate that about 800
lucky grant events owed their status to opportunistic timing, and that about 460 firms and 1400 outside
directors were associated with grant events produced by such timing. There is evidence that the opportunistic
timing of director grant events has been to a substantial extent the product of backdating and not merely
spring-loading based on private information. We find that directors' luck has been correlated with
executives' luck. Furthermore, grant events were more likely to be lucky when the firm had more entrenching
provisions protecting insiders from the risk of removal, as well as when the board did not have a majority
of independent directors.
Lucian A. Bebchuk Urs Peyer
Harvard Law School INSEAD - Finance
1545 Massachusetts Avenue Boulevard de Constance
Cambridge, MA 02138 F-77305 Fontainebleau Cedex FRANCE
and NBER urs.peyer@insead.edu
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu
Yaniv Grinstein
Johnson Graduate School of Management
Cornell University
371 Sage Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
yg33@cornell.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
The opportunistic timing of executive stock option grants -- via backdating, spring-
loading based on the use of private information, or otherwise – has been the subject of significant
empirical work and a great deal of public attention. But it has not been thus far recognized that
grants awarded to outside directors have also been opportunistically timed. This paper shows that
opportunistic timing problems have not been limited to executives’ grants, as has been thus far
assumed, but rather have also affected outside directors’ grants. The paper investigates the link
between executives' and directors' luck, and it identifies governance and other factors associated
with opportunistic timing of director grants. Our findings contribute to understanding the scope
of opportunistic timing practices and are relevant for attempts to understand their underlying
causes. More generally, by highlighting the potential existence and determinants of agency
problems between directors and shareholders, our analysis contributes to assessing outside
directors' role and identifying governance arrangements that could improve directors'
performance.
Financial economists' empirical work is widely regarded as responsible for drawing
attention to the abnormal returns accompanying executives' option grants. More recently, the
realization that many executive grants have been backdated has led to a wave of corporate
scandals. The Senate Banking and Finance committees held hearings on the subject, and the SEC
and a small army of private law firms hired by companies are investigating past grant practices.
More than 120 companies have come under scrutiny as of this writing. Dozens of executives
have been forced to resign, and dozens of companies announced that they will have to restate
their past financial statements.1
The alleged backdating of executives' grants has raised questions regarding the role if any
played by outside directors. In his opening statement at the Senate Finance hearing on
backdating, Chairman Grassley expressed concerns that "boards of directors were either asleep at
1 The Wall Street Journal (WSJ) maintains an "Options Scorecard" at www.wsj.com with an updated list
of all the companies that have come under scrutiny in connection with backdating issues, and it counted
more than 120 such companies as of this writing. For an account of the large scale of investigations of
past grants conducted by companies with the help of hired outside professionals, see James Bandler and
Kara Scannell, "In Options Probes, Private Law Firms Play Crucial Role", Wall Street Journal, October
28, 2006.
1

the switch, or in some cases, willing accomplices themselves." 2 In the view of Chairman
Grassley, as in that of others who focused on the opportunistic timing of executive options, there
were two possible scenarios that could raise concerns: first, the "asleep at the switch” scenario of
directors not knowing about the opportunistic timing of executives' grants, which raises the
question of whether directors should have commonly been expected to notice such practices;3
second, the "accomplice" scenario of outside directors knowing but electing to go along with the
opportunistic timing of executives' grants, which raises questions about the directors' incentives
and the adequacy of their performance as guardians of shareholder interests. Thus far, evidence
that directors knew about the backdating of executives’ grants has surfaced only in a few cases.4
With attention focused on what role, if any, was played by directors in the opportunistic
timing of grants awarded to executives, little attention was paid to the grants awarded to outside
directors themselves. Practitioners with whom we discussed the subject told us that in their view,
director grants have been unlikely targets for opportunistic timing because many of them
coincide with the annual meeting and because the monetary stakes are substantially smaller than
in executives' grants. Also, some of the possible reasons given by observers for the backdating of
executives' options – such as a desire to provide executives with non-performance pay that is not
subject to the limitations on tax deductibility of Section 162(m) of the Tax Code – are not
2 Opening Statement of Sen. Chuck Grassley, Chairman, Finance Committee Hearing, “Executive
Compensation: Backdating to the Future", Wednesday, Sept. 6, 2006, available at
http://www.senate.gov/~finance/.
3 Some observers believe that directors should not have been generally expected to know about the
existence of opportunistic timing practices. See, e.g., Martin Lipton, Deconstructing American Business II
(Nov. 1, 2006) (expressing concern that business might be hurt by backdating investigations leading to
criticism "not only of those at fault but all directors of the companies involved").
4 According to the WSJ's options scorecard, among the more than 120 companies coming under scrutiny
thus far and among the dozens of corporate officials forced to depart, outside directors departed or were
alleged to have been directly involved only in a small number of cases, including United Health, Brooks
Automation, and Mercury Interactive.
2