NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MULTINATIONAL FIRMS, FDI FLOWS AND IMPERFECT CAPITAL MARKETS
Pol Antràs
Mihir A. Desai
C. Fritz Foley
Working Paper 12855
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12855
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2007
The statistical analysis of firm-level data on U.S. multinational companies was conducted at the International
Investment Division, Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce under arrangements
that maintain legal confidentiality requirements. The views expressed are those of the authors and
do not reflect official positions of the U.S. Department of Commerce. The authors thank Gita Gopinath,
James Markusen, Aleh Tsyvinski Bill Zeile and seminar participants at Boston University, Brown
University, Hitotsubashi University, MIT, the NBER ITI program meeting, the New York Fed, Oxford,
UC Berkeley, UC Boulder, Universidad de Vigo, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, and the World Bank for helpful
suggestions. Davin Chor provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Pol Antràs, Mihir A. Desai, and C. Fritz Foley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Multinational Firms, FDI Flows and Imperfect Capital Markets
Pol Antràs, Mihir A. Desai, and C. Fritz Foley
NBER Working Paper No. 12855
January 2007
JEL No. F21,F23,G32,L24
ABSTRACT
This paper examines how costly financial contracting and weak investor protection influence the cross-border
operational, financing and investment decisions of firms. We develop a model in which product developers
have a comparative advantage in monitoring the deployment of their technology abroad. The paper
demonstrates that when firms want to exploit technologies abroad, multinational firm (MNC) activity
and foreign direct investment (FDI) flows arise endogenously when monitoring is nonverifiable and
financial frictions exist. The mechanism generating MNC activity is not the risk of technological expropriation
by local partners but the demands of external funders who require MNC participation to ensure value
maximization by local entrepreneurs. The model demonstrates that weak investor protections limit
the scale of multinational firm activity, increase the reliance on FDI flows and alter the decision to
deploy technology through FDI as opposed to arm's length licensing. Several distinctive predictions
for the impact of weak investor protection on MNC activity and FDI flows are tested and confirmed
using firm-level data.
Pol Antràs C. Fritz Foley
Department of Economics Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University Harvard University
1805 Cambridge Street Soldiers Field
Littauer Center 319 Boston, MA 02163
Cambridge, MA 02138 and NBER
and NBER ffoley@hbs.edu
pantras@fas.harvard.edu
Mihir A. Desai
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mdesai@hbs.edu

1 Introduction
Firms globalizing their operations and the associated capital flows have become major
features of the world economy. These cross-border activities and capital flows span insti-
tutional settings with varying investor protections and levels of capital market develop-
ment. Whiletheimportanceofinstitutionalheterogeneityindictatingeconomicoutcomes
has been emphasized, existing analyses typically ignore the global firms and the capital
flows that are now commonplace. Investigating how global firms make operational and
financing decisions in a world of heterogenous institutions promises to provide a novel
perspective on observed patterns of flows and firm activity.
This paper develops and tests a model of the operational and financial decisions of
firms as they exploit their technologies in countries with differing levels of investor pro-
tections. The model demonstrates that multinational firm (MNC) activity and foreign
directinvestment(FDI)ariseendogenouslyinsettingscharacterizedby financial frictions.
Furthermore, the model generates several predictions regarding the use of arm’s length
licensingtotransfertechnology, thedegreetowhichmultinationalfirmactivityisfinanced
by capital flows, the extent to which multinationals take ownership in foreign projects,
and the scale of operations abroad. These predictions are tested using firm-level data on
U.S. multinational firms.
The model considers the problem of a firm (which we interpret as the parent firm
of a multinational corporation) seeking to deploy a proprietary technology abroad with
the help of a local (or host-country) entrepreneur. The central premise of the model
is that the parent firm, as developer of the technology, has a comparative advantage in
monitoringhowitstechnologyisexploitedandcanuniquelyidentifyif local entrepreneurs
are pursuing value maximization. A set of external investors are attractive sources of
financefortheexploitationofthetechnologyabroadbecausetheyfacealoweropportunity
cost of capital than that faced by the entrepreneur and the parent firm. In order to
convince external funders to supply capital, entrepreneurs need to give financial claims
on the project to parent firms to ensure that they provide monitoring when monitoring is
unverifiable, thus mitigating managerial misbehavior by entrepreneurs. The concern over
managerial misbehavior, and the requirement for parent firm financial participation, is
particularly acute when investor protections are weak.
The characterization of multinational firms as developers of technologies has long
been central to models explaining multinational firm activity. In contrast to those models
that emphasize the risk of technology expropriation, the model in this paper emphasizes
financial frictions, a cruder form of managerial opportunism and the role of external
1

funders. As such, while technology is central to these other models and the model in
this paper, the mechanism generating multinational firm activity is entirely distinct. Our
emphasis on monitoring builds on the theory presented in Holmstrom and Tirole (1997)
which captures how monitoring is critical to understanding financial intermediation.
In deriving our theoretical results, we find it useful to first develop a benchmark in
which monitoring is verifiable. In this setting, we show that when the developer of a
technology wants to deploy that technology abroad, the developer chooses to license this
technology to a host country entrepreneur who obtains financing from external investors.
Under these circumstances, the entrepreneur can exploit technology without giving a fi-
nancial claim on the project to the developer, who simply obtains a flat fee for the use
of its proprietary technology. Nevertheless, when monitoring is verifiable, weak investor
protections still limit the scale of projects because these environments require more mon-
itoring and this inflates the marginal cost of production.
When monitoring is nonverifiable, capital flows and multinational ownership of assets
abroad arise endogenously to align the incentives of the inventors of technology and the
entrepreneurs in host economies. In this setting, we show that an optimal contract calls
for the developer of the technology to own equity in the project and may also call for
the parent firm to provide funds for investment, even though external investors are more
efficient sources of financing.1
The case of nonverifiable monitoring delivers several novel predictions about the na-
ture of FDI and patterns of multinational firm activity. First, the model predicts that
technology will be exploited through unrelated party licensing rather than through affil-
iate activity in countries where investor protections are stronger. Second, the share of
activity abroad financed by capital flows from the multinational parent will be decreas-
ing in the quality of investor protections in host economies. Third, ownership shares by
multinational parents will also be decreasing in the quality of investor protections in host
economies. These predictions reflect the fact that monitoring by the developer of the
technology is more critical in settings where investor protections are weaker. The model
also predicts that the scale of activity based on multinational technologies in host coun-
tries will be an increasing function of the quality of the institutional environment. Better
investor protections reduce the need for monitoring and therefore allow for a larger scale
of activity.
Wetestthesepredictionsusingthemostcomprehensiveavailabledataontheactivities
1Following Holmstrom and Tirole (1997), in our model contracting is “complete” in the sense that
we solve for the optimal contract subject to explicit information frictions. This is in contrast to a large
incomplete-contracting literature in corporate finance.
2