NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO U.S. FIRMS HAVE THE BEST CORPORATE GOVERNANCE? A CROSS-COUNTRY
EXAMINATION OF THE RELATION BETWEEN CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
AND SHAREHOLDER WEALTH
Reena Aggarwal
Isil Erel
Rene M. Stulz
Rohan Williamson
Working Paper 12819
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12819
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2007
Respectively, Professor, Georgetown University, Assistant Professor, Ohio State University, Reese
Chair of Banking and Monetary Economics, Ohio State University, NBER, and ECGI, and Associate
Professor, Georgetown University. We are grateful for comments from Jerome Taillard. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Reena Aggarwal, Isil Erel, Rene M. Stulz, and Rohan Williamson. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do U.S. Firms Have the Best Corporate Governance? A Cross-Country Examination of the
Relation between Corporate Governance and Shareholder Wealth
Reena Aggarwal, Isil Erel, Rene M. Stulz, and Rohan Williamson
NBER Working Paper No. 12819
January 2007
JEL No. G30,G32,G34,G38,K22
ABSTRACT
We compare the governance of foreign firms to the governance of similar U.S. firms. Using an index
of firm governance attributes, we find that, on average, foreign firms have worse governance than
matching U.S. firms. Roughly 8% of foreign firms have better governance than comparable U.S. firms.
The majority of these firms are either in the U.K. or in Canada. When we define a firm's governance
gap as the difference between the quality of its governance and the governance of a comparable U.S.
firm, we find that the value of foreign firms increases with the governance gap. This result suggests
that firms are rewarded by the markets for having better governance than their U.S. peers. It is therefore
not the case that foreign firms are better off simply mimicking the governance of comparable U.S.
firms. Among the individual governance attributes considered, we find that firms with board and audit
committee independence are valued more. In contrast, other attributes, such as the separation of the
chairman of the board and of the CEO functions, do not appear to be associated with higher shareholder
wealth.
Reena Aggarwal Rene M. Stulz
Georgetown University Fisher College of Business
Finance Group The Ohio State University
McDonough School of Business 806A Fisher Hall
G 04, Old North 2100 Neil Avenue
Washington, DC 20057 Columbus, OH 43210-1144
aggarwal@georgetown.edu and NBER
stulz_1@cob.osu.edu
Isil Erel
Department of Finance Rohan Williamson
The Ohio State University Georgetown University
832 Fisher Hall Finance Group
2100 Neil Avenue McDonough School of Business
Columbus, OH 43210 G 04 Old North
erel_1@cob.osu.edu Washington, DC 20057
WILLIARG@georgetown.edu

Using the well-known definition of Shleifer and Vishny (1997), governance consists of the
mechanisms which insure that shareholders receive a return on their investment. Governance depends
both on country-level mechanisms and firm-level mechanisms. The country-level governance
mechanisms include a country’s laws and the institutions that enforce the laws, its culture and norms, and
the various formal and informal monitors of corporations. Firm-level or internal governance mechanisms
are the mechanisms that operate within the firm. These mechanisms are heavily influenced by a firm’s
choice of governance attributes through its charter and policies. There is a considerable literature that
compares the quality of institutions across countries. Surprisingly, while there are many studies of firm-
level governance, there is no systematic comparison of firm-level governance quality between the U.S.
and foreign countries. In this paper, we investigate how a foreign firm’s firm-level governance compares
to the firm-level governance it would have if it were a U.S. firm and whether the foreign firm’s
shareholders suffer or benefit when their firm’s governance differs from what it would be if it were a U.S.
firm.
Corporate governance differs across countries. In some countries, many view the objective of
corporations to maximize the welfare of a collection of stakeholders, while in others, especially the U.K.
and the U.S., it is more commonly believed that corporations should be run to maximize the wealth of
shareholders. Further, it is often argued that shareholder wealth maximization can require different
models of governance in different countries or regions, so shareholders may actually benefit from
governance differences across countries. With this view, some firm-level governance attributes that are
useful in the U.S. may not be as useful or even be detrimental in other countries because institutions,
economic and financial development differ across countries. For instance, Scott and Dallas (2006)
conclude that “no one system of corporate governance is the benchmark for all companies in all
jurisdictions.” Similarly, Gilson (2005) concludes that “within limits, different corporate governance
systems may solve the same monitoring problem through different institutions.” An alternative view is
that there is a dominant common standard of governance. As Hansmann and Kraakman (2000) put it: “we
2

make the claim that no important competitors to the standard model of corporate governance remain
persuasive today.” If a firm’s adherence to that common standard can be measured, firms that rank better
according to that standard should be worth more to their shareholders.
To conduct our investigation, we need information about firm-level corporate governance attributes
for a large number of firms across a large number of countries. Further, we would like measures of
individual governance attributes to be computed in the same way across all these firms. Two widely
known governance rankings include both U.S. and foreign firms. One of these two rankings, the Standard
and Poor's ranking, focuses on disclosure. The other one, produced by Institutional Shareholder Services
(ISS), uses a comprehensive inventory of governance attributes. We use the ISS governance attributes in
this paper. By doing so, we can analyze 44 common governance attributes for 2,235 non-U.S. firms and
5,296 U.S. firms covering 23 developed countries. To compare governance quality across the U.S. and
foreign countries, we have to create our own index making sure that the governance attributes included
are relevant both for U.S. firms and foreign firms. We call it the Global Governance Index, or GOV
Index.
One can reasonably disagree both with the governance attributes ISS focuses on and with the
computation of the index. It is obviously true, as Jack and Suzy Welch argue, that “Good governance
comes down to a lot more than a point system.”1 However, if the point system were to convey no
information, we would simply find that the ranking we use is not related to firm value. A criticism
advanced by some is that the index takes a U.S. view of governance. For our purpose, we would like a
ranking that takes such a view since we want to evaluate whether a foreign firm’s value is related to
governance attributes that are important from a U.S. firm’s perspective. If the U.S. governance approach
were not value relevant or if the ISS index were of poor quality, we would find that the attributes recorded
by ISS are not related to firm value. In that case, foreign firms would not lose value by having a worse
ranking than their U.S. counterparts.
1 “A dangerous division of labor,” by Jack and Suzy Welch, Business Week, November 6, 2006. For an academic
version of this argument, see Arcot and Bruno (2006).
3