NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHO BLOWS THE WHISTLE ON CORPORATE FRAUD?
Alexander Dyck
Adair Morse
Luigi Zingales
Working Paper 12882
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12882
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2007
*Alexander Dyck thanks the Connaught Fund of the University of Toronto and Luigi Zingales the
Center For Research on Security Prices, the Stigler Center, and the Initiative on Global Financial Markets
at the University of Chicago for financial support. We would like to thank Alexander Phung and Victor
Xin for truly outstanding research assistantship. We thank John Donohue, Jay Hartzell, Andrew Metrick,
Shiva Rajgopal, Adriano Rampini, and seminar participants at Harvard Business School, Harvard Law
School, Michigan Law School, the University of Pennsylvania, the Duke-UNC Corporate Finance
Conference, the NBER Summer Institute, the University of Texas Conference on Empirical Legal
Studies and the American Finance Association Meetings (2007) for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Alexander Dyck, Adair Morse, and Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Who Blows the Whistle on Corporate Fraud?
Alexander Dyck, Adair Morse, and Luigi Zingales
NBER Working Paper No. 12882
February 2007
JEL No. G3
ABSTRACT
What external control mechanisms are most effective in detecting corporate fraud? To address this
question we study in depth all reported cases of corporate fraud in companies with more than 750 million
dollars in assets between 1996 and 2004. We find that fraud detection does not rely on one single mechanism,
but on a wide range of, often improbable, actors. Only 6% of the frauds are revealed by the SEC and
14% by the auditors. More important monitors are media (14%), industry regulators (16%), and employees
(19%). Before SOX, only 35% of the cases were discovered by actors with an explicit mandate. After
SOX, the performance of mandated actors improved, but still account for only slightly more than 50%
of the cases. We find that monetary incentives for detection in frauds against the government influence
detection without increasing frivolous suits, suggesting gains from extending such incentives to corporate
fraud more generally.
Alexander Dyck Luigi Zingales
Joseph L. Rotman School of Management 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
University of Toronto Chicago, IL 60637
105 St. George Street and NBER
Toronto, Ontario luigi.zingales@gsb.uchicago.edu
Canada M5S 3E6
adyck@rotman.utoronto.ca
Adair Morse
University of Michigan
Ross School of Business
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
adairm@umich.edu

The large and numerous corporate frauds that emerged in the United States at the
onset of the new millennium provoked an immediate legislative response in the Sarbanes
Oxley Act (SOX). This law was predicated upon the idea that the existing institutions
designed to uncover fraud (e.g., the auditors) had failed, and their incentives as well as
their monitoring should be increased. The political imperative to act quickly prevented
any empirical analysis to substantiate the law’s premises. Which actors play a role in
deterring corporate fraud through detection? What motivates them? Did reforms target
the right actors and change the situation? Can detection be improved in a more cost
effective way?
To answer these questions we gather data on a comprehensive sample of alleged
corporate frauds in the United States that took place between 1996 and 2004 in
companies with more than 750 million dollars in assets. After screening for frivolous
suits, we end up with a sample of 230 cases of alleged corporate frauds, which include all
of the high profile cases such as Enron, HealthSouth, and World Com.1
Through an extensive reading of each fraud’s history, we identify who is involved
in the revelation of the fraud, and what are the circumstances that lead to its detection.
Using data on the fraud duration we study the timing of revelation to infer which
mechanisms are more efficient in revealing fraud. To understand better why these fraud
detectors are active, we study the sources of information and the incentives detectors face
in bringing the fraud to light. To identify the role played by short sellers, we look for
unusual levels of short positions before a fraud emerges.
1 In that follows we will drop the term alleged and simply refer to fraud. While a number of these cases
have settled with findings of fact of fraud, the majority of them settled for financial payment without any
admittance of wrongdoing and hence, from a legal point of view, remains allegations.
1

We find that no specific actor dominates the revelation of fraud. Even using the
most comprehensive and generous interpretation, shortsellers and equity holders revealed
the fraud in only 9 percent of the cases. Financial analysts and auditors do a little better
(each accounting for 14 percent of the cases), but they hardly dominate the scene. The
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) accounts for only 6 percent of detected
frauds by external actors. More surprising is the key role played by actors who lack a
direct role in investment markets, such as the the media (14 percent), non-financial-
market regulators (16 percent), and employees (19 percent).
As interesting as who detects corporate fraud are who did not. Stock exchange
regulators, commercial banks, and underwriters are notable for their complete absence.
Also, private security litigation plays a minimal role (less than 2 percent) in the detection
of fraud. This does not mean that it is useless to prevent fraud, since it could be the
mechanism through which people committing fraud are forced to pay for their mistakes.
But it does suggest that this mechanism cannot work alone. It needs another (vast) set of
institutions to help bring fraud to light.
Another way to measure the relative efficiency of those actors, besides the
frequency, is to look at the average speed with which these actors bring fraud to light.
Financial analysts and short sellers are in a league of their own, taking only a median
duration of 9.1 months to reveal fraud. These are the players whose market role is closest
to a financial monitoring mechanism. Frauds that make it through these monitors are then
caught by those with a significant stake in the firm: external equity holders (15.9
months), suppliers, clients and competitors (13.3 months). Non financial market
regulators and auditors also seem to intervene at a similar speed (respectively 13.3 and
2