NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SLOW MOVING CAPITAL
Mark Mitchell
Lasse Heje Pedersen
Todd Pulvino
Working Paper 12877
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12877
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2007
Mitchell and Pulvino are at CNH Partners. Pedersen (corresponding author) is at the Stern School
of Business, New York University, CEPR and NBER. The authors are affiliated with AQR Capital
Management, a global asset management firm that may apply some of the principles discussed in this
research in some of its investment products. We are grateful for helpful conversations with Lars N.
Nielsen and research assistance from Rachel Perez and Linda Rabel. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2007 by Mark Mitchell, Lasse Heje Pedersen, and Todd Pulvino. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Slow Moving Capital
Mark Mitchell, Lasse Heje Pedersen, and Todd Pulvino
NBER Working Paper No. 12877
January 2007
JEL No. G1,G12,G14
ABSTRACT
We study three cases in which specialized arbitrageurs lost significant amounts of capital and, as a
result, became liquidity demanders rather than providers. The effects on security markets were large
and persistent: Prices dropped relative to fundamentals and the rebound took months. While multi-strategy
hedge funds who were not capital constrained increased their positions, a large fraction of these funds
actually acted as net sellers consistent with the view that information barriers within a firm (not just
relative to outside investors) can lead to capital constraints for trading desks with mark-to-market losses.
Our findings suggest that real world frictions impede arbitrage capital.
Mark Mitchell Todd Pulvino
Graduate School of Business Administration CNH Partners
Harvard University 2 Greenwich Plaza, 1st Floor
Morgan Hall 125 Greenwich, CT 06830
Boston, MA 02163 tpulvino@cnhpartners.com
mmitchell@cnhpartners.com
Lasse Heje Pedersen
Copenhagen Business School
Solbjerg Plads 3, A5
DK-2000 Frederiksberg
DENMARK
and NYU
and also NBER
lpederse@stern.nyu.edu

Unlike textbook arbitrageurs who instantaneously trade when prices deviate from
fundamental values, real world arbitrageurs must overcome various frictions. For example, they
often invest other peoples’ money, resulting in a principal/agent problem that is exacerbated in
market downturns. Rather than increasing investment levels when prices dip below fundamental
values, arbitrageurs may, in the face of capital constraints, sell cheap securities causing prices to
decline further. As a result, mispricings can be large and can extend for long periods of time.
We first study the convertible bond market in 2005 when convertible hedge funds faced
large redemptions of capital from investors. These redemptions led to binding capital constraints
for many funds, resulting in massive bond sales, and in many cases, fund liquidations. These
sales reduced prices of convertibles relative to fundamental values, especially around redemption
dates. While the group of multi-strategy hedge funds who were not capital constrained increased
its overall position, about half of these hedge funds actually acted as net sellers consistent with
the view that information barriers within a firm (not just relative to outside investors) can lead to
capital constraints for trading desks with mark-to-market losses. We document similar patterns
in the convertible bond market around the collapse of Long Term Capital Management (LTCM)
in 1998. When LTCM incurred large losses on macroeconomic bets, the firm was forced to
liquidate large convertible bond positions. These sales led to depressed valuations of convertible
bonds despite the fact there was little change in overall fundamentals. As a result, other hedge
funds incurred large losses and were also forced to sell their convertible bond holdings. In both
cases, it took several months for traders to increase their capital, or for better-capitalized traders
to enter.
We also study merger targets during the 1987 market crash. Merger arbitrageurs buy
shares of target firms following merger announcements, providing liquidity to shareholders who
1

choose to sell. The market crash and concurrently proposed anti-takeover legislation caused
merger spreads (the difference between the acquirer’s offer and the target price) to widen
substantially, inflicting large losses on arbitrageurs. Data from Wall Street proprietary arbitrage
desks show that Wall Street firms reduced their exposures by selling target stocks. Furthermore,
numerous arbitrage funds and Wall Street trading desks were forced to cease operations. Even
though the market rebounded and the proposed legislation was dropped, spreads remained wide
for several months, arguably caused by capital withdrawals from the market as natural liquidity
providers became short-term liquidity demanders.
Our findings do not support the frictionless economic paradigm. Under this paradigm, a
shock to the capital of a relatively small subset of agents should have a trivial effect on security
prices since new capital would immediately flow into the market and prices would be bid up to
fundamental values. Rather, the findings support an alternative view that market frictions are of
first order importance: Shocks to capital matter if arbitrageurs with losses face the prospect of
investor redemptions (Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny (1997)), particularly when margin
constraints tighten during liquidity crises (Markus K. Brunnermeier and Lasse H. Pedersen
(2006)), when other agents lack both infrastructure and information to trade the affected
securities (Robert C. Merton (1987)), and when agents require a return premium to compensate
for liquidity risk (Viral Acharya and Lasse H. Pedersen (2005)).
I. Convertible Bond Arbitrage: Capital Redemptions in 2005
Convertible bonds (corporate bonds with a call option on the underlying shares) are a
capital source for many firms. Corporate capital needs are often immediate, and are facilitated
by convertible arbitrage funds which account for up to 75% of the convertible market. Because
the payoff of a convertible can be nearly replicated using other traded securities, its fundamental
2