NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MEASURING THE IMPACTS OF FDI IN CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPE
Robert E. Lipsey
Working Paper 12808
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12808
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006
I am indebted to Jing Sun for excellent research assistance. This paper was originally prepared for
the Conference on European Integration: The Changing Landscape of FDI in Europe, sponsored by
the Oesterreichische Nationalbank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, in
Vienna, November 20-21, 2006. A shorter version will be published in a conference volume to be
issued by Edward Elgar Publishing. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Robert E. Lipsey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Measuring the Impacts of FDI in Central and Eastern Europe
Robert E. Lipsey
NBER Working Paper No. 12808
December 2006
JEL No. F21,F23
ABSTRACT
The impacts of inward FDI on host countries are frequently studied using balance-of-payments based
measures of flows and stocks. These are unreliable for the purpose because, while theories of the effects
of investment are based on FDI production and employment in the host country, these measures are
often distorted approximations of the location of real activity. The mismeasurement is particularly
important if trade openness, often associated with FDI, is treated as a control variable.
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe, a very minor object of US direct investment, have, since
1990, become a major location for FDI from Europe, especially from Germany. The investments from
both the US and Germany are, on average, very labor-intensive, and are heavily concentrated in Motor
Vehicles. One result has been a shift in the export comparative advantage of these countries toward the
machinery and transport equipment sector.
Microdata studies in the CEE countries have found that foreign participation is associated with higher
productivity in the affiliates themselves. Spillovers to indigenous firms are more spotty, clearer to
upstream suppliers than to firms in the same industries as the affiliates.
Robert E. Lipsey
NBER
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10016-4309
and NBER
rlipsey@gc.cuny.edu

Measuring the Impacts of FDI in Central and Eastern Europe
Robert E. Lipsey*
Introduction
In one sense the issue of the desirability of inward FDI for host countries seems to have
been decided. Policy making has come to ignore the ambiguous and inconclusive academic
literature and, in most countries, has shifted away from measures restricting and discouraging
inward FDI. Many countries have not only reduced or eliminated such restrictions, but also
moved toward encouraging FDI with tax and other incentives. UNCTAD’s compilations of
regulatory changes by host countries since 1991 show that they have been overwhelmingly
favorable to inward FDI, although recent years have seen more unfavorable changes, up to 20
percent in 2005, the highest share in the compilation. The unfavorable changes were
concentrated in extractive industries and in Latin America (UNCTAD, 2006, pp. 24-25).
Something must have happened to influence so many countries’ policies. I think I know
what that something is. It is the success that a few countries have apparently had in achieving
rapid economic growth after moving from virtual prohibition of direct investment to active
encouragement of it. Ireland and China are two notable and conspicuous examples of countries
that reversed a long standing antipathy toward foreign investors and have achieved rapid growth
in which foreign-owned firms have played a very large part.
An aspect of the role of FDI that I think is almost beyond dispute is that much of the
world’s stock of technological knowledge is possessed by multinational firms. That can be seen
partly in the fact that labor is so much more productive in these firms than outside them;
* I am indebted to Jing Sun for excellent research assistance. This paper was originally prepared for the Conference
on European Integration: The Changing Landscape of FDI in Europe, sponsored by the Oesterreichische
Nationalbank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, in Vienna, November 20-21, 2006. A
shorter version will be published in a conference volume to be issued by Edward Elgar Publishing.
1

multinationals probably produce more than 10 percent of the world’s output, but employ only 1
or at most 2 percent of the world’s labor. Whenever comparisons are made within countries, it
appears that not only are foreign multinationals more productive than domestic firms in general,
as measured by labor productivity or TFP, but among domestically-owned firms, those that are
multinational are more efficient than non-multinational firms, even within the same industries
and taking account of other factors affecting efficiency.
What is it that we want to know about the impacts of FDI? Quite often the issue is put in
the context of the use of subsidies or other incentives specific to foreign-owned firms and the
question posed is whether these subsidies are worth while. I think that that is the wrong context,
and distorts the issue. The most important measures favorable to inward FDI in my view, are to
remove prohibitions against it, to remove other measures that discriminate against foreign firms,
to reduce or remove impediments to trade and open markets, and to improve governance.
One of the main technological advantages of foreign-owned firms is their knowledge of
international markets and the ability to judge and compare the costs of different locations for
production, particularly locations for fragments in long lines of production that extend across
several countries. Subsidies and other preferential arrangements can distort the choices of
locations, leaving uneconomic white elephants after the preferential arrangements end. In some
of the most successful cases of growth through exploiting foreign investment, the foreign firms
have been able to look past host countries’ current comparative advantages in exporting and to
see potential comparative advantages that exploit the combination of the host country’s resources
with the technology and other knowledge of the foreign firms.
Many studies have asked whether attracting foreign firms will make a recipient country
grow faster than it would without foreign investment or with only portfolio investment. Another
2