NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE INS AND OUTS OF CYCLICAL UNEMPLOYMENT
Michael W. Elsby
Ryan Michaels
Gary Solon
Working Paper 12853
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12853
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2007
The authors are grateful for comments from seminar participants at an NBER Monetary Economics
conference, the University of Michigan, York University, and the CEPR European Summer Symposium
in Labor Economics. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Michael W. Elsby, Ryan Michaels, and Gary Solon. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Ins and Outs of Cyclical Unemployment
Michael W. Elsby, Ryan Michaels, and Gary Solon
NBER Working Paper No. 12853
January 2007
JEL No. E24,E32,J63,J64
ABSTRACT
One of the strongest trends in recent macroeconomic modeling of labor market fluctuations is to treat
unemployment inflows as acyclical. This trend stems in large part from an influential paper by Shimer
on "Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment," i.e., the extent to which increased unemployment
during a recession arises from an increase in the number of unemployment spells versus an increase
in their duration. After broadly reviewing the previous literature, we replicate and extend Shimer's
main analysis. Like Shimer, we find an important role for increased duration. But contrary to Shimer's
conclusions, we find that even his own methods and data, when viewed in an appropriate metric, reveal
an important role for increased inflows to unemployment as well. This finding is further strengthened
by our refinements of Shimer's methods of correcting for data problems and by our detailed examination
of particular components of the inflow to unemployment. We conclude that a complete understanding
of cyclical unemployment requires an explanation of countercyclical inflow rates as well as procyclical
outflow rates.
Michael W. Elsby Gary Solon
University of Michigan Department of Economics
Department of Economics University of Michigan
238 Lorch Hall Ann Arbor, MI 48109
611 Tappan Street and NBER
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220 gsolon@umich.edu
and NBER
elsby@umich.edu
Ryan Michaels
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
rmikes@umich.edu

The Ins and Outs of Cyclical Unemployment
1. Introduction
In principle, the increased unemployment during a recession could arise from an
increase in the number of unemployment spells, an increase in the duration of
unemployment spells, or both. Equivalently, one can decompose the cyclical variation in
unemployment into changes in the rates of inflow to and outflow from unemployment.
The title of a 1986 paper by Darby, Haltiwanger, and Plant dubbed this subject “The Ins
and Outs of Unemployment.” Because Darby et al. claimed that cyclical unemployment
variation in the United States stems almost entirely from cyclical variation in the inflow,
their paper’s subtitle was “The Ins Win.”
Contrary to that conclusion, one of the strongest trends in recent macroeconomic
modeling of the labor market is to treat the inflow to unemployment as acyclical. In
some instances, acyclicality of the inflow is assumed; in others, the model is designed to
explain the supposed acyclicality of the inflow. Examples include Hall (2005a, 2005b),
Gertler and Trigari (2006), Menzio and Moen (2006), Rotemberg (2006), and Blanchard
and Gali (2006). Several of these authors motivate their treatment of the inflow as
acyclical by referring to a pair of papers by Shimer (2005a, 2005b), which reach a
conclusion diametrically opposite to that of Darby et al. For example, the introductory
passage in the first of these, entitled “Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment,”
declares, “Using United States data from 1948 to 2004, I find that there are substantial
fluctuations in unemployed workers’ job finding probability at business cycle
1

frequencies, while employed workers’ separation probability is comparatively acyclic.”1
Similar statements appear in Shimer (2005b and 2005c).2
Viewed in the context of a longer history of unemployment studies, the opposite
conclusions of Darby et al. and Shimer both seem surprising. Darby et al.’s finding that
“The Ins Win” and the outs lose appears to be contradicted by a large body of
accumulated evidence suggesting that unemployment duration is substantially
countercyclical:
• Regularly published statistics on the cross-sectional distribution of unemployment
duration from the monthly Current Population Survey (CPS) show a pronounced
shift towards longer unemployment spells during recessions. Similarly,
sophisticated econometric analyses that have used repeated CPS cross-sectional
data on unemployment duration to impute month-to-month hazard rates for
exiting unemployment have found these outflow rates to be substantially
procyclical (Sider, 1985; Baker, 19923).
• Numerous studies have estimated inflow and outflow rates with the so-called
gross flows data, which are based on the 2/3 or so of the CPS sample that can be
longitudinally matched from one month to the next.4 Without exception, these
1 Shimer uses the term “separation probability” to mean the probability of entering unemployment. We do
not use this terminology for two reasons. First, we wish to avoid confusion with the more commonly used
meaning of “separation” as a quit or layoff from a particular employer, which often involves no
unemployment at all (especially in the case of quits). Second, as we will emphasize in section 2.D of this
paper, many spells of unemployment begin with entry into the labor force, not a separation from
employment.
2 Similarly, the abstract of Hall’s Review of Economics and Statistics Lecture (2005b) says, “In the modern
U.S. economy, recessions do not begin with a burst of layoffs. Unemployment rises because jobs are hard
to find, not because an unusual number of people are thrown into unemployment.”
3 Baker’s study, which disaggregated unemployment by reason for unemployment and demographic
characteristics, directly refuted the conjecture by Darby et al. that the apparent cyclicality of unemployment
duration could be explained mostly by cyclical changes in the composition of the unemployed.
4 While the gross flows data are useful, they are not necessarily the data source of choice because they are
plagued by numerous deficiencies, including the systematic exclusion of individuals who change residence
2