NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DETERMINANTS OF DEPOSIT-INSURANCE ADOPTION AND DESIGN
Asli Demirguc-Kunt
Edward J. Kane
Luc Laeven
Working Paper 12862
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12862
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2007
Demirguc-Kunt: World Bank; Kane: Boston College and NBER; Laeven: IMF and CEPR. Corresponding
author: Edward Kane, James F. Cleary Professor in Finance, Boston College, Fulton Hall 330A, Chestnut
Hill, MA 02467, e-mail: edward.kane@bc.edu, phone: (617) 552-3986, fax: (617) 552-0431. We are
grateful to George Pennacchi (the Editor), two anonymous referees, Thorsten Beck, Stijn Claessens,
Mark Flannery, Patrick Honohan, Ozer Karagedikli, and Loretta Mester for very useful comments.
For additional suggestions, we also want to thank seminar participants at the Reserve Bank of New
Zealand, Victoria University of Wellington, the FDIC Center for Financial Research's Fifth Annual
Banking Research Conference, and the 2005 AFA meetings in Philadelphia. We thank Baybars Karacaovali
and Guillermo Noguera for helping to construct the new database and for providing excellent research
assistance, and we thank numerous colleagues at the World Bank for providing input for the deposit
insurance database. This paper's findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the
authors and do not represent the views of the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, their Executive
Directors, or the countries they represent. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Asli Demirguc-Kunt, Edward J. Kane, and Luc Laeven. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Determinants of Deposit-Insurance Adoption and Design
Asli Demirguc-Kunt, Edward J. Kane, and Luc Laeven
NBER Working Paper No. 12862
January 2007
JEL No. G21,G28,P51
ABSTRACT
This paper identifies factors that influence decisions about a country's financial safety net, using a
comprehensive dataset covering 180 countries during the 1960-2003 period. Our analysis focuses on
how private interest-group pressures, outside influences, and political-institutional factors affect deposit-insurance
adoption and design. Controlling for macroeconomic shocks, quality of bank regulations, and institutional
development, we find that both private and public interests, as well as outside influences to emulate
developed-country regulatory schemes, can explain the timing of adoption decisions and the rigor
of loss-control arrangements. Controlling for other factors, political systems that facilitate intersectoral
power sharing dispose a country toward design features that accommodate risk-shifting by banks.
Asli Demirguc-Kunt Luc Laeven
World Bank Senior Economist
1818 H Street International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC 20433 700 19th Avenue, NW
ademirguckunt@worldbank.org Washington, DC 20431
Llaeven@imf.org
Edward J. Kane
Department of Finance
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
edward.kane@bc.edu

Introduction
This paper portrays government decisions about the design of a country’s financial safety net as
an exercise in incomplete social contracting. The contract authorizes failed financial institutions
and their customers to transfer some of their losses to taxpayers in other sectors of the economy.
Social contracting is a political bargaining process in which different sectors attempt to extract
net value from government services. Although financial stability is a nonexclusive good, its
benefits need not be enjoyed equally by every sector. Successful contracting requires that the
terms appear mutually beneficial. Especially because the rights and duties generated in safety net
contracting are incomplete, sectoral concerns and contract terms may be expected to vary greatly
across countries. This paper tests and confirms the hypothesis that across countries salient
differences in safety net design can be explained to an important degree by differences in
economic and political circumstances.
Our analysis seeks particularly to determine what factors influence two issues in safety
net design: (1) a country’s decision on whether or not to adopt a system of explicit deposit
insurance; and (2) for countries that adopt explicit deposit insurance, the type of design features
imbedded in their deposit insurance system. We focus on the extent of deposit insurance
coverage, but also include other design features that could control the banking sector’s ability to
extract net rents from other sectors. We investigate these issues using a newly collected dataset
on deposit insurance schemes and selected design features for a large sample of countries.
Cross-country differences in political arrangements are bound to affect both kinds of
decisions. The presence of an explicit deposit insurance system and how it is designed affects
many constituencies, especially banks, depositors, creditors, specialized bureaucracies, and
taxpayers. Because individual constituencies have conflicting interests, the political process
governing adoption and design decisions can be complex.
2

Economists presume that political dealmaking serves both public and private interests.
Public-interest rationales for deposit insurance focus on protecting small, uninformed depositors
and assuring the stability of the banking system (Diamond and Dybvig, 1983). Private-interest
rationales portray regulatory decisions as the outcome of interest-group competition, in which
well-organized or powerful groups compete with voters to pressure public-spirited, but
opportunistic politicians and regulators for regulatory interventions that enable sponsoring
groups to capture rents from other sectors (Stigler, 1971; Peltzman, 1976; Becker, 1983).
Deposit insurance subsidizes banks that are prepared to exploit weaknesses in
supervisory risk control to extract value from taxpayers and safer banks. Safety-net subsidies
may be defined as implicit risk capital that the government administers in helping to recapitalize
banks when they become deeply insolvent. It is natural to hypothesize that differences in the
distribution of political clout would influence safety net design. Financial institutions regularly
lobby for “reforms” that promise to increase their franchise value (Kroszner and Stratmann,
1998). The more a country’s political system allows sectors to share power, the better narrow
private interests can make their concerns felt.
An extensive literature analyzes the public and private benefits and costs of explicit
deposit insurance and explores theoretically the challenges of designing an optimal deposit
insurance system.1 Our paper is part of an emerging, complementary body of empirical research.
Demirgüç-Kunt and Detragiache (2002) and Demirgüç-Kunt and Huizinga (2004) show that
deposit insurance design features affect banking system fragility and market discipline.
Demirgüç-Kunt and Kane (2002), Laeven (2002), and Hovakimian, Kane and Laeven (2003)
show that weak institutional environments undermine deposit insurance design.
1 See for example, Diamond and Dybvig (1983), Ronn and Verma (1986), Pennacchi (1987), Chari and Jagannathan
(1988), Cooperstein et al. (1995), Kane (1995), Wheelock and Wilson (1995), Calomiris (1996), Bhattacharya et al.
(1998), and Allen and Gale (1998), and Pennacchi (2006).
3