NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE DEMAND FOR TREASURY DEBT
Arvind Krishnamurthy
Annette Vissing-Jorgensen
Working Paper 12881
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12881
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2007
We thank Ricardo Caballero, Ken Garbade, Lorenzo Garlappi, Bob McDonald, Monika Piazzesi, Sergio
Rebelo, Suresh Sundaresan and seminar participants at MIT, Moody's-KMV, NBER AP meeting,
Northwestern University, University of Texas-Austin, and the NY Fed for comments. Josh Davis and
Byron Scott provided research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Arvind Krishnamurthy and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Demand for Treasury Debt
Arvind Krishnamurthy and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen
NBER Working Paper No. 12881
January 2007
JEL No. E43,G12
ABSTRACT
We show that the US Debt/GDP ratio is negatively correlated with the spread between corporate bond
yields and Treasury bond yields. The result holds even when controlling for the default risk on corporate
bonds. We argue that the corporate bond spread reflects a convenience yield that investors attribute
to Treasury debt. Changes in the supply of Treasury debt trace out the demand for convenience by
investors. We show that the aggregate demand curve for the convenience provided by Treasury debt
is downward sloping and provide estimates of the elasticity of demand. We analyze disaggregated
data from the Flow of Funds Accounts of the Federal Reserve and show that individual groups of Treasury
holders also have downward sloping demand curves. Even groups with the most elastic demand curves
have demand curves that are far from flat. The results have bearing for important questions in finance
and macroeconomics. We discuss implications for the behavior of corporate bond spreads, interest
rate swap spreads, the riskless interest rate, and the value of aggregate liquidity. We also discuss the
implications of our results for the financing of the US deficit, Ricardian equivalence, and the effects
of foreign central bank demand on Treasury yields.
Arvind Krishnamurthy
Finance Department
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
a-krishnamurthy@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Annette Vissing-Jorgensen
Finance Department
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
a-vissing@northwestern.edu

1 Introduction
Figure 1 graphs the yield spread between AAA rated corporate bonds and Treasury securities against the
US government debt-to-GDP ratio (i.e. the ratio of the face value of publicly held US government debt to
US GDP). The figure suggests that the corporate bond spread is high when the stock of debt is low, while
the spread is low when the stock of debt is high.
Figure 1: Corporate Bond Spread and Government Debt
2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2
Debt/GDP
saerT-AAA
The corporate bond spread (y-axis) is graphed versus the Debt/GDP ratio (x-
axis) based on annual observations from 1925 to 2005. The bond spread is the
difference between the percentage yield on Moody’s AAA long maturity bond
index and the percentage yield on long maturity Treasury bonds.
In the next sections of the paper, we argue that the negative correlation between the debt-to-GDP ratio
and the corporate bond spread arises because ofvariationinthe “convenience yield”on Treasury securities,
ratherthanvariationinthedefaultriskofcorporateborrowers. InvestorsplaceavalueonTreasurysecurities
– the convenience value – above and beyond the securities’ cash flows. When the stock of debt is low, the
marginal convenience valuation of debt is high. Investors bid up the price of Treasuries relative to other
securities such as corporate bonds, causing the yield on Treasuries to fall further below corporate bond
rates, and the bond spread to widen. The opposite applies when the stock of debt is high. Variation in the
supply of Treasury securities traces out a downward sloping demand curve for Treasuries. We estimate the
semi-elasticity of the corporate bond spread to the Debt/GDP ratio, finding that a hypothetical increase
2

in the Debt/GDP ratio from the current level of 0.38 to a new level of 0.39 will raise long term Treasury
yields bybetween 1.5bps(TableI-A,Panel B, column(2)) and4.25bps(TableIV-B, column(2)), relativeto
corporate bond yields.
Sections 2, 3, 4, and 6 present these results relating the aggregate supply of Treasury securities to the
spread between corporate and Treasury bond yields. We show that the results are robust to adding various
controls for corporate default risk. We alsoshow the results hold when the dependent variableis the spread
between a short-maturity corporate bond and Treasury bond, or is the spread between the realized excess
returns of corporate bonds over Treasury bonds. These results along with a number of other robustness
checks presented in Section 8 strongly support the existence of a convenience yield on Treasury securities.
Section 5 of the paper examines which groups of investors are the strongest drivers of the convenience
value of Treasury securities. We first argue that different groups of Treasury owners likely have different
motivesforholdingTreasuries. Wethen estimatewhichgroupshavethe leastelasticdemandcurves inorder
to determine which of the various motives are likely to contribute substantially to the convenience yield on
Treasuries. We offer three motives: The first is a liquidity motive. Treasury securities are extremely liquid
in comparison to corporate bonds. For example, Reinhart and Sack (2000) note that bid-offer spreads on
corporate bonds are fourtosixtimeslarger thanthose ofTreasury bonds. The liquiditymotiveisanalogous
to the demand for holding money. Like Treasuries, money offers a low rate of return and yet is held in
equilibrium. Theories of money demand suggest that this is because agents derive special liquidityservices
from holding money. For official groups (foreign central banks, US regional Federal Reserve banks and US
state and local governments) and for groups such as banks and households (including mutual funds) the
liquidity of Treasuries may be very important. The second motive is a neutrality motive. Kohn (2005)
suggest that a key reason for why the US federal reserve banks mainlyhold Treasury securities is that they
do notwish tofavoranynon-governmentalborrower over another. A similarmotivemayapplyto state and
local governments and foreign central banks. The third motive is that Treasuries are widely considered the
lowest risk interest bearing asset. The surety of Treasuries may be attractive for unsophisticated investors
who are unable to assess the risk in corporate assets.
We study disaggregated data from the Flow of Funds Accounts and estimate demand curves for each of
the maingroups that hold Treasuries. We find that the Treasury demands of officialgroups (foreign central
banks, US regional Federal Reserve banks and US state and local governments) are the least sensitive to
the corporate bond spread. Banks, households and the foreign private sector have somewhat more elastic
Treasury demands, while groups who likely have very long investment horizons (state/local government
retirement funds, private pension funds and insurance companies) have the most elastic Treasury demands.
These findings suggest the liquidity and neutrality motives are primary factors behind the “convenience
value” from holding Treasuries.
3