NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GENDER AND JOB PERFORMANCE:
EVIDENCE FROM WALL STREET
T. Clifton Green
Narasimhan Jegadeesh
Yue Tang
Working Paper 12897
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12897
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2007
We thank Stanimir Markov for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by T. Clifton Green, Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and Yue Tang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Gender and Job Performance: Evidence from Wall Street
T. Clifton Green, Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and Yue Tang
NBER Working Paper No. 12897
February 2007
JEL No. G14,G29,J44,J7
ABSTRACT
We study the relation between gender and job performance among brokerage firm equity analysts.
Women's representation in analyst positions drops from 16% in 1995 to 13% in 2005. We find women
cover roughly 9 stocks on average compared to 10 for men. Women's earnings estimates tend to be
less accurate. After controlling for forecast characteristics, the difference in accuracy is roughly
equivalent to four years of experience. Despite reduced coverage and lower forecast accuracy, we
find women are significantly more likely to be designated as All-Stars, which suggests they outperform
at other aspects of the job such as client service.
T. Clifton Green Yue Tang
Goizueta Business School Goizueta Business School
Emory University Emory University
1300 Clifton Rd. 1300 Clifton Rd.
Atlanta, GA 30322 Atlanta, GA 30322
clifton_green@bus.emory.edu Yue_Tang@bus.emory.edu
Narasimhan Jegadeesh
Goizueta Business School
Emory University
1300 Clifton Road
Suite 507
Atlanta, GA 30322
and NBER
narasimhan_jegadeesh@bus.emory.edu

Despite the dramatic reduction in the gender income gap in recent decades, women
remain underrepresented in many high-profile careers. Explanations for this phenomenon
fall into two broad categories. One line of research emphasizes occupational self-
selection due to preferences or differences in abilities (e.g. Polachek, 1981 and Pitts,
2003). Other researchers focus on discrimination in the workplace. Evidence of gender-
based discrimination has been documented in certain fields (e.g. Neumark, 1996 and
Goldin and Rouse, 2000), yet employers’ attempts to offset bias through focused hiring
strategies also raises concerns of reverse discrimination. Does the low representation of
women in many high paying jobs reflect a lower “natural rate” due to preferences, or is it
indicative of discrimination? Because of an emphasis on affirmative action, do employers
reverse discriminate in order to attract more women for the job?
This study examines the gender composition of sell-side stock analysts in
investment banks and brokerages, and investigates whether employers either
systematically discriminate based on gender, or generally attempt to promote gender
balance through affirmative action. Sell-side analyst positions are well paying jobs where
the average annual salary in 2005 was about $168,000,1 which is well above the per
capita income in the U.S. As with many jobs on Wall Street, a vast majority of analysts
are males, and it is often alleged that women face gender discrimination in such high
profile, well paying jobs. For instance, a 1996 class action law suit against Merrill Lynch
contained over 900 complaints, representing roughly one third of the female brokers who
worked at the company during the previous five years.2 Concerns about potential
1 Source: CFA Institute survey.
2 USA Today 9/15/2000. “Wall Street Battles Sexual Bias. Even as Brokerage Industry Fights
Discrimination, women make accusations.” Smith Barney (now owned by Citigroup) and Morgan Stanley
1

discrimination have led many investment banks and other employers to institute hiring
programs to promote diversity. For example, a 2001 survey of investment banks reports
that roughly one third of large investment banks tie their reward systems to diversity
initiatives. An even greater proportion of these banks also specify numerical objectives
for affirmative action recruiting.3
Although issues of gender discrimination and affirmative action have attracted
considerable attention, we find that the proportion of female stock analysts has
progressively declined over time. For instance, the proportion of female analysts declined
from roughly 16% in 1995 to 13% in 2005. It is important to determine whether this
decline indicates growing discrimination or whether it reflects a shift in women’s career
preferences. It is also important to understand whether employers’ attempts to achieve
gender balance in the workforce compromise the effectiveness of their workforce.
The essence of gender discrimination is that when faced with a choice between
equally qualified men and women, employers prefer to hire men. As a result, gender
discrimination leads to a higher hurdle being set for women, and hence women who are
able to cross the hurdle would do a better job on average than their male counterparts. On
the other hand, if affirmative action is an important factor in hiring decisions, then
employers may set a lower hurdle for women to promote gender balance. If affirmative
action based hiring is prevalent, women would on average perform worse than men.
Investment banks are traditionally known for their competitive locker room
mentality and 90-hour work weeks, which women may find less attractive in a general
also faced sex discrimination class action lawsuits in recent years that were backed by the U.S. Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission.
3 Securities Industry Association, 2003, “Report on Diversity Strategy, Development and Demographics:
Key Findings.”
2