NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES FIRM VALUE MOVE TOO MUCH TO BE JUSTIFIED BY SUBSEQUENT
CHANGES IN CASH FLOW?
Borja Larrain
Motohiro Yogo
Working Paper 12847
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12847
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2007
For comments and discussions, we thank Andrew Abel, Tobias Adrian, Malcolm Baker, John Campbell,
Jonathan Lewellen, Craig MacKinlay, Michael Roberts, Robert Stambaugh, Stanley Zin, and seminar
participants at Dartmouth College, Federal Reserve Bank (FRB) of Boston, Federal Reserve Board,
Harvard University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Singapore Management University, Wharton
School, National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Asset Pricing Meeting 2005, Western Finance
Association Annual Meeting 2006, and NBER Summer Institute Capital Markets and the Economy
Workshop 2006. Maria Giduskova provided excellent research assistance. This paper was completed
while Borja Larrain was an economist at the FRB of Boston. He thanks his colleagues there for a great
research environment. The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and do not
reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, the Federal Reserve System, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Borja Larrain and Motohiro Yogo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Does Firm Value Move Too Much to be Justified by Subsequent Changes in Cash Flow?
Borja Larrain and Motohiro Yogo
NBER Working Paper No. 12847
January 2007, Revised August 2009
JEL No. G12,G32,G35
ABSTRACT
The appropriate measure of cash flow for valuing corporate assets is net payout, which is the sum
of dividends, interest, and net repurchases of equity and debt. Variation in net payout yield, the ratio
of net payout to asset value, is mostly driven by movements in expected cash flow growth, instead
of movements in discount rates. Net payout yield is less persistent than dividend yield and implies
much smaller variation in long-horizon discount rates. Therefore, movements in the value of corporate
assets can be justified by changes in expected future cash flow.
Borja Larrain
Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile
Escuela de Administracion
Avda Vicuna Mackenna 4860, Macul
Santiago, Chile
larrain@post.harvard.edu
Motohiro Yogo
University of Pennsylvania
The Wharton School
Finance Department
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
yogo@wharton.upenn.edu

1. Introduction
This paper examines the present-value relation between the asset value and cash flow of
US corporations. The total cash outflow from firms is net payout, which is the sum of
dividends, interest, equity repurchase net of issuance, and debt repurchase net of issuance.
Variation in net payout yield, the ratio of net payout to asset value, is mostly driven by
movements in expected cash flow growth, instead of movements in discount rates. A variance
decomposition of net payout yield shows that 12% of its variation is explained by asset
returns, while 88% is explained by cash flow growth. Moreover, net payout yield is less
persistent than other valuation ratios with an autoregressive coefficient of 0.78. A model of
expected returns based on net payout yield implies relatively small variation in long-horizon
discount rates. Therefore, movements in the value of corporate assets can be explained by
changes in expected future cash flow.
Our findings are somewhat surprising in light of previous studies on the present-value
relation between stock prices and dividends. Variation in dividend yield is mostly driven by
movements in discount rates, instead of movements in expected dividend growth (Campbell
and Shiller, 1988). A variance decomposition of dividend yield shows that 83% of its vari-
ation is explained by stock returns, while 17% is explained by dividend growth. Moreover,
dividend yield is highly persistent with an autoregressive coefficient of 0.93. A model of
expected returns based on dividend yield implies large variation in long-horizon discount
rates. Therefore, movements in stock prices cannot be explained by changes in expected
future dividends (LeRoy and Porter, 1981; Shiller, 1981).
Our focus on net payout, instead of dividends, is motivated by three considerations.
First, a recent literature on corporate payout policy has broadened the scope of payout be-
yond ordinary dividends (see Allen and Michaely, 2003, for a survey). Because firms jointly
determine all components of net payout, instead of dividends in isolation, a comprehensive
measure of cash flow is necessary for understanding asset valuation (Modigliani and Miller,
1961). Firms tend to use dividends to distribute the permanent component of earnings
2

because dividend policy requires financial commitment (Lintner, 1956). Consequently, divi-
dends change slowly and remain mostly independent of asset value. In contrast, firms tend
to use repurchases to distribute the transitory component of earnings because repurchase
and issuance policy retains financial discretion. Consequently, repurchases and issuances of
both equity and debt are cyclical and move together with asset value (Hall, 2001a).1
The second motivation for focusing on net payout is the difference between the portfolio
view and the macro view of investment. Dividends are the appropriate measure of cash flow
for an individual investor who owns one share of a value-weighted portfolio. The investor
essentially follows a portfolio strategy in which dividends are received and net repurchases
of equity are reinvested. In contrast, net payout is the appropriate measure of cash flow
for a representative investor who owns the entire corporate sector. From a macro view, net
repurchases of equity and debt are cash outflows from the corporate sector that (by defini-
tion) cannot be reinvested. The value of corporate assets, instead of a stock price index, is
related to the underlying quantity of capital and ultimately enters the representative house-
hold’s intertemporal budget constraint (Abel, Mankiw, Summers, and Zeckhauser, 1989;
Hall, 2001b).
The third motivation for focusing on net payout is a recent literature that has shown the
shortcomings of dividend yield in measuring the magnitude of variation in discount rates.
Dividend yield is highly persistent, or even nonstationary, leading to fairly uninformative
inference on the exact magnitude of return predictability (see Stambaugh, 1999; Lewellen,
2004; Torous, Valkanov, and Yan, 2004; Campbell and Yogo, 2006). In addition, the fore-
casting relation between stock returns and dividend yield appears to suffer from structural
instability (see Viceira, 1996; Goyal and Welch, 2003; Lettau and Van Nieuwerburgh, 2006).
Partlyinresponsetotheseproblems, RobertsonandWright(2006)andBoudoukh, Michaely,
Richardson, and Roberts (2007) reexamine the evidence for return predictability using val-
uation ratios that include equity repurchase in addition to dividends. This paper is in the
1See Guay and Harford (2000), Jagannathan, Stephens, and Weisbach (2000), and Dittmar and Dittmar
(2004) for related evidence on equity repurchase.
3