NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IMPLEMENTING TECHNOLOGY
Diego Comin
Bart Hobijn
Working Paper 12886
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12886
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2007
We would like to thank Frederic Dufourt, Stefano Eusepi, and Chloe Tergiman for their comments
and suggestions. We are grateful to the NSF (Grant # SES-0517910) and the C.V. Starr Center for
Applied Economics for their financial support. Part of this research was conducted while Bart Hobijn
was a visiting scholar at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York. The views expressed
in this paper solely reflect those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or those of the Federal Reserve System as
a whole. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Diego Comin and Bart Hobijn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Implementing Technology
Diego Comin and Bart Hobijn
NBER Working Paper No. 12886
February 2007
JEL No. O0,O3
ABSTRACT
We introduce a tractable model of endogenous growth in which the returns to innovation are determined
by the technology adoption decisions of the users of new technologies. Technology adoption involves
an implementation investment that determines the initial productivity of a new technology. After implementation,
learning increases the productivity of a technology to its full potential. In this framework, implementation
enhances growth, while growth increases obsolescence and reduces implementation. In a calibrated
version of our model, the optimal policy involves a subsidy to capital and to implementation and a
R&D tax. This policy would lead to a welfare improvement of 7.6 percent. Out of steady-state analysis
yields that the transitional dynamics of the detrended variables after a shock to capital are very similar
to the dynamics of the neoclassical growth model, but transitory shocks have permanent effects on
the level of productivity.
Diego Comin
Department of Economics
New York University
269 Mercer Street, 725
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
diego.comin@nyu.edu
Bart Hobijn
Domestic Research Function
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty St.
New York, NY 10045
bart.hobijn@ny.frb.org

1 Introduction
Adopting a technology requires an active engagement of the adopter beyond the selection of
which technology to adopt. The initial productivity of a newly adopted technology depends
on a series of investments undertaken by the adopter. We refer to these investments as the
technology implementation process.
Thereisampleevidenceontheimportanceoftechnologyimplementation. LientzandRea
(1998) recognize that “when implementing a new technology, the current business process
is often streamlined and reengineered to take advantage of the technology.”1 Bikson et al.
(1987)studythedeterminantsofsuccessinimplementingmultifunctioninteractivecomputer
systems2. Their …ndings “indicate that site-to-site variations in the success of implementing
new technologies are more fully explained by di¤erences in the implementation process than
by di¤erences in the systems or in the organizations.” Moreover, Brynjolfsson, Hitt, and
Yang (2002) …nd evidence of substantial organizational investments to accommodate the
adoption and enhance the productivity of new IT technologies.
Despite its empirical signi…cance, state of the art models of endogenous innovation and
growth ignore the technology implementation process. In this paper, we develop a tractable
model of endogenous development and implementation of technologies.
In our model, research and development (R&D) activities determine the potential pro-
ductivity of new technologies. The initial productivity of a new technology and its intensity
of adoption are determined, however, by the investments in implementing the technology
undertaken by the adopter. Over time, the adopter learns how to use the technology e¢ -
ciently and the actual productivity converges smoothly to the potential. This generates a
1BasedontheexperienceofimplementingPlato,aneducationalsoftware,atover5000sites,PlatoLearn-
ing Inc. has written an eight-point technology implementation guide to maximize the educational bene…ts
from the technology. The di¤erent stages of implementation involve (i) assigning roles prior to adopting
technology, (ii) deciding on program goals, (iii) deciding how technology will be integrated in production
process, (iv) determining who does what once the technology is adopted, (v) planning the deployment of
technology, (vi) planning technical support, (vii) training professionals and (viii) planning the evaluation of
the program goals and the implementation process.
2They use data covering 530 employees from 55 di¤erent departments in 26 private sector organizations
2

smooth di¤usion of new technologies that resembles empirical di¤usion curves.
Including the implementation margin in a theory of endogenous innovation and growth
has important consequences for the positive and normative implications of the model. On
the positive side, better implementation makes new technologies more productive and leads
to a faster adoption of technologies. Implementation, therefore, increases the returns to
innovation and, consequently, economic growth. Growth, in turn, a¤ects the technology
implementationdecision. Inparticular, sincehighergrowthincreasestherateofobsolescence
of technologies, growth decreases the return to implementing new technologies at a higher
productivity level and thus leads to lower implementation investments. It is crucial for
this interaction that both technology di¤usion as well as obsolescence are endogenously
determined in our model.3
On the normative side, the consideration of an implementation margin provides an ad-
ditional growth policy instrument. Besides stimulating growth through R&D, the policy
maker can also consider stimulating growth by enhancing the intensity of adoption. As it
turns out, these two policy alternatives have very di¤erent consequences. R&D subsidies
stimulate innovation and growth, but, at the same time, increase endogenous obsolescence
and thus reduce implementation. Stimulating implementation increases the rate of di¤usion
of technologies which in turn increases the return to R&D and thus growth4.
The implementation decision in our model determines how far below their potential
productivity technologies are operated. When aggregating this gap over the technologies
available for production, our model yields an endogenous level of TFP, satisfying Prescott’s
3Endogenous growth and creative destruction do yield an endogenous rate of obsolescence but standard
models generally take the rate of di¤usion of technologies as exogenous. This is the case, for example, in
Aghion and Howitt’s (1992) model of creative destruction in which technology di¤usion is immediate and
in Dinopoulos and Waldo (2005) where di¤usion occurs gradually but at an exogenous rate. Comin (2000)
and Comin and Gertler (2006) introduce models of both endogenous di¤usion and endogenous growth but
these models di¤er from ours in that the intensitity of adoption is not determined by the implementation
investments.
4Kok (2004) and Sapir (2003) emphasize the importance of policy measures beyond R&D subsidies and
tax credits to stimulate growth in the European Union. Many of the alternative policies emphasize the
importance of speeding up technology di¤usion.
3