NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TAXING CAPITAL? NOT A BAD IDEA AFTER ALL!
Juan Carlos Conesa
Sagiri Kitao
Dirk Krueger
Working Paper 12880
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12880
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2007
We thank seminar participants at SED, the MEA conference on OLG models, the NBER Summer
Institute consumption group, UAB, UPF, Workshop in DGEM - Santiago, and BEMAD - Granada
for many useful suggestions. Conesa acknowledges financing from Spanish Ministry of Education
and FEDER through SEJ2006-03879, Generalitat de Catalunya through 2005SGR00447 and Barcelona
Economics - CREA. The authors can be reached at juancarlos.conesa@uab.es, sagiri.kitao@nyu.edu
and dkrueger@econ.upenn.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Juan Carlos Conesa, Sagiri Kitao, and Dirk Krueger. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Taxing Capital? Not a Bad Idea After All!
Juan Carlos Conesa, Sagiri Kitao, and Dirk Krueger
NBER Working Paper No. 12880
January 2007
JEL No. E62,H21,H24
ABSTRACT
In this paper we quantitatively characterize the optimal capital and labor income tax in an overlapping
generations model with idiosyncratic, uninsurable income shocks, where households also differ permanently
with respect to their ability to generate income. The welfare criterion we employ is ex-ante (before
ability is realized) expected (with respect to uninsurable productivity shocks) utility of a newborn
in a stationary equilibrium. Embedded in this welfare criterion is a concern of the policy maker for
insurance against idiosyncratic shocks and redistribution among agents of different abilities. Such
insurance and redistribution can be achieved by progressive labor income taxes or taxation of capital
income, or both. The policy maker has then to trade off these concerns against the standard distortions
these taxes generate for the labor supply and capital accumulation decision. We find that in our model
the optimal capital income tax rate is significantly positive. The optimal (marginal and average) tax
rate on capital is 36%, in conjunction with a progressive labor income tax code that is, to a first approximation,
a flat tax of 23% with a deduction that corresponds to about $6,000 (relative to an average income
of households in the model of $35,000). We argue that the high optimal capital income tax is mainly
driven by the life cycle structure of the model whereas the optimal progressivity of the labor income
tax is due to the insurance and redistribution role of the income tax system.
Juan Carlos Conesa Dirk Krueger
Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona Associate Professor
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Edifici B, Campus Bellaterra University of Pennsylvania
08193 Cerdanyola del Valles, SPAIN 3718 Locust Walk
juancarlos.conesa@uab.es Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
Sagiri Kitao dkrueger@econ.upenn.edu
New York University
Depatment of Economics
19 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
sk910@nyu.edu

1 Introduction
Shouldthegovernmenttaxcapitalincome? Theseminalcontributionsof Cham-
ley (1986) and Judd (1985) argue that standard economic theory provides a
negative answer to this question. The government should not tax capital, at
least not in the long run. The survey articles by Chari and Kehoe (1999) and
Atkeson,Chari andKehoe (1999)argue thatthisresultisrobusttoa relaxation
of a number of stringent assumptionsmade by Chamley and Judd.
Chamley and Judd derive their result under the assumptions that house-
holds are in…nitely lived and face no risk (either aggregate or idiosyncratic),
or equivalently, can fully insure against idiosyncratic risk and trade a full set
of Arrow securities against aggregate uncertainty. If, on the other hand, idio-
syncratic risk is not insurable, Aiyagari (1995) suggests that positive capital
taxation may be optimal, in order to cure the overaccumulation of capital as a
resultof precautionary savingsbehaviorby households. Hisquantitative results
suggests, however, that the optimal capital income tax is small.1 Even if in-
surance markets are complete, or equivalently householdsface no idiosyncratic
risk, Hubbard and Judd (1997) demonstrate that …nancial market frictions in
the form of borrowing constraints may make the taxation of capital income
desirable.
Both the original Chamley-Judd result as well as its response by Aiyagari
relied on models with in…nitely lived agents. Characterizing the structure of
optimal taxes in a model that explicitly models the life cycle of households in
an overlapping generations economy, Erosa and Ventura (2002) and Garriga
(2003) demonstrate that the optimal capital income tax in general is di¤erent
from zero, at least if the tax code is anonymous in that the tax schedule a
household faces is not allowed to depend on the age of the household. It is an
open question, however, how large the optimal capital income tax, relative to
the optimal labor income tax is in a realistically calibrated life cycle model in
which households face borrowing constraints and idiosyncratic income risk in
the same orderof magnitude asin the data.
The goal of this paper is therefore to quantitatively characterize the opti-
mal capital and labor income tax in a model that nests both model elements
previously identi…edinthe literature ashavingpotential forgenerating positive
capital income taxes: imperfect insurance against idiosyncratic income shocks
due to missing insurance markets and borrowing constraints, as well as an ex-
plicitlife cycle structure. Inour model households di¤er according to theirage
and their history of income realizations. In addition, we allow agents to be
heterogenous with respect to their initial ability to generate income, modelled
as a …xed e¤ect in their labor productivity. To the extent that society values
an equitable distribution of welfare this model element induces a positive role
for taxes that redistribute from the more to the less able households.
In order to determine the optimal tax system in our model with rich cross-
1Golosov et al. (2003)also argue, in a dynamic private information economy with idio-
syncraticincomeshocks,foranoptimalcapitalincome taxratethatisex-postdi¤erentfrom
zero,butstillequalto zeroinexpectationforeachhousehold.
2

sectional heterogeneity we need to take a stand on the social welfare function
employed in evaluating policies. The welfare criterion we employ is ex-ante
(before ability is realized) expected (with respect to uninsurable productivity
shocks) lifetime utility of a newborn in a stationary equilibrium. Embedded
in this welfare criterion is a concern of the policy maker for insurance against
idiosyncratic shocks andredistributionbetweenagentsof di¤erentability, since
taking anextra dollarfrom the highly able andgivingitto the lessable, ceteris
paribus, increases social welfare since the value function characterizing lifetime
utility is strictly concave in ability to generate income.2 Such insurance and
redistribution can be achieved by progressive labor income taxes or taxation
of capital income (which mainly accrues to the wealthy), or both. The policy
maker then has to trade o¤ the concern against the standard distortions these
taxesimpose on labor supply andcapital accumulationdecisionsof households.
We …nd that the optimal capital income tax rate is not only positive, but
is signi…cantly positive. The optimal tax rate oncapital is36%, in conjunction
witha progressive laborincometax code thatis, to a…rstapproximation, a‡at
tax of 23% with a deduction that corresponds to about $6;000 (relative to an
average income of householdsin the model of $35;000).
What explains these results? In our life cycle economy those contributing
most to tax revenue are middle-aged individuals which are both highly pro-
ductive in their jobs (and hence have high labor income) and in the middle of
accumulating savings for retirement (and therefore pay the bulk of the capital
income tax bill). But these agents supply laborquite elastically, whereas their
savingchoices(whichattheirage ismainly life cycle savingratherthanprecau-
tionary savingdueto idiosyncraticincomeshocks)isfairly inelasticwithrespect
tothe marginal capital income tax rate.3 As acorollary, the capitalincome tax
issubstantial; in fact, substantially higher at the margin thanthe laborincome
tax. A decomposition analysis demonstrates that to a …rst order, high capital
income taxesarise evenina versionof ourmodel withoutidiosyncratic risk and
type heterogeneity, although heterogeneity aswell as risk in labor productivity
contribute to its size. The magnitude of the progressivity of the labor income
tax code, on the other hand, depends crucially on the presence of these model
elements.
Since one would expect our …ndings, especially with respect to the high
capital income tax, to depend crucially on the exact speci…cation of household
preferences with respect to leisure (and thus the labor supply elasticity), we
investigate how sensitive our results are with respect to this speci…cation. Re-
placing the Cobb-Douglas utility speci…cationbetween consumptionand leisure
which is often used in macroeconomics (and which we therefore employ as a
2Of course redistributionandinsurancearetwo sidesof the samemedal: whatis redistri-
butionbetweenhouseholdsofdi¤erentabilitiesex post(afterability is realized) isinsurance
againstlow ability ex ante(before birth).
3Saez (2003) carries out an empirical investigation into the link between marginal taxes
and income elasticity of the rich. His estimated elasticities are in line with the elasticities
we compute in our model. Note that in models where households live forever the life cycle
savingsmotive,crucialinourmodel,isabsentbyconstruction.
3