NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MONEY ILLUSION AND HOUSING FRENZIES
Markus K. Brunnermeier
Christian Julliard
Working Paper 12810
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12810
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006
We benefited from helpful comments from an anonymous referee, Yakov Amihud, Patrick Bolton,
Smita Brunnermeier, John Campbell, James Choi, Albina Danilova, Aureo de Paula, Emir Emiray,
Will Goetzmann, Kevin Lansing, Chris Mayer, Alex Michaelides, Stefan Nagel, Martin Oehmke, Maureen
O'Hara, Filippos Papakonstantinou, Lasse Pedersen, Adriano Rampini, Matt Richardson, Bob Shiller,
Matt Spiegel, Jeremy Stein, Demosthenes Tambakis, Haibin Zhu and seminar and conference participants
at the Bank of England, Cambridge-Princeton conference, CSEFIGIER symposium, Duke-UNC Asset
Pricing Conference, 2006 Econometric Society Winter Meetings in Boston, Federal Reserve Bank
of Philadelphia, Harvard University, IIES Stockholm, London Business School, London School of
Economics, NBER Behavioral Meetings, Oxford University, Queen-Mary University, RFS Bubble
Conference in Indiana, University of Copenhagen, University of Salerno, Wharton School, University
of Wisconsin-Madison Real Estate Research conference, and Yale Conference on Behavioral Economics.
We also thank the BIS for providing part of the housing data used in this analysis. Brunnermeier acknowledges
financial support from the National Science Foundation and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Markus K. Brunnermeier and Christian Julliard. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Money Illusion and Housing Frenzies
Markus K. Brunnermeier and Christian Julliard
NBER Working Paper No. 12810
December 2006
JEL No. G12,R2
ABSTRACT
A reduction in inflation can fuel run-ups in housing prices if people suffer from money illusion. For
example, investors who decide whether to rent or buy a house by simply comparing monthly rent and
mortgage payments do not take into account that inflation lowers future real mortgage costs. We decompose
the price-rent ratio in a rational component -- meant to capture the proxy effect and risk premia -- and
an implied mispricing. We find that inflation and nominal interest rates explain a large share of the
time-series variation of the mispricing, and that the tilt effect is unlikely to rationalize this finding.
Markus K. Brunnermeier
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
markus@princeton.edu
Christian Julliard
Department of Economics(cid:13)(cid:10)
London School of Economics(cid:13)(cid:10)
Houghton Street(cid:13)(cid:10)
London, WC2A 2AE(cid:13)(cid:10)
United Kingdom(cid:13)(cid:10)
C.Julliard@lse.ac.uk

1 Introduction
Housing prices have reached unprecedented heights in recent years. Sharp run-ups
followed by busts are a common feature of the time-series of housing prices. Figure
1 illustrates different real housing price indices and shows that this phenomenon has
been observed in several OECD countries.
Panel A Panel B
275 275
250 250
225 225
200
200
175
175
150
150
125
125
100
100
75
75
50
50 1970 1974 1978 1982 1986 1990 1994 1998 2002
1970 1974 1978 1982 1986 1990 1994 1998 2002
NL DK NO
US UK CA AU SE CH
Figure 1: Residential property (real) price indices for a group of Anglo-Saxon countries
(Panel A) and for Scandinavian countries and other European countries (Panel B). Base
period is 1976:Q1.
Shiller (2005) documents similar patterns for other countries and cities over shorter
samples. Moreover,CaseandShiller(1989,1990) documentthathousingpricechanges
are predictable and suggest that this might be due to inefficiency in the housing mar-
ket. There are several potential reasons for this market inefficiency — one of them
being money illusion. The housing market is particularly well suited to study money
illusion, since frictions make it difficult for professional investors to arbitrage possible
mispricings away.
Inthispaperweidentifyanempiricalproxyforthemispricinginthehousingmarket
and show that it is largely explained by movements in inflation. Inflation matters and
it matters in a particular way. Our analysis shows that a reduction in inflation can
generate substantial increases in housing prices in a setting in which agents are prone
to money illusion. For example, people who simply base the decision of whether to
rent or buy a house on a comparison between monthly rent and monthly payment of
2

a fixed nominal interest rate mortgage suffer from money illusion. They mistakenly
assume that real and nominal interest rates move in lockstep. Hence, they wrongly
attribute a decrease in inflation to a decline in the real interest rate and consequently
underestimate the real cost of future mortgage payments. Therefore, they cause an
upward pressure on housing prices when inflation declines.
To identify whether the link between housing price movements and inflation is due
tomoneyillusion, we first have toisolatethe rational components of price changes that
are due to movements in fundamentals such as land and construction costs, housing
quality, property taxes, and demographics (Mankiw and Weil (1989)).1 We do so in
two stages. First, we focus on the price-rent ratio to insulate our analysis from fun-
damental movements that affect housing prices and rents symmetrically. Even though
renting and buying a house are not perfect substitutes, the price-rent ratio implicitly
controlsformovementsintheunderlyingserviceflow. Second, wetrytoisolaterational
channels through which inflation could influence the price-rent ratio. Several authors
including Fama (1981) have claimed that the negative relationship between inflation
andthe price of real assets (like stocks) might be due to a “proxyeffect”: highinflation
and/or high inflation expectations are a bad signal about future economic conditions.
Moreover, higher inflation might make the economy more risky or agents more risk
averse, generating a risk premium that is correlated with inflation. Also, an increase
in inflation reduces the after-tax user cost of housing, potentially driving up hous-
ing demand (Poterba (1984)). We use a Campbell and Shiller (1988) decomposition
that takes into account housing specific risk factors, (such as probability of moving
interacted with cross-sectional variation of house prices), to decompose the price-rent
ratio into rational components (expected future returns on housing investment and
rent growth rates) and a mispricing component. After controlling for rational chan-
nels, we find that inflation has substantial explanatory power for the sharp run-ups
and downturns of the housing market.
Figure 2 depicts the time series of the (estimated) mispricing component of the
price-rentratiointheU.K.housingmarketanditsfittedvaluesobtainedusinginflation
as the only explanatory variable. The first thing to notice is that the mispricing shows
sharp and persistent run-ups during the sample period. Moreover, the fitted series
closely tracks the mispricing.
The close link between inflation and housing prices could be due to a departure
from rationality and/or financing frictions. First, as argued by Modigliani and Cohn
(1979), if agents suffer from money illusion, their valuation of an asset will be inversely
related to the overall level of inflation in the economy. This explanation of housing
1Thesevariablesalonearegenerallynotabletocapturethesharprun-upsinhousingprices. Ithas
becomecommonintheempiricalliteraturetoaddcubic‘frenzy’termsinthehousingpriceregressions
(seeHendry(1984)andMuellbauerandMurphy(1997))andtherationalexpectationshypothesishas
been rejected by the data (Clayton (1996)).
3