NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TEACHING LOCALS NEW TRICKS:
FOREIGN EXPERTS AS A CHANNEL OF KNOWLEDGE TRANSFERS
James R. Markusen
Natalia Trofimenko
Working Paper 12872
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12872
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2007
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by James R. Markusen and Natalia Trofimenko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Teaching Locals New Tricks: Foreign Experts as a Channel of Knowledge Transfers
James R. Markusen and Natalia Trofimenko
NBER Working Paper No. 12872
January 2007
JEL No. F2,O19,O47
ABSTRACT
Gains from productivity and knowledge transmission arising from the presence of foreign firms have
received a good deal of empirical attention, but theoretical micro-foundations for this mechanism are
limited. Here we develop a dynamic model in which foreign experts may train domestic workers who
work with them. Gains from training can in turn be decomposed into two types: (a) obtaining knowledge
and skills at a lower cost than if they were self-learnt at home, (b) producing domestic skilled workers
earlier in time than if the domestic economy had to rediscover the relevant knowledge through "reinventing
the wheel." We use fixed effects and nearest neighbour matching estimators on a panel of plant-level
data for Colombia that identifies the use of foreign experts, to show that these experts have substantial,
although not always immediate, positive effects on the wages of domestic workers and on the value
added per worker.
James R. Markusen
Department of Economics
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309-0256
and NBER
james.markusen@colorado.edu
Natalia Trofimenko
Kiel Institute for World Economics
Duesterbrooker Weg 120
24105 Kiel Germany
natalia.trofimenko@ifw-kiel.de

1. Introduction
There now exists a well-developed empirical literature on the transmission of
technical/managerial knowledge and productivity “spillovers” between countries and whether
trade or investment is a more important channel of transmission (Keller 1998, 2002ab, Haskel
and Slaughter 2002, Gong and Keller 2003, Javorcik and Spatareanu 2003 and Javorcik 2004).
In the latter vein of literature, several different ideas for the micro-foundations of the
transmission mechanism have been proposed or modelled. Theoretical models have looked at
linkages as a source of productivity spillovers, so that upstream and/or downstream firms benefit
from the arrival of multinationals (Markusen and Venables, 1999). This has generally been in the
form of variety effects from supporting an increased number of intermediate or final goods.
Rodriguez-Clare (1996), for example, develops a model of how the multinationals can improve
welfare by generating more linkages compared to the linkages that would be generated by the
domestic firms they displace from the labor market. The second stream of theoretical analysis
looks at workers or local firms learning from watching or working for foreign firms with a
resulting increase in their productivity (Ethier and Markusen 1996, Fosfuri, Motta, and Rønde
2001, Markusen 2001, Glass and Saggi 2002). Empirical work in search of spillovers to local
firms include Haddad and Harrison (1993), Aiken and Harrison and Lipsey (1996), Blomström
and Kokko (1998), Blomström and Sjöholm (1999), Aitken and Harrison (1999), Blalock (2002),
Javorcik and Spatareanu (2003) and Javorcik (2004). Other empirical literature has documented
that local firms and their managers often get their start as employees of multinational firms (Katz
1987, Hobday 1995, Hall and Khan 2003).
Very little in this literature is directed at modelling the precise micro-mechanism of how
foreign skilled workers impart those skills to domestic workers. To close this gap is the purpose
of our paper. We focus on direct imports of the services of foreign experts as a method of both
2

providing an important good or service and for training domestic workers faster and/or cheaper
than they can learn on their own. We depart from the tradition of comparative steady-state
analysis used in new growth theory, since we want to explicitly consider timing issues rather than
merely steady-state levels and growth rates. For this reason, we use a very simple competitive
constant-returns model with no spillovers, externalities, or other bells-and-whistles.
Firms and workers are initially identical in the model in period 1. In period 2, any/all
firms can choose to hire foreign experts for one period. Due to the general-equilibrium structure
of the model, there are ranges of parameters for which some firms do and some do not hire
foreign experts. Workers in firms hiring foreign experts have a higher productivity in period 2
and (generally) in period 3. In period 4, productivity in firms not hiring foreign experts catches
up to those that do.
The model solves for the wage profiles of workers in firms that use foreign experts and
those that do not as a basis for our empirical section. In general, the model predicts that workers
in firms with foreign experts should accept lower wages in period 2 in exchange for higher wages
in period 3. However, if there are perfect spillovers to the other firms or if foreigners are just
used to substitute for scarce skilled workers in period 2, this effect is not present; that is, there is
no observed effect of foreign experts on the wages of those in firms with versus without foreign
experts.
Our empirical section uses Colombian Manufacturing Surveys (1977-1991), where the use
of foreign experts is identified in each period (if any) for each plant. The surveys contain a
sample of 304 plants for which we observe three distinct stages – before employing any foreign
experts, while foreign experts remain with the plant, and after they leave – and this information
allows us to evaluate contemporaneous and posterior impact of the experts on the wages of
skilled and unskilled workers and labor productivity. We find the impact to be large and positive
3