NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIQUIDITY AND RISK MANAGEMENT
Nicolae B. Garleanu
Lasse H. Pedersen
Working Paper 12887
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12887
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2007
We are grateful for helpful conversations with Franklin Allen, Dimitri Vayanos, and Jeff Wurgler.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Nicolae B. Garleanu and Lasse H. Pedersen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Liquidity and Risk Management
Nicolae B. Garleanu and Lasse H. Pedersen
NBER Working Paper No. 12887
February 2007
JEL No. G10
ABSTRACT
This paper provides a model of the interaction between risk-management practices and market liquidity.
On one hand, tighter risk management reduces the maximum position an institution can take, thus
the amount of liquidity it can offer to the market. On the other hand, risk managers can take into account
that lower liquidity amplifies the effective risk of a position by lengthening the time it takes to sell
it. The main result of the paper is that a feedback effect can arise: tighter risk management reduces
liquidity, which in turn leads to tighter risk management, etc. This can help explain sudden drops in
liquidity and, since liquidity is priced, in prices in connection with increased volatility or decreased
risk-bearing capacity.
Nicolae B. Garleanu
University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School
3620 Locust Walk
2300 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6137
and NBER
garleanu@wharton.upenn.edu
Lasse H. Pedersen
NYU Stern Finance
44 West Fouth Street
Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
lpederse@stern.nyu.edu

Liquidity and Risk Management
Nicolae Gˆarleanu and Lasse Heje Pedersen
This paper provides a model of the interaction between risk-management practices and
market liquidity. Our main finding is that a feedback effect can arise: tighter risk manage-
ment leads to market illiquidity, and this illiquidity further tightens risk management.
Risk management plays a central role in institutional investors’ allocation of capital to
trading. For instance, a risk manager may limit a trading desk’s one-day 99% value at
risk (VaR) to $1 million. This means that the trading desk must choose a position such
that, over the following day, its value drops no more than $1 million with 99% probability.
Risk management thus helps control an institution’s use of capital while limiting default
risk, and helps mitigate agency problems. Jorion (2000, page xxiii) states that VaR “is now
increasingly used to allocate capital across traders, business units, products, and even to the
whole institution.”
We do not focus on the benefits of risk management within an institution adopting such
controls, but, rather, on the aggregate effects of such practices on liquidity and asset prices.
An institution may benefit from tightening its risk management and restricting its security
position, but as a consequence it cannot provide as much liquidity to others. We show that,
if everyone uses a tight risk management, then market liquidity is lowered in that it takes
longer to find a buyer with unused risk-bearing capacity, and, since liquidity is priced, prices
1

fall.
Notonlydoesriskmanagementaffectliquidity,butliquiditycanalsoaffectrisk-management
practices. For instance, Bank for International Settlements (2001, page 15) states that “For
the internal risk management, a number of institutions are exploring the use of liquidity
adjusted-VaR, in which the holding periods in the risk assessment are adjusted to account
for market liquidity, in particular by the length of time required to unwind positions.” For
instance, if liquidation is expected to take two days, a two-day VaR might be used instead
of a one-day VaR. Since a security’s risk over two days is greater than over one day, this
means that a trader must choose a smaller position to satisfy his liquidity-adjusted value at
risk (LVaR) constraint. One motivation for this constraint is that, if an institution needs to
sell, its maximum loss before the completion of the sale is limited by the LVaR.
ThemainresultofthepaperisthatsubjectingtraderstoanLVaRgivesrisetoamultiplier
effect: tighter risk management leads to more restricted positions, hence longer expected
selling times, implying higher risk over the expected selling period, which further tightens
the risk management, and so on. This snowballing feedback between liquidity and risk
management can help explain why liquidity can suddenly drop. We show that this spiraling
illiquidity can arise if volatility rises, or if more agents face reduced risk-bearing capacity —
for instance, because of investor redemptions, losses, or increased risk aversion.
Our link between liquidity and risk management is a testable prediction. While no formal
empirical evidence is available, to our knowledge, our prediction is consistent with anecdotal
evidence on financial market crises. For example, in August 1998 several traders lost money
due to a default of Russian bonds and, simultaneously, market volatility increased. As a
2