NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OVERRULING AND THE INSTABILITY OF LAW
Nicola Gennaioli
Andrei Shleifer
Working Paper 12913
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12913
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2007
We are grateful to Olivier Blanchard, Filipe Campante, Edward Glaeser, Claudia Goldin, Oliver Hart,
Elhanan Helpman, Anup Malani, Fausto Panunzi, Torsten Persson, Richard Posner, Ilia Rainer, Alan
Schwartz, Kathryn Spier, Pablo Spiller, Mathew Stephenson, David Stromberg, and especially Louis
Kaplow for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Nicola Gennaioli and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Overruling and the Instability of Law
Nicola Gennaioli and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 12913
February 2007
JEL No. K13,K4
ABSTRACT
We investigate the evolution of common law under overruling, a system of precedent change in which
appellate courts replace existing legal rules with new ones. We use a legal realist model, in which
judges change the law to reflect their own preferences or attitudes, but changing the law is costly to
them. The model's predictions are consistent with the empirical evidence on the overruling behavior
of the U.S. Supreme Court and appellate courts. We find that overruling leads to unstable legal rules
that rarely converge to efficiency. The selection of disputes for litigation does not change this conclusion.
Our findings provide a rationale for the value of precedent, as well as for the general preference of
appellate courts for distinguishing rather than overruling as a law-making strategy.
Nicola Gennaioli
Stockholm University
Institute for International Economic Studies
SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden
Nicola.Gennaioli@iies.su.se
Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M-9
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu

Introduction
In the common law tradition, the law evolves through the creation and revision of precedents by
appellate courts (Stone, 1985). There are two principal forms of such revision in common law. The
first, and more typical, is distinguishing, whereby an appellate court accepts the previous precedent, but
limits the scope of its applicability and establishes a new rule for the circumstances in which the
previous precedent no longer applies. The second, and less typical, form is overruling, whereby an
appellate court simply replaces the precedent with a new rule. Overruling deserves some attention
both because it is the form of precedent revision typically studied in law and economics (Rubin, 1977,
Priest, 1977, Posner, 2003) and because it is sometimes used by the U.S. Supreme Court.
Political scientists find that, although there is some role of precedent in binding the U.S.
Supreme Court’s decisions, the Court overrules precedents incompatible with its political orientation
(Brenner and Spaeth, 1995, Segal and Spaeth, 2002). Furthermore, Supreme Court judges vote based
on their ideological preferences (George and Epstein, 1992, Brenner and Spaeth, 1995, Songer and
Lindquist, 1996), follow only those prior Court decisions that are compatible with their own ideologies
(MacKuen and McGuire, 2005), and do not revise their past votes after the Court they sit on has
established a new legal rule they had voted against (Segal and Spaeth, 1996, 2002). Klein (2002)
obtains similar results in a study of appellate and not just Supreme Court decisions.
This evidence indicates that judges’ policy preferences play a key role in shaping appellate
courts’ overruling behavior. What do these findings imply for the evolution of common law? Does
overruling lead the law to converge in the long run? If so, does the law converge to efficiency? What
is the role of the selection of disputes for litigation for the quality of law?
This paper presents a model of overruling by appellate courts. The model answers the above
questions and allows us to compare the evolution of common law under overruling with that under
3

distinguishing, not considered in this paper but investigated by Gennaioli and Shleifer (2007). One
important question we do not address is the court’s choice of overruling versus distinguishing when
both options are open.
Like Gennaioli and Shleifer (2007), our model relies on two assumptions. First, consistent with
the findings of political science, we assume that judges hold biases favoring different types of
disputants, and that these biases vary across the population of judges.2 This assumption has its
intellectual foundation in legal realism, the theory that sees judicial decisions as based largely on
judges’ preferences and beliefs (Holmes, 1897, Radin, 1925, Frank, 1930, Stone, 1985, Posner, 2005).
Second, following Radin (1925) and Posner (2003, 2005), we assume that changing precedent is
personally costly to judges: it requires extra investigation of facts, extra writing, extra work of
persuading colleagues when judges sit in panels, extra risk of being criticized, and so on. “Judges are
people and the economizing of mental effort is a characteristic of people, even if censorious persons
call it by a less fine name” (Radin, 1925, p. 362). The assumption that, other things equal, judges
would rather not change the law implies that only the judges who disagree with the current legal rule
strongly enough actually change it. Posner (2003, p. 544) sees what he calls “judicial preference for
leisure” as a source of stability in the law; we revisit this issue.
Using a model relying on these two assumptions, we examine the evolution of legal rules under
overruling in the case of a simple tort: a dog bites a man (e.g., Landes and Posner, 1987). We ask
when and how precedents evolve through overruling, what factors render such evolution more efficient,
and whether legal rules converge to efficient ones. We also examine how the selection of disputes for
litigation influences efficiency3.
2 Legal scholars increasingly accept the importance of judicial ideologies for rulings on politically sensitive issues (e.g.,
Pinello 1999, Rowland and Carp 1996, Revesz 1997, Sunstein, Schkade, and Ellman 2004).
3 The hypothesis that common law tends toward efficiency was introduced by Posner (2003, 1st edition 1973). Key studies
include Rubin (1977), Priest (1977), Cooter, Kornhauser, and Lane (1979), and Cooter and Kornhauser (1979).
4