NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
POLITICAL CAREERS OR CAREER POLITICIANS?
Andrea Mattozzi
Antonio Merlo
Working Paper 12921
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12921
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2007
We are particularly indebted to Steve Coate whose detailed suggestions on a previous version of
this paper inspired this revision. We also thank seminar and conference participants at several institutions,
Federico Echenique, Leonardo Felli, and Preston McAfee for their useful comments. Financial support
from National Science Foundation grant SES-0617901 is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2007 by Andrea Mattozzi and Antonio Merlo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Political Careers or Career Politicians?
Andrea Mattozzi and Antonio Merlo
NBER Working Paper No. 12921
February 2007
JEL No. D72,J44,J45
ABSTRACT
Two main career paths are prevalent among politicians in modern democracies: there are career politicians
(i.e., politicians who work in the political sector until retirement), and political careers (i.e., there are
politicians who leave politics before retirement and work in the private sector). In this paper, we propose
a dynamic equilibrium model of the careers of politicians in an environment with a private sector and
a political sector, where individuals are heterogeneous with respect to their market ability and political
skills. Our analysis provides an explanation for the existence of career politicians and individuals with
political careers, and their motivations. We also investigate the effects of monetary incentives and
other features of the political-economic environment on the quality of politicians and their careers.
We show that an increase in the salary a politician receives while in office decreases the average quality
of individuals who become politicians, decreases turnover in office, and may either decrease or increase
the average quality of career politicians.
Andrea Mattozzi
California Institute of Technology
Division of Humanities and Social Sciences, MC 228
Pasadena, CA 91125
andrea@hss.caltech.edu
Antonio Merlo
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER
merloa@econ.upenn.edu

1 Introduction
The very existence and functioning of representative democracy, where citizens delegate
policy-making to elected representatives, hinge on the presence of politicians. In his famous
1918 lecture entitled Politics as a Vocation, Max Weber writes:
“Politics, justaseconomicpursuits, maybeaman’savocationorhisvocation.
[...] There are two ways of making politics one’s vocation: Either one lives ‘for’
politics or one lives ‘off’ politics. [...] He who lives ‘for’ politics makes politics
his life [...] He who strives to make politics a permanent source of income lives
‘off’ politics as a vocation.” [from Gerth and Mills (1946; pp. 83-84)]
The view expressed by Weber highlights the importance of analyzing the motivations of
politicians in the context of their career decisions over the life-cycle.
A recent article by Diermeier, Keane and Merlo (2005) studies the career decisions of
politicians who served in the U.S. Congress in the post-war period. Several interesting
observationsemergefromthedata. AsignificantfractionofthemembersoftheU.S.Congress
leaveofficevoluntarilyandbecomeemployedintheprivatesector. Atthesametime,manyof
themremaininCongressuntilretirement. OutofallthepoliticianswhoenteredtheHouseof
Representatives after 1945 and left (alive) by 1994, 46% left voluntarily. Of those, 39% took
ajobintheprivatesector, whiletheremaining61%eithermovedtoadifferentpoliticaloffice
(36%), or retired (25%).1 Furthermore, the politicians who exit Congress voluntarily and
leave politics altogether for another occupation tend to have successful careers in the private
sector. For example, the average annual earnings of former representatives who choose to
leaveCongresstoworkintheprivatesectorareequal to$258,418(in1995constantdollars).2
In fact, one of the key findings of Diermeier, Keane and Merlo (2005) is that congressional
experience significantly increases post-congressional wages in the private sector.3
1Ofthe54%wholeftCongressbecauseofelectoraldefeat,61%tookajobintheprivatesector,36%took
another political job, and 3% retired.
2ThecorrespondingfigureforformerrepresentativeswholeftCongressbecauseofelectoraldefeatisequal
to $247,198.
3They find that, holding everything else constant, winning reelection in the House for the first time
1

These observations are not unique to Congress or the United States. While data on the
wages of former politicians who work in the private sector are in general not available, by
and large, there are two main career paths that are prevalent among politicians in modern
democracies. There are career politicians (i.e., politicians who work in the political sector
until retirement), and political careers (i.e., there are politicians who leave politics before
retirement and work in the private sector).4 Obviously, political careers can be either volun-
tary (i.e., when a politician deliberately opts out of office undefeated), or involuntary (i.e.,
when exit from office follows an electoral defeat).
These considerations raise the following important questions: Who wants to be a politi-
cian and why? How do monetary incentives and other features of the political-economic
environment affect the quality of politicians and their career paths?
To address these issues, we propose a dynamic equilibrium model of the careers of politi-
cians in an overlapping-generations environment with two sectors: the private (or market)
sector, and the political sector. In our model, individuals are heterogeneous with respect to
their market ability as well as their political skills, and individual skill-endowments, which
are private information, are positively correlated (e.g., better politicians may be more likely
to be better managers). Each individual lives for two periods, and in each period can either
work in the perfectly competitive market sector or be a politician. To become a politician,
an individual must win an election, and to be a career politician he must then be confirmed
in office for a second term.
While in office politicians perform a public service which benefits the voters, with rel-
atively more skilled politicians generating higher benefits, and they receive a salary. In
addition to their salary, politicians who remain in office for a second term also receive an
additional payoff, which can be interpreted as ego-rents from being confirmed in office by
increasespost-congressionalwagesintheprivatesectorby4.4%. However,themarginaleffectofcongressional
experience on post-congressional wages diminishes quite rapidly with additional experience.
4Foradescriptionofthecareersofpoliticiansinseveralcountries,see,e.g., BestandCotta(2000),Cotta
(1979), Jones et al. (2002), and Samuels (1999). A third possible career path is to achieve success in the
privatesectorandthenmoveintopolitics. Whilethereareseveralrecentexamplesofthisphenomenon(e.g.,
SilvioBerlusconiinItalyorMichaelBloombergintheUnitedStates),thisisstillarelativelyrareoccurrence.
2