NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MARKET LIQUIDITY AND FUNDING LIQUIDITY
Markus K. Brunnermeier
Lasse Heje Pedersen
Working Paper 12939
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12939
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2007
We are grateful for helpful comments from Franklin Allen, Yakov Amihud, David Blair, Bernard Dumas,
Denis Gromb, Charles Johns, Christian Julliard, John Kambhu, Markus Konz, Martin Oehmke, Filippos
Papakonstantinou, Ketan Patel, Guillaume Plantin, Felipe Schwartzman, Jeremy Stein, Dimitri Vayanos,
Jiang Wang, and Pierre-Olivier Weill. We also thank seminar participants at the New York Federal
Reserve Bank and the New York Stock Exchange, Citigroup, Bank for International Settlement, University
of Zuerich, INSEAD, Northwestern University, Stockholm Institute for Financial Research, Goldman
Sachs, IMF, the World Bank, UCLA, LSE, Warwick University, Bank of England, University of Chicago,
Texas A&M, University of Notre Dame, HEC, University of Maryland, University of Michigan, Virginia
Tech and conference participants at the American Economic Association Meeting, FMRC conference
in honor of Hans Stoll at Vanderbilt, NBER Market Microstructure Meetings, NBER Asset Pricing
Meetings, NBER Risks of Financial Institutions conference, the Five Star conference, and American
Finance Association Meeting. Brunnermeier acknowledges funding support from the National Science
Foundation (NSF) and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Markus K. Brunnermeier and Lasse Heje Pedersen. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity
Markus K. Brunnermeier and Lasse Heje Pedersen
NBER Working Paper No. 12939
February 2007
JEL No. G12,G21,G24
ABSTRACT
We provide a model that links an asset's market liquidity - i.e., the ease with which it is traded - and
traders' funding liquidity - i.e., the ease with which they can obtain funding. Traders provide market
liquidity, and their ability to do so depends on their availability of funding. Conversely, traders' funding,
i.e., their capital and the margins they are charged, depend on the assets' market liquidity. We show
that, under certain conditions, margins are destabilizing and market liquidity and funding liquidity
are mutually reinforcing, leading to liquidity spirals. The model explains the empirically documented
features that market liquidity (i) can suddenly dry up, (ii) has commonality across securities, (iii) is
related to volatility, (iv) is subject to "flight to quality", and (v) comoves with the market, and it provides
new testable predictions.
Markus K. Brunnermeier
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
markus@princeton.edu
Lasse Heje Pedersen
NYU Stern Finance
44 West Fouth Street
Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
lpederse@stern.nyu.edu

Trading requires capital. When a trader — e.g. a dealer, hedge fund, or investment
bank — buys a security, he can use the security as collateral and borrow against it, but he
cannot borrow the entire price. The difference between the security’s price and collateral
value, denoted as the margin, must be financed with the trader’s own capital. Similarly,
shortselling requires capital in the form of a margin; it does not free up capital. Therefore,
the total margin on all positions cannot exceed a trader’s capital at any time.
Our model shows that the funding of traders affects — and is affected by — market
liquidity in a profound way. When funding liquidity is tight, traders become reluctant to
take on positions, especially “capital intensive” positions in high-margin securities. This
lowers market liquidity, leading to higher volatility. Further, under certain conditions, low
future market liquidity increases the risk of financing a trade, thus increasing margins.
Basedonthelinksbetweenfundingandmarketliquidity, weprovideaunifiedexplanation
for the main empirical features of market liquidity. In particular, our model implies that
marketliquidity(i)cansuddenlydryup, (ii)hascommonalityacrosssecurities, (iii)isrelated
to volatility, (iv) is subject to “flight to liquidity,” and (v) comoves with the market. The
model has several new testable implications that link margins and dealer funding to market
liquidity: Wepredictthat(i)ashocktospeculators’capitalisastatevariableaffectingmarket
liquidity and risk premia, (ii) a reduction in capital reduces market liquidity, especially if
capitalisalreadylow(anon-lineareffect)andforhigh-marginsecurities,(iii)marginsincrease
in illiquidity if the fundamental value is difficult to determine, and (iv) speculators’ returns
are negatively skewed (even if they trade securities without skewness in the fundamentals).
Our model is similar in spirit to Grossman and Miller (1988) with the added feature that
speculators face the real-world funding constraint discussed above. In our model, different
customers have offsetting demand shocks, but arrive sequentially to the market. This creates
a temporary order imbalance. Speculators smooth price fluctuations, thus providing market
liquidity. Speculators finance their trades through collateralized borrowing from financiers
who set the margins to control their value-at-risk (VaR). We derive the competitive equilib-
1

rium of the model and explore its liquidity implications. We define market liquidity as the
difference between the transaction price and the fundamental value, and funding liquidity as
a speculator’s scarcity (or shadow cost) of capital.
14%
12%
Black Monday
US/Iraq war LTCM
10/19/87
10%
8%
6%
4%
2%
1989 mini crash
Asian crisis
0%
Jan-82 Jan-84 Jan-86 Jan-88 Jan-90 Jan-92 Jan-94 Jan-96 Jan-98 Jan-00 Jan-02 Jan-04 Jan-06
Figure 1: Margins for S&P500 Futures. The figure shows margin requirements on S&P500
futuresformembersoftheChicagoMercantileExchangeasafractionofthevalueoftheunderlying
S&P500indexmultipliedbythesizeofthecontract. (Initialormaintenancemarginsarethesame
for members.) Each dot represents a change in the dollar margin.
We first analyze the properties of margins. We show that margins can increase in illiquid-
ity when margin-setting financiers’ are unsure whether price changes are due to fundamental
news or to liquidity shocks and fundamentals have time-varying volatility. This happens
when a liquidity shock leads to price volatility, which raises the financier’s expectation about
future volatility. Figure 1 shows that margins did increase empirically for S&P 500 futures
during the liquidity crises of 1987, 1990, and 1998. We denote margins as “destabilizing” if
they can increase in illiquidity, and note that anecdotal evidence from prime brokers suggests
that margins often behave this way.
The model also shows that margins can, in contrast, decrease in illiquidity and thus be
“stabilizing.” This happens when financiers know that prices diverge due to temporary mar-
2