NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OPTIMAL ASSET ALLOCATION IN ASSET LIABILITY MANAGEMENT
Jules H. van Binsbergen
Michael W. Brandt
Working Paper 12970
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12970
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2007
We thank Tim Bollerslev, Frank de Jong, Joachim Inkmann, Ralph Koijen, Vinay Nair, Theo Nijman,
Anamaria Pieschacon, George Tauchen, Bas Werker, and seminar participants at the 2005 SAMSI
conference on Financial Mathematics, Statistics and Econometrics, Duke University, Tilburg University
and ABP Investments for helpful discussions and comments. Jules van Binsbergen thanks the Prins
Bernhard Cultuurfonds for generous financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Jules H. van Binsbergen and Michael W. Brandt. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Optimal Asset Allocation in Asset Liability Management
Jules H. van Binsbergen and Michael W. Brandt
NBER Working Paper No. 12970
March 2007
JEL No. G0,G11,G23
ABSTRACT
We study the impact of regulations on the investment decisions of a defined benefits pension plan.
We assess the influence of ex ante (preventive) and ex post (punitive) risk constraints on the gains
to dynamic, as opposed to myopic, decision making. We find that preventive measures, such as Value-at-Risk
constraints, tend to decrease the gains to dynamic investment. In contrast, punitive constraints, such
as mandatory additional contributions from the sponsor when the plan becomes underfunded, lead
to very large utility gains from solving the dynamic program. We also show that financial reporting
rules have real effects on investment behavior. For example, the current requirement to discount liabilities
at a rolling average of yields, as opposed to at current yields, induces grossly suboptimal investment
decisions.
Jules H. van Binsbergen
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
Box 90120
One Towerview Drive
Durham, NC 27708
jules.vanbinsbergen@duke.edu
Michael W. Brandt
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
Box 90120
One Towerview Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
mbrandt@duke.edu

1 Introduction
The investment behavior of corporate pension plans is receiving increasing attention. A
recentstudybythePensionBenefitGuaranteeCorporationshowsthatthenumberofpension
plans that are more than $50 million short of promised benefit levels has risen from 221 in
2000 to 1,108 in 2004 with an aggregate of $786.8 billion in assets to cover $1.14 trillion
in liabilities.1 In response to this crisis, a set of funding rule reforms has been proposed
to strengthen the pension system. These proposed reforms include limits on the deviation
of the actuarial values of assets and liabilities from their market values and more stringent
guidelines for pension plans to make up shortfalls in the value of their assets, relative to that
of their liabilities, through additional financial contributions (AFCs) to the plan. We study
in this paper the optimal asset allocation decisions of an investment manager of a defined
benefit pension plan as a function of the plan’s funding ratio (defined as the ratio of its
assets to liabilities), interest rates, and the equity risk premium. We compare the optimal
investment decisions under several policy alternatives to understand better the real effects
of financial reporting and risk management rules.
We focus on two general mechanisms a regulator or principal can apply to keep an agent
fromtakingundesirableactions: preventionandpunishment. Toillustratethesemechanisms,
consider the example of a truck driver. The carrier rewards the truck driver for delivering the
goods he transports early, but wants to keep him from taking excessive risk when speeding.
One way to achieve the latter is to provide the driver with a truck that mechanically cannot
exceed the speed limit (prevention). Alternatively, the carrier can make the driver pay
for the damage in case he is involved in an accident, for example in the form of a salary
cut (punishment). In the context of investment management, ex ante (preventive) risk
constraints, such as Value-at-Risk (VaR) constraints, short-sale constraints and a maximum
weight in stocks, restrict the investment manager’s set of allowable portfolio weights. The
manager is required to adhere to these ex ante constraints but is not held responsible for bad
return realizations ex post. In contrast, ex post (punitive) risk constraints, when triggered,
lead to a punitive action that decreases the investment manager’s utility either through loss
of personal compensation or reputation. Such ex post constraints do not restrict investment
choices ex ante, but the manager is held accountable for a bad return realizations ex post.
The ex post constraint we focus on, is the requirement to draw AFCs from the plan sponsor
whenever the plan becomes underfunded.2
12004 Pension Insurance Data Book, Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation.
2Another important example of an ex post constraint is a firing rule for investment managers based on
their performance.
1

At first glance, ex ante and ex post risk constraints may seem similar as both aim
to decrease the risk-taking behavior of the manager. However, we show that they have
profoundly different implications for the gains to dynamic, as opposed to myopic, decision
making. Weshowthatexante(preventive)constraintstendtodecrease thegainstodynamic
investment. Expost(punitive)constraints, incontrast, largelyincrease theutilitygainsfrom
solving the dynamic program. In other words, under ex ante constraints, the myopic solution
provides a good approximation for the optimal solution whereas under ex post constraints
it requires dynamic optimization to make the optimal investment decision. As such, ex post
constraints induce the manager to behave strategically.
Another important aspect of the asset liability management (ALM) problem is the
discount factor used for computing the present value of a pension plan’s liabilities. Recently,
the discount factor has received a lot of attention for its impact on the reported financial
position of the plan. On one hand, discounting by current yields guarantees an accurate
description of the fund’s financial situation. On the other hand, using a constant yield
smoothes out temporary fluctuations in the present value of the liabilities and gives a
more long-term description of the fund’s financial condition. Under current regulations, the
discount factor equals a four-year rolling average of the 30-year government (or corporate)
bond yield, which constitutes a compromise between the two options described above. What
has received much less attention, however, is the effect that these financial reporting rules
have on the optimal decisions of the investment manager of the pension plan. We show that
the way liabilities are computed can drive an important wedge between the fund manager’s
long-term objective of maximizing the funding ratio and his short-term objective (and/or
requirement) of satisfying risk constraints and avoiding AFCs from the plan sponsor as
described above. The key to this wedge is the fact that these risk constraints are based
on the (smoothed) reported liabilities instead of on the actual liabilities that enter into the
investment manager’s long-term objective.
We thus examine two important issues in a stylized ALM problem. First, we address
the role of hedging demands. ALM problems are inherently long-horizon problems with
potentiallyimportantstrategicaspects.3 Theydifferfromstandardportfoliochoiceproblems
(Markowitz (1952), Merton (1969,1971), Samuelson (1969) and Fama (1970)), not only
because of the short position in the pension liabilities, but also because of the regulatory
risk constraints and mandatory AFCs discussed above. We assume that the investment
manager dislikes drawing AFCs from the plan sponsor and directly model this dislike as a
utility cost. We interpret this utility cost as a reduced form for the loss of compensation or
3Recent strategic asset allocation studies include Kim and Omberg (1996), Campbell and Viceira (1999),
Brandt (1999,2005), A¨ıt-Sahalia and Brandt (2001), and Sangvinatsos and Wachter (2005).
2