NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A LOBBYING APPROACH TO EVALUATING THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT
OF 2002
Yael V. Hochberg
Paola Sapienza
Annette Vissing-Jorgensen
Working Paper 12952
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12952
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2007
We thank John de Figueiredo, Wei Jiang, Holger Mueller, Morten Sorensen, Cong Wang, Luigi Zingales
and seminar participants at the European Central Bank, InterDisciplinary Center Hertzlia, Iowa State
University, NBER Law and Economics Summer Meeting, New York University, Northwestern University,
Norwegian School of Economics and Business, Securities and Exchange Commission, UNC - Duke
Corporate Finance Conference, University of Copenhagen, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign,
University of Oregon, and Yale University for helpful comments and suggestions. We are grateful
to Catherine Leblond and Che Banjoko for outstanding research assistance, to Cindy Alexander for
assistance with SEC requests, to Kin Lo for provision of prior lobbying data, and to Yaniv Grinstein
and Vidhi Chhaochharia for provision of governance data. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Yael V. Hochberg, Paola Sapienza, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Lobbying Approach to Evaluating the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
Yael V. Hochberg, Paola Sapienza, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen
NBER Working Paper No. 12952
March 2007
JEL No. G3,G34,K22
ABSTRACT
We evaluate the net benefits of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) for shareholders by studying the lobbying
behavior of investors and corporate insiders to affect the final implemented rules under the Act. Investors
lobbied overwhelmingly in favor of strict implementation of SOX, while corporate insiders and business
groups lobbied against strict implementation. We identify the firms most affected by the law as those
whose insiders lobbied against strict implementation, and compare their returns to the returns of less
affected firms. Cumulative returns during the four and a half months leading up to passage of SOX
were approximately 10 percent higher for corporations whose insiders lobbied against one or more
of the SOX disclosure-related provisions than for similar non-lobbying firms. Analysis of returns in
the post-passage implementation period indicates that investors' positive expectations with regards
to the effects of the law were warranted for the enhanced disclosure provisions of SOX.
Yael V. Hochberg Annette Vissing-Jorgensen
Finance Department Finance Department
Kellogg School of Management Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road 2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2001 Evanston, IL 60208-2001
y-hochberg@kellogg.northwestern.edu and NBER
a-vissing@northwestern.edu
Paola Sapienza
Finance Department
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
paola-sapienza@northwestern.edu

Following the Enron/Arthur Andersen scandal in late 2001, the U.S. Congress came under increas-
ing pressure to pass legislation that would make it more difficult and costly for corporate insiders
to misrepresent company performance and divert resources for personal gain. Bills were introduced
in the House by Representative Michael Oxley on February 13, 2002, and in the Senate by Senator
Paul Sarbanes on May 8, 2002. The final bill, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, was passed in the
House and Senate on July 25, 2002.
There are two main competing views about the likely impact of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX)
on shareholders. Proponents ofthe Act argue that it will lead to improved disclosure and corporate
governance, therebyreducingmisconductofinsiders, andthatthesebenefitswilloutweighthecosts
of compliance. Opponents argue either that SOX will be ineffective in preventing corporate wrong-
doing and/or that any benefits of SOX will not be large enough to outweigh the compliance costs
associated with it.
The central challenge to distinguishing between the two main views regarding the effect of
SOX is the lack of a control group of publicly traded firms unaffected by the legislation. In this
paper, we employ two approaches in an attempt to circumvent the lack of a control group of
comparable firms unaffected by SOX. Our methodology follows from the procedural process used
in the implementation of the SOX legislation.
Following the passage of SOX in 2002, Congress delegated the drafting and implementation of
the principles outlined by SOX to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). The various
sections of SOX were divided into separate rules by the SEC, which then solicited public comments
regarding its proposing rule releases, prior to drafting the final adopting releases. Letters to the
SEC commenting on the proposed rule releases were made publicly available on the SEC web site
or through its public reference office.
Following the main compliance-related titles of SOX, we classify the rules on which the SEC
solicitedcommentsintogroups,focusingonthreemajorsetsofrules: provisionsrelatedtoenhanced
financial disclosure (including the much discussed Section 404 assessment of internal controls),
provisions related to corporate responsibility, and provisions related to auditor independence. Our
first approach to evaluating the effect of SOX on shareholder value is to classify the nature of
comment letters submitted to the SEC by individual investors and investor groups. We document
that based on their letters to the SEC, individual investors were overwhelmingly in favor of strict
implementation of SOX, across all three categories of proposed rules. Importantly, lobbying by
1

investor groups such as pension funds and labor unions, who presumably are more sophisticated
than individual shareholders, was equally supportive. These findings allow us to speak to the
perceived value of SOX for shareholders. To the extent that investors were sufficiently informed
and sufficiently sophisticated to evaluate the costs and benefits of SOX, these findings suggest that
SOXwasperceivedtobebeneficialtoindividualinvestorsandinvestorgroups. Thisresultstandsin
stark contradiction to the conclusions of studies such as Zhang (2005), who argue that shareholder
reactions to SOX were unfavorable based on the price movement of the market as a whole.
To provide additional evidence on the value of SOX, our second approach utilizes the comment
letters sent to the SEC by and on behalf of corporate insiders. Our reading of these letters reveals
that an overwhelming majority of insiders in lobbying companies opposed strict implementation
of SOX, and argued strongly for delays, exemptions and loopholes in its implementation. While
lobbying by investors in favor of SOX is useful for distinguishing between the improved disclosure
andcorporategovernanceviewandthecostlycomplianceviewofSOX,lobbyingbyinsidersagainst
strict implementation is not informative for this purpose in and of itself. Corporate insiders may
lobby against strict implementation of SOX both if SOX was expected to succeed in improving
disclosure and governance or if the dominant effect of SOX was expected to be its high compliance
costs.1
Lobbying by corporate insiders against strict implementation of SOX, however, can be used as
aproxytoidentifycompaniesmorelikelytobeaffectedbythelegislation(positivelyornegatively),
and thus allows us to circumvent the lack of a control group of firms unaffected by the Act. Under
the improved disclosure and governance view, these more affected firms will be those for whom
the governance gain will be greatest. If SOX provides a net benefit in the form of improved
disclosure and corporate governance for shareholders, companies whose insiders lobbied against
strict implementation of SOX should have higher cumulative returns than otherwise similar non-
lobbying companies in the period leading up to the passage of SOX, as the market adjusts its
expectations of future cash flows for these companies relative to their matched, less-affected peers.
Conversely, under the compliance cost view, where SOX is detrimental to shareholders because it
imposes costs that outweigh any associated governance gains, the more affected companies will be
those for whom the net costs are highest, and thus we would expect lobbyers to experience lower
1Under the improved disclosure and governance view, insiders lobby against strict implementation due to SOX’s
effect of reducing insiders’ ability to divert resources to themselves. Under the compliance cost view, insiders may
lobby against SOX either because they choose to lobby in the interest of company shareholders, or because they
anticipate a possible reduction in diversion of resources.
2