NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ACTIVITY-BASED VALUATION OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES
Charles W. Calomiris
Doron Nissim
Working Paper 12918
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12918
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2007
The authors gratefully acknowledge the helpful comments and suggestions made by seminar participants
at Columbia University and Yale University. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Charles W. Calomiris and Doron Nissim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Activity-Based Valuation of Bank Holding Companies
Charles W. Calomiris and Doron Nissim
NBER Working Paper No. 12918
February 2007
JEL No. G12,G21,G3
ABSTRACT
Standard valuation methods do not lend themselves to bank holding companies. Banks create value
through the types of assets and liabilities they create (e.g., lending and deposit taking relationships).
Bank income streams reflect heterogeneous sources of income which differ in their margins of profitability
and persistence. Our approach to valuation permits potential differences in the composition of assets,
liabilities, income and expenses, and in the profitability and persistence of different sources of income,
to reflect themselves in estimated relationships that relate the composition of the balance sheet and
income statement to bank value. Our approach explains substantial cross-sectional variation in observed
market-to-book values, and residuals from cross-sectional regressions of market-to-book values are
useful for predicting future stock returns. Predictable future variation in returns does not reflect priced
risk factors, but is related to trading costs.
Charles W. Calomiris
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu
Doron Nissim
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
dn75@columbia.edu

1. INTRODUCTION
Roughly 20% of the S&P 500 and Russell 3000 consist of financial services companies,
with banking constituting the largest industry in this sector. Despite their importance in the stock
market, there is no existing satisfactory valuation approach for banks comparable to the
discounted cash flow approach used for nonfinancial firms. This study develops and tests a
valuation model for Bank Holding Companies (BHCs), which is based on the cross-sectional
relationship between the market-to-book ratio and proxies for the value generated by various
bank activities and bank attributes. The explanatory variables are constructed using data
extracted from regulatory FR Y-9C reports, which contain detailed and uniform information on
the assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses of BHCs. We find that the model performs well in
explaining cross-sectional differences in the market-to-book ratio, especially for large BHCs. We
also find that the model’s residual is strongly related to subsequent stock returns. That is, the
model’s inability to fully explain cross-sectional variation in the market-to-book ratio is due in
part to market inefficiency rather than to model error. While the magnitude of short-term market
mispricing decreases with larger bank size and greater stock liquidity, the model consistently
predicts excess portfolio returns for both large and small banks. For example, of the 18 quarters
examined, excess returns are positive in all 18 quarters for a portfolio of small bank stocks
selected on the basis of large estimated residuals for the market-to-book ratio, and excess returns
are positive in 17 of 18 quarters for a similarly constructed portfolio of large banks’ stocks.
The estimated coefficients of the valuation model are generally consistent with
expectations. For example, we find that persistent streams of noninterest income have larger
valuation coefficients than less persistent ones. Further, the model generates reasonable estimates
of the contributions of different bank activities to value. For example, the valuation coefficients
1

of loans average about 1.08, suggesting that investors price existing loans and related intangibles
8% above their gross book value. Similarly, the average valuation coefficient of noninterest-
bearing deposits is -0.89 and that of interest-bearing core deposits is -0.92. While these
coefficients likely do not capture all valuation implications of the related instruments (e.g.,
lending and deposit-taking activities also affect noninterest income and noninterest expense,
which we account for separately), the relative magnitudes are consistent with expectations.
Moreover, the estimated effects on bank value of activity-specific attributes generally have the
expected signs and are significant. For example, the valuation coefficient of loans increases with
average loan yield and decreases with the relative magnitudes of nonperforming loans and credit
losses. Similarly, the valuation coefficient of deposits decreases (i.e., becomes more negative)
with the average interest rate on deposits and increases with the relative magnitudes of
transactions and savings accounts, which typically have greater “relationship” value than
certificates of deposit.
Although our model is not structural in the sense that it is not based on explicit cash flow
forecasting, it nevertheless allows us to compare the value contributions of different banking
activities and analyze their correlations. This analysis yields many interesting insights. For
example, we find that the gross value contribution of noninterest income (i.e., the present value
of expected future noninterest income) is at least as large as that of loans or deposits, particularly
for large firms. However, its correlation with the value impact of noninterest expense is
significantly more negative than those of lending and deposit-taking activities. Thus, the net
value contribution of noninterest income may be smaller than that of loans or deposits. Another
interesting result is the strong positive correlation between the values created by loans and
2