NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO HOUSEHOLDS BENEFIT FROM FINANCIAL DEREGULATION AND INNOVATION?
THE CASE OF THE MORTGAGE MARKET
Kristopher Gerardi
Harvey S. Rosen
Paul Willen
Working Paper 12967
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12967
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2007
The authors thank seminar audiences at Boston University, Boston College, the Federal Reserve Banks
of Boston and San Francisco, the 2006 Applied Micro System Meeting, the Fall 2006 Macro System
Meeting and Princeton's Public Finance working group for useful comments. We are especially grateful
to Mark Aguiar, Alan Blinder, Mark Doms, Karen Dynan, Wendy Edelberg, Jean Grossman, Bob
King, Yolanda Kodrzycki, Wayne Passmore, Julio Rotemberg, Scott Schuh, Frank Vannerson and
Mark Watson for helpful suggestions. Finally, we thank Jeff Fuhrer for providing us with computer
programs. This research has been supported by Princeton's Center for Economic Policy Studies. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Kristopher Gerardi, Harvey S. Rosen, and Paul Willen. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Households Benefit from Financial Deregulation and Innovation? The Case of the Mortgage
Market
Kristopher Gerardi, Harvey S. Rosen, and Paul Willen
NBER Working Paper No. 12967
March 2007
JEL No. D14,G21,H89
ABSTRACT
The U.S. mortgage market has experienced phenomenal change over the last 35 years. This paper
develops and implements a technique for assessing the impact of changes in the mortgage market on
households. Our framework, which is based on the permanent income hypothesis, that allows us to
gauge the importance of borrowing constraints by estimating the empirical relationship between the
value of a household's home purchase and its future income. We find that over the past several decades,
housing markets have become less imperfect in the sense that households are now more able to buy
homes whose values are consistent with their long-term income prospects. One issue that has received
particular attention is the role that the housing Government Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs), Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac, have played in improving the market for housing finance. We find no evidence
that the GSEs' activities have contributed to this phenomenon. This is true whether we look at all homebuyers,
or at subsamples of the population whom we might expect to benefit particularly from GSE activity,
such as low-income households and first-time homebuyers.
Kristopher Gerardi Paul Willen
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Research Department
Boston, MA 02205 Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
Kristopher.Gerardi@bos.frb.org P.O. Box 55882
Boston, MA 02205
Harvey S. Rosen and NBER
Department of Economics willen968@yahoo.com
Fisher Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
HSR@princeton.edu

1. Introduction
The U.S. mortgage market has experienced phenomenal change over the last 35 years.
Gone are the days when most households got a cookie-cutter, 30-year, fixed-rate, level-payment
mortgage from a savings and loan that took deposits at 3 percent and lent out at 6 percent. And
gone are the days when the typical lender held that mortgage on its books until the maturity of
the loan. Today, consumers choose from an extensive menu of mortgages offering flexibility
along almost every dimension. Furthermore, most lenders hold the mortgage for a very short
time; typically, they sell the mortgage on the secondary market and, more often than not,
financial intermediaries then pool that mortgage with many other mortgages and sell the cash
flow in a complex security called a collateralized mortgage obligation.
As noted below, many researchers have argued that this transformation has enhanced
efficiency by integrating the mortgage market with the broader financial markets. But there has
been comparatively little research investigating how or even whether the transformation of
mortgage markets has directly benefited the average homeowner. This question is obviously
pertinent to both government agencies and consumer advocacy groups that have significant
concerns about housing finance at the family level. However, it may also be of interest to a much
wider group of researchers and policymakers who are concerned with monetary and fiscal policy.
For example, some macroeconomists argue that the well-documented decrease in business-cycle
volatility can be partially attributed to the increasing ease with which households can obtain
mortgage financing as well as access their existing home equity. Stock and Watson (2003) state,
“One explanation for the decreased volatility in residential, but not nonresidential, construction is
the increased ability of individuals to obtain nonthrift mortgage financing…” Indeed, Dynan,
Elmendorf, and Sichel (2005) have documented that financial innovation more generally played
an important role in the reduction of the volatility of economic activity that began in the mid
1980s.
In this paper, we use a novel technique to assess the impact of changes in the mortgage
market on individual households. Our analysis starts with an implication of the permanent
income hypothesis: that the higher a household's expected future income, the more it desires to
spend and consume, ceteris paribus. If perfect credit markets exist, desired consumption matches
actual consumption and current spending should forecast future income. Since credit market
1

imperfections mute this effect, we view the strength of the relationship between house spending
and future income as a measure of the “imperfectness” of mortgage markets.
We apply this methodology using household-level data from the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics (PSID) and consider the forecasting ability of a newly purchased home on future
income. We find that households buying bigger houses have higher future incomes, all else being
equal. Furthermore, we find that the forecasting relationship of housing purchases and future
income has changed over time. The estimated sensitivity of future income to current housing
expenditures more than doubled over the length of our sample, from 1969 to 1999. Further, the
change was not smooth over time—the application of econometric techniques for locating
unknown structural breaks suggests that the relationship changed discretely in the mid 1980s.
Following the logic of the previous paragraph, we view the increased sensitivity of future income
to house spending as evidence that mortgage markets have become less imperfect over time.
With this finding in hand, we set out to accomplish two goals. First, as success has many
fathers, we attempt to establish paternity of the improved system of housing finance. Was it
deregulation? Was it the creation of a secondary market? Or was it the activities of the
Government Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs), Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, whose mission is to
help families realize the “American dream” of owning a home? Assessment of paternity presents
particular difficulties for us, as many of the changes in mortgage markets occurred
simultaneously, during the period from 1977 to 1983. To skirt these problems, we focus on the
period after 1983 when mortgage market deregulation had mostly run its course and secondary
markets were in place, but during which activities by the GSEs fluctuated considerably. We find
that the activities of the GSEs had little or no impact on the imperfectness of mortgage markets.
Our second task is to assess the consequences of the new mortgage market for various
groups in the population. Advocates for the GSEs, in particular, argue that the transformation of
the mortgage market has improved opportunities for the less-well-off and for first-time
homebuyers, claiming that the more efficient allocation of risk has enabled lenders to lend to
more-marginal borrowers. While we do in fact find evidence of relaxed credit constraints for
marginal borrowers, including first-time homebuyers, younger households, and financially
impoverished households, we are not able to attribute these improvements directly to GSE
activities.
2