NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THREE GREAT AMERICAN DISINFLATIONS
Michael D. Bordo
Christopher Erceg
Andrew Levin
Ryan Michaels
Working Paper 12982
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12982
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2007
Bordo is a Professor of Economics at Rutgers University and an NBER Research Associate; during
the 2006-2007 academic year, he is also the Pitt Professor of Economic History at Cambridge University
and a Fellow at Kings College Cambridge. Erceg is chief of the Trade and Financial Studies section
in the Division of International Finance at the Federal Reserve Board. Levin is an assistant director
and chief of the Monetary Studies section in the Division of Monetary Affairs at the Federal Reserve
Board and is a CEPR Research Fellow. Michaels was a research assistant at the Federal Reserve Board
and is now a graduate student in economics at the University of Michigan. We thank Dale Henderson,
Jinill Kim, Lee Ohanian, Thomas Sargent, Anna Schwartz, Lars Svensson, Francois Velde, Marc Wiedenmeier,
and Tack Yun for helpful comments and suggestions, as well as seminar participants at the annual
American Economic Association Meeting in Chicago, Columbia University, the Federal Reserve Board,
Harvard University, at the fourth International Research Forum on Monetary Policy conference, and
at an NBER workshop honoring Anna Schwartz. Bordo received financial support from the Federal
Reserve Board on this project. The views expressed in this paper are solely the responsibility of the
authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research,
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, or of any other person associated with the
Federal Reserve System.
© 2007 by Michael D. Bordo, Christopher Erceg, Andrew Levin, and Ryan Michaels. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Three Great American Disinflations
Michael D. Bordo, Christopher Erceg, Andrew Levin, and Ryan Michaels
NBER Working Paper No. 12982
March 2007
JEL No. E32,E42,E52,E58
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the role of transparency and credibility in accounting for the widely divergent
macroeconomic effects of three episodes of deliberate monetary contraction: the post-Civil War deflation,
the post-WWI deflation, and the Volcker disinflation. Using a dynamic general equilibrium model
in which private agents use optimal filtering to infer the central bank's nominal anchor, we demonstrate
that the salient features of these three historical episodes can be explained by differences in the design
and transparency of monetary policy, even without any time variation in economic structure or model
parameters. For a policy regime with relatively high credibility, our analysis highlights the benefits
of a gradualist approach (as in the 1870s) rather than a sudden change in policy (as in 1920-21). In
contrast, for a policy institution with relatively low credibility (such as the Federal Reserve in late
1980), an aggressive policy stance can play an important signalling role by making the policy shift
more evident to private agents.
Michael D. Bordo Andrew Levin
Faculty of Economics Federal Reserve Board
Cambridge University Mail Stop 71
Austin Robinson Building 20th and C Street, NW
Siegwick Avenue Washington, DC 20551
Cambridge andrew.levin@frb.gov
ENGLAND CD3, 9DD
and NBER Ryan Michaels
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Christopher Erceg Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
The Federal Reserve Board rmikes@umich.edu
Mail Stop 42B
20th and C Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20551
christopher.erceg@frb.gov

1 Introduction
Since at least the time of David Hume (1752) in the mid-18th century, it has been recognized
that episodes of deflation or disinflation may have costly implications for the real economy, and
much attention has been devoted to assessing how policy should be conducted to reduce such
costs. Theinterestofprominentclassicaleconomistsinthesequestions, includingHume, Thornton,
and Ricardo, was spurred by practical policy debates about how to return to the gold standard
1
following episodes of pronounced wartime inflation. Drawing on limited empirical evidence, these
authorstriedtoidentifyfactorsthatcontributedtotherealcostofdeflation,includingthosefactors
controlled by policy. They advocated that a deflation should be implemented gradually, if at all;
in a similar vein a century later, Keynes (1923) and Irving Fisher (1920) discussed the dangers
of trying to quickly reverse the large runup in prices that occurred during World War I and its
aftermath.
Whilethemodernliteraturehasprovidedsubstantialempiricalevidencetosupportthecasethat
deflationsordisinflationsareoftenquitecostly, thereislessagreementabouttheunderlyingfactors
that may have contributed to high real costs in some episodes, or that might explain pronounced
2
differences in costs across episodes. Indeed, disagreement about the factors principally responsible
forinfluencingthecostsofdisinflationhelpedfuelcontentiousdebatesabouttheappropriatewayto
reduceinflationduringthe1970sandearly1980s. Manypolicymakersandacademicsrecommended
apolicyofgradualism–reflectingtheviewthatthecostsofdisinflationwerelargelyduetostructural
persistence in wage and price setting–while others recommended aggressive monetary tightening on
the grounds that the credibility of monetary policy in the 1970s had sunk too low for gradualism
to be a viable approach.
In this paper, we examine three notable episodes of deliberate monetary contraction: the post-
Civil War deflation, the post-WWI deflation, and the Volcker disinflation. One goal of our paper
is to use these episodes to illuminate the factors that influence the costs of monetary contractions.
1Humphrey(2004)providesanexcellentsurveyoftheviewsofleadingclassicaleconomistsregardingthemacroe-
conomic effects of deflation and the associated challenges for policymakers.
2For example, see Gordon (1982), Taylor (1983), and Ball (1994a).
1

These episodes provide a fascinating laboratory for this analysis, insofar as they exhibit sharp
differences in the policy actions undertaken, in the credibility and transparency of the policies, and
in the ultimate effects on inflation and output. Our second objective is to evaluate the ability of a
variant of the New Keynesian model that has performed well in fitting certain features of post-war
U.S. data to account for these historical episodes.
Our paper begins by providing a historical overview of each of these episodes. In the decade
following the Public Credit Act of 1869, which set a 10 year timetable for returning to the Gold
standard, the price level declined gradually by 30 percent, while real output grew at a robust 4-5
percent per year. We argue that the highly transparent policy objective, the credible nature of
the authorities’ commitment, and gradual implementation of the policy helped minimize disruptive
effects on the real economy. By contrast, while prices fell by a similar magnitude during the
deflation that began in 1920, the price decline was very rapid, and accompanied by a sharp fall
in real activity. We interpret the large output contraction as attributable to the Federal Reserve’s
abrupt departure from the expansionary policies that had prevailed until that time; fortunately,
because the ultimate policy objective was clear (reducing prices enough to raise gold reserves), the
downturn was fairly short-lived. Finally, the Volcker disinflation succeeded in reducing inflation
fromdoubledigitratesinthelate1970stoasteady4percentby1983,thoughatthecostofasevere
and prolonged recession. We argue that the substantial costs of this episode on the real economy
reflected the interplay both of nominal rigidities, and the lack of policy credibility following the
unstable monetary environment of the previous 15 years.
We next attempt to measure policy predictability during each of the three episodes in order to
quantify the extent to which each deflation was anticipated by economic agents. For the two earlier
periods, we construct a proxy for price level forecast errors by using commodity futures data and
realizedspotprices. Whilethesecommoditypriceforecasterrorsprovideveryimperfectmeasuresof
errors in forecasting the general price level, we believe that they provide useful characterizations of
thelevelofpolicyuncertaintyduringeachperiod: inparticular,thecommoditypriceforecasterrors
in the early 1920s were much larger and more persistent than in the 1870s. This pattern confirms
other evidence on policy predictability during each episode taken from bond yields, contemporary
2