NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERNATIONAL DIFFERENCES IN LEAN PRODUCTION, PRODUCTIVITY
AND EMPLOYEE ATTITUDES
Susan Helper
Morris M. Kleiner
Working Paper 13015
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13015
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2007
The authors thank the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation for funding the research. We also thank Wei Chi,
Susan Fernie, and Alexander Lefter for their assistance with the study. The study is forthcoming in
International Differences in Business Practices and Productivity, ed. Richard B. Freeman and Kathryn
Shaw, University of Chicago Press and National Bureau of Research. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2007 by Susan Helper and Morris M. Kleiner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

International Differences in Lean Production, Productivity and Employee Attitudes
Susan Helper and Morris M. Kleiner
NBER Working Paper No. 13015
April 2007
JEL No. D21,D24,J31,J33,J53,J81,L11,L2,L23,L25,L6
ABSTRACT
The study examines US-European productivity and worker attitude differences, focusing on changes
in incentive structures. We analyze productivity and worker attitudes in five plants in the UK and US
belonging to the same multinational producer of automotive sensors and actuators. We examine the
firm's efforts to make complementary changes in product strategy and human-resource policies. In
particular, we look at the impact of a Value-Added Gainsharing plan (VAG) that was introduced at
different times among the four plants. Our analysis draws on multiple plant visits, surveys of almost
all of the workforce, and confidential financial data. Our study offers a rare look inside a low-wage,
non-union firm. We find that the VAG had an impact on productivity and profitability. We find that
the UK plant's productivity and worker satisfaction was well below that of the US plants. However,
neither our analysis nor interviews with managers suggest that differences in national institutions play
a key role in explaining these results.
Susan Helper
Weatherhead School of Management
Case Western Reserve University
11119 Bellflower Rd
Cleveland, OH 44106-7235
and NBER
susan.helper@weatherhead.cwru.edu
Morris M. Kleiner
University of Minnesota
Humphrey Institute
260 Humphrey Center
301 19th Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
kleiner@umn.edu

I. Introduction
In this paper, we report on a study of US-European productivity differences,
conducted at five plants belonging to a single multi-national firm. We investigate
whether human resource policy changes within a firm in concert with other
manufacturing transformations have affected the organization’s ability to prosper
financially and provide job satisfaction for its employees.
All 5 plants we study make similar products (sensors and actuators for
automobiles), using similar processes. We look at the impact of a Value-Added
Gainsharing plan (VAG) that was introduced at different times among the four plants, in
a way that had many features of a natural experiment. Our analysis draws on multiple
plant visits over eight years, surveys of almost all of the workforce, and confidential
financial data. Our study thus offers an unusual opportunity to examine the internal
operations of a low-wage, non-union firm, using data from both management and
workers.
A major issue for our firm has been the appropriate method of compensation to
complement its other strategic initiatives. In 1987, the firm began a major change in its
product market strategy; it now designs its own products (which are complex assemblies
of plastic and electronic parts) and modifies them frequently, rather than producing
individual electronic components to customer blueprints. It has also vastly increased its
quality levels and reduced its inventory. These changes are common in this industry, and
result from pressure from the firm’s customers, such as Ford and General Motors (though
our firm was above-average in its response).
As a result of these product-market changes, the firm introduced changes in its
human resource policies, changing its methods of compensation, increasing automation,
2

introducing work in groups and (recently) increasing training. In some of the plants,
compensation received by production workers has fallen dramatically; in others it has
increased slightly. (Wages are now similar at the firms’ four US plants, and are less than
40% of the US manufacturing average.)
We present information on the dates of the introduction of the VAG in Figure 1.
The firm has employed a variety of methods of pay (both piece rates and time rates) in
plants making similar products in similar ways. It changed these plants over to a plant-
wide gain-sharing system at different times. The plants also adopted various aspects of
“lean production” (moving toward total quality management and just-in-time inventory
policies), at different times. We use these changes as a quasi-experiment, to examine the
impact of changes in human resource policies on productivity and worker well-being. We
will examine the impact on the plants that changed over early, treating the later adopters
as a control group, using a time-series cross-section statistical methodology (Bertrand,
Duflo, and Mullainathan, 2002 and Athey and Imbens, 2006).
In the next section, we review relevant literature. In Section III, we discuss basic
characteristics of the industry and our plants, and the nature and timing of their adoption
of the value-added gain-sharing plan and complementary policies such as automation,
worker recognition programs, and training. In Section IV, we discuss our methods, both
qualitative (multiple visits to each plant, discussions with both management and workers)
and quantitative . In Section V we present results, and in Section VI, our conclusions.
We find that the US plants were more productive and profitable than ones in the
UK, and that the introduction of VAG enhanced plant level performance across all the
3