NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HUMAN CAPITAL, BANKRUPTCY AND CAPITAL STRUCTURE
Jonathan B. Berk
Richard Stanton
Josef Zechner
Working Paper 13014
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13014
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2007
Address correspondence to the authors at berk@haas.berkeley.edu (Berk), stanton@haas.berkeley.edu
(Stanton), or josef.zechner@univie.ac.at (Zechner). The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Jonathan B. Berk, Richard Stanton, and Josef Zechner. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Human Capital, Bankruptcy and Capital Structure
Jonathan B. Berk, Richard Stanton, and Josef Zechner
NBER Working Paper No. 13014
April 2007
JEL No. G3,G32,G33,J24,J3
ABSTRACT
We derive a firm's optimal capital structure and managerial compensation contract when employees
are averse to bearing their own human capital risk, while equity holders can diversify this risk away.
In the presence of corporate taxes, our model delivers optimal debt levels consistent with those observed
in practice. It also makes a number of predictions for the cross-sectional distribution of firm leverage.
Consistent with existing empirical evidence, it implies persistent idiosyncratic differences in leverage
across firms. An important new empirical prediction of the model is that, ceteris paribus, firms with
more leverage should pay higher wages.
Jonathan B. Berk Josef Zechner
Haas School of Business Department of Finance
University of California University of Vienna
545 Student Services josef.zechner@univie.ac.at
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
berk@haas.berkeley.edu
Richard Stanton
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
stanton@haas.berkeley.edu

1 Introduction
Ever since Modigliani and Miller (1958) first showed that capital structure is irrelevant in
a frictionless economy, financial economists have puzzled over exactly what frictions make
the capital structure decision so important in reality. Several compelling arguments for the
optimality of debt financing have been proposed, the most important by Modigliani and
Miller themselves: Dividends are subject to corporate taxation while interest payments are
not, so firms can potentially realize significant tax savings by maintaining high levels of debt.
However, in practice, firms maintain only modest levels of debt. As Miller (1988) pointed
out in a 30 year retrospective on his own work:
“In sum, many finance specialists, myself included, remain unconvinced that the
high-leverage route to corporate tax savings was either technically unfeasible or
prohibitively expensive in terms of bankruptcy or agency costs.” (p. 113)
Miller goes on to argue that corporate debt levels result from sub-optimal decision making,
and points to two innovations that were happening at the time of the retrospective – the
growth in junk bond markets and an explosion in the number of LBOs – as evidence of
employees changing behavior and movement towards more “optimal” debt levels. However,
subsequent developments have not borne out Miller’s prediction. In a recent study, Graham
(2000) finds (p. 1903) that “...even extreme estimates of distress costs do not justify observed
debt policies.” Why, then, do many firms appear to have too little debt?
Clearly, an opposing friction must exist. However, economists have struggled to identify
it. Direct bankruptcy costs are one candidate: High levels of debt increase the probability of
bankruptcy, so any costs associated with bankruptcy will be a disincentive to issue debt (see
KrausandLitzenberger(1973)). However, inanimportantpaper, HaugenandSenbet(1978)
point out these costs cannot exceed the cost of negotiating around them (otherwise debt
holderswouldhaveanincentivetoavoidthembyrecapitalizingthefirmoutsidebankruptcy).
This argument significantly limits the potential role of direct bankruptcy costs as an effective
counterweight to the large benefit of the tax shield.
In response to Haugen and Senbet’s critique, Titman (1984) argues that another possible
explanationforexistingdebtlevelsistheindirect costsofbankruptcy—costsprecipitatedby
the bankruptcy filing that affect stakeholders other than debt and equity holders. Although
an extensive literature documenting and studying these costs has developed since Titman’s
insight, researchers have nevertheless struggled to identify a specific indirect bankruptcy cost
large enough to offset the benefits of debt.1 In this paper we argue that the cost borne by
the firm’s employees is just such a cost.
1See, for example, Andrade and Kaplan (1998).
1

Aninterestingcharacteristicoftheexistingliteratureonbankruptcycostsistheapparent
disconnect between the costs that researchers study and those identified in the popular press.
During a corporate bankruptcy, a major focus of the popular press is on the human costs
of bankruptcy, yet these have received minimal attention in the research literature. It is
not difficult to understand why. If employees are being paid their competitive wage, it
should not be very costly to find a new job at the same wage. For substantial human costs of
bankruptcytoexist, employeesmustbeentrenched—theymustincurcostsassociatedeither
with not being able to find an alternative job, or with taking another job at substantially
lower pay. At first blush, such entrenchment seems difficult to reconcile with optimizing
behavior: Even if labor markets are inefficient, why do shareholders ignore this inefficiency,
and instead overpay their employees, especially at times when the firm is facing the prospect
of bankruptcy?2
In this paper we argue, extending an insight in Harris and Holmstr¨om (1982), that this
intuition is wrong. In an economy with perfectly competitive capital and labor markets,
one should expect employees to face large human costs of bankruptcy. It is precisely these
indirect costs that limit the use of corporate debt.
In a setting without bankruptcy, Harris and Holmstr¨om (1982) show that the optimal
employmentcontractguaranteesjobsecurity(employeesareneverfired), andpaysemployees
a fixed wage that never goes down, but rises in response to good news about employee
ability. Consequently, most employees eventually become entrenched. The intuition behind
this result is that, while employees are averse to their own human capital risk, this risk is
idiosyncratic, so equity holders can costlessly diversify it away. Optimal risk sharing then
implies that the shareholders will bear all of this risk by offering employees a fixed wage
contract. However, employees cannot be forced to work under such a contract. Employees
who turn out to be better than expected will threaten to quit unless they get a pay raise.
This leads to the optimal contract derived by Harris and Holmstr¨om (1982).3
In Harris and Holmstr¨om (1982), firms have no debt, and equity holders have unlimited
liability (to credibly commit to the terms of the contract, equity holders must make the
wage payments even when the firm cannot). In principle, there is no reason why the optimal
equity contract requires limited liability. However, such contracts would be very difficult to
trade in anonymous markets. Without the ability to trade, equity holders would no longer
2Firm-specific human capital is one possible explanation (see Neal (1995)). Yet, in an efficient labor
market, it is not clear that employees are necessarily paid for their investments in human capital. Even if
they are, in a competitive economy like the United States it is hard to argue that most employees’ skills are
not easily transferable, or that wages could not be lowered during financial distress.
3Severalotherpapersinlaboreconomicshavestudiedoptimalwageswhenthefirmisriskneutralbutthe
workers are risk averse. See, for example, Holmstr¨om (1983), Bester (1983), or Thomas and Worrall (1988).
2