NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PRODUCT CREATION AND DESTRUCTION:
EVIDENCE AND PRICE IMPLICATIONS
Christian Broda
David E. Weinstein
Working Paper 13041
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13041
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2007
The authors wish to thank the NSF (grant #0214378) and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for
providing critical financial support for this project. We would like to thank the Director of Research
at the FRBNY, Joseph Tracy, for his early support of this project. We would also like to thank ACNielsen's
vice-president of Pricing Research Frank Piotrowski, Ivan Rocabado, and Maura Elhbretch for their
careful explanation of the data, and Olivier Blanchard, Jeff Campbell and Steve Davis for very useful
comments. Nonetheless, the views expressed here, do not reflect those of the Federal Reserve System,
and all errors remain our own. Alexis Antoniades provided us with outstanding research assistance.
In addition, we would like to thank the Global Financial Markets Initiative at the University of Chicago
GSB for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Christian Broda and David E. Weinstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Product Creation and Destruction: Evidence and Price Implications
Christian Broda and David E. Weinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 13041
April 2007
JEL No. E21,E31,E32
ABSTRACT
This paper describes the extent and cyclicality of product creation and destruction in a large sector
of the U.S. economy and quantifies its implications for the measurement of consumer prices. We find
four times more entry and exit in product markets than is typically found in labor markets because
most product turnover happens within the boundaries of the firm. Net product creation is strongly
pro-cyclical, but contrary to the behavior of labor flows, it is primarily driven by creation rather than
destruction. High rates of innovation are also accompanied by substantial price volatility of products.
These facts suggest that the CPI deviates from a true cost-of-living index in three important dimensions.
The quality bias that arises as new goods replace outdated ones causes the CPI to overstate inflation
by 0.8 percent per year; the cyclicality of the bias implies that business cycles are more volatile than
indicated by official statistics; and finally, sampling error is sufficiently large that over the last 10
years policymakers could not statistically distinguish whether quarterly inflation was accelerating
or decelerating 65 percent of the time.
Christian Broda
University of Chicago
Graduate School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
cbroda@chicagogsb.edu
David E. Weinstein
Columbia University, Department of Economics
420 W. 118th Street
MC 3308
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
dew35@columbia.edu

I. Introduction
Over the last twenty years, economists have dramatically improved our theoretical
understanding of how product innovation influences major aspects of macroeconomic
performance. Not only has research explored the potential role that product creation and
destruction has for explaining business cycle fluctuations (e.g., Shleifer (1986), Caballero and
Hammour (1994) and Ghironi and Melitz (2005) among others) but economists have also
examined the key role played by new and better products for long-run growth (e.g., Romer
(1987), Grossman and Helpman (1991), Aghion and Howitt (1992) and Klette and Kortum
(2004) among others). Despite the vast theoretical implications of product creation and
destruction, the empirical analysis on the aggregate behavior of product turnover lags far behind
its theoretical counterpart.1 In this paper, we document the nature, extent and cyclicality of
product entry and exit in the U.S. with special attention to the implications that it has for the
measurement of prices. In particular, we quantify the biases that arise in “fixed-good” price
indexes like the CPI because they largely ignore the changes in overall product quality available
to consumers that occur as new products replace outdated ones.
We introduce a unique dataset that contains the universe of products with barcodes in
sectors that cover around 40 percent of all expenditures on goods in the CPI. We first explore the
vast amount of information about product creation and destruction that is lost if researchers only
have access to firm-level data. By matching barcodes with firms, we document the multi-product
nature of the firm and show that the vast majority of product creation and destruction happens
within the boundaries of the firm. In particular, we find four times more entry and exit in product
markets than that found in establishment and labor market data (e.g., Dunne, Roberts and
Samuelson (1988, 1989) and Davis and Haltiwanger (1992)). In a typical year, 40 percent of
household’s expenditures are in goods that were created in the last 4 years, and 20 percent of
expenditures are in goods that disappear in the next 4 years.
We also document the cyclical patterns of product creation and destruction. We find that
net creation is strongly pro-cyclical, with more products being introduced in expansions and in
product categories that are booming. Destruction of goods is counter-cycle, although its
magnitude is quantitatively less important. This is suggestive of models where firms have an
1 This gap has emerged largely because of data availability. The lack of empirical evidence was not resolved even
with the appearance of scanner databases specific to particular stores, as store-specific data are not appropriate to
analyze the extent of creation and destruction of products for the consumer.
1

incentive to defer implementation of the product until aggregate demand is relatively high (as in
Schmookler (1962) and Shleifer (1986)).2 While labor market data suggest that job destruction
responds more to cyclical movements than job creation (c.f. Blanchard and Diamond (1990),
Campbell (1998), Davis and Haltiwanger (1996)), we find the opposite to be true in product
markets. Product creation moves more than product destruction with business cycle fluctuations.3
The high degree of product churning is also associated with substantial price volatility as
products move through their life cycle.
These new facts have important implications for the measurement of prices. They
suggest that the CPI may deviate from a true cost-of-living index in three important dimensions.
First, the creation and destruction of products can hide quality upgrades that are not captured by
indexes that are based on the prices of a fixed set of goods over time.4 Second, if the quality bias
has a pro-cyclical component it can augment the volatility of real variables over the cycle.
Finally, since the CPI is based on the prices of a sample of goods available in the market it is
subject to sampling error. Given the high degree of price volatility of individual goods that we
observe in the data, the potential for sampling error is large. The core of the paper is about
quantifying these three implications of product churning for the measurement of the true cost-of-
living.
We show that since most product creation and destruction is unobserved by the BLS,
there remains a substantial bias arising from new and higher quality goods in the CPI. This
upward bias averages 0.6 – 0.9 percent per year depending on the aggregation methodology. This
implies that inflation was around 7 percentage points lower than suggested by the CPI over the
period studied (1994 – 2003). The fact that the quality available for consumers rises as a result of
2 As noted by Shleifer, Schumpeter (1939) thought the innovation process to be essentially autonomous and
independent of market demand. By contrast, Schmookler (1962, 1966) believed that high demand periods were
conducive to large profits from innovation. Thus, innovation would be concentrated in booms. Judd (1985) also
finds cyclical patterns of innovation that are driven by a different mechanism. In periods where variety per capita is
low, profits to innovators are high and innovation thrives. However, as the patents from new products expire, prices
of recently introduced products drop and profits for innovators fall. Only after an extended period of growth does
innovation restart the process. In this paper we present evidence of Schmookler’s view of innovation. In future
work, we will systematically compare the cyclical predictions of different models of product innovation.
3 In terms of Caballero and Hammour (1994), we find a strong “insulating” effect of creation that dampens the
response of destruction to the business cycles.
4 We discuss the role played by “forced” substitutions later in the paper. The BLS performs regular product
substitutions every 4 to 5 years, so except for forced substitutions the CPI is based on a fixed set of goods within
each product group over this period.
2