NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RETURN PERSISTENCE AND FUND FLOWS IN THE WORST PERFORMING
MUTUAL FUNDS
Jonathan B. Berk
Ian Tonks
Working Paper 13042
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13042
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2007
Berk is grateful for financial support from the National Science Foundation (Grant No. 23-3371-00-0-79-092).
Part of this work was completed while Tonks was a visiting Houblon-Norman fellow at the Bank of
England. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Jonathan B. Berk and Ian Tonks. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Return Persistence and Fund Flows in the Worst Performing Mutual Funds
Jonathan B. Berk and Ian Tonks
NBER Working Paper No. 13042
April 2007
JEL No. G11,G12,G14,G23
ABSTRACT
We document that the observed persistence amongst the worst performing actively managed mutual
funds is attributable to funds that have performed poorly both in the current and prior year. We demonstrate
that this persistence results from an unwillingness of investors in these funds to respond to bad performance
by withdrawing their capital. In contrast, funds that only performed poorly in the current year have
a significantly larger (out)flow of funds/return sensitivity and consequently show no evidence of persistence
in their returns.
Jonathan B. Berk
Haas School of Business
University of California
545 Student Services
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
berk@haas.berkeley.edu
Ian Tonks
University of Exeter
Finance & Investment
Rennes Drive
Exeter, EX4 4PU UK
i.tonks@exeter.ac.uk

1 Introduction
In an influential study, Carhart (1997) showed that after controlling for the market return,
the Fama-French book-to-market and size factors, and more importantly, momentum, there
is no evidence of persistence in mutual fund returns. In addition, a number of papers1 have
identified a very strong relation between the past performance of a mutual funds and the
flow of new capital into funds: superior performance is followed by an influx of capital while
poor performance is followed by an outflow of capital. Taken together, these two results beg
the question: If there is no persistence in performance, why do investors react by moving
funds towards good performers and away from bad performers?
In a recent paper Berk and Green (2004) provide an answer to this question. They base
their explanation on the idea that investors compete with each other to find skilled managers
who can deliver superior performance. Superior past performance is evidence of this skill, so
investors rationally move their money into the better performing funds. Because a managers’
ability to deliver superior performance is assumed to feature decreasing returns to scale, the
inflow of funds degrades performance. This process continues until the size of the fund
reaches a point where the manager is no longer expected to outperform in the future, at
which point the inflow of funds ceases. Similarly for poorly performing managers, there is
an outflow of funds up to the point at which the underperformance ceases. Berk and Green
(2004) thus argue that performance is not persistent precisely because investors chase good
performance and punish bad performance.
In their paper Berk and Green (2004) argue that their model can explain most of the
regularities documented in the data. But a test of a theoretical model is not simply its
ability to explain facts that are already known. Rather, it should also be able to explain
new features in the data — empirical facts that were not known at the time the model was
developed. The object of this paper is to subject the Berk and Green model to this, more
stringent, test.
To construct such a test, we begin with an observation documented by Carhart (1997).
Hefindsthat“exceptfortherelativeunderperformancebylastyear’sworstperformingfunds,
the 4-factor model accounts for almost all of the cross-sectional variation in expected return
on portfolios of mutual funds (p.63-5).” If Berk and Green’s argument is correct, then the
underperformance in the worst performing funds results from an unwillingness of investors
to remove capital from these funds.
Note that when a fund does well the entire universe of investors can choose to react to
this information by investing money in the fund. However, when a fund does badly, only
1seeChevalierandEllison(1997),SirriandTufano(1998),Zheng(1999),orDelGuercioandTkac(2002)
1

investors who are currently invested in the fund can withdraw money. That is, because the
number of investors who can remove their money from badly performing funds is restricted
to investors in these funds, one might expect that capital in those funds might not be as
sensitive to past performance as in well performing funds. This is precisely what researchers
have found. The performance–flow of funds relation is convex — for the same absolute
level of out-performance, the capital inflows of the good performers is much larger than
the outflows of poor performers. One might therefore surmise that this lack of sensitivity
explains the underperformance documented in Carhart (1997). Unfortunately, because all
these facts were known prior to the development of the Berk and Green model, although
novel, this explanation for the existence of underperformance does not satisfy our criteria
that the identified effect was not known at the time the model was developed.
To accomplish our goal of using the model to explain a previously undocumented feature
of the data, we expand on this insight using an empirical observation from the mortgage
industry. It is well documented in that industry that significant heterogeneity exists in
homeowner’s willingness to prepay their mortgages which results in a phenomenon known in
the mortgage backed security market as burnout.2 When interest rates fall, different pools
of mortgages experience different prepayment rates; pools that have previously experienced
a drop in interest rates have lower prepayment rates than pools that have not previously ex-
perienced a drop in interest rates. This behavior is attributed to homeowners heterogeneous
responses to interest rate drops (presumably because they face different costs of refinancing
their homes). Because the homeowners with the higher interest rate sensitivity prepay first,
they exit the mortgage pool at the first drop in interest rates. Consequently a pool that has
previously experienced a drop in interest rates has a disproportionate number of borrowers
with low interest rate sensitivity and hence has an overall lower prepayment-interest rate
sensitivity going forward. Christoffersen and Musto (2002) and Elton, Bruber and Busse
(2004) document similar heterogeneity among mutual fund investors.
We can exploit this heterogeneity to derive a new prediction for the flow of funds in the
worst performing funds. As we have already argued, when a fund performs badly only the
investorsinthefundcanreactbywithdrawingcapital. Becausethemostresponsiveinvestors
exit first, going forward, a poorly performing fund is likely to have a greater proportion of
less responsive investors. Consequently, if such a fund experiences yet another year of poor
performance, one should expect lower sensitivity of flow of funds to performance. This is
precisely what we find in our empirical work below. Funds that performed poorly two years
in a row have a significantly lower flow of funds–performance sensitivity than funds that
have performed poorly in just the current year.
2See, Schwartz and Torous (1989), Deng, Quigley and Order (2000), Hayre (2002) or Fabozzi (2001)
2