NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK SIZE AND LENDING RELATIONSHIPS IN JAPAN
Hirofumi Uchida
Gregory F.Udell
Wako Watanabe
Working Paper 13005
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13005
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2007
This study was conducted as one of the projects of the Regional Finance Workshop of the Research
Institute of Economy, Trade, and Industry (RIETI). The authors would like to thank the RIETI for
financial support, Shuichi Uemura for administrative help and useful comments, and Masaji Kano
for his help in constructing the base data set. The authors would also like to thank Allen Berger, Masaru
Yoshitomi, Takashi Hatakeda, and the seminar participants at the RIETI and the Monetary Economics
Workshop for their comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Hirofumi Uchida, Gregory F.Udell, and Wako Watanabe. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bank Size and Lending Relationships in Japan
Hirofumi Uchida, Gregory F.Udell, and Wako Watanabe
NBER Working Paper No. 13005
April 2007
JEL No. D82,D83,G21,G32,L22
ABSTRACT
Current theoretical and empirical research suggests that small banks have a comparative advantage
in processing soft information and delivering relationship lending. The most comprehensive analysis
of this view found using U.S. data that smaller SMEs borrow from smaller banks and smaller banks
have stronger relationships with their borrowers (Berger, Miller, Petersen, Rajan, and Stein 2005)
(BMPRS). We employ essentially the same methodology as BMPRS on a unique Japanese data set
and obtained findings that are quite interesting from an international comparison point of view. We
found like BMPRS that larger firms tend to borrow from larger banks. However, unlike BMPRS we
did not find that this was because larger firms are more transparent. Together these results imply that
large banks do not necessarily have a comparative advantage in extending transactions-based lending.
We also found like BMPRS that smaller banks have strong relationships with their borrowers. However,
we find that banking relationships in the U.S. and Japan are strong in somewhat different dimensions.
Our paper clarifies these and other interesting similarities and differences between the U.S. and Japan.
Hirofumi Uchida Wako Watanabe
Wakayama University Graduate School of Economics and Management
Faculty of Economics Tohoku University
930 Sakaedani 27-1 Kawauchi, Sencai
Wakayama, JAPAN Miyagi, 980-8576 JAPAN
uchida@eco.wakayama-u.ac.jp watanabe@econ.tohoku.ac.jp
Gregory F.Udell
Kelley School of Business
Indiana University
1309 East Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN 47405-1701
USA
gudell@indiana.edu

1. Introduction
There is a general perception in Japan that competition across different types of banks has
intensified in the past two decades. It has been reported in the financial press that large banks
have encroached on the markets that were once the domain of small banks such as Shinkin banks
and credit cooperatives.1 Large banks have created and introduced new loan products, such as
loans collateralized by inventory, non-tangible assets, and accounts receivable, that have been
specifically targeted to small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).2 At the same time the
number of small banks in market has been contracting due to bank failures and consolidation.3
As in other developed economies, these trends raise significant policy questions: Will small banks
survive in the future in Japan? If they do not, will some markets become underserved?
Recent academic research suggests that small banks may have an advantage over large banks
in providing credit to SMEs. Specifically, this research suggests that large banks and small banks
may have different comparative advantages in utilizing different lending technologies. On the one
hand, large banks are viewed as having a comparative advantage in underwriting SME loans using
transactions-based lending technologies that rely on quantitative and transferable information
referred to as hard information, since they can enjoy scale economies in evaluating such
information. On the other hand, small banks are considered to have a comparative advantage in
1 A recent article for example reports that the uncollateralized and non-guaranteed “bargain-sale loans”
of large bank which aim to capture blue-chip SMEs are threatening regional financial institutions
(“Ootegin Kousei de Shuueki Kibishiku (Large banks threaten small banks’ profits),” the Nikkei
Newspaper, January 20, 2004). Another article reports that in response to this, regional financial
institutions are increasing uncollateralized loans to SMEs (“Chigin, Shinkin, Mutanpo Yuushi wo
Kakudai (Regional banks and Shinkin banks are expanding uncollateralized loans),” the Nikkei
Newspaper, August 2, 2005).
2 See, for example, “Ginko yu-shi ni kawaridane tanpo: chu-sho torihikisaki kaitaku ni chie (unusual
collateral for bank loans: beat brains to develop new SME customers),” (Nikkei Newspaper, January 23,
2006).
3 Yamori (2005) reports the drastic decrease in the number of two types of cooperative banks in Japan:
The number of Shinkin banks decreased from 462 in 1980 to 301 in 2005 and that of credit cooperatives
decreased from 483 in 1980s to 179 in 2005.
3

underwriting SME loans utilizing the relationship lending technology, which relies primarily on
qualitative non-transferable information referred to as soft information.4 Stein (2002) shows that
small banks with simple organizational structures have comparative advantages in producing soft
information and thereby excel at providing relationship lending. A number of papers have found
empirical evidence consistent with this theory particularly in the U.S. context (e.g., Cole, Goldberg
and White 2004, Scott 2004, Berger, Miller, Petersen, Rajan and Stein 2005).
The primary aim of this paper is to investigate whether banks have these size-dependent
advantages in Japan and, more broadly, what this implies for the future of small banks in the
Japanese context. Our methodological approach borrows extensively from Berger, Miller,
Petersen, Rajan, and Stein (2005) (hereafter BMPRS), who found that bank-SME relationships are
stronger for smaller banks than for larger banks. Specifically, we apply the BMPRS’s empirical
methodology to investigate (1) whether smaller firms borrow from smaller banks and (2) whether
strength of the bank-SME relationship differs by bank size, using a unique data set of Japanese
SMEs. We are thus able to examine whether the findings of BMPRS and other U.S.-focused
studies translate across country borders.
Our analysis, however, is not just a replication of BMPRS using a data set in Japan. Our data
allow us to pursue the issue of bank size and bank-borrower relationships in more depth on one
important dimension: information verifiability. Specifically, unlike data used in U.S. studies such
as BMPRS, our data allow us to identify whether an SME has audited financial statements. Using
this information, we decompose the effect of financial statement transparency from that of firm size
in general. This decomposition is important, because the availability of audited financial
statements determines whether an SME can receive loans based on financial statement lending,
4 After the seminal works by Petersen and Rajan (1994) and Berger and Udell (1995), enormous effort
has been exerted to investigate whether a strong relationship between a bank and an SME brings about
benefits, such as a lower interest rate and greater credit availability. See Boot (2000), Ongena and
Smith (2000), and Elyasiani and Goldberg (2004), for survey.
4