NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHEN DID OWNERSHIP SEPARATE FROM CONTROL? CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
IN THE EARLY NINETEENTH CENTURY
Eric Hilt
Working Paper 13093
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13093
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2007
I would like to acknowledge the helpful comments of Leah Boustan, Stanley Engerman, Carola Frydman,
Zorina Khan, Naomi Lamoreaux, Petra Moser, Antoinette Schoar, and seminar participants at UCLA,
Yale, Harvard, Columbia, UNC Chapel Hill, MIT Sloan, the NBER Summer Institute, the Economic
History Association annual meetings, and the Cliometrics Society conference. Elira Kuka and Jaree
Pinthong provided superb research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Eric Hilt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

When did Ownership Separate from Control? Corporate Governance in the Early Nineteenth
Century
Eric Hilt
NBER Working Paper No. 13093
May 2007
JEL No. G3,K22,M2,N21,N81
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the ownership and governance of the business corporations of New York State
in the 1820s. Using a new dataset collected from the manuscript records of New York's 1823 capital
tax, and from the charters of the corporations, I analyze the ownership structures of the firms, and
investigate the degree to which ownership was separated from control at the time. In contrast to Berle
and Means's account of the development of the corporation, the results indicate that many of the firms
were dominated by large shareholders, who were represented on the firms' boards, and held sweeping
power to utilize the firms' resources for their own benefit. The oppression of minority shareholders
was a significant problem in early corporate governance, and many of the firms configured their voting
rights in a way that curtailed the power of large investors. A positive relationship between firm value
and these voting rights configurations is found among the publicly-traded firms in the sample.
Eric Hilt
Wellesley College
Department of Economics
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
ehilt@wellesley.edu

When did the separation of ownership from control arise in American corporations? Was there
an early period in the development of the American economy in which ownership and control were
unified, and if so, how did the governance of these early corporations function? Such questions are
difficult to answer, given the fragmentary nature of the records that survive from early businesses.
The most influential history of corporate ownership in the United States is presented in Berle and
Means’s The Modern Corporation and Private Property (1932), which argues that legal, organiza-
tional and technological developments in the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries eroded
thepowerandinfluenceofstockholders, andledtotheemergenceoflarge, diffusely-heldenterprises
controlled by professional managers, or by minority interests. In particular, Berle and Means claim
that in the early nineteenth century, ownership and control were indeed unified, and they distin-
guish the corporations of their time from those of a hundred years earlier, in which “the number
of shareholders was few; they could and did attend meetings; they were business-men; and their
vote meant something.”1 Most of the subsequent literature on corporate governance has accepted
Berle and Means’s characterization of the history of American corporations, and its emphasis on
developments in the late-nineteenth century leading to the separation of ownership from control
(see, for example, Dodd (1938) or Coffee (2001))2.
But the early history of American corporations is not well understood. By the end of the
first quarter of the nineteenth century, thousands of businesses in all manner of industries had
been granted corporate charters by American states, and especially beginning in the 1820s, a
small but growing number of these firms had publicly-traded equity shares (Rousseau and Sylla,
2005)3. This era is generally regarded as a “statistical dark age,” however, and although these
firms were certainly much smaller than the large industrial enterprises that appeared in the late-
nineteenth century, relatively little is known about their ownership or governance.4 With the
noteworthy exception of Werner (1986), who argues that control by management arose even in
the early-nineteenth century, the governance of America’s early corporations has been the focus of
1Pg. 135 n. 14. The authors acknowledge the existence of textile corporations in Massachusetts with large
numbers of owners in the 1830s, but claim that these enterprises “stood alone” at the time (pg. 12).
2Roe (1994) and Becht and Delong (2005) complement the analysis of Berle and Means by examining additional
causes of the diffusion of American corporate ownership in the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries.
3The total number of business incorporations in the United States for any year after 1800 is not known, but the
data in Davis (1917), Evans, (1948) and Kessler (1948) indicate that well in excess of two thousand businesses were
chartered prior to 1826 in the large but incomplete group of states covered by those volumes.
4Theownershipstructuresofextremelysmallnumbersofearlycorporationsinspecificindustries,includingtextile
manufacturing(Davis,1958),turnpikeroads(Majewski,1996),banks(Wright,1999),andwhaling(Hilt,2006),have
been documented from the surviving records of individual firms, but even these studies are unable to analyze the
governance of the firms in any detail.
1

little research. In view of the importance of the historical legal origins of contemporary investor
protections (see, for example, LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1998), this gap in
our understanding of early corporate governance is striking.
Thispaperanalyzestheownershipandgovernanceofarelativelylargesampleofearly-nineteenth-
century firms, using a newly-collected dataset of all of the business corporations chartered in New
York State through 1825. The main elements of the dataset were collected from the surviving
records generated by New York’s capital tax of 1823-28, which required all operating business cor-
porations to submit a list of their stockholders to the state’s comptroller. Many of these ownership
lists survive in the New York State Archives, and have been matched to the charters of the corpo-
rations; to lists of corporate directors obtained from contemporary newspapers and city directories,
and from surviving directors’ minute books; and to price data of securities traded on the New York
StockandExchangeBoard(NYS&EB),theinstitutionthatwouldlaterchangeitsnametotheNew
York Stock Exchange, collected by Sylla, Wilson and Wright (2005). The extensive information in
the dataset enables me to analyze the governance of the firms in some detail.
In particular, I examine a series of questions relating to the extent of separation between own-
ership and control at the time. The first question is: what rights or protections were offered to
investorsintheseearlycorporations,andhowdidtheserightsinfluencethegovernanceofthefirms?
Surprisingly, few of the firms were required to produce regular financial statements, and there were
no financial reporting standards of any kind, beyond the common-law prohibition against fraud.
Mandatory dividend payments were also imposed only infrequently. The voting rights specified in
the charters were the most important means by which the stockholders could protect their inter-
ests, and the configurations of voting rights chosen varied considerably. About half of the firms
offered one vote per share to their stockholders, whereas most of the others offered what might
be termed “graduated” voting rights—the number of votes per share an investor was entitled to
was a (weakly) declining function of the number of shares he or she held.5 In order to analyze the
different configurations of votes specified in the charters I develop a simple index of shareholder
voting rights, and analyze how the average values of the index varied across across industries.
The second question I examine is: to what extent did large shareholders control these corpora-
tions? And what was the relationship between the extent of control by large shareholders, on the
one hand, and the governance institutions specified in the charters, on the other? Although the
5Davis (1917) documents the use of these measures in the earliest American corporations, and Dunlavy (2004)
describes the political rhetoric surrounding their use.
2