NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FOREIGN KNOW-HOW, FIRM CONTROL, AND THE INCOME OF DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES
Ariel Burstein
Alexander Monge-Naranjo
Working Paper 13073
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13073
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2007
We thank Manuel Amador, Pol Antràs, Andy Atkeson, Wilbur John Coleman, Pete Klenow, Éva Nagypál,
Giorgio Primiceri, Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, Martin Schneider, Aleh Tsyvinski,
and seminar participants in various places for useful comments and suggestions. Gilberto Arce provided
superb research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Ariel Burstein and Alexander Monge-Naranjo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Foreign Know-How, Firm Control, and the Income of Developing Countries
Ariel Burstein and Alexander Monge-Naranjo
NBER Working Paper No. 13073
May 2007
JEL No. F23,F43
ABSTRACT
Managerial know-how shapes the productivity of firms by defining the set of available technologies,
production choices, and market opportunities. This know-how can be reallocated across countries
as managers acquire control of factors of production abroad. In this paper, we construct a quantitative
model of cross-country income differences to study the aggregate consequences of international mobility
of managerial know-how. We use the model and aggregate data to infer the relative scarcity of this
form of know-how for a sample of developing countries. We also conduct policy counterfactuals and
find that on average, developing countries gain up to 23% in output and 9% in consumption when
they eliminate all barriers to foreign control of domestic factors of production.
Ariel Burstein
UC, Los Angeles
Department of Economics
Bunche Hall 8365
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
arielb@econ.ucla.edu
Alexander Monge-Naranjo
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
Andersen Hall 3232
Evanston, IL 60208
a-monge1@northwestern.edu

1. Introduction
The diffusion of productive knowledge plays an important role in the literature on cross-
country income differences (e.g., Barro and Sala-i-Martin 1998 and Klenow and Rodriguez-
Clare 2005). Much of the attention has been focused on flows of knowledge embedded in
capital goods and in patents, and on the role of international trade and imitation in the
diffusion of ideas. Less attention has been given to the transfer of know-how that takes
place when management crosses borders to directly control inputs in a foreign country. Such
transfers,however,appeartobeimportantinlightofthelargeandfastgrowingmultinational
activity observed in recent years.1 In this paper, we construct a quantitative model of cross-
country income differences to study the aggregate consequences of foreign management and
control of inputs in host countries.
There is a long tradition of linking the productivity of firms to the quality of their
management.2 Managerial know-how shapes the productivity of firms by governing the
set of available technologies, production choices, and market opportunities. This know-how
is costly to reproduce but can be imported from abroad as foreign management acquires
controloflocalinputs.Toevaluatetheconsequencesofpoliciesthatrestricttheinternational
mobility of managerial know-how, it is essential to separate this component of productivity
from other complementary factors that are fixed in each country.
Werefertothosefactorswhichareimmobileacrosscountriesandthatimpacttheproduc-
tivity of all firms operating in the country, as “country-embedded productivity”. It includes,
for example, the infrastructure, regulations, natural amenities, and the quality of the local
labor force and other inputs that are fixed in the country. We refer to the know-how of the
individuals in control of the firm as “firm-embedded productivity”. Because of its human
aspect this factor has two important characteristics. First, it is a “rival” factor that is in
limited supply. At any point in time, employing the skills of an individual in one task or lo-
cation precludes them from being used in another one. Second, firm-embedded productivity
can be reallocated across sectors, regions and, albeit imperfectly, across countries.
Considerthecaseofwineproduction. Makingwineismostlyamatterofthechoicesmade
1See chapter 1 of Barba Navaretti and Venables (2004) and references therein for an account of the
impressive growth of multinational firms during the last two decades of the 20th century.
2See, for example, Kaldor (1934), Lucas (1978), Oi (1983), Prescott and Visscher (1980), and Rosen
(1982). BloomandVanReenen(2006)providesurveyevidencethatmanagerialpracticeisstronglyassociated
with firm-level performance.
2

during each phase of production, from choosing the grapes to bottling and marketing the
finished product. Country-embedded productivity includes the quality of the soil, rainfall,
sunlight, water, as well as appellations, seals of origin, and other amenities. Firm-embedded
productivity is given by the viticultural and enological know-how of winemakers, as well as
their connections and knowledge of the relevant markets. The international mobility of firm-
embeddedproductivityisillustratedbywinemakerssuchasGallo, Mondavi, andRothschild,
who export their know-how to produce wine faraway from their traditional ‘terroirs’.3
The mobility of firm-embedded productivity across countries conforms with the obser-
vation that multinational firms in developing countries rely largely on expatriates from the
source country for “senior management positions and key technical and engineering jobs to
execute sophisticated or specialized production tasks” (UNCTAD 1994, p. 238).4 Bloom,
Sadun and Van Reenen (2007) provide direct evidence that multinational firms transplant
their organization structure and managerial practices, and this shapes their productivity
abroad. Indeed, Bloom (2007) documents that foreign operations of firms from developed
countries (e.g., U.S. and Japan) are better managed than domestic firms in developing coun-
tries (e.g., China and India).
At the aggregate level, country- and firm-embedded productivity cannot be directly sep-
arated. For given levels of capital and labor, a combination of high country- and low firm-
embedded productivity can lead to the same observed output level as a combination of low
country- and high firm-embedded productivity. Firm-embedded productivity, however, is
a rival factor that can be reallocated across countries. To equalize the marginal product
across countries, firm-embedded productivity must flow from countries where it is relatively
abundant to countries where it is scarce. Therefore, for the same measured level of output,
a high observed share of capital and labor controlled by foreign know-how indicates a high
ratio of country- to firm-embedded productivity.
We formalize this logic in a standard model of cross-country income differences, extended
with internationally mobile managerial know-how. We use the model and aggregate data to
disentangle country- and firm-embedded productivities for a sample of developing countries,
3For example, The Economist (“Vino Twin Peaks”, March 15, 2007) describes how the arrival of foreign
winemakers in Argentina led to a large increase of high quality wine exports over recent years. See Fisher
(1999) for a broader discussion on the globalization in wine production.
4TheUNCTADreportprovidesevidencethattherelianceonexpatriatesisgreaterindevelopingcountries
thanindevelopedcountries. Italsohighlightstheimportantroleofforeignpersonnelinorganizingtheearly
phases of the enterprise as well as training the local workers.
3