NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STRATEGIC ENTRY DETERRENCE AND THE BEHAVIOR OF PHARMACEUTICAL
INCUMBENTS PRIOR TO PATENT EXPIRATION
Glenn Ellison
Sara Fisher Ellison
Working Paper 13069
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13069
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2007
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (grants SES-9818534, SES-0219205,
and SES-0550897), the Sloan Foundation, and the Hoover Institute. We thank Emek Basker, Tom
Chang, David Hwang, and Alan Sorensen for excellent research assistance, Gillian Currie for help
in constructing the data set, Katie MacFarlane for guidance on institutional details, and Ditas Riad
and Rhea Mihalison for their assistance on data issues. We also thank Fiona Scott Morton for her
part in our joint data collection efforts and for providing other data to us. Finally, we thank Marcus
Asplund, Ernie Berndt, Steve Berry, Richard Blundell, Judy Chevalier, Paul Joskow, Nancy Rose,
Otto Toivanen, and seminar participants at various schools for helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2007 by Glenn Ellison and Sara Fisher Ellison. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Strategic Entry Deterrence and the Behavior of Pharmaceutical Incumbents Prior to Patent
Expiration
Glenn Ellison and Sara Fisher Ellison
NBER Working Paper No. 13069
April 2007
JEL No. L13,L65
ABSTRACT
This paper develops a new approach to testing for strategic entry deterrence and applies it to the behavior
of pharmaceutical incumbents just before they lose patent protection. The approach involves looking
at a cross-section of markets and examining whether behavior is nonmonotonic in the size of the market.
Under certain conditions, investment levels will be monotone in market size if firms are not influenced
by a desire to deter entry. Strategic investments, however, may be nonmonotone because entry deterrence
is unnecessary in very small markets and impossible in very large ones, resulting in overall nonmonotonic
investment. The pharmaceutical data contain advertising, product proliferation, and pricing information
for a sample of drugs which lost patent protection between 1986 and 1992. Among the findings consistent
with an entry deterrence motivation are that incumbents in markets of intermediate size have lower
levels of advertising and are more likely to reduce advertising immediately prior to patent expiration.
Glenn Ellison
Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive, E52-380A
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
gellison@mit.edu
Sara Fisher Ellison
Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive, E52-274B
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
sellison@mit.edu

1 Introduction
The insight that firms may make “strategic investments” to alter future competitive con-
ditions is one of the most fundamental ideas in industrial organization. The chapter on
“Entry, Accomodation, and Exit” is easily the longest in Tirole’s (1988) text. In it, Tirole
reviews arguments about how excess capacity, capital structure, advertising, contractual
practices, learning-by-doing, and long-run decisions can be used to deter entry.1 Strategic
investment models are difficult to test directly, however, and the vast majority of this lit-
erature is theoretical. In this paper, we propose a new empirical approach for examining
strategic entry deterrence.
Our applied focus is on the pharmaceutical industry. Using a panel of drugs that
lost their U.S. patent protection between 1986 and 1992, we explore how pharmaceutical
incumbents have dealt with the threat of generic entry. We examine incumbents’ advertis-
ing, product proliferation, and pricing decisions as patent expiration approached, and ask
whether the behaviors appear to be influenced by an entry-deterrence motive.
We begin in Section 2 with a discussion of strategic entry deterrence and some moti-
vation for our approach. We modify the textbook model to bring it closer to empirical
applications: we assume that entry costs are random and unknown to the incumbent so
thatitisimpossibletoperfectlyforecastwhetherentrywilloccur. Wereviewwhatismeant
by “strategic entry deterrence” in this setting. We note that the incentive to deter entry
will be stronger in intermediate-sized markets than in very small or very large markets.
In the former, no investments are needed to deter entry. In the latter, deterring entry is
often impossible. A simple numerical example illustrates how the nonmonotonicity of the
entry-deterrence incentive can lead to a nonmonotonic relationship between equilibrium
investment levels and market size.
Our approach to testing whether firms are actively trying to deter entry is a classic
reduced-form approach: we identify a prediction of the strategic investment model that dif-
fers depending on whether firms take entry-deterrence benefits into account when choosing
1SomeoftheclassicpapersinthisliteratureareBulow,Geanakoplos,andKlemperer(1985),Fudenberg
and Tirole (1983a, 1983b, 1984), Dixit (1980), Schmalensee (1978, 1981), Gelman and Salop (1983), Judd
(1985), Aghion and Bolton (1987), and Cooper (1986).
1

their actions; and then test this prediction. The formal results underlying the approach are
presented in Section 3. Our main IO theory result is a demonstration that, under specified
conditions, actionswillbemonotonicallyrelatedtoamarketsizeparameterif firms are not
influenced by an entry deterrence motive. Several examples are used to provide intuition
for the required conditions. The important implication of the theoretical result is that one
can reject the null hypothesis that firms are not actively trying to deter entry by testing
and rejecting the hypothesis that there is a monotonic relationship between firms’ actions
and market size in a cross-section of markets.
Severalrecentpapershavediscussedwaysofperformingstatisticalhypothesisteststhat
a relationship is monotonically increasing.2 Section 4 contains a brief discussion of this lit-
erature, a description of the tests we will use, and some additional monotonicity theorems
relating to models with measurement error and endogenous right-hand side variables. Ro-
bustness to such factors is a potential advantage of an approach focusing on monotonicity.
In Section 5 we turn our attention to the pharmaceutical industry. The pharmaceutical
industry is an important industry that has attracted a great deal of attention in policy
circles. It also has several features that make it a nice environment in which to study
strategic entry deterrence. One of these is that one can obtain a sizable sample of similarly
situated incumbents facing a threat of entry by looking at manufacturers of branded drugs
whose patent protection is about to expire. Another is that there are several potential tools
that incumbents might use to deter entry, and we were able to obtain data on several of the
most important: advertising, product proliferation, and pricing. A third is that there is a
changeinentryconditionswithineachmarket—entryisprohibiteduntilaknowndate. Our
approach to testing for strategic entry deterrence only requires a single cross-section, but
having data both on actions immediately prior to patent expiration and actions in earlier
years when patent expiration was less salient allows us to also implement a difference-in-
differences version of our test.
The first thing we do in our analysis is to identify a proxy for “market size” and note
that our dataset contains sufficient heterogeneity in market size to make it plausible that
2TheseincludeHallandHeckman(2000),Ghosal,SenandvanderVaart(2000),andGijbels,Hall,Jones
and Koch (2000).
2