NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIQUIDITY CONSTRAINTS AND IMPERFECT INFORMATION IN SUBPRIME
LENDING
William Adams
Liran Einav
Jonathan Levin
Working Paper 13067
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13067
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2007
We thank Raj Chetty, Amy Finkelstein, Robert Hall, Richard Levin, and many seminar participants
for suggestions and encouragement. Mark Jenkins provided stellar research assistance and Ricky Townsend
greatly assisted our early data analysis. Einav and Levin acknowledge the support of the National Science
Foundation and the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, and Levin acknowledges the
support of the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by William Adams, Liran Einav, and Jonathan Levin. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Liquidity Constraints and Imperfect Information in Subprime Lending
William Adams, Liran Einav, and Jonathan Levin
NBER Working Paper No. 13067
April 2007
JEL No. D14,G14
ABSTRACT
We present new evidence on consumer liquidity constraints and the credit market conditions that might
give rise to them. Our analysis is based on unique data from a large auto sales company that serves
the subprime market. We first document the role of short-term liquidity in driving purchasing behavior,
including sharp increases in demand during tax rebate season and a high sensitivity to minimum down
payment requirements. We then explore the informational problems facing subprime lenders. We find
that default rates rise significantly with loan size, providing a rationale for lenders to impose loan caps
because of moral hazard. We also find that borrowers at the highest risk of default demand the largest
loans, but the degree of adverse selection is mitigated substantially by effective risk-based pricing.
William Adams Jonathan Levin
Citigroup Stanford University
william.adams@citigroup.com Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Liran Einav Stanford, CA 94305-6072
Stanford University and NBER
Department of Economics jdlevin@stanford.edu
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
leinav@stanford.edu

1 Introduction
Access to credit markets is generally considered a hallmark of developed economies. In the United
States,mosthouseholdsappeartohavesubstantialabilitytoborrow; indeed,theaveragehousehold
in the United States has over 23,000 dollars in non-mortgage debt alone. Nevertheless, economists
often point to limited borrowing opportunities, or liquidity constraints, to explain anomalous …nd-
ings about consumption behavior, labor supply, and the demand for credit. Despite a sizeable
theoretical literature that explains why some borrowers might have trouble obtaining credit even in
competitive markets (e.g., Ja¤ee and Stiglitz, 1990), there has been relatively little work relating
the consumer behavior indicative of liquidity constraints to the actual functioning of the credit
market.
In this paper, we use unique data from a large auto sales company to study liquidity constraints
and credit market conditions for precisely the population that is most likely to have a di¢ cult
time obtaining credit, those with low incomes and poor credit histories. These consumers, who
typically cannot qualify for regular bank loans, comprise the so-called subprime market. Because
the company we study originates subprime loans, its loan applications and transaction records
provide an unusual window into the consumption and borrowing behavior of households that are
rationed in primary credit markets. Moreover, we track loan repayments allowing us to analyze
the di¢ culties in lending to the subprime population and explain why their supply of credit may
be limited.
We begin by documenting the importance of short-term liquidity constraints for individuals
in our sample. We present two pieces of evidence. Both are based on purchasing behavior and
indicate a high sensitivity to cash-on-hand. First, we document a dramatic degree of demand
seasonality associated with tax rebates. Overall demand is almost 50 percent higher during tax
rebate season than during other parts of the year. This seasonal e¤ect substantially varies with
household income and with the number of dependents, closely mirroring the federal earned income
tax credit schedule. Second, we …nd that demand is highly responsive to changes in minimum
down payment requirements. A 100 dollar increase in the required down payment, holding car
prices …xed, reduces demand by 7 percent. In contrast, generating the same reduction in demand
requires an increase in car prices of close to 1,000 dollars. We calculate that in the absence of
liquidity constraints these e¤ects would imply an annual discount rate of 427 percent.1
1Throughout,weusestodenotethesubjectivediscountrate. A discountrateof427percentimpliesasubjective
1

Taken together, these …ndings point to the conclusion that this population does not have ready
access to credit that allows them to shift wealth across time. This raises the question of whether
consumer liquidity constraints can be tied to underlying credit market conditions. One possibility
is that high default rates, coupled with legal caps on interest rates, simply rule out some forms
of lending. A second possibility is that fundamental features of the consumer credit market are
responsible for credit constraints. To investigate this possibility, we turn to the information eco-
nomics view of credit markets, as developed by Ja¤ee and Russell (1976) and Stiglitz and Weiss
(1981).
Modern information economics emphasizes that credit constraints can arise in equilibrium even
if …nancing terms can adjust freely and lenders are fully competitive. Its explanation lies in the
twin problems of moral hazard and adverse selection. In the moral hazard version of the story,
individual borrowers are more likely to default on larger loans. This leads to problems in the loan
market because borrowers do not internalize the full increase in default costs that come with larger
loan sizes. As a result, lenders may need to cap loan sizes to prevent over-borrowing. In contrast,
adverse selection problems arise if borrowers at high risk of default also desire large loans, as might
be expected given that they view repayment as less likely. As the theoretical literature has pointed
out, adverse selection can give rise not only to loan caps, but to some worthy borrowers being
denied credit because they cannot distinguish themselves from the less worthy.2
The second half of the paper explores these ideas, …rst from the standpoint of theory and then
empirically. InSection4wedevelopasimplemodelofconsumerdemandforcreditandcompetitive
lending, along the lines of Ja¤ee and Russell (1976). We show that such a model can explain many
of the institutional features we observe on the lender side of the market, such as the adoption of
credit scoring and risk-based pricing, and the use of interest rates that increase with loan size.
We also explain why informational problems, compounded by interest rate caps, create a rationale
for lenders to limit access to credit. The model therefore provides a simple credit market based
explanation for why purchasing behavior might re‡ect liquidity constraints.
Having outlined the theoretical framework, we investigate the empirical importance of moral
hazard and adverse selection for subprime lending. Separately identifying these two forces is often
discount factor, equal to 1=(1+s), of less than 0:2. Such an individual is indiferent between paying 1,000 dollars
today and 5,270 dollars in a year.
2ThefactthatimperfectinformationinthecreditmarketleadstolimitsonlendingisanalogoustoRothschildand
Stiglitz’s (1976) famous observation that imperfect information in an insurance market may lead to under-insurance
relative to the full-information optimum.
2