NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CENTRAL BANK TRANSPARENCY:
WHERE, WHY, AND WITH WHAT EFFECTS?
N. Nergiz Dincer
Barry Eichengreen
Working Paper 13003
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13003
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2007
State Planning Organization, Ankara, and University of California, Berkeley, respectively. An earlier
version was presented to the conference on central banking hosted by the Cournot Center, Paris, 30
November-1 December 2006. We thank Petra Geraats, Pierre Siklos and conference participants for
helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by N. Nergiz Dincer and Barry Eichengreen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Central Bank Transparency: Where, Why, and with What Effects?
N. Nergiz Dincer and Barry Eichengreen
NBER Working Paper No. 13003
March 2007
JEL No. E0,E4,F0
ABSTRACT
Greater transparency in central bank operations is the most dramatic change in the conduct of monetary
policy in recent years. In this paper we present new information on its extent and effects. We show
that the trend is general: a large number of central banks have moved in the direction of greater transparency
since the late 1990s. We then analyze the determinants and effects of central bank transparency in
an integrated empirical framework. Transparency is greater in countries with more stable and developed
political systems and deeper and more developed financial markets. Our preliminary analysis suggests
broadly favorable if relatively weak impacts on inflation and output variability.
N. Nergiz Dincer
Economic Modeling Department,
State Planning Organization
Necatibey cad. No:108, rm:1016
Yucetepe, 06100, Ankara
Turkey
nergiz.dincer@gmail.com
Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California
549 Evans Hall 3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
eichengr@econ.Berkeley.edu

Central Bank Transparency: Where, Why, and with What Effects?1
Nergiz Dincer and Barry Eichengreen
1. Introduction
Transparency is the most dramatic difference between central banking today and
central banking in earlier historical periods.2 In recent years a number of central banks
have moved in the direction of greater transparency about their objectives, procedures,
rationales, models, and data. The question is whether the trend is widespread and
whether it is likely to be transitory or enduring. Below we show that this movement in
the direction of greater policy transparency is remarkably general. The answer to the
question of whether it is likely to prove durable or to be a passing phase is likely to turn
on the consequences. Our analysis suggests broadly favorable impacts on inflation and
output variability. If institutional arrangements that produce favorable results retain
public support, then this suggests that the trend toward greater monetary policy
transparency is here to stay.
While there have been a few previous studies along these lines, relatively little is
known about actual trends in transparency, their correlates, and their implications.
Theory has provided useful insights, as we shall see below, but its implications are less
than general. Our goal in this study is therefore to contribute new evidence.
We construct an index of central bank transparency, distinguishing its
components and dimensions, for a larger range of countries and years than in previous
1 State Planning Organization, Ankara, and University of California, Berkeley, respectively. An earlier
version was presented to the conference on central banking hosted by the Cournot Center, Paris, 30
November-1 December 2006. We thank Petra Geraats, Pierre Siklos and conference participants for
helpful comments.
2 Here we use transparency to mean information disclosure. This minimal definition leaves unspecified
whether or not the information set has more than one dimension and if so which dimension is relevant. For
more on this, see below.
1

studies. Both the time dimension and the international dimension shed light on recent
trends in transparency. They allow us to ask questions like: in what countries have
central banks been growing more transparent, and why? Next we analyze the impact of
transparency on inflation persistence, inflation variability and output variability. An
advantage of considering both the determinants of transparency and the effects is that we
can use our analysis of the determinants to identify instrumental variables that address the
concern that an observed correlation between outcomes and transparency reflects the
impact of the former on the latter, rather than the other way around.
2. Reflections on the development of central bank transparency
Central banks originated as closely held, privately owned suppliers of credit to the
government. Because they competed with other financial institutions, they tended to be
less than forthcoming about their pricing and portfolio decisions. Because they had a
privileged relationship with the state – often with the head of state himself – the treated
information as confidential, as properly known only to the bank and its client. That they
were less than transparent about their decision making is understandable given these
circumstances.
As part of this bargain, central banks gradually acquired their modern competency
of regulating supplies of money and credit. Typically they acquired it in the era of
commodity money. The obligation of converting their liabilities into specie at a fixed
rate of exchange ensured an important element of transparency in their operations.
Observers knew something about the institution’s objective function: the central bank
assigned a high weight to the maintenance of convertibility. They knew something about
2