NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY DO EMERGING ECONOMIES BORROW SHORT TERM?
Fernando A. Broner
Guido Lorenzoni
Sergio L. Schmukler
Working Paper 13076
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13076
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2007
We are grateful to Marina Halac, Tatiana Didier, Juan Carlos Gozzi Valdez, and Lishan Shi for superb
research assistance. For valuable comments, we thank Mark Aguiar, Ricardo Caballero, Olivier Jeanne,
Roberto Rigobon, Jaume Ventura, Jeromin Zettelmeyer, and participants at presentations held at the
AEA Meetings (Washington, DC), the Conference on Sovereign Debt at the Dallas Fed, CREI-Universitat
Pompeu Fabra, George Washington University, the Inter-American Development Bank, the IMF Annual
Research Conference, the LACEA Meetings (Madrid and Puebla), MIT, the NBER Summer Institute,
the SED Meetings (Vancouver), and the XII Finance Forum (Barcelona). For financial support, we
thank the World Bank Latin American and Caribbean Research Studies Program and Research Support
Budget and the IMF Research Department. Broner thanks the Spanish Ministry of Education and Sciences
(grant SEJ2005-01126), the Generalitat de Catalunya (DURSI, SGR2005 0049), and CREA-Barcelona
Economics. This paper was finished while Schmukler was visiting the IMF Research Department.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Fernando A. Broner, Guido Lorenzoni, and Sergio L. Schmukler. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Why Do Emerging Economies Borrow Short Term?
Fernando A. Broner, Guido Lorenzoni, and Sergio L. Schmukler
NBER Working Paper No. 13076
May 2007
JEL No. E43,F30,F34,G15
ABSTRACT
We argue that emerging economies borrow short term due to the high risk premium charged by bondholders
on long-term debt. First, we present a model where the debt maturity structure is the outcome of a
risk sharing problem between the government and bondholders. By issuing long-term debt, the government
lowers the probability of a rollover crisis, transferring risk to bondholders. In equilibrium, this risk
is reflected in a higher risk premium and borrowing cost. Therefore, the government faces a trade-off
between safer long-term debt and cheaper short-term debt. Second, we construct a new database of
sovereign bond prices and issuance. We show that emerging economies pay a positive term premium
(a higher risk premium on long-term bonds than on short-term bonds). During crises, the term premium
increases, with issuance shifting towards shorter maturities. The evidence suggests that international
investors' time-varying risk aversion is crucial to understand the debt structure in emerging economies.
Fernando A. Broner Sergio L. Schmukler
CREI and Universitat Pompeu Fabra The World Bank
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27 MSN MC3-301
08005 Barcelona 1818 H Street, N.W.
Spain Washington, DC 20433
fabroner@gmail.com Sschmukler@worldbank.org
Guido Lorenzoni
MIT Department of Economics
E52-251C
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
glorenzo@mit.edu

1 Introduction
During the last two decades, emerging economies have experienced recurring financial crises. A
common factor across many of these crises has been a maturity mismatch between assets and
liabilities, which has led to rollover problems.1 When governments (or the private sector) have
large stocks of short-term liabilities to repay and prospects deteriorate, it becomes very costly to
renew their debt, sometimes triggering outright default. Even worse, excessive reliance on short-
term debt can open the door to self-fulfilling liquidity crises, which may be simply triggered by a
shift in expectations. The risks associated with short-term debt have prompted several authors to
suggest that countries should decrease their vulnerability to capital inflow reversals by lengthening
the maturity structure of their liabilities.2 However, if it is so clear that short-term borrowing is
risky, why do emerging economies borrow short term?
Theconventionalviewisthatemergingeconomiesborrowshorttermtoalleviateamoralhazard
problem that exists on the demand (debtor) side.3 The early literature, such as Calvo (1988) and
BlanchardandMissale (1994), focusesonthe government incentive tolowerthe real value of public
debt by creating inflation. These papers show that this incentive is lower when the debt is indexed,
in foreign currency, and short-term. More recent work by Rodrik and Velasco (1999) and Jeanne
(2004) shows that, when they have tomeet early debt repayments, opportunistic governments have
ex-post a lower incentive to default on their debt and a higher incentive to carry out revenue-
raising reforms. In this context, short-term debt serves as a commitment device for the debtor and
increases its welfare ex-ante.4
Inthispaper,weproposeanalternativeviewbasedonsupply(lender)sidefactors. Inparticular,
we argue that investor risk aversionmakes short-term borrowingcheaper, thus providingincentives
1For example, large amounts of short-term debt had been accumulated by governments prior to the crises of
Mexico1994-95,Russia1998,andBrazil1998-99,andbytheprivatesectorinIndonesia, SouthKorea,andThailand
beforethe1997EastAsiancrisis. Accordingtocentralbanksources,theaveragematurityofoutstandinggovernment
bondsinBrazilwas1.7yearsin 1998. Inthecases ofSouthKoreaand Thailand,short-term debt(maturing atmost
in five years) was, respectively, 97 and 60 percent of total corporate bonds outstanding in 1997.
2Thisviewispresented,amongothers,bySachs,Tornell,andVelasco(1996),FurmanandStiglitz(1998),Obstfeld
(1998),RadeletandSachs(1998),Corsetti,Pesenti,andRoubini(1999),EichengreenandHausmann(1999),Feldstein
(1999), and Cole and Kehoe (2000).
3Throughoutthepaperwerefertothesupplyanddemandsidesofthemarketforloanablefunds. Thus,investors
are on the supply side, while the government is on the demand side.
4Theroleofshort-termdebtasacommitmentdeviceinthecontextofinternationallendinghasalsobeenempha-
sized by Diamond and Rajan (2001), Rochet and Vives (2004), and Tirole (2002, 2003). Dell’Ariccia, Schnabel, and
Zettelmeyer (2002) present some evidence consistent with the conventional view based on moral hazard.
1

for emerging economies to rely on short-term debt.5 What do we mean by short-term borrowing
beingcheaperthanlong-termborrowing? Thecostofborrowingisgivenbytheexpectedrepayment
for each borrowed dollar and it equals the difference between the spread a country pays and the
probability of default.6 Since the cost of borrowing at a given maturity is captured by the risk
premium on bonds of that maturity, the difference between long-term and short-term risk premia
(i.e. the term premium) measures the extent to which borrowing short term is cheaper.7
Our main arguments are illustrated using a simple model, where the optimal debt maturity
structure and borrowing cost at different maturities are determined as the result of a risk sharing
problem betweena debtor country and risk averse investors with a short horizon. On the one hand,
since investors may need to liquidate long-term bonds before maturity and the price of these bonds
fluctuates over time, investors are subject to more risk when holding long-term bonds. They thus
require higher returns on long-term bonds to compensate for this “price risk.”8 On the other hand,
long-termdebtissaferforthegovernmentbecauseitreducestheprobabilityofarollovercrisis. Asa
result, emerging economies have to balance the rollover costs associated with short-term borrowing
against the higher borrowing cost associated with long-term borrowing. This model allows us to
clarify the difference between bond prices, bond spreads, and risk premia and illustrate the role of
the supply side on the risk premium and the maturity of bond issuance.
The model has several implications. First, it shows that, when investors are risk averse, the
term premium is positive on average and increases during crises. Moreover, the model explores
the effects of different types of shocks on the optimal maturity choice and risk premia at different
maturities. A negative shock to government resources leads to an increase in the risk premium on
long-term bonds and an increase in the maturity of bond issues. This is analogous to a positive
demand shock on the market for international loans, leading to higher risk premia and higher
quantities of long-term bonds. A negative shock to investor wealth also leads to an increase in the
5The literature on emerging market borrowing has already stressed the importance of the supply side of interna-
tional capital markets. See, for example, Calvo and Mendoza (2000), Kaminsky and Reinhart (2000), Caballero and
Krishnamurthy (2001, 2003), Chang and Velasco (2001), Kaminsky, Lyons, and Schmukler (2004), Broner, Gelos,
and Reinhart (2005), and Pavlova and Rigobon (2005).
6Inotherwords,thecostofborrowingequalsthedifferencebetweenactualspreadsand“actuariallyfair”spreads.
7A positiveterm premium should notbe confused with spreadson long-term bonds being higher than spreads on
short-termbonds. Thelattermayalsobeduetoahigherprobabilityofdefaultatlongerhorizons. Forexample,this
isthecaseinthemodelofChangandVelasco(2000), inwhichlong-term spreadsarehigherthanshort-term spreads
even though bondholders are risk neutral and the term premium is thus zero.
8On the investor side, the model has the features of a model of liquidity provision in the tradition of Diamond
and Dybvig (1983).
2