NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCIAL FRICTIONS, INVESTMENT AND TOBIN'S Q
Guido Lorenzoni
Karl Walentin
Working Paper 13092
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13092
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2007
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research or the Executive Board of Sveriges Riksbank.
© 2007 by Guido Lorenzoni and Karl Walentin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Financial Frictions, Investment and Tobin's q
Guido Lorenzoni and Karl Walentin
NBER Working Paper No. 13092
May 2007
JEL No. E22,E30,E44,G30
ABSTRACT
We develop a model of investment with financial constraints and use it to investigate the relation between
investment and Tobin's q. A firm is financed partly by insiders, who control its assets, and partly by
outside investors. When their wealth is scarce, insiders earn a rate of return higher than the market
rate of return, i.e., they receive a quasi-rent on invested capital. This rent is priced into the value of
the firm, so Tobin's q is driven by two forces: changes in the value of invested capital, and changes
in the value of the insiders' future rents per unit of capital. This weakens the correlation between q
and investment, relative to the frictionless benchmark. We present a calibrated version of the model,
which, due to this effect, generates realistic correlations between investment, q, and cash flow.
Guido Lorenzoni
MIT Department of Economics
E52-251C
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
glorenzo@mit.edu
Karl Walentin
Sveriges Riksbank
Research Department
103 37 Stockholm
Sweden
karl.walentin@riksbank.se

1 Introduction
Thestandardmodelofinvestmentwithconvexadjustmentcostspredictsthatmovementsin
theinvestmentrateshouldbeentirelyexplainedbychangesinTobin’sq. Thispredictionhas
generally been rejected in empirical studies, which show that cash flow and other measures
of current profitability have a strong predictive power for investment, after controlling for
Tobin’s q. This has been taken by many authors as prima facie evidence of the presence
of financial constraints at the firm level. In recent papers, Gomes (2001) and Cooper
and Ejarque (2003) have challenged this interpretation. They compute dynamic general
equilibriummodelswithfinancial frictions, calibratethem, andlookattherelationbetween
Tobin’s q and investment in the simulated series. Their results show that, even in the
presence of financial frictions, Tobin’s q still explains most of the variability in investment,
and cash flow does not provide any additional explanatory power. This seems to echo a
concern raised by Chirinko (1993):
“Even though financial market frictions impinge on the firm, q is a forward-
looking variable capturing the ramifications of these constraints on all the firm’s
decisions. Notonlydoesq reflectprofitableopportunitiesinphysicalinvestment
but,dependingoncircumstances,q capitalizestheimpactofsomeorallfinancial
constraints as well.”1
In this paper we analyze this issue by building a model of investment with financial
frictions caused by limited enforcement of financial contracts. For each firm there is an
“insider,” which can be interpreted as the entrepreneur, the manager, or the controlling
shareholder. The insider has the ability to partially divert the assets of the firm and, if he
does so, he is punished by losing control of the firm. This imposes an upper bound on the
amount of outside finance that the insider is able to raise. In this framework, we are able
to fully characterize the optimal long-term financial contract, and to derive the total value
of the state-contingent claims issued by the firm. This gives a measure of Tobin’s q and
allows us to study the joint equilibrium dynamics of investment, q, and cash flows.
Our main analytical result is that the financial constraint introduces a positive wedge
between average q, which corresponds to Tobin’s q in our model, and marginal q, which
determines investment decisions. This wedge reflects the tension between the future prof-
itability of investment and the availability of internal funds in the short run. On the
quantitative side, we use a calibrated version of the model to show that this wedge varies
over time, breaking the one-to-one correspondence between investment and q which holds
in the frictionless model. When we run standard investment regressions on simulated data
we can obtain realistic coefficients on q and cash flow. Therefore, financial frictions do help
to reconcile models of firms’ investment with the data.
1Chirinko (1993) p. 1903.
1

Aside from the enforcement friction, our model is virtually identical to the classic
Hayashi (1982) model. In particular, it features convex adjustment costs and constant
returns to scale. This allows us to identify in a clean way the effect of the financial friction
on the equilibrium behavior of investment and q. In the benchmark model with quadratic
adjustment costs, the coefficient of q in investment regressions is identical to the inverse of
the constant in front of the quadratic term. The presence of the financial friction reduces
this coefficient by a factor of 6 and gives a large positive coefficient on cash flow.
The main difference between our approach and that in Gomes (2001) and Cooper and
Ejarque (2003) is the modeling of the financial constraint. They introduce a constraint
on the flow of outside finance that can be issued each period. Here instead, we explicitly
model a contractual imperfection and solve for the optimal long-term contract. This adds
a state variable to the problem, namely the stock of existing liabilities of the firm, thus
generating slow-moving dynamics in the gap between internal funds and the desired level of
investment. As we shall see, these dynamics account for the empirical disconnect between
investment and q.
Our paper is related to the large theoretical literature on the macroeconomic implica-
tions of financial frictions (e.g., Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997),
Holmström and Tirole (1997), Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), Cooley, Marimon and Quadrini
(2004)).2 In particular, our model provides a tractable framework that introduces long-
term, state-contingent financial contracts, into a standard general equilibrium model with
adjustment costs. The form of limited enforcement we adopt, and the recursive characteri-
zation of the optimal contract, are related to the approach in Albuquerque and Hopenhayn
(2004). By exploiting constant returns to scale, we are able to simplify the analysis of the
optimal contract, which takes a linear form, making aggregation straightforward. In this
sense, the model retains the simplicity of a representative agent model, while allowing for
rich dynamics of net worth, profits and investment.
Following Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen (1988) there has been a large empirical lit-
erature exploring the relation between investment and asset prices using firm level data.
The great majority of these papers have found small coefficients on Tobin’s q and positive
and significant coefficients on cash flow, or other variables describing the current financial
condition of a firm.3 This result has been ascribed to measurement error in q, possibly
caused by non-fundamental stock market movements.4 Measurement error would reduce
the explanatory power of q, and cash flow would then appear as significant, given that it
is a good predictor of future profits. Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1995) show that this is
2See Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (2000) for a survey.
3E.g. Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1995), Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1998). See Hubbard (1998) for a
survey.
4The debate is open whether non-fundamental movements in q should affect investment or not. See
Chirinko and Shaller (2001), Gilchrist, Himmelberg and Huberman (2005) and Panageas (2005).
2