NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY DO PRIVATE ACQUIRERS PAY SO LITTLE COMPARED TO PUBLIC ACQUIRERS?
Leonce Bargeron
Frederik Schlingemann
Rene M. Stulz
Chad Zutter
Working Paper 13061
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13061
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2007
Part of this research was conducted while Stulz was visiting the University of Southern California.
We thank seminar participants at the University of Pittsburgh for valuable comments. Manoj Kulchania
provided useful research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Leonce Bargeron, Frederik Schlingemann, Rene M. Stulz, and Chad Zutter. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Why Do Private Acquirers Pay So Little Compared to Public Acquirers?
Leonce Bargeron, Frederik Schlingemann, Rene M. Stulz, and Chad Zutter
NBER Working Paper No. 13061
April 2007
JEL No. G3
ABSTRACT
We find that the announcement gain to target shareholders from acquisitions is significantly lower
if a private firm instead of a public firm makes the acquisition. Non-operating firms like private equity
funds make the majority of private bidder acquisitions. On average, target shareholders receive 55%
more if a public firm instead of a private equity fund makes the acquisition. There is no evidence that
the difference in premiums is driven by observable differences in targets. We find that target shareholder
gains depend critically on the managerial ownership of the bidder. In particular, there is no difference
in target shareholder gains between acquisitions made by public bidders with high managerial ownership
and by private bidders. Such evidence suggests that the differences in managerial incentives between
private and public firms have an important impact on target shareholder gains from acquisitions and
managers of firms with diffuse ownership may pay too much for acquisitions.
Leonce Bargeron Rene M. Stulz
Katz Graduate School of Business Fisher College of Business
University of Pittsburgh The Ohio State University
372 Mervis Hall 806A Fisher Hall
Pittsburgh, PA 15260 2100 Neil Avenue
llbargeron@katz.pitt.edu Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
Frederik Schlingemann stulz_1@cob.osu.edu
Katz Graduate School of Business
University of Pittsburgh Chad Zutter
372 Mervis Hall Katz Graduate School of Business
Pittsburgh, PA 15260 University of Pittsburgh
schlinge@katz.pitt.edu 372 Mervis Hall
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
czutter@pitt.edu

1. Introduction
At least six so-called merger waves have taken place since the end of the nineteenth century
and much research has been done trying to understand them.1 The current merger wave started
approximately in 2002. It is associated in the press with the growing participation of private firms
in general and private equity firms specifically.2 Strikingly, in 2006, private equity firms bought
654 companies for a total of $375 billion.3
Whereas the popular press has emphasized the relative importance and growing role that
private bidders play in the takeover market, academic research has devoted little attention to the
actions of these bidders. We know of no systematic evidence on whether the gains of target
shareholders differ when the acquirer is a private firm instead of a public firm.4 Yet, there is
much debate in the press about whether shareholders of acquired firms are being exploited by
private equity bidders with the help of the management of the acquired firm, which amounts to
saying that the acquisition premiums paid by private equity firms are too low.5 In this paper, we
provide evidence on how the premiums paid by private acquirers compare to the premiums paid
by public companies.
Most acquisitions by private firms are paid for with cash. We construct a sample of
completed cash-only deals during the period 1990-2005 which consists of 407 deals by private
bidders and 885 deals by public bidders. The difference in premiums between these two types of
acquisitions is sizeable. In our sample from 1990 to 2005, the average gain for target shareholders
1 Earlier M&A waves that have been identified in the literature are the 1895-1904 ‘horizontal merger’
wave, the 1925-1929 ‘vertical merger wave’, the 1965-1970 ‘conglomerate merger’ wave, and the 1981-
1987 wave which is mostly characterized by hostile takeovers, break-ups of large conglomerates, more
going-private deals, and the use of leverage to finance these deals. Finally, the merger wave during the
second half of the nineties is mostly characterized by deregulation, very large deals by public firms, the use
of a relatively high degree of equity financing, and some deals with extreme negative bidder returns (see
e.g., Moeller, Schlingemann, and Stulz, 2005). For a more detailed description of these waves, see e.g.,
Bruner (2004).
2 See e.g., Newsweek, April 24, 2006.
3 See “The enigma of private equity,” Newsweek, March 12, 2007, by Robert J. Samuelson.
4 The literature has investigated going private transactions (see, for instance, DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and
Rice, 1984; Lehn and Poulsen, 1989; Kaplan,1989). The acquisitions we consider differ from going private
transactions in that the company making the acquisition is not a company created by large investors in the
company for the purpose of acquiring the shares they do not own to take it private.
5 See, for instance, the article cited in footnote 3.
1

when the bidder is a public firm is 31.74% over the three days surrounding the announcement of
the acquisition. This is 43% higher than the gain for shareholders when a private firm acquires
their firm and 55% higher than the gain when a private equity fund is the acquirer. The average
gain for shareholders of the target when the acquirer is a private firm is 22.20% and when it is a
private equity fund it is only 20.47%.
After documenting this dramatic difference in the gains of target shareholders between
acquisitions by public firms and by private firms, we investigate why such a difference exists.
The simplest explanation would be that public firms and private firms acquire different types of
firms. With such an explanation, target shareholders do not receive less if a private firm acquires
their firm than they would if a public firm makes the acquisition. The obvious issue is why then
private firms concentrate on making low premium acquisitions. One might argue that public firm
acquisitions generate more shareholder wealth because public firms are operating companies, so
that the typical acquisition by a public firm would have synergy gains. Though the majority of the
private acquirers are not operating companies, 39.6% of the private bidders in our sample are
operating companies. The private operating companies pay less for acquisitions than public
companies. Synergy gains cannot therefore be the explanation for the lower premiums paid by
private acquirers. In fact, the three-day target abnormal return for acquisitions by private
operating companies is not significantly different from the three-day target abnormal return for
acquisitions by private equity firms.
We find that there are differences in target characteristics. In particular, private bidders tend
to acquire firms that have performed more poorly than the firms acquired by public bidders.
There is a vast literature that attempts to explain differences in target gains. It could be, therefore,
that the difference in premiums results from differences in target and deal characteristics.
However, we don’t find evidence that differences in target and deal characteristics commonly
used in the literature explain the difference in premiums between private and public bidder
acquisitions. In particular, using a number of different regression specifications, we find that the
2