NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FOREIGN FIRMS, DOMESTIC WAGES
Nikolaj Malchow-Møller
James R. Markusen
Bertel Schjerning
Working Paper 13001
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13001
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2007
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support for this project from the Danish National
Agency for Enterprise and Construction. We also thank participants at seminars at Hitosubashi Uinversity,
Nottingham University, and the NBER trade group. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Nikolaj Malchow-Møller, James R. Markusen, and Bertel Schjerning. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Foreign Firms, Domestic Wages
Nikolaj Malchow-Møller, James R. Markusen, and Bertel Schjerning
NBER Working Paper No. 13001
March 2007
JEL No. F16,F2,F23
ABSTRACT
Foreign-owned firms are often hypothesized to generate productivity "spillovers" to the host country,
but both theoretical micro-foundations and empirical evidence for this are limited. We develop a heterogeneous-firm
model in which ex-ante identical workers learn from their employers in proportion to the firm?s productivity.
Foreign-owned firms have, on average, higher productivity in equilibrium due to entry costs, which
means that low-productivity foreign firms cannot enter. Foreign firms have higher wage growth and,
with some exceptions, pay higher average wages, but not when compared to similarly large domestic
firms. The empirical implications of the model are tested on matched employer-employee data from
Denmark. Consistent with the theory, we find considerable evidence of higher wages and wage growth
in large and/or foreign-owned firms. These effects survive controlling for individual characteristics,
but, as expected, are reduced significantly when controlling for unobservable firm heterogeneity. Furthermore,
acquired skills in foreign-owned and large firms appear to be transferable to both subsequent wage
work and self-employment.
Nikolaj Malchow-Møller Bertel Schjerning
Centre for Economic and Business Research Centre for Economic and Business Research
Porcelaenshaven 24B, Porcelaenshaven 24B,
Copenhagen Business School Copenhagen Business School
DK-2000 Frederiksberg Denmark DK-2000 Frederiksberg Denmark
malchow@cebr.dk bsc.cebr@cbs.dk
James R. Markusen
Department of Economics
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309-0256
and NBER
james.markusen@colorado.edu

1. Introduction
The last decades have witnessed a significant increase in the amount of foreign direct
investment (FDI) and the activities of multinational enterprises (MNEs). This has led to
considerable academic and political interest in the role of FDI an MNEs for both source and host
countries. One aspect of this concerns the potential for FDI and MNEs as important channels for
productivity transfers to host countries. MNEs are hypothesized to possess superior knowledge,
better production technology or better management techniques compared to the average domestic
firm.
However, the microeconomic foundations of these ideas are weak, and empirical analysis
is limited and indirect. In this paper, the productivity advantages of foreign firms are assumed to
affect domestic workers directly. We assume that firms have different productivity levels, and
that workers learn more (increase their productivity more) when they are employed by higher
productivity firms. Similarly, they earn more in subsequent wage employment and self-
employment if they have previously worked for a high-productivity firm.
Our model builds on Melitz’s (2003) (also Helpman et al., 2004) model of industry
structure with heterogeneous firms, and blends this with the learning-on-the-job models of Ethier
and Markusen (1996), Markusen (2001), Fosfuri et. al. (2001), and Glass and Saggi (2002).
Small numbers of domestic and foreign firms get high productivity “draws” and a potentially
unlimited number of other domestic and foreign firms get low productivity draws. Foreign firms
of both types face higher fixed costs of entry. All high-productivity firms can enter, but only
low-productivity domestic firms can enter: they enter until profits are zero, which excludes the
foreign low-productivity firms due to the latter’s higher fixed costs.
1

2
The consequence of this is that foreign firms on average are larger and have higher
productivity than domestic firms. But it also provides the hypothesis that, corrected for firm
size, foreign firms are not more productive than domestic firms.
Our model does not rely on externalities or on foreign firms identifying and hiring better
workers. All workers are ex ante identical and earn the same present value of income over a
two-period working lifetime. Skills learned in the first period when employed by a high-
productivity firm are transferable to other high-productivity firms and, to a less degree, to low-
productivity firms. There is thus no ex post hold-up problem as in Antrás (2003): workers in
the second period of their career are paid their full productivity, but first period workers joining
high-productivity firms receive a discounted wage reflecting their later higher earnings in wage
work or self-employment.
The model allows us to solve for outputs, wage levels and wage growth in high and low-
productivity firms, and in domestic and foreign firms. In the base case, workers joining high-
productivity firms receive a higher average wage and higher wage growth over their careers, but
a lower initial wage. The foreign-firm effect disappears when correcting for firm size.
Then we conduct some experiments. Increasing the productivity of a worker who transits
from a high- to a low-productivity firm or increasing the probability of getting a favorable draw
on suitability for self-employment lowers the average wage premium for workers in high-
productivity firms and that premium can go negative. Thus the model does not trivially produce
a result that workers in high-productivity or foreign firms earn more.
Imposing a minimum wage which prevents high-productivity firms from capturing rents
on inexperienced workers or imposing a progressive income tax raises the average earnings of