NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CREDIT CONSTRAINTS AND STOCK PRICE VOLATILITY
Galina Hale
Assaf Razin
Hui Tong
Working Paper 13089
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13089
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2007
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Galina Hale, Assaf Razin, and Hui Tong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Credit Constraints and Stock Price Volatility
Galina Hale, Assaf Razin, and Hui Tong
NBER Working Paper No. 13089
May 2007
JEL No. E44,E5
ABSTRACT
This paper addresses how creditor protection affects the volatility of stock market prices. Credit protection
reduces the probability of oscillations between binding and non-binding states of the credit constraint;
thereby lowering the rate of return variance. We test this prediction of a Tobin's q model, by using
cross-country panel regression on stock price volatility in 40 countries over the period from 1984 to
2004. Estimated probabilities of a liquidity crisis are used as a proxy for the probability that credit
constraints are binding. We find support for the hypothesis that institutions that help reduce the probability
of oscillations between binding and non-binding states of the credit constraint also reduce asset price
volatility.
Galina Hale Hui Tong
Economic Research Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco IMF Washington DC
101 Market St., MS 1130 htong@imf.org.
San Francisco, CA 94105 hui.tong@imf.org
Galina.B.Hale@sf.frb.org
Assaf Razin
Department of Economics
Cornell University
Uris 422
Ithaca, NY 14853 USA
and
Tel Aviv University
and NBER
ar256@cornell.edu

1 Introduction
Recent literature on law and finance has emphasized the role of strong institutions, such as credi-
tor protection, in fostering the development of financial markets. Creditor rights regulation helps
mitigating the problems of asymmetry information and moral hazard between creditors and bor-
rowers. Hence, it is shown to affect credit cycle and credit market breadth. For example, La
Porta et al. (1997) find that countries with poor creditor protection have smaller debt markets.
Their findings are confirmed in Levine (2004) and Djankov et al. (2006), with more sophisticated
econometric methods and boarder country coverage. Burger and Warnock (2006) further find that
countries with strong creditor rights have more developed local bond markets, and rely less on
foreign-currency bonds. Moreover, Galindo and Micco (2005) report that strong creditor rights can
reduce the volatility of credit market.
Beside the impact on macro economy, creditor protection also affect firm’s investment and
operation. It lowers firm’s borrowing cost and increases firm’s value (e.g. La Porta et al. (2000),
and Bae and Goyal (2003)). Furthermore, it reduce cash-flow risk, operating income variability,
and operating leverage (e.g. Claessens et al. (2001)).
So far, these studies focus on the credit market and very little on the stock market. In this
paper, we try to fill a gap by looking at how creditor rights affect the stock return volatility
for market aggregates.1 We argue that creditor protection that may relax credit constraints is
also associated with equity price volatility, and the institutional weakness in the credit market
exacerbates the volatility. We expect that better creditor protection could reduce market volatility.
The main intuition is as follows. Firms need to provide collaterals to creditors and thus face
credit constraints. When the credit constraint oscillates between binding and non-binding, firms’
1Some studies have examined how corporate control affects the dispersion of stock prices with a market. For
example, Morck et al. (2000) look at the stock price co-movement within a country. They find that co-movement
is more pronounced in poor economies than in rich economies, which they contribute to cross-country differences in
property rights. Our work is not concerned with the idiosyncratic dispersion of stock prices, but rather with the
instability in the aggregate.
2

investment,operationandcapitalreturnwillfluctuateaswell. Buttheprobabilityofthisoscillation
can be reduced with better creditor protection. Consequently, firm value (first moment) will rise,
and the volatility (second moment) of firm value will decline.
We illustrate this intuition with a Tobin’s q investment model. We start with the free market
case, and derive the closed-form solution of Tobin’s q (our theoretical counterpart of stock price)
and its volatility. We then introduce the credit constraint, which depends on the degree of creditor
protection and firm’s productivity. We show that given a distribution of productivity shocks, weak
creditor protection causes more variation of Tobin’s q, due to the oscillation between credit binding
and nonbinding.
We then put the prediction into empirical testing. We look at aggregated stock return volatility
in 41 countries over the years 1984-2004. We find a empirical regularity that better creditor
protection is associated with lower stock price volatility. We then use a two-stage cross-country
analysis to further examine this regularity. In the first stage, we look at how creditor protection
affects the probability of liquidity crises, defined as a large rise of real interest rate, which serves as
our proxy for the probability of credit binding. We find that better creditor protection reduces the
probability of crises. In the second stage, we examine whether the predicted probability of crises
has an expected effect on the stock market volatility. And we find that higher probability of crises
is indeed connected with larger stock return volatility.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the theory. Section 3
describes the data, empirical regularity, empirical approach and results. Section 4 summarizes the
conclusions.
2 Theory
Here we propose a model that demonstrates potential links between creditor rights and stock price
volatility. It is based on the Tobin’s q investment model.
3