NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE SMALL WORLD OF INVESTING:
BOARD CONNECTIONS AND MUTUAL FUND RETURNS
Lauren Cohen
Andrea Frazzini
Christopher Malloy
Working Paper 13121
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13121
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2007
We would like to thank Malcolm Baker, Nick Barberis, John Campbell, Judy Chevalier, Jennifer Conrad,
Kent Daniel, Will Goetzmann, Steve Kaplan, Owen Lamont, Alexander Ljungqvist, Toby Moskowitz,
Fiona Scott Morton, Ludovic Phalippou, Bob Shiller, Jeremy Stein, Mike Weisbach, and seminar participants
at the University of Chicago, Yale University, London Business School, Harvard University, University
of Illinois, Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam, 2007 Asset Pricing Mini Conference at Washington University,
AQR Capital Management, and Goldman Sachs Asset Management for helpful comments. We also
thank BoardEx and Linda Cechova for providing firm board data, and Morningstar and Annette Larson
for providing mutual fund data. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Lauren Cohen, Andrea Frazzini, and Christopher Malloy. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Small World of Investing: Board Connections and Mutual Fund Returns
Lauren Cohen, Andrea Frazzini, and Christopher Malloy
NBER Working Paper No. 13121
May 2007
JEL No. G10,G11,G14
ABSTRACT
This paper uses social networks to identify information transfer in security markets. We focus on connections
between mutual fund managers and corporate board members via shared education networks. We find
that portfolio managers place larger bets on firms they are connected to through their network, and
perform significantly better on these holdings relative to their non-connected holdings. A replicating
portfolio of connected stocks outperforms a replicating portfolio of non-connected stocks by up to
8.4% per year. Returns are concentrated around corporate news announcements, consistent with mutual
fund managers gaining an informational advantage through the education networks. Our results suggest
that social networks may be an important mechanism for information flow into asset prices.
Lauren Cohen Christopher Malloy
Yale School of Management London Business School
135 Prospect Street Regent's Park
New Haven, CT 06520 London NW1 4SA
lauren.cohen@yale.edu United Kingdom
cmalloy@london.edu
Andrea Frazzini
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
andrea.frazzini@chicagogsb.edu

Information moves security prices. How information disseminates through
agents in financial markets and into security prices, though, is not as well
understood. We study a particular type of this dissemination in the form of social
networks. Social networks are network structures composed of nodes (usually
people or institutions) that are connected through various social relationships
ranging from casual to close bonds. In the context of information flow, social
networks allow a piece of information to flow, often in predictable paths, along the
network. Thus, one can test the importance of the social network in disseminating
information by testing its predictions on the flow of information. One convenient
aspect of social networks is that they have often been formed ex-ante, sometimes
years in the past, and their formation is then frequently independent of the
information to be transferred. This is the case with the social network we examine.
Specifically, we define social networks as those tied to educational institutions. The
nodes of our social networks are mutual fund portfolio managers and senior officers
of publicly traded companies. We then examine the information flow between these
nodes, and test predictions on the portfolio allocations and returns earned by
mutual fund managers on securities within and outside their networks.
We believe the two agents of our social network (senior officers and portfolio
managers) provide a useful setting because one side likely possesses private
information, while the other side has a large incentive to access this private
information. Similarly, the stock market is a valuable setting in which to examine
private information flow through a social network because of the information’s
eventual revelation into prices, and so easy relation to stock return predictability.
We examine how private information flows from top senior firm officers (and board
members) to fund portfolio managers connected through a network.
Our tests focus on educational institutions providing a basis for social
networks. Specifically, our goal is to use social networks to study information
dissemination in security markets. We use academic institutions attended for both
undergraduate and graduate degrees as our network measure and test the
hypothesis that mutual fund managers are more likely to place larger bets in firms
run by individuals in their network, and earn higher average returns on these
The Small World of Investing — Page 1

investments. We motivate the use of educational institutions as a basis for social
networks in three ways. First, people often select into undergraduate and graduate
programs made up of social groups having aligned interests to their own,
generating both a higher level of interaction and a longer relationship length from
relationships built.1 Second, outside of donations to religious organizations,
educational institutions are the largest beneficiary of individuals’ charitable
donations. Over 1 in 7 dollars donated in 2005 went to educational institutions,
suggesting the presence of ties to academic institutions past graduation.2 Lastly,
there is direct evidence that school relationships are on average more homophilous
than those formed in other settings (Flap and Kalmijn (2001)) and that
communication between parties is more effective when the two parties are more
alike (Bhowmik and Rogers (1971)).
There are a number of potential ways information could be moving through
networks. First, there could be a direct transfer from senior firm officers to
portfolio managers. Second, the networks could simply lower the cost of gathering
information for portfolio managers. So, for instance, it may take fewer calls, or
people may be more forthcoming with information if they are inside the network.
This explanation would be a case where agents have comparative advantages in
collecting certain types of information. Third, it could be that networks may make
it cheaper to access information on managers, and so assess managerial quality (for
similar reasons as above). We are not able to completely rule out any of these
mechanisms, but we do provide evidence of all three working to some extent in the
data.
To test whether information is disseminated through education networks,
we use trading decisions of mutual fund portfolio managers in firms that have
senior officials in their social network (connected firms) and firms that do not
(non-connected firms). Grossman and Stiglitz (1976) offer a simple intuition that
when agents have comparative advantages in collecting certain types of
1 See Richardson (1940), Lazarsfeld and Merton (1954), McPherson et. al (2001), Fischer et al.
(1977).
2 Data from The Giving Institute. In 2005, 15% of charitable donations ($38.6 billion) were given
to educational institutions. The largest recipient, religious organizations, received 36% ($93.2
billion) (Giving USA (2006)).
The Small World of Investing — Page 2