NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BARGAINING AROUND THE HEARTH
Robert A. Pollak
Working Paper 13142
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13142
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2007
Robert A. Pollak is the Hernreich Distinguished Professor of Economics at Washington University
in St. Louis and a Research Associate of the National Bureau of Economic Research. He wishes to
thank Susan Appleton, Robert Ellickson, and Margo Schlanger for helpful comments and conversation,
and Joanne Spitz for editorial assistance. Reprinted by permission of The Yale Law Journal Company
and William S. Hein Company from The Yale Law Journal's The Pocket Part. Vol. 116, page 414.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Robert A. Pollak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Bargaining Around the Hearth
Robert A. Pollak
NBER Working Paper No. 13142
May 2007
JEL No. D1,J12,K36
ABSTRACT
In "Unpacking the Household: Informal Property Rights Around the Hearth" (Yale Law Journal, 2006)
Robert Ellickson argues that as long as members of a household expect their relationship to continue,
norms, rather than law, will determine allocations among them. More specifically, Ellickson argues
that in "midgame" household members either ignore the "endgame" completely or, if they do take
endgame considerations into account, the relevant endgame considerations are determined by norms
rather than by law. This paper examines the fit between Ellickson's claims and four bargaining models
that economists have used to understand interactions within household and families.
Robert A. Pollak
Washington University in St. Louis
Faculty of Arts and Sciences
and the John M. Olin School
Campus Box 1133
1 Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
and NBER
pollak@wustl.edu

In “Unpacking the Household: Informal Property Rights Around the Hearth,” Ellickson
(2006) argues that as long as members of a household expect their relationship to continue,
norms, rather than law, will determine allocations among them. More specifically, Ellickson
argues that in “midgame” household members either ignore the “endgame” completely or, if they
do take endgame considerations into account, the relevant endgame considerations are
determined by norms rather than by law. In this paper I examine the fit between Ellickson’s
claims and four bargaining models that economists have used to understand interactions within
households and families.
The irrelevance of “small bore private law” is a theme familiar to readers of Ellickson’s justly
famous 1991 book, Order Without Law: How Neighbors Settle Disputes. Using the Coasian
example of liability for damage caused by straying cattle, Order Without Law investigates the
effect of liability rules on the behavior of ranchers and farmers in Shasta County, California.
Contrary to the Coasian, “legal centralist” prediction about the importance of liability rules and
property rights, Ellickson finds that norms trump law. More specifically, he finds that even in
jurisdictions in which the law does not impose on ranchers responsibility for the damage their
straying cattle do to crops, ranchers compensate farmers.
In “Unpacking the Household,” an important recent article in the Yale Law Journal, Ellickson
shifts his attention from how neighbors settle disputes to how households settle disputes. The
close relationship between the book and the article is signaled by the title of the article’s final
part: “Order Without Law in an Ongoing Household.” In the article, as in the book, Ellickson’s
concern is the relative importance of norms and law. His conclusion: norms, not law, are the
crucial determinants of allocation within households.
Recent work in economics has emphasized bargaining power rather than transaction costs and
norms as a determinant of allocation within households/families. Economists have developed a
number of alternative bargaining models, each capturing a different aspect of household/family
interaction. I examine the fit between these alternative bargaining models and Ellickson’s claims
about the unimportance of legal rules and the importance of norms. I argue that for some types of
3

households/families—specifically, parents with minor children and married couples—legal rules
are more important than Ellickson allows. For other types of households, his conclusion that, for
transaction cost reasons, individuals organize their domestic arrangements without regard to
small bore private law is surely correct.
Ellickson begins, as transaction cost analysis usually does, with Coase’s (1937) famous
questions about the nature of the firm. Coase asked: if markets provide efficient coordination of
production activities, why do we have firms? Or, arguing the contrary point: if hierarchical firms
provide efficient coordination of production activities, why do we have markets? Why not
organize all production activities through one giant firm? Ellickson asks the analogous questions
about households: “why don’t all adults live alone? Or, conversely, all in one huge household?”
A substantial transaction cost literature addresses Coase’s questions about firms; a much
smaller literature addresses the analogous questions about households. Beginning with the
ownership of the dwelling unit and the role of providers of at-risk capital, Ellickson’s analysis
provides an important new perspective on household governance. Ellickson emphasizes the
distinction between households and families, explicitly limits his analysis to households, and
correctly points out that the literature is often careless about this distinction.
Using transaction cost analysis, Ellickson examines the relationship between household
governance and the size and composition of households. Household governance is characterized
by the absence of formal contracts. Ellickson argues that informal household governance works
best when household members are few in number and linked together by ties that go beyond the
household. Because people forming households prefer to “consort with intimates,” households
are typically kin based. The “liberal state” provides background rules guaranteeing individuals
freedom of exit, and freedom of exit limits exploitation within the household. Ellickson restricts
his attention to adults and does not deal with the complications presented by children. Thus, he
does not consider the terms on which children can leave the household and, more seriously given
his focus on adults, he does not consider the terms on which parents with minor children can
exit. Yet freedom of exit would have very different implications for the ongoing relationship
between parents if the law were to presumptively award custody of minor children to fathers than
if it presumptively awarded custody to mothers.
4