NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEBT MATURITY: IS LONG-TERM DEBT OPTIMAL?
Laura Alfaro
Fabio Kanczuk
Working Paper 13119
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13119
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2007
We thank Daniel Cohen, Jean-Charles Rochet, Eduardo Borensztein, Federico Sturzenegger, Eric Werker,
Alejandro Werner, Jing Zhang and participants at the 2005 IADB IPES pre-conference, the LACEA
Conference-Mexico, the Chicago Econometric Society Winter Meetings, and seminars at the New
York-Federal Reserve Bank and the University of São Paulo for valuable comments and suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Laura Alfaro and Fabio Kanczuk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Debt Maturity: Is Long-Term Debt Optimal?
Laura Alfaro and Fabio Kanczuk
NBER Working Paper No. 13119
May 2007
JEL No. E62,F34,H63
ABSTRACT
We model and calibrate the arguments in favor and against short-term and long-term debt. These arguments
broadly include: maturity premium, sustainability, and service smoothing. We use a dynamic equilibrium
model with tax distortions and government outlays uncertainty, and model maturity as the fraction
of debt that needs to be rolled over every period. In the model, the benefits of defaulting are tempered
by higher future interest rates. We then calibrate our artificial economy and solve for the optimal debt
maturity for Brazil as an example of a developing country and the U.S. as an example of a mature
economy. We obtain that the calibrated costs from defaulting on long-term debt more than offset costs
associated with short-term debt. Therefore, short-term debt implies higher welfare levels.
Laura Alfaro
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 263
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
lalfaro@hbs.edu
Fabio Kanczuk
Department of Economics,
Universidade de Sao Paulo
Brazil.
kanczuk@usp.br

1 Introduction
Prior to many of the major emerging market financial crises of the past decade—Mexico, Russia,
Brazil, Argentina—governments borrowed large amounts of short-maturity liabilities. Each of these
countries subsequently had to roll over large amounts of short-term debt to meet its payment obligations.1
Scholars have argued that short-term liabilities render an economy particularly vulnerable as the shorter
and more concentrated the debt maturity the more likely debt crises are to occur.2 In addition, short-term
debt may increase a country’s exposure to sharp increases in interest rates, which may have additional
negative consequences, as governments may need to increase taxes in order to service the debt.3
Reacting to the apparent link between the maturity structure of government debt and these
financial crises, many academics and policy makers have urged governments to increase the maturity of
the debt. However, governments usually have to pay a higher premium on long-term bonds, a premium
that may reflect uncertainties about governments’ ability (including issues of taxation and inflation) but
also willingness to repay. The short-term maturity structure of emerging market debt simply might be a
market response to deeper problems associated with uncertainty and enforcement of contracts.4 Hence, at
least from a theoretical point of view, it is not clear that the optimal maturity of government debt is
characterized by large quantities of long-term debt.
In this paper, we quantitatively compare the different rationales in favor of and against short-term
debt in order to evaluate the optimal debt maturity of a government. Those rationales broadly include:
maturity premium, sustainability, and service smoothing. We do this by modeling the different arguments
and calibrating the model in order to assess their quantitative importance.
Our model has the following main features. First, we construct a dynamic equilibrium infinite
period economy. Second, we model maturity as the amount of debt that becomes due every period.5 Thus,
in our model, a government that attempts to lengthen maturity will structure the debt so that similar and
small quantities of government bonds are rolled over each period. Third, following Grossman and Van
Huyck (1988), we treat debt as a contingent claim.6 That is, sovereign defaults occur as bad outcomes of
1 See Borensztein et al. (2005) for an overview of the main stylized facts related to the composition and structure of
sovereign debt and the role of short- term debt.
2 See, for example, Alesina, Prati and Tabellini (1990), Chang and Velasco (2000), Cole and Kehoe (1996, 2000),
Giaviazzi and Pagano (1990), and Rodrik and Velasco (1999).
3 See Barro (1997) for a discussion.
4 See discussions in Barro (1995, 1997), Chari and Kehoe (2003), Jeanne (2004), Rodrik and Velasco (1999), and
Tirole (2002, 2003).
5 Our modeling of debt maturity is close to Cole and Kehoe (1996, 2000) and Alesina et al. (1990).
6 In the sovereign debt literature, two main assumptions are employed to smooth consumption. In contingent debt
models such as that of Eaton and Gersovitz (1981), consumption smoothing is achieved by making debt issuance
contingent on the realization of income: the sovereign issues (retires) new debt when realized income is low (high).
In contingent service models such as that of Grossman and Van Huyck (1988), consumption smoothing is achieved
by making debt servicing contingent on the realization of income: the sovereign services its debt fully only when
1

debt-servicing obligations that are implicitly contingent on the realized state of the world.7 This
assumption follows from the observation of two of the main stylized facts behind sovereign borrowing
and defaulting: (i) defaults are usually partial and associated with identifiable bad states of nature; and (ii)
sovereign states often are able to borrow soon after default. In their model, lenders sharply differentiate
excusable defaults, which are justifiable when associated with implicitly understood contingencies from
debt repudiations, which are inexcusable. Hence, in the model debt allows accommodating negative
shocks to the government budget.
However, our model also recognizes that contingent debt is associated with incentive problems:
when the method of financing is too convenient, the government is likely to abuse it. To capture this
trade-off, we propose an information structure similar to the one used by Cole, Dow and English (1995)
and Alfaro and Kanczuk (2005), in which lenders signal-extract the type of government. We assume there
are two types of sovereigns. “Bad” sovereigns are extremely impatient and always default, independently
of the state of the economy; “good” sovereigns default optimally (excusably) in order to smooth tax
distortions. The assumption of different type of sovereign is meant to capture the uncertainty lenders face
about the borrowers’ preferences.8 The equilibrium interest rate is determined by lenders, who signal-
extract the type of government. When a government defaults, lenders charge high interest rates in the
following period. Consequently, the government’s financing problem might get worse. This assumption is
consistent with another stylized fact of sovereign borrowing; namely, that countries with histories of
defaults are charged higher interest rates than countries with no repayment difficulties.9
Within this framework of contingent service, we study three channels through which the choice
between short- or long-term maturities might affect an economy. We name these three channels maturity
premium, sustainability, and service smoothing.
Maturity premium captures the observation that long-maturity debt tends to be more expensive
than short-maturity debt. As Barro (1997) notes, this stylized fact is not so obviously rationalized,
realized income is high and defaults, either partially or fully, when realized income is low; see Grossman and Han
(1999) for a taxonomy of debt models.
7 As Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996) note, although much lending takes the form of non-contingent loans, debt crises
have shown that payments can be rescheduled, renegotiated, or changed unilaterally if the borrower’s economy
falters; lenders have the option of making new loans or cutting off existing credit lines. That loans incorporate a
premium to compensate for states of nature in which scheduled payments are not made in full shows that such
eventualities are anticipated. Similarly, Eaton et al. (1986, p. 482) conclude: “[T]hough indeed the borrower is
required to service a debt, there is no way that, in general, the borrower can be forced to do so under all
contingencies. Debt and equity are both contingent claims, although they clearly differ in the nature of the
contingencies involved.”
8 In Brazil, the 2002 election of Luis Ignacio “Lula” Da Silva serves as just one example of the difficulty lenders
face in assessing a sovereign’s type.
9 Eichengreen and Portes (1989) and Ozler (1993) find evidence that lenders base their country risk assessment on
past debt-servicing behavior. However, this is not the only view prevailing in the literature, see Jorgensen and Sachs
(1989) and Eichengreen and Lindert (1989).
2