NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PATENTS AND THE SURVIVAL OF INTERNET-RELATED IPOS
Iain M. Cockburn
Stefan Wagner
Working Paper 13146
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13146
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2007
Financial support from the German Academic Exchange Service DAAD is gratefully acknowledged.
We thank Baruch Lev, INNO-tec, and participants in seminars at Melbourne Business School, Nanyang
Technological University, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, INSEAD, ZEW, and the NBER Entrepreneurship
Working Group for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Iain M. Cockburn and Stefan Wagner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Patents and the Survival of Internet-related IPOs
Iain M. Cockburn and Stefan Wagner
NBER Working Paper No. 13146
June 2007
JEL No. L0,L26,L86,O34
ABSTRACT
We examine the effect of patenting on the survival prospects of 356 internet-related firms that IPO'd
at the height of the stock market bubble of the late 1990s. By March 2005, nearly 2/3 of these firms
had delisted from the NASDAQ exchange. Although changes in the legal environment in the US in
the 1990s made it much easier to obtain patents on software and, ultimately, on business methods,
less than half of the firms in this sample obtained, or attempted to obtain, patents. For those that did,
we hypothesize that patents conferred competitive advantages that translate into higher probability
of survival, though they may also simply be a signal of firm quality. Controlling for age, venture-capital
backing, financial characteristics, and stock market conditions, patenting is positively associated with
survival. Quite different processes appear to govern exit via acquisition compared to exit via delisting
from the exchange due to business failure. Firms that applied for more patents were less likely to be
acquired, though obtaining unusually highly cited patents may make them more attractive acquisition
target. These findings do not hold for business method patents, which do not appear to confer a survival
advantage.
Iain M. Cockburn
School of Management
Boston University
595 Commonwealth Ave
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
cockburn@bu.edu
Stefan Wagner
INNO-tec
Ludwig Maximilien University
Kaulbachstrasse
80539 Munich
Germany
swagner@bwl.uni-muenchen.de

1 Introduction
Invention, entrepreneurship, andentryareverysignificantfactorsdrivinggrowthandcompe-
tition. Patents are tightly linked to these fundamental economic processes, providing signals
ofqualitytoinvestors, somemeasureofprotectionfromrapidimitation, andabasisformany
types of commercial transactions in the market for knowledge (see Arora et al. (2001), Gans
etal.(2002), orScotchmer(2005)). Thispaperexplorestheroleplayedbypatentsinshaping
industrydynamicsandfirmsurvivalduringtherapidandunconstrainedrealtimeexperiment
provided by the dot-com boom of the late 1990s. During these “bubble years” new firms had
unusuallyeasyaccess tocapitalto fundtheir explorationofcommercial opportunities opened
up by the explosive growth of the internet. Entrepreneurs rapidly devised and implemented
new business models and developed new products, with new firms appearing apparently from
nowhere to become household names in financial services, retailing, and many other sec-
tors. Unfortunately, it equally quickly became clear that many of these new businesses were
intrinsically unprofitable and the boom years of unrestricted entry, easy access to capital,
and extraordinary valuations of untested new companies were quickly followed by an equally
dramatic period of collapsing stock prices, exit and bankruptcies.
This remarkable episode took place against a backdrop of a worldwide surge in filing
and granting of patents, and the extension of the patent system, particularly in the United
States, into new subject matter areas such as software and business methods. Patentability
of software per se was firmly established in the US by the mid-1990s, and decisions in the
US courts in the late 1990s such as AT&T v. Excel Communications and State Street v.
Signature Financial Services werewidelyinterpretedasopeningthedoortoafloodofpatents
on methods of doing business, particularly those implemented in computers and networks.
The new dot-com companies therefore had the option of seeking patent protection for
their products and business processes — and many inventors and entrepreneurs apparently
took advantage of this opportunity, with thousands of “business method” patent applications
filed with the USPTO between 1999 and 2002. These patents generated considerable con-
troversy, with many industry participants, legal scholars, and economists concerned about
the potential adverse consequences of allowing large numbers of low-quality patents to issue
(Hall (2003), Merges (1999), Meurer (2003), Cockburn (2001), Hunt (2001) and many oth-
ers). Many of these concerns parallel those expressed about the consequences of software
patents for innovation and competition. Critics argued that the flood of business method
patents would “choke” innovation by blocking new technological developments, making it
prohibitively expensive for new firms to enter these markets, or allowing patentees to con-
trol entire markets by obtaining patents with inappropriately broad claims, and/or trivial
inventive steps over the existing technology. Apparently concerned about the opportunistic
assertion of patents on business methods against incumbent firms, the US Congress took
the unusual step of singling out business methods for special treatment, creating a limited
“earlier inventor” defense against patent infringement (or prior user right) for “a method of
2

doing or conducting business”.1 However the impact of these patents on the profitability and
growth of the companies that obtained them, or on the pace of innovation in the industries
in which they compete is far from clear.
Quantitative research on patents for software and business methods is limited and often
contradictory. Lerner (2002) found no clear evidence on the impact of patents on innova-
tion in finance. Lerner & Zhu (2005) found, if anything, a positive impact of strengthened
patent protection on software firms. On the other hand, Bessen & Hunt (2004) suggest that
increasing numbers of software patents are associated with a decrease in R&D by large soft-
ware companies. Gambardella & Giarratana (2006) find an important role for patents in the
security software industry, where the commercial success of small firms appears to have been
driven by their ability to license technology to established downstream competitors. Noel
& Schankermann (2006) find evidence for a negative impact of strategic patenting on entry,
R&D, and market value of software firms, while Cockburn & MacGarvie (2006) find that
while incumbent patents deter entry in software markets, higher numbers of patents held by
entrants stimulate entry. Hall & MacGarvie (2006) find mixed effects of changes in legal doc-
trine on the market value and stock returns of software firms, with a initially negative impact
of the strengthening software patent protection on the valuation of incumbent software firms
followed by an increase in the market valuation of software patents after 1995. There is,
therefore, considerable uncertainty about the economic value and impact of these patents.2
Rather than attempt to directly assess the monetary value of these patents, or relate
them to technological indicators of the pace of innovation, this paper examines the impact
of patenting on a much more basic measure of economic impact — the survival of a sample
of internet-based and software firms that went public during the boom phase of the dot-com
bubble, and then faced high probabilities of business failure during the bust period that
followed. To the extent that patents obtained by these firms improved their competitive
position, through mechanisms such as excluding competitors, supporting higher margins,
raising rivals’ costs, or signaling quality, we hypothesize that they should have conferred a
substantial survival advantage. Estimates of the size and significance of such an effect may
provide useful insight into the economic impact of these types of patents.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 of the paper we briefly
summarize previous findings on firm turn-over and review existing literature scrutinizing
software and business method patents. Section 3 contains a short description of the dataset
used for the analysis, which combines financial data and patent data for 356 firms that made
an IPO on the NASDAQ at the height of the stock market bubble between 1998 and 2001.
In Section 4, results are presented from estimating multivariate hazard models relating firm
survival to patenting, financing, and economic performance. Finally, Section 5 concludes and
offers some implications of our findings.
135 USC Sec. 273.
2It is even unclear whether claims about the poor quality of business method patents are
generallytrue. Hunter(2003)andAllison&Tiller(2003)arguethatbusinessmethodpatents
compare well to patents in other technologies in terms of citation of prior art, etc.
3