NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TAXES, INSTITUTIONS AND FOREIGN DIVERSIFICATION OPPORTUNITIES
Mihir A. Desai
Dhammika Dharmapala
Working Paper 13132
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13132
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2007
We thank Alan Auerbach, Lucas Davis, Jim Hines, Peter Merrill, Bill Simpson, and seminar participants
at the University of Michigan for helpful discussions and comments, and Claire Gilbert for research
assistance. Desai acknowledges the financial support of the Division of Research of Harvard Business
School. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Mihir A. Desai and Dhammika Dharmapala. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Taxes, Institutions and Foreign Diversification Opportunities
Mihir A. Desai and Dhammika Dharmapala
NBER Working Paper No. 13132
May 2007
JEL No. F21,F23,G11,G30,H25
ABSTRACT
Investors can access foreign diversification opportunities through either foreign portfolio investment
(FPI) or foreign direct investment (FDI). By combining data on US outbound FPI and FDI, this paper
analyzes whether the composition of US outbound capital flows reflect efforts to bypass home country
tax regimes and weak host country investor protections. The cross-country analysis indicates that a
10% decrease in a foreign country's corporate tax rate increases US investors' equity FPI holdings
by 21%, controlling for effects on FDI. This suggests that the residual tax on foreign multinational
firm earnings biases capital flows to low corporate tax countries toward FPI. A one standard deviation
increase in a foreign country's investor protections is shown to be associated with a 24% increase in
US investors' equity FPI holdings. These results are robust to various controls, are not evident for debt
capital flows, and are confirmed using an instrumental variables analysis. The use of FPI to bypass
home country taxation of multinational firms is also apparent using only portfolio investment responses
to within-country corporate tax rate changes in a panel from 1994 to 2005. Investors appear to alter
their portfolio choices to circumvent home and host country institutional regimes.
Mihir A. Desai
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mdesai@hbs.edu
Dhammika Dharmapala
Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
Weill Hall 5219
735 South State St.
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-3091
dhammika@umich.edu

1. Introduction
Alternative financial instruments that provide the same economic exposure can have
differing tax treatments and control implications. For example, combinations of derivatives
instruments can replicate payoffs to other instruments yet receive differing tax treatment and
control rights. For outbound international investments from the U.S., foreign direct investment
(FDI) and foreign portfolio investment (FPI) both provide access to country-specific
diversification opportunities. However, they differ markedly in the degree to which investors are
exposed to local investor protections and the degree to which those investments are subject to the
U.S. corporate tax regime. Specifically, FDI outbound flows are typically associated with whole
ownership of foreign corporations and are subject to the American worldwide corporate tax
regime, while FPI flows are non-controlling stakes in foreign corporations that are only subject
to the local corporate tax regime.1
Consider the example of American investors hoping to access newly available global
diversification opportunities in China. Concerns about the rights available to minority investors
might tilt investors towards accessing those opportunities via investments in US multinational
firms that undertake FDI in China, to ensure that investor interests are better protected. On the
other hand, investing through U.S. multinational firms to access Chinese diversification
opportunities creates an additional corporate tax obligation, as the U.S. taxes the returns these
firms earn in China upon repatriation.
This paper investigates whether the composition of outbound capital flows from the U.S.
reflects these desires to circumvent the residual tax imposed by the U.S. and weak investor
protections in host countries.2 This paper employs data on patterns of outbound U.S. FPI from
the Treasury International Capital (TIC) reporting system and on outbound U.S FDI from the
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). Figure 1 depicts the ratio of US equity FPI to US FDI for
1 Equity FPI involves the purchase of a minority stake (according to US tax rules, less than 10% of voting shares) in
a foreign corporation by (typically) a US-resident individual. In contrast, FDI involves the purchase of a controlling
stake (according to US tax rules, more than 10% of voting shares) in a foreign corporation by (typically) a US-
resident corporation.
2 Rather than investigating the extent of “home bias” in portfolio holdings, this paper investigates the use of equity
FPI relative to US FDI, given some (possibly suboptimal) desire on the part of investors for global diversification.
1

a sample of countries with significant stock market activity.3 As Figure 1 demonstrates, the ratio
of outbound FPI to FDI varies significantly across countries that are of comparable levels of
economic development, giving rise to the possibility that taxation and investor protections might
affect the desirability of these alternative diversification vehicles.
The potential effects of taxation on FPI result from the interaction between home and
host country taxes. In particular, the U.S. taxes multinational firms legally domiciled in the U.S.
on their worldwide income. As a consequence of this policy regime, U.S. investors should prefer
FPI as a means of accessing foreign diversification opportunities, particularly in low-tax
countries where the residual tax imposed by the U.S. will be most burdensome. In effect, FPI
allows investors to avoid any residual tax arising from the worldwide regime on investment
income earned abroad. Conversely, the absence of the residual US tax should make US equity
FPI sensitive to variations in foreign corporate tax rates, even controlling for any effects of
corporate taxes on levels of US FDI. As such, the worldwide system of taxing income may
vitiate the diversification benefits of multinational firms, emphasized in papers such as Errunza,
Hogan and Hung (1999) and Cai and Warnock (2006).
A weaker institutional environment in the host country should make both FPI and FDI
less attractive to US investors. More specifically, however, the extent of legal protections for
minority shareholders against expropriation by controlling shareholders should differentially
affect the attractiveness of FPI and FDI. In particular, weaker investor protections should make
FDI, with its controlling feature, a more desirable means of accessing foreign diversification
opportunities. This paper provides a simple framework that demonstrates these effects of
corporate taxes and investor protections and the assumptions required for them to be operative.
This paper uses both cross-sectional and panel data to test these hypotheses. Overall, the
analysis shows a large and robust negative effect of foreign countries’ corporate tax rates on the
amount of US equity FPI (relative to US FDI) that they attract. In the cross-sectional analysis,
the estimated elasticity of equity FPI flows with respect to tax rates is -2.1, which is substantially
larger than standard measures of the elasticity of FDI to tax rates. An index of investor
protections for minority shareholders (based on disclosure requirements, liability standards, and
3 The sample, as described in Section 3, is based on the countries with the largest aggregate stock market
capitalization in 1993 (La Porta et al., 2006), excluding those without significant amounts of either US equity FPI
and US FDI.
2