NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO SECURITY ANALYSTS SPEAK IN TWO TONGUES?
Ulrike Malmendier
Devin Shanthikumar
Working Paper 13124
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13124
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2007
We would like to thank Sris Chatterjee, Paul Healy, David Hirshleifer, Gerard Hoberg, Jennifer Juergens,
Charles Lee, Pat O’Brien, Tim McCormick, Zoran Ivkovich, Siew Hong Teoh, seminar participants
at the MIT Sloan School of Management, UC Irvine, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the
N.Y. Fed/Ohio State University/JFE 2004 conference on Agency Problems and Conflicts of Interest
in Financial Intermediaries, the 2005 Early Career Women in Finance Mini-Conference, the 2006
American Finance Association Annual Meeting, the 2006 Financial Accounting and Reporting Section
Mid-Year Meeting of the AAA, the 2006 Financial Management Association Europe Conference,
the Seventh Maryland Finance Symposium on Behavioral Finance, the 2007 European Accounting
Association Annual Meeting and the University of Minnesota. Michael Jung provided excellent research
assistance. Ulrike Malmendier gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Coleman Fung
Risk Management Research Center. Send correspondence to Devin Shanthikumar. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2007 by Ulrike Malmendier and Devin Shanthikumar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Security Analysts Speak in Two Tongues?
Ulrike Malmendier and Devin Shanthikumar
NBER Working Paper No. 13124
May 2007, Revised February 2014
JEL No. D14,D82,G12,G14,G24
ABSTRACT
Why do security analysts issue overly positive recommendations? We propose a novel approach to
distinguish strategic motives (e.g., generating small-investor purchases and pleasing management)
from nonstrategic motives (genuine overoptimism). We argue that nonstrategic distorters tend to issue
both positive recommendations and optimistic forecasts, while strategic distorters “speak in two tongues,”
issuing overly positive recommendations but less optimistic forecasts. We show that the incidence
of strategic distortion is large and systematically related to proxies for incentive misalignment. Our
“two-tongues metric” reveals strategic distortion beyond those indicators and provides a new tool for
detecting incentives to distort that are hard to identify otherwise.
Ulrike Malmendier
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall # 3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ulrike@econ.berkeley.edu
Devin Shanthikumar
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 377
15 Harvard Way
Boston, MA 02163
dshanthikumar@hbs.edu

A large body of research shows that analyst recommendations are positively biased.1 The
explanations for the upward bias fall into two categories, “strategic” and “nonstrategic.”
Strategic distortion reflects misaligned incentives: analysts aim to please company man-
agement, generate corporate finance business, and induce investors to purchase stock.2
Nonstrategic distortion reflects genuine overoptimism: analysts have too-positive expec-
tations, for example, due to self-selection into covering stocks they view favorably, or
due to credulity (McNichols and O’Brien 1997; Teoh and Wong 2002).3 Despite the poli-
cy relevance of this distinction, especially for reducing analyst distortion, we know little
about the relative importance of strategic and nonstrategic motives. Analysts’ affiliation
with stock underwriters and other measures of incentive misalignment are often interpret-
ed as proxies for strategic distortion, but they are open to alternative interpretations. For
example, the higher incidence of positive recommendations among affiliated analysts
could reflect that an analyst’s genuine overoptimism encourages the corporate-finance di-
vision to underwrite in the first place.4
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to distinguish strategic and nonstrate-
gic bias. We exploit the fact that strategic distorters have stronger incentives to distort
their recommendations than their forecasts. We construct a novel “two-tongues metric” of
strategic distortion, issuing optimistic recommendations but less optimistic or even pessi-
mistic forecasts. We find that a large number of analysts distort strategically.
1 Michaely and Womack (2005) provide an excellent recent review of the recommendations literature.
2 See Michaely and Womack (1999). Management often calls analysts to complain about low ratings, and
has “frozen out” the analysts who gave them (Francis, Hanna, and Philbrick 1997; Chen and Matsumoto
2006), while buy-side clients push for positive recommendations on stocks they hold (Boni and Womack
2002).
3 Lin and McNichols (1998) use the terminology “strategic and non-strategic bias” more narrowly to
capture whether distortion is aimed at being selected as an underwriter or not. Kothari (2001) uses
“incentives-based versus cognitive” to capture the same distinction we make.
4 Relatedly, Bradley, Jordan, and Ritter (2003) and Ljungqvist, Marston, and Wilhelm (2006) show that
analysts fail to win underwriting business with positive recommendations.
2

We relate our metric to existing measures of incentive (mis-)alignment used in
prior work (Ljungqvist et al. 2007 and Ljungqvist, Marston, and Wilhelm 2006). We
show that affiliation and investment-banking pressure (share of a company’s previous
underwriting mandate) are highly predictive of strategic distortion, but other measures are
not, including bank reputation capital, bank loyalty index, institutional ownership, and
all-star status. As such, our results speak to the interpretation and relative strength of the
existing indicators of distortion. Our measure detects widespread and persistent strategic
distortion beyond that captured by existing proxies.
Our empirical strategy consists of four steps. First, using Institutional Brokers’
Estimate System (IBES) data, we compare the average distortion of recommendations
and annual earnings forecasts.5 Consistent with prior studies (e.g., Lin and McNichols
1998; Michaely and Womack 1999), we find that recommendations are tilted toward
buys and strong buys, in particular if analysts are affiliated with a stock’s underwriter.
Annual earnings forecasts, instead, often underestimate the subsequent earnings, and af-
filiated forecasts are less positive than unaffiliated ones.6 We also find recommendation
timing to be as in O’Brien, McNichols, and Lin (2005): affiliated analysts are slower to
downgrade stocks from “buy” or “strong buy” than unaffiliated analysts. Going beyond
prior findings, we extend the timing analysis to forecasts and find no differential timing
of affiliated and unaffiliated forecasts. Sampling by other incentive measures reveals sim-
ilar contrasts.
Second, we relate distortion to investor behavior. Using New York Stock Ex-
change Trades and Quotations (TAQ) data, we show that small and large investors react
5 Quarterly earnings forecasts and long-term growth forecasts are discussed in the Online Appendix.
6 Lin and McNichols (1998) find no difference for SEO-affiliated analysts (in 1989–1994). Our different
finding might reflect our longer post-IPO/SEO window and the different sample period (1993–2008).
3