NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ALTRUISM AND THE CHILD-CYCLE OF ALUMNI GIVING
Jonathan Meer
Harvey S. Rosen
Working Paper 13152
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13152
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2007
We are grateful to B. Douglas Bernheim, William Bowen, Ronald Ehrenberg, Jean Grossman, Bo
Honore, Donna Lawrence, Brian McDonald, Ashley Miller, John Morgan, Sriniketh Nagavarapu, Andres
Santos, Julie Shadle and Burton Weisbrod for useful suggestions. Brent Newhouse and Zhihao Zhang
provided excellent research assistance. This research was supported in part by Princeton's Center for
Economic Policy Studies and in part by the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Jonathan Meer and Harvey S. Rosen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Altruism and the Child-Cycle of Alumni Giving
Jonathan Meer and Harvey S. Rosen
NBER Working Paper No. 13152
June 2007
JEL No. H49,I22
ABSTRACT
This paper uses a unique data set to assess whether donors' contributions to a nonprofit institution
are affected by the perception that the institution might confer a reciprocal benefit. We study alumni
contributions to an anonymous research university. Inter alia, the data include information on the ages
of the alumni's children, whether they applied for admission to the university, and if so, whether they
were accepted. The premise of our analysis is simple: If alumni believe that donations will increase
the likelihood of admission for their children and if this belief helps motivate their giving, then the
pattern of giving should vary systematically with the ages of their children, whether the children ultimately
apply to university, and the outcome of the admissions process. We refer to this pattern as the child-cycle
of alumni giving. If the child-cycle is operative, one would observe that, ceteris paribus, the presence
of children increases the propensity to give, that giving drops off after the admissions decision is made,
and that the decline is greater when the child is rejected by the university. Further, under the joint hypothesis
that alumni can reasonably predict the likelihood that their children will someday apply to the university
and that reciprocity in the form of a higher probability of admission is expected, we expect that alumni
with children in their early teens who eventually apply will give more than alumni whose teenagers
do not. The evidence is strongly consistent with the child-cycle pattern. Thus, while altruism drives
some giving, the hope for a reciprocal benefit plays a role as well. Using our results, we compute rough
estimates of the proportion of giving due to selfish motives.
Jonathan Meer
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
jmeer@stanford.edu
Harvey S. Rosen
Department of Economics
Fisher Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
HSR@princeton.edu

1. Introduction
In an essay on the economics of altruism, Samuelson [1993, p. 143] writes
Mesmerized by Homo economicus, who acts solely on egoism,
economists shy away from altruism almost comically. Caught
in a shameful act of heroism, they aver: “Shucks, it was only
enlightened self interest.” Sometimes it is. At other times it
may be only rationalization… “If I rescue somebody’s son,
someone will rescue mine.”
Samuelson concludes that such arguments render economists guilty of “face saving tau-
tologies.” Bergstrom and Stark [1993, p. 149] similarly criticize economists’ stance to-
ward altruistic behavior: “Why are economists convinced that Homo economicus is self-
ish? No doubt we find considerable support for this hypothesis in the behavior of our
colleagues.”
However, the notion that mainstream economics categorically rejects the exis-
tence of altruism is essentially false. As noted below, a substantial theoretical literature
explicitly allows for the possibility that human behavior is unselfish and draws out the
implications of altruism in a variety of contexts. Contrary to Samuelson, it would be
more accurate to characterize economists’ view of the importance of altruism as agnostic
rather than skeptical. They are willing to contemplate the possibility that altruism is an
important motivator of behavior, but at the same time do not rule out selfishness. Clot-
felter’s [1985] important volume on charitable giving is typical in this regard. In an in-
troductory section, he provides a list of possible motivations for charity. Some involve
narrow self-interest, such as the expectation that donors and their families will receive
services in return, or favorable publicity for their businesses. But the list gives equal
footing to altruism, associated with social norms or a sense of duty or commitment.

2
Clotfelter takes no position on the relative importance of the various motivations, mere-
ly observing that they could all be operative.1
Of course, saying that both selfishness and altruism can be present does not tell
us that both motivations actually guide behavior. This is an empirical question, but
empirical work using observational data is rare in this area. Perhaps the primary reason
is the difficulty of measuring the benefits that donors expect to receive. Without quanti-
fiable indicators of the potential selfish benefits, one cannot estimate how responsive
giving is to their existence.
This paper uses a unique data set that allows us to assess whether donors’ con-
tributions to a nonprofit institution are affected by the expectation of a reciprocal bene-
fit. We study alumni contributions to an anonymous selective research university, hen-
ceforth referred to as Anon U. The proprietary data provided by Anon U contain de-
tailed information about donations made by alumni as well as a variety of their eco-
nomic and demographic characteristics. The data also include information on the ages of
the children of the alumni, whether they applied for admission to Anon U, and if so,
whether they were accepted. The premise of our analysis is simple: If alumni believe
that donations increase the likelihood of their children being accepted to Anon U and if
this belief helps motivate their giving, then the pattern of giving should vary systemati-
cally with the age of their children, whether the children ultimately apply to Anon U,
and the outcome of the admissions process. Specifically, if reciprocity influences the be-
havior of donors, one would expect that, ceteris paribus, the presence of children in-
creases the propensity to give, that giving drops off after the admissions decision is ren-
dered, and that the decline is greater when the child is rejected. We refer to this pattern
as the child-cycle of alumni giving.
1 In the same way, Dugan et al. [1999, p.2] ascribe a number of motivations to university donors. The list includes
“avoidance of social stigma, tax incentives, recognition for generosity, a response to past or deterrence to future so-
licitation, and quid pro quo for services rendered indirectly such as access to elite social circles or business con-
tacts.” However, at the top of their list is “pure altruism.”