NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INVESTMENT AND THE COST OF CAPITAL:
NEW EVIDENCE FROM THE CORPORATE BOND MARKET
Simon Gilchrist
Egon Zakrajsek
Working Paper 13174
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13174
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2007
We appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Eileen Mauskopf, Stacey Tevlin, Jonathan
Wright, and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Board, the European Central Bank, the Bank
of Canada, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Bank of Japan and the University of Tokyo.
Jason Grimm and Isaac Laughlin provided superb research assistance. Simon Gilchrist thanks the National
Science Foundation for financial support. The views expressed in this paper are solely the responsibility
of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, or those of anyone else associated with the Federal Reserve System, or the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Simon Gilchrist and Egon Zakrajsek. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Investment and the Cost of Capital: New Evidence from the Corporate Bond Market
Simon Gilchrist and Egon Zakrajsek
NBER Working Paper No. 13174
June 2007
JEL No. E22,E44,E62
ABSTRACT
We study the effect of variation in interest rates on investment spending, employing a large panel data
set that links yields on outstanding corporate bonds to the issuer income and balance sheet statements.
The bond price data -- based on trades in the secondary market -- enable us to construct a firm-specific
measure of the user cost of capital based on the marginal cost of external finance as determined in
the market for long-term corporate debt. Our results imply a robust and quantitatively important effect
of the user cost of capital on the firm-level investment decisions. According to our estimates, a 1 percentage
point increase in the user cost of capital implies a reduction in the investment rate of 50 to 75 basis
points and, in the long run, a 1 percent reduction in the stock of capital.
Simon Gilchrist
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
sgilchri@bu.edu
Egon Zakrajsek
Division of Monetary Affairs
Federal Reserve Board
20th Street & Constitution Avenue, NW
Washington, D.C. 20551
egon.zakrajsek@frb.gov

1 Introduction
The notion that business spending on fixed capital falls when interest rates rise is a the-
oretically unambiguous relationship that lies at the heart of the monetary transmission
mechanism. Nevertheless, the presence of a robust negative relationship between invest-
ment expenditures and real interest rates—or the user cost of capital more generally—has
been surprisingly difficult to document in actual data (e.g., Abel and Blanchard [1986] and
Schaller [2006]). Similarly, the magnitude of the response of investment to changes in cor-
porate tax policies is a key parameter that fiscal policy makers rely on when weighing the
costs and benefits of altering the tax code. With the exception of Cummins, Hassett, and
Hubbard [1994], whose methodology utilizes firm-level variation in investment expenditures
within a context of a “natural” experiment, researchers have had a difficult time identify-
ing the relationship between capital formation and changes in corporate tax policy (e.g.,
Schaller [2006] and Chirinko, Fazzari, and Meyer [1999, 2004]).1
The empirical difficulties associated with estimating the effects of changes in interest
rates and corporate tax policies on business fixed investment are often blamed on a lack of
identification. At the macroeconomic level in particular, long-term interest rates (through
monetary policy actions) and corporate tax obligations (through investment tax credits or
partial expensing allowances) are often lowered when investment spending is weak.2 In
the extreme, the endogeneity between both monetary and fiscal policy actions and the
macroeconomy may result in a positive relationship between investment expenditures and
the user cost of capital.
In this paper, we revisit this apparent and long-standing empirical anomaly. We do
so by constructing a new data set that links income and balance sheet information for
about 900 large U.S. nonfinancial corporations to interest rates on their publicly-traded
debt. Covering the last three decades, this new data set enables us to evaluate and to
quantify empirically the relationship between firms’ investment decisions and fluctuations
inthefirm-specific usercostofcapitalbasedonmarginalfinancingcostsasmeasuredbythe
changes in secondary market prices of firms’ outstanding bonds. Our results indicate that
investmentspendingishighlysensitive—botheconomicallyandstatistically—tomovements
in the firm-specific measure of the user cost of capital. The sensitivity of capital formation
to changes in the user cost is robust to the inclusion of various measures of investment
1For extensive surveys of this topic, see Auerbach [1983] and Chirinko [1993]; see also Hassett and
Hubbard [1997] and Devereux, Keen, and Schiantarelli [1994].
2Partial expensing allowances permit firms to deduct a portion of their newly purchased capital goods
from their taxable income. In that sense, both an investment tax credit (ITC) and an expensing allowance
raisethefirm’safter-taxincomewhenthefirmpurchasescapitalgoods. Thetwotaxpolicies,however,differ
in that under partial expensing, the firm is not allowed to claim any future depreciation allowances for its
expensed capital, whereas under an ITC, such a restriction is partly or wholly absent.
1

opportunities emphasized by frictionless neoclassical models and to an estimation approach
that controls for the potential endogeneity between investment and financial policy at the
firm level.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide a brief
overview of the user-cost framework and review the evidence—at both the macro and micro
levels—onthelinkbetweenfinancingcostsandinvestmentspending. Section3describesour
new data set and highlights its key feature. Section 4 outlines our panel-data econometric
methodology, and Section 5 presents our benchmark results. In Section 6, we consider an
alternative estimation approach that addresses the potential endogeneity between interest
rates and investment decisions at the firm level. This approach involves constructing an
instrument for the user cost of capital that explicitly controls for firm-specific expected
defaultriskusingbothoption-theoreticmeasuresofdefaultprobabilitiesandexternalcredit
ratings of firms’ debt. Section 7 concludes.
2 Empirical Framework
In this section, we briefly outline the user-cost framework that motivates our empirical
analysis. We assume that output of the firm in period t—denoted by Y —is a CES function
t
of capital (K ) and variable inputs (L ):3
t t
Y = (aKσ +bLσ)1/σ,
t t t
where 0 < a,b < 1 and σ ≤ 1. Letting CK denote the cost of capital in period t, then the
t
firm’s desired capital stock K∗ satisfies the optimality condition
t
1−σ
Y
a t = CK.
K∗ t
(cid:18) t (cid:19)
Assuming a simple partial adjustment between actual and desired capital implies the fol-
lowing log-specification for the growth rate of the capital stock:
Y 1
∆lnK = η+λ ln t − lnCK ,
t K 1−σ t
(cid:20) (cid:18) t(cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:21)
where the parameter 0 < λ < 1 measures the speed of adjustment to the desired stock
of capital and 1/(1−σ) is the long-run elasticity of capital with respect to the user cost.
The partial adjustment model is typically implemented empirically with a variant of the
3We adopt the convention that the time subscript t on stock variables indicates the beginning of the
period—that is, Kt denotes the stock of capital at the beginning of period t.
2