NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INVESTOR SENTIMENT IN THE STOCK MARKET
Malcolm Baker
Jeffrey Wurgler
Working Paper 13189
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13189
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2007
We thank Xavier Gabaix, Robin Greenwood, Jim Hines, Stefan Nagel, Ronnie Sadka, Andrei Shleifer,
Timothy Taylor, and Michael Waldmann for very helpful comments. We thank the Investment Company
Institute for data on mutual fund flows. Baker gratefully acknowledges financial support from the
Division of Research of the Harvard Business School. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Malcolm Baker and Jeffrey Wurgler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Investor Sentiment in the Stock Market
Malcolm Baker and Jeffrey Wurgler
NBER Working Paper No. 13189
June 2007
JEL No. E32,G11,G12,G14
ABSTRACT
Real investors and markets are too complicated to be neatly summarized by a few selected biases and
trading frictions. The "top down" approach to behavioral finance focuses on the measurement of reduced
form, aggregate sentiment and traces its effects to stock returns. It builds on the two broader and more
irrefutable assumptions of behavioral finance -- sentiment and the limits to arbitrage -- to explain which
stocks are likely to be most affected by sentiment. In particular, stocks of low capitalization, younger,
unprofitable, high volatility, non-dividend paying, growth companies, or stocks of firms in financial
distress, are likely to be disproportionately sensitive to broad waves of investor sentiment. We review
the theoretical and empirical evidence for these predictions.
Malcolm Baker
Baker Library 261
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mbaker@hbs.edu
Jeffrey Wurgler
Stern School of Business, Suite 9-190
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
jwurgler@stern.nyu.edu

The history of the stock market is full of events striking enough to earn their own names:
the Great Crash of 1929, the 'Tronics Boom of the early 1960s, the Go-Go Years of the late
1960s, the Nifty Fifty bubble of the early 1970s, and the Black Monday crash of October 1987.
Each of these events refers to a dramatic level or change in stock prices that seems to defy
explanation. The standard finance model, where unemotional investors always force capital
market prices to equal to the rational present value of expected future cash flows, has
considerably difficulty fitting these patterns. Researchers in behavioral finance have been
working to augment the standard model with an alternative model built on two basic
assumptions.1
The first assumption is that investors are subject to sentiment. Investor sentiment, defined
broadly, is a belief about future cash flows and investment risks that is not justified by the facts
at hand. The second assumption is that betting against sentimental investors is costly and risky.
And so, rational investors, or arbitrageurs as they are often called, are not as aggressive in
forcing prices to fundamentals as the standard model would suggest. In the language of modern
behavioral finance, there are limits to arbitrage. Recent stock market history has cooperated
nicely, providing the Internet bubble and the ensuing Nasdaq and telecom crashes and thus
validating the two premises of behavioral finance. A period of extraordinary investor sentiment
pushed the prices of speculative and difficult-to-value technology stocks to unfathomable levels
in the late 1990s. Instead of creating opportunity for contrarian arbitrageurs, the period forced
many out of business, as prices that were merely high went higher still before an eventual crash.
Now, the question is no longer, as it was a few decades ago, whether investor sentiment
affects stock prices, but rather how to measure investor sentiment and quantify its effects. One
1 See De Long et al. (1990) and Shleifer and Vishny (1997) for this conception.
1

approach is “bottom up,” using biases in individual investor psychology, such as overconfidence,
representativeness, and conservatism, to explain how individual investors underreact or overreact
to past returns or fundamentals.2 A related class of models, discussed by Hong and Stein in this
issue, relies on differences of opinion across investors, often combined with short sales
constraints to generate misvaluation. When aggregated, these models make predictions about
patterns in market wide investor sentiment, stock prices, and volume.
The investor sentiment approach that we develop in this paper is, by contrast, distinctly
“top down” and macroeconomic. The starting point for this approach is that many of the bottom
up models lead to a similar reduced form of variation over time in mass psychology, and
certainly none is uniquely true. Real investors and markets are too complicated to be neatly
summarized by a few selected biases and trading frictions. The top down approach focuses on
the measurement of reduced form, aggregate sentiment and traces its effects to market returns
and individual stocks. The new directions in this top down approach build on the two broader
and more irrefutable assumptions of behavioral finance—sentiment and the limits to arbitrage—
to explain which stocks are likely to be most affected by sentiment, rather than simply pointing
out that the level of stock prices in the aggregate depends on sentiment.3
In particular, stocks of low capitalization, younger, unprofitable, high volatility, non-
dividend paying, growth companies, or stocks of firms in financial distress, are likely to be
disproportionately sensitive to broad waves of investor sentiment. As the reader will recall, small
startup firms represented a majority of the excitement and subsequent carnage of the Internet
bubble, so this statement may ring true already. Theoretically, it follows because these groups of
2 See Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998) and Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyman (1998) for models of this
sort.
3 As an analogy, aggregate risk aversion is another one-dimensional variable that will affect all stocks to some
degree but will also affect some more than others.
2