NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COINTEGRATION AND CONSUMPTION RISKS IN ASSET RETURNS
Ravi Bansal
Robert Dittmar
Dana Kiku
Working Paper 13108
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13108
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2007
An earlier draft of this paper was circulated with the title "Long Run Risks and Equity Returns." We
would like to thank George Tauchen, Jessica Wachter, Vivian Wang, Amir Yaron, and the seminar
participants at Arizona State University, Duke University, Simon Fraser University, Stanford University,
University of British Columbia, University of Michigan, University of North Carolina, University
of Pennsylvania, Vanderbilt University, Federal Reserve Board of Governors Conference on Risk
Premiums: Time Variation and Macroeconomic Links, and 2007 American Finance Association Meetings
for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Ravi Bansal, Robert Dittmar, and Dana Kiku. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Cointegration and Consumption Risks in Asset Returns
Ravi Bansal, Robert Dittmar, and Dana Kiku
NBER Working Paper No. 13108
May 2007
JEL No. C01,C13,G00,G1,G12
ABSTRACT
We argue that the cointegrating relation between dividends and consumption, a measure of long run
consumption risks, is a key determinant of risk premia at all investment horizons. As the investment
horizon increases, transitory risks disappear, and the asset's beta is dominated by long run consumption
risks. We show that the return betas, derived from the cointegration-based VAR (EC-VAR) model,
successfully account for the crosssectional variation in equity returns at both short and long horizons;
this is not the case when the cointegrating restriction is ignored. Our evidence highlights the importance
of cointegration-based long run consumption risks for financial markets.
Ravi Bansal Dana Kiku
Fuqua School of Business Finance Department
Duke University Wharton School
1 Towerview Drive University of Pennsylvania
Durham, NC 27708 3620 Locust Walk
and NBER Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
ravi.bansal@duke.edu kiku@wharton.upenn.edu
Robert Dittmar
Stephen M. Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
rdittmar@bus.umich.edu

Introduction
How does the riskiness of equity returns change with investment horizon? We show that at
long horizons risks are dominated by long run consumption risks in dividends, while at short
horizons, additional price risks may also matter. The cointegrating relation between dividends
and consumption measures long-run covariance consumption risks in dividends. We show that
this cointegrating relation has important conceptual and empirical implications for the risks
at all horizons. Empirically, we document that consumption asset betas determined by the
cointegration based vector-autoregression (EC-VAR) can very well account for the mean equity
returns in the cross-section at both short and long horizons. This is not the case when the
cointegration restriction, as is traditionally done, is ignored. Hence, our evidence underscores
the economic importance of the cointegrating relation in understanding sources of risks and
explaining equity risk premia across all investment horizons.
Our focus on the cointegrating relation is motivated by Bansal and Yaron (2004), Bansal,
Dittmar, and Lundblad (2001, 2005), Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2005), and Bansal, Gallant,
and Tauchen (2005) who show that long run risks can be important in explaining risk premia.
Cointegration, as made clear by the representation theorem of Granger and Engle (1987),
has sharp implications for predictability. In the context of dividends and consumption, the
representation theorem implies that the deviation of the level of dividends from consumption
(the error-correction variable) is important for predicting dividend growth rates and returns
at all horizons. As the error-correction variable alters the information set used to predict
future returns, it also significantly influences the return innovation and, hence, the conditional
consumption betas.
The empirical literature frequently imposes the implicit assumption of no cointegration by
modeling returns with a standard vector autoregression (VAR). We show that this traditional
approach leads to a significant deterioration in the ability of consumption-based models to
3

explain risk premia at both short and long horizons relative the the cointegration-based
specification. In this “standard VAR”, consumption and dividend growth rates are stationary,
however the levels of consumption and dividends are not cointegrated. Deviations of dividends
from consumption contain a unit root and, thus, the two series can drift far apart — there
is no error-correction mechanism, which ties dividends and consumption together in the long
run. Cointegration, and the implied EC-VAR framework, ties these two series together in the
long run; for this reason, the error-correction term can be quite important for predicting future
returns and growth rates. The inclusion of the error-correcting mechanism can significantly
alter the transition dynamics of returns and asset betas relative to the standard growth-rate
based VAR specification.
We first document that the error-correction term in the dividend-consumption cointegrating
relation contains important information for predicting future dividend growth and returns.
Imposing cointegration, we are able to predict on average 11.5% of the variation in one-year
returns, compared to 7.5% when we do not impose cointegration. This difference is even starker
atlongerhorizons: atthe10-yearhorizon, theEC-VARspecificationresultsinanaverage44.0%
adjusted R2, compared to 9.9% for the standard growth-rate VAR specification. That is, at
longer horizons, we are able to predict far more variation in returns using the cointegration
specification than when we do not impose cointegration on the return dynamics. This
predictability evidence suggests that cointegration has important implications for measuring
return innovations and, consequently, conditional consumption betas.
Using the EC-VAR, we find that the cointegrating relation indeed significantly influences
the conditional consumption betas and resulting prices of risk at all investment horizons. The
estimated market price of consumption risks is always positive and significant. For example, at
the short horizon, the market price of risk is 1.19 (SE=0.41); at the long horizon, it continues
to be highly significant of 0.72 (SE=0.25). Our conditional consumption betas account for
about 75% of the cross-sectional variation in risk premia at the one-year horizon, and are able
4