NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO MARKETS CARE WHO CHAIRS THE CENTRAL BANK?
Kenneth N. Kuttner
Adam S. Posen
Working Paper 13101
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13101
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2007
Our thanks go to seminar participants at the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, Birkbeck College,
the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, the Liberal Arts Macro Workshop, the NBER, Oberlin College,
the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, and the Zentrum für Europäische Wirtschaftsforschung; and to
Barbara Craig, Simon Gilchrist, Pavel Kapinos, and Peter Pedroni for constructive suggestions. Dimitar
Vlahov provided research assistance, and we are also grateful to Marta Abreu, Geoffrey Barrows,
Özer Karagedikli, and Tarja Yrjola for their assistance with the data. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2007 by Kenneth N. Kuttner and Adam S. Posen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Do Markets Care Who Chairs the Central Bank?
Kenneth N. Kuttner and Adam S. Posen
NBER Working Paper No. 13101
May 2007, Revised August 2008
JEL No. E58,E61,G14
ABSTRACT
This paper assesses the effects of central bank governor appointments on financial market expectations
of monetary policy. To measure these effects, we assemble a new dataset of appointment announcements
from 15 countries, and conduct an event study analysis on exchange rates, bond yields, and stock prices.
The analysis reveals a significant reaction of exchange rates and bond yields to unexpected appointments.
The reactions are not unidirectional, and thus do not suggest new governors suffer from a generic credibility
problem. Federal Reserve chairman appointments stand out in terms of their unusually pronounced
effects on financial markets.
Kenneth N. Kuttner
c/o Economics Department
Williams College
Williamstown MA 01267
and NBER
kenneth.n.kuttner@williams.edu
Adam S. Posen
Peterson Institute for International Economics
1750 Massachusetts Ave., NW
Washington, DC 20036-1903
aposen@petersoninstitute.org

1 Introduction
The appointment of a new central bank governor usually makes headlines in the financial
press, and those reports often attribute to the appointment the subsequent movement in
the financial markets.1 Ben S. Bernanke’s October 24, 2005 appointment to chair the US
Federal Reserve, for example, generated hundreds of press reports and nearly as many
analyses and commentaries speculating on his policy leanings.2 Stocks climbed sharply
immediatelyfollowingtheannouncement,whilebondpricesfell.
That financial markets should react to the appointment of a new governor is hardly
surprising. After all, central banks’ policies can have significant macroeconomic effects,
and it is taken as given that the governor exerts a disproportionate influence over those
policies. This may have been especially true in the case of Alan Greenspan, to whom
extraordinary powers of foresight were sometimes attributed and who was increasingly
personally identified with US monetary policy over the course of his long tenure.3 And
decades earlier, a similar degree of prescience and personal influence was attributed to
Benjamin Strong, the governor of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (then the locus
of US monetary policy decisionmaking), whose death in 1928 is thought by some to have
contributedtotheonsetoftheGreatDepression.4
Governor-specificattributesalsoplayacentralroleinmuchofthetheoreticalliterature
on monetary policy. The currently standard framework for modeling policymakers’ incen-
tives, which began with Kydland & Prescott (1977) and Barro & Gordon (1983), opened
the door to characterizing differences in central bank behavior in terms of the objective
function attributed to the central banker, as well as the institutional setting within which
1Thispaperusestheterm“governor”genericallytorefertotheheadofthecentralbank,evenwhenthe
actualjobtitleis“president”or“chair.”
2Factivaalonereports1322sucharticlesonthedayof,andthedayfollowing,hisappointment.
3This is nicely illustrated by Senator John McCain’s unforgettable quip from a 1999 GOP presidential
debate: “...if Mr. Greenspan should happen to die, God forbid, I would do like they did in the movie
‘WeekendatBernie’s,’ Iwouldprophimupandputapairofdarkglassesonhimandkeephimaslongas
wecould.”
4Friedman&Schwartz(1963,p.412-13)conjecturedthat“if[Benjamin]Stronghadstillbeenaliveand
headoftheNewYork[FederalReserve]Bankinthefallof1930,hewouldverylikelyhaverecognizedthe
oncomingliquiditycrisis...”andtaken“appropriatemeasurestoheaditoff.”
1

he or she served. This was made explicit in the influential Rogoff (1985) model of the
“conservative”centralbanker. Inasimilarvein,themodelofCukierman&Meltzer(1986)
distinguishes between different central banker types—“hawks” versus “doves”. Financial
market commentary often makes much of this distinction in central bankers’ preferences
whenforecastingappointees’likelyinfluenceonmonetarypolicy.5
The point of this paper is not to determine whether, and to what extent, central bank
governors influence monetary policy and the economy—we assume that they do. Rather,
it is to determine whether financial markets perceive that the central bank appointments
containnewinformationrelevanttopolicyexpectations.6 Ifso,thentheseappointments(or
moreprecisely,theannouncements)shouldmovemarketsthroughtheireffectsonexpected
inflationandinterestrates.
Our objective is therefore to assess empirically the perceived information content, if
any, of governor appointments in the eyes of financial market participants. The paper’s
specific goals are threefold. The first is to document the reaction of exchange rates, bond
yields,andstockprices,andtodeterminethosereactions’jointstatisticalsignificance. The
second goal is to determine the extent to which the monetary policy framework in place
at the time of the appointment affects the magnitude of the market response. Third, we
are interested in whether the reactions indicate a generic concern about incoming gover-
nors’ anti-inflationcredibility: ifthis were thecase, we would expectto see atendency for
announcementstobeassociatedwithrisingbondyieldsanddepreciatingexchangerates.
Sofarasweknow,thisisthefirstefforttoanalyzetheimpactofnewgovernorappoint-
ments on financial markets and monetary policy expectations. There is, of course, a large
literature on how economic news affects financial markets, and a number of recent papers
5Bernasek(2005),forexample,wrotefollowingBernanke’sappointment:“Greenspandid,however,make
onethingclear[atthetimeofhisappointment]: theneedtocombatinflation. Herealizedthatheneededto
establish his credibility on this front. Soon after his appointment, the Fed raised interest rates by half a
percentagepointandsentamessageabouthisdeterminationtotamepriceincreases. Heunderstoodthatan
unhappy bond market could undo a Fed chairman and that the economy would suffer the consequences....
Thefirsttestwillbe[Bernanke’s]credibilityoninflation...thevotethatultimatelymattersmorewillbethe
onecastbythebondmarkets.Inflationwillbetheirlitmustest.BondtradersarealreadyscouringBernanke’s
recordforevidenceonewayortheother.... Thebondmarketreactedbyinchingrateshigher.”
6Notethattheshiftsinexpectationscreatedbytheseannouncementsneednotbecorrectexpost.
2