NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXCHANGE RATE FUNDAMENTALS AND ORDER FLOW
Martin D. D. Evans
Richard K. Lyons
Working Paper 13151
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13151
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2007
We thank the following for valuable comments: Anna Pavlova, Andrew Rose and seminar participants
at the NBER (October 2004 meeting of IFM), the Board of Governors at the Federal Reserve, the European
Central Bank, the London Business School, the University of Warwick, the Graduate School of Business
at the University of Chicago, UC Berkeley, the Bank of Canada, the International Monetary Fund,
and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Both authors thank the National Science Foundation for
financial support, which includes funding for a clearinghouse for recent micro-based research on exchange
rates (at georgetown.edu/faculty/evansm1 and at faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/lyons). The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2007 by Martin D. D. Evans and Richard K. Lyons. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Exchange Rate Fundamentals and Order Flow
Martin D. D. Evans and Richard K. Lyons
NBER Working Paper No. 13151
June 2007
JEL No. F31,G12,G14
ABSTRACT
We address whether transaction flows in foreign exchange markets convey fundamental information.
Our GE model includes fundamental information that first manifests at the micro level and is not symmetrically
observed by all agents. This produces foreign exchange transactions that play a central role in information
aggregation, providing testable links between transaction flows, exchange rates, and future fundamentals.
We test these links using data on all end-user currency trades received at Citibank over 6.5 years, a
sample sufficiently long to analyze real-time forecasts at the quarterly horizon. The predictions are
borne out in four empirical findings that define this paper's main contribution: (1) transaction flows
forecast future macro variables such as output growth, money growth, and inflation, (2) transaction
flows forecast these macro variables significantly better than the exchange rate does, (3) transaction
flows (proprietary) forecast future exchange rates, and (4) the forecasted part of fundamentals is better
at explaining exchange rates than standard measured fundamentals.
Martin D. D. Evans
Department of Economics
Georgetown University
Washington, DC 20057
evansm1@georgetown.edu
Richard K. Lyons
Goldman Sachs
85 Broad Street, Floor 20
New York, NY 10004
and NBER
Richard.Lyons@gs.com

Introduction
Exchange rate movements at frequencies of one year or less remain unexplained by observable
macroeconomic variables (Meese and Rogo¤1983, Frankel and Rose 1995, Cheung et al. 2005). In
their survey, Frankel and Rose (1995) describe evidence to date as indicating that "no model based
on such standard fundamentals ... will ever succeed in explaining or predicting a high percentage of
thevariationintheexchangerate,atleastatshort-ormedium-termfrequencies."Sevenyearslater,
Cheung et al.’s (2005) comprehensive study concludes that "no model consistently outperforms a
random walk."
This paper addresses this long-standing puzzle from a new direction. Rather than attempting
to empirically link macro variables to exchange rates directly, we address instead the intermediate
market-based process that impounds macro information into exchange rates. Our approach is
based two central ideas: First, only some of the macro information relevant for the current spot
exchange rate is publicly known at any point in time. Other information is present in the economy,
but it exists in a dispersed microeconomic form in the sense of Hayek (1945). The second idea
relates to determination of the spot rate through the operation of the foreign exchange market.
Speci…cally, since the spot rate literally is the price of foreign currency quoted by foreign exchange
dealers, it can only re‡ect information that is known to dealers. Consequently, the spot rate will
only re‡ect dispersed information once it has been assimilated by dealers, (collectively called “the
market”) –a process that takes place via trading. We shall argue that this trade-based mechanism
is economically important because much information about the current state is dispersed, and
because it takes a considerable time for dispersed information to be completely assimilated by “the
market”.
To make these ideas concrete, we present a two-country general equilibrium model in which the
spot rate is determined via the optimal trading activities of dealers in the foreign exchange market.
Our model contains three essential ingredients. First, it includes information that is not publicly
observed, at least initially. Second, transaction ‡ows are correlated with this information. Third,
the equilibrium spot rate is not fully revealing. The model not only provides a theoretical rationale
for the strong empirical link between spot rate changes and transaction ‡ows (see, for example,
Evans and Lyons 2002a,b), but it also delivers two new testable implications: First, transaction
‡ows should have more power to forecast future fundamentals than current spot rates. Second,
1

insofar as the transaction ‡ows received by individual dealers predict what the rest of “the market”
will learn about fundamentals in the future, those ‡ows should have forecasting power for future
exchange rate returns.
We investigate these empirical predictions using a new data set that comprises USD/EUR spot
rates, transaction ‡ows and macro fundamentals over six and a half years. The transaction ‡ows
come from Citibank and represent propriety information of an important Bank in the USD/EUR
market. A novel and important feature of our empirical analysis is that it utilizes high-frequency
real-time estimates of macro variables. These data are estimates of the underlying macro variables
based on contemporaneously available public information. As such, they provide a more precise
measureofpublicexpectationsregardingfundamentalsthanrealizationsofthevariablesthemselves.
This greater precision is re‡ected in the strong statistical signi…cance of our …ndings.
The implications of our model are strongly supported by our data. In particular we …nd that:
1. Transaction ‡ows in the USD/EUR market have signi…cant forecasting power for future out-
put growth, money growth, and in‡ation in both the US and Germany.
2. Transaction ‡ows have incremental forecasting power for macro variables beyond that con-
tained in the history of exchange rates and the variable itself.
3. Propriety transaction ‡ows forecast future exchange rate returns, and do so much more ef-
fectively than forward discounts.
4. The forecasting power of propriety transaction ‡ows re‡ects their ability to predict how “the
market”will react to the ‡ow of subsequent information concerning macro fundamentals.
To the best of our knowledge, these are the …rst …ndings to link macro fundamentals, transaction
‡owsandexchangeratedynamics. Takentogether,theyprovidestrongsupportfortheideathatex-
change rates vary as “the market”assimilates dispersed information regarding macro fundamentals
from transaction ‡ows.
Ouranalysisisrelatedtoseveralstrandsoftheinternational…nanceliterature. Fromatheoreti-
calperspective,ourgeneralequilibriummodelincludestwonovelingredients: dispersedinformation
and a micro-based rationale for trade in the foreign exchange market. Dispersed information does
2