NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ARE SHOCKS TO THE TERMS OF TRADE SHOCKS TO PRODUCTIVITY?
Timothy J. Kehoe
Kim J. Ruhl
Working Paper 13111
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13111
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2007
We would like to thank Narayana Kocherlakota, Ellen McGrattan, Edward Prescott, and Katheryn
Russ for helpful advice and comments. This work was undertaken with the support of the National
Science Foundation under grant SES-0536970. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis or the Federal Reserve System.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Timothy J. Kehoe and Kim J. Ruhl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Are Shocks to the Terms of Trade Shocks to Productivity?
Timothy J. Kehoe and Kim J. Ruhl
NBER Working Paper No. 13111
May 2007
JEL No. E23,F41,F43
ABSTRACT
International trade is frequently thought of as a production technology in which the inputs are exports
and the outputs are imports. Exports are transformed into imports at the rate of the price of exports
relative to the price of imports: the reciprocal of the terms of trade. Cast this way, a change in the
terms of trade acts as a productivity shock. Or does it? In this paper, we show that this line of reasoning
cannot work in standard models. Starting with a simple model and then generalizing, we show that
changes in the terms of trade have no first-order effect on productivity when output is measured as
chain-weighted real gross domestic product. The terms of trade do affect real income and consumption
in a country, and we show how measures of real income change with the terms of trade at business
cycle frequencies and during financial crises.
Timothy J. Kehoe
University of Minnesota
Department of Economics
271 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
tkehoe@econ.umn.edu
Kim J. Ruhl
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin
BRB 3.148
Austin, Texas 78712
ruhl@eco.utexas.edu

1. Introduction
The terms of trade — the price of imports relative to the price of exports — vary greatly
over time and country. This variation makes the terms of trade a natural candidate for explaining
country performance. Intuitively, we can think about foreign trade as a production technology:
a country’s exports are the inputs to the technology, and these inputs are turned into outputs that
are recorded as a country’s imports. Exports are transformed into imports at the rate that is the
ratio of the price of exports to the price of imports, which is just the reciprocal of the terms of
trade. Viewed in this way, an increase in the terms of trade acts much like a technology shock:
the same amount of exports now produces a smaller amount of imports.
In figures 1 and 2 we plot two well-known examples of terms of trade shocks. Figure 1
shows the contractions in real GDP in the United States that accompanied the sharp increases in
the terms of trade, these coming largely from the OPEC oil embargo in 1973 and the Iranian
Revolution in 1979. In fact, writing in the early 1980s, Hamilton (1983) points out that all but
one of the post–World War II economic downturns in the United States up until that time had
been preceded by an upward spike in the price of imported oil. Figure 2 presents the analogous
data for Mexico, which in 1983 and 1995 suffered severe debt crises that brought with them
sharp increases in the price of imports. These deteriorations of the terms of trade were
accompanied by large contractions in real GDP. The correlation coefficient for changes in real
GDP and changes in the terms of trade is −0.30 for the United States and −0.73 for Mexico. In
these figures, we also plot total factor productivity (TFP), which is even more strongly correlated
with the terms of trade for the United States and almost as correlated for Mexico, with
correlation coefficients −0.54 and −0.71, respectively. Data like these certainly seem to support
the intuition that shocks to the terms of trade affect the economy as shocks to productivity.
In this paper, we show that standard models do not support this line of reasoning. The
problem lies in the construction of real gross domestic product (GDP), the most common
measure of a country’s output. The effect of a shock to the terms of trade on real GDP is not the
same as the effect of a productivity shock and is highly dependent upon the method used to
construct real GDP. When real GDP is constructed using the chain-weighting method specified
in the United Nations System of National Accounts, terms of trade shocks have no first-order
effects if inputs of factors are constant. When real GDP is constructed using fixed base year
prices, the effect of a terms of trade shock is ambiguous: in some cases a deterioration of the
1

terms of trade can even increase real GDP! In this paper we bring this accounting to bear on the
terms of trade and productivity relationship. As productivity is computed using GDP as the
measure of output, the terms of trade cannot have a direct effect on a country’s TFP. An increase
in the terms of trade lowers the purchasing power of the country, which can be very painful in
terms of consumption and welfare, but does not impact TFP directly.
The empirical literature on growth is replete with examples of the association of the terms
of trade and output growth. Easterly, Kremer, Pritchett, and Summers (1993) study a large panel
of countries to uncover the sources of long-run growth and aggregate volatility. They conclude
that “shocks, especially to the terms of trade, play a large role in explaining variance in growth.”
In setting out a framework for studying developing country growth, Easterly, Islam, and Stiglitz
(2001) find that the terms of trade volatility are more correlated with output volatility than are
the standard deviations of many of the usual suspects: money growth, fiscal balance, and capital
flows to name a few. Becker and Mauro (2005) use a large panel of countries to study how
output drops are related to various external shocks and, using the likelihood of the shock and the
associated output drop, compute the cost of the different shocks. They find that the costliest
shocks, particularly for developing countries, are terms of trade shocks. The idea underlying
many of these conclusions is succinctly summarized by Easterly, Islam, and Stiglitz (2001), who
write, “For small open economies, adverse terms of trade shocks can have much the same effect
as negative technology shocks, and this is one of the important differences between
macroeconomics in these economies and that which underlies some of the traditional closed
economy models.”
In line with the above reasoning, we show that, in standard models, a shock to the terms
of trade has an effect on consumption and welfare that is similar to a TFP shock. The analogy
between the terms of trade and productivity breaks down when we calculate their effects on real
GDP and productivity. When real GDP is measured at base period prices and domestic factors
of production are held fixed, the effect of a terms of trade shock on real GDP is determined by
the current terms of trade relative to the base period terms of trade. If the current import price is
the same as the base period price, then the shock has no effect. If the current price is higher
(lower) than the base period price, the effect is negative (positive). In this case, a change in the
terms of trade can have a first-order effect on GDP, but this result follows from an artifact of the
deflation method and not from an underlying structural relationship. When we consider real
2