NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IMPROVED ACCESS TO FOREIGN MARKETS RAISES PLANT-LEVEL PRODUCTIVITY
... FOR SOME PLANTS
Alla Lileeva
Daniel Trefler
Working Paper 13297
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13297
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2007
We are grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Andy Bernard, Christian Broda, Xavier Gabaix, Bob Gibson,
Elhanan Helpman, Sam Kortum, Kala Krishna, Marc Melitz, Diego Puga, John Sutton and Jim Tybout
as well as seminar participants at Chicago, CIFAR, Harvard, MIT Sloan, MBER, Princeton, Statistics
Canada and Toronto. We are particularly indebted to John Baldwin for developing the database and
for his many rich insights. Trefler gratefully acknowledges funding from the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council of Canada (SSHRC) and the tremendous support of the Canadian Institute for Advanced
Research (CIFAR). Lileeva gratefully acknowledges funding from Statistics Canada. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2007 by Alla Lileeva and Daniel Trefler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Improved Access to Foreign Markets Raises Plant-Level Productivity ... for Some Plants
Alla Lileeva and Daniel Trefler
NBER Working Paper No. 13297
August 2007
JEL No. F1
ABSTRACT
We weigh into the debate about whether rising productivity is ever a consequence rather than a cause
of exporting. Exporting and investing to raise productivity are complimentary activities. For lower-productivity
firms, incurring the fixed costs of such investments is justifiable only if accompanied by the larger
sales volumes that come with exporting. Lower foreign tariffs will induce these firms to simultaneously
export and invest in productivity. In contrast, lower foreign tariffs will induce higher-productivity
firms to export without investing, as in Melitz (2003). We model this econometrically using a heterogeneous
response model. Unique 'plant-specific' tariff cuts serve as our instrument for the decision of Canadian
plants to start exporting to the United States. We find that those lower-productivity Canadian plants
that were induced by the tariff cuts to start exporting (a) increased their labor productivity, (b) engaged
in more product innovation, and (c) had high adoption rates of advanced manufacturing technologies.
These new exporters also increased their domestic (Canadian) market share at the expense of non-exporters,
which suggests that the labor productivity gains reflect underlying gains in TFP. In contrast, we find
no effects for higher-productivity plants, just as predicted by our complementarity theory.
Alla Lileeva
York University
1144 Vari Hall
4700 Keele Street
Toronto, Ontario M3J 1P3 Canada
lileeva@econ.yorku.ca
Daniel Trefler
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E6 CANADA
and NBER
dtrefler@rotman.utoronto.ca

Does exporting raise productivity? The seminal contributions to the topic by Clerides, Lach, and
Tybout(1998)andBernardandJensen(1999)provideaclear‘no’tothisquestion. Thesameconclu-
sion appears in many subsequent contributions, including Bernard and Wagner (1997), Delgado,
Fariñas,andRuano(2002)andBernardandJensen(2004). However,alargenumberofresearchers
have found varying degrees of support for a positive effect of exporting on productivity e.g.,
Aw, Chung, and Roberts (2000), Baldwin and Gu (2003), VanBiesebroeck (2004), Lileeva (2004),
Hallward-Driemeier, Iarossi, and Sokoloff (2005), Fernandes and Isgut (2006), Park, Yang, Shi,
and Jiang (2006), Aw, Roberts, and Winston (2007) and DeLoecker (forthcoming). Any study
examining whether starting to export raises productivity must confront two issues. First, there
is an ironclad consensus in the literature that starting to export is endogenous: more productive
plantschoosetoexport. Second,ifstartingtoexportraisesproductivity,whatarethemechanisms?
It is hard to believe that there could be large productivity gains unless firms actively engaged in
costlyproductivity-enhancinginvestmentssuchastheadoptionofadvancedmanufacturingtech-
nologies,theuseofjust-in-timeproductiontechniques,andproductrestructuring(theelimination
oflesssuccessfulproductsandtheimprovementofmoresuccessfulproducts). Whenthedecisions
to start exporting and to invest in raising productivity are both endogenous, a set of econometric
and policy issues emerge that have been ignored to date. These issues are similar to those raised
inothercontextsbyImbensandAngrist(1994),Card(2001)andHeckmanandVytlacil(2005).
The reason for linking the decisions to export and invest is that they are complimentary ac-
tivities. When a firm does not export, the productivity gains from investing raise profits only on
domestic sales. One the other hand, when a firm exports, the productivity gains from investing
raiseprofitsonbothdomesticandforeignsales. Thus,exportingraisesthereturnstoinvestingin
productivity. ThiscomplementarityappearsinEkholmandMidelfart(2005),Yeaple(2005),Bustos
(2005),AtkesonandBurstein(2006),CostantiniandMelitz(2007)andEderingtonandMcCalman
(forthcoming)whoprovideconditionsunderwhichareductionintheforeigntariffinducesfirms
tosimultaneouslyexportandinvest.
All of these papers allow for heterogeneity in initial productivity as in Melitz (2003). Produc-
tivitygainsarethenuniquelydeterminedbythefirm’sinitialproductivity. (AtkesonandBurstein
2006andCostantiniandMelitz2007areexceptions.) Inpractice,however,weobservesubstantial
heterogeneityinproductivitygainsevenafterconditioningoninitialproductivity,exporterstatus,
and the decision to invest. Stories abound of firms that fail to implement new technologies as
1

successfullyastheircompetitors—oneneedonlythinkofFordversusToyota—andthesestories
are confirmed by econometric studies e.g., Aw et al. (2007, table 6). Once one allows for two
sourcesofheterogeneity,ininitialproductivityandinproductivitygrowthfrominvesting,things
quickly become complicated. In particular, if the productivity benefits of starting to export vary
acrossfirmsthenmanyoftheparametersofinterestforpolicyarenotidentified. Forexample,the
impactofexportingonproductivity(theaveragetreatmenteffect)andtheimpactofexportingon
productivityforthosewhoexport(theeffectoftreatmentonthetreated)arenotidentified. Imbens
and Angrist (1994) show that if there is a valid instrument for exporting then what is identified
is the average productivity gains from exporting for firms that are induced to export because of the
instrument. In this study we will be able to identify the average productivity gains for Canadian
firmsthatwereinducedtoexporttotheUnitedStatesbecauseoftheU.S.tariffcutsmandatedby
theCanada-U.S.FreeTradeAgreement.
Onewayofthinkingabouttheroleofinstrumentsisintermsoftheverydifferentconclusions
drawnbyBernardandJensen(1999)fortheUnitedStatesandDeLoecker(forthcoming)forSlove-
nia. Slovenian firms likely started exporting because of improved access to the European Union
and, as a pre-requisite to joining European Union supply chains, Slovenian firms likely invested
heavily in reducing product defect rates and lowering costs. The implicit instrument — entry
into the European Union — picks off new exporters that were investing. In contrast, most U.S.
plantsfindthemselvesinadomesticmarketthatislargeenoughtojustifyinvestingevenwithout
accesstoforeignmarkets. AsBernardandJensenshowed,plantsintheirU.S.samplelikelystarted
exporting because improved productivity from previous investing pushed them past the Melitz
(2003) cut-off. These new exporters thus did not experience additional productivity gains from
startingtoexport. Theimplicitinstrument—pastproductivitygrowth—picksoffnewexporters
that started investing before exporting. More generally, different firms have different degrees of
complementarity between exporting and investing and thus have heterogeneous post-exporting
investment strategies and productivity responses. Since different instruments yield different pre-
dictions about who exports, different instruments yield different results about the relationship
betweenexporting,investingandproductivity.
ThisobservationaboutinstrumentsiscentraltoworkbyImbensandAngrist(1994),Card(2001)
and Heckman and Vytlacil (2005). It means that the policy conclusions drawn about the benefits
of starting to export will depend on the choice of instrument. It is thus surprising that not a single
2