NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
US FACULTY PATENTING:
INSIDE AND OUTSIDE THE UNIVERSITY
Jerry Thursby
Anne Fuller
Marie Thursby
Working Paper 13256
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13256
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2007
The authors gratefully acknowledge research support from the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation.
Fuller acknowledges support from the Alan and Mildred Peterson Foundation, and M. Thursby acknowledges
support from the National Science Foundation. Participants of seminars at University College London,
London Business School, the 2006 Technology Transfer Society meeting and 2006 Roundtable on
Engineering Entrepreneurship Research at Georgia Institute of Technology provided useful comments.
We thank Bhaven Sampat for providing access to his patent database. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2007 by Jerry Thursby, Anne Fuller, and Marie Thursby. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

US Faculty Patenting: Inside and Outside the University
Jerry Thursby, Anne Fuller, and Marie Thursby
NBER Working Paper No. 13256
July 2007
JEL No. L24,L26,O31,O34,O38
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the empirical anomaly that in a sample of 5811 patents on which US faculty are
listed as inventors, 26% of the patents are assigned solely to firms rather than to the faculty member's
university as is dictated by US university employment policies or the Bayh Dole Act. In this paper
we estimate a series of probability models of assignment as a function of patent characteristics, university
policy, and inventor fields in order to examine the extent to which outside assignment is nefarious
or comes from legitimate activities, such as consulting. Patents assigned to firms (whether established
or start-ups with inventor as principal) are less basic than those assigned to universities suggesting
these patents result from faculty consulting. A higher inventor share increases the likelihood of university
assignment as compared with assignment to a firm in which the inventor is a principal but it has no
effect on consulting with established firms versus assignment to the university. Faculty in the physical
sciences and engineering are more likely to assign their patents to established firms than those in biological
sciences.
Jerry Thursby Marie Thursby
Dept. of Economics College of Management
Emory University Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30322 800 West Peachtree street, NW
jthursb@emory.edu Atlanta, GA 30332-0520
and NBER
Anne Fuller marie.thursby@mgt.gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
800 W Peachtree St NW
Atlanta, Georiga 30332
anne.fuller@mgt.gatech.edu

2
1. Introduction
The role of universities in industrial innovation has long been a topic of keen interest to academ-
ics, practitioners, and policy makers. Despite extensive research, there is still much that we do not under-
stand, in large part because knowledge flows do not always leave a publicly accessible “paper trail.” In
this regard, patents are a useful tool as citations to prior patents or publications provide such a trail. Thus
much of our understanding of the impact of academic research on industrial innovation comes from the
literature on spillovers, which is based on citations to university assigned patents (e.g., Henderson et al.,
1998; Jaffe, 1989; Jaffe et al., 1993; Trajtenberg et al., 1997). The contribution of other mechanisms such
as consulting, sponsored research, and licensing has relied on the analysis of proprietary data from sur-
veys or interviews (e.g., Cohen et al., 1998; Mansfield, 1995; Mowery et al., 2001; Thursby et al., 2001;
Thursby and Thursby, 2004; Zucker and Darby, 2006). A key insight from the latter stream of research is
that faculty themselves, rather than their disembodied work, often play a critical role in university-
industry technology transfer. In this paper, we focus on faculty inventors and show that patent data, when
collected not by assignee, but by inventor, provide a more comprehensive picture of the contribution of
universities to industrial patenting than is commonly understood.
We examine a sample of 5811 US patents on which one or more of the inventors were faculty
members of 87 PhD granting departments of Research I universities at the time of patent application.
Only 62.4 percent of these patents were assigned solely to universities. This is a remarkably low percent-
age since employment contracts in US universities specify that inventions resulting from faculty research
belong to the university when university resources are used in the research. Further, the Bayh-Dole Act of
1980 allows universities to own and patent the intellectual property (IP) resulting from federally-funded
research and, in the case of industry sponsored research, US universities historically have insisted on
ownership (Thursby et al., 2001).
An immediate implication of this low percentage is that the common practice of identifying US
university patents by institutional assignment misses a surprisingly large percentage of inventive activity
by faculty in US universities. Others have found a similar phenomenon in Europe where the majority of
patents listing faculty as inventors are assigned outside the inventors’ universities (Crespi et al., 2006;
Geuna and Nesta, 2006; Saragossi and van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie, 2003). It is important to recog-
nize, however, that until recently professor privilege (faculty ownership of inventions) was common in
Europe so that inventors typically assigned patent rights to their research sponsors rather than to their uni-
versities (Geuna and Nesta 2006). This of course cannot explain the phenomenon in the US.
It is therefore important to ask why the faculty in our data assign patents outside the university.
While patents assigned outside may legitimately belong to the university, our interviews with university
technology transfer, industry personnel and faculty inventors suggest that the bulk of this assignment re-

3
sults from faculty consulting. In this paper we estimate a series of probability models of assignment as a
function of patent, university, and inventor characteristics in order to examine the extent to which outside
assignment is nefarious or comes from legitimate activities, such as consulting.
Our main regression is a multinomial logit model in which assignment can be of four types: 1) as-
signment to a university, 2) assignment to a firm in which the inventor is a principal, 3) assignment to a
firm in which the inventor is not a principal, or 4) the patent is unassigned and therefore owned by the
inventor(s). Any type of assignment other than assignment to a university can result from a number of
scenarios, some legitimate and some not. In our analysis we rely on patent characteristics to make infer-
ences in this regard. In particular, we argue that where the research is conducted determines legitimate
assignment. Since university research tends to be more basic or fundamental than industry research, we
would expect patents based on research in university labs to be more basic than those resulting from con-
sulting in firm labs. Thus if firm-assigned patents are more incremental than university-assigned patents,
we infer that they are the result of consulting. In contrast, if firm-assigned patents are similar to or more
fundamental than those assigned to universities, the inference is that they may have emanated from uni-
versity labs. In the regression analysis, we find that the patents assigned to firms are indeed more incre-
mental than those assigned to universities. Thus, our results support Thursby and Thursby’s (2005) con-
jecture that firm assignment is primarily the result of consulting. Moreover, we show that while some
firm assignments may be nefarious, simply assuming that outside assignment represents inventor circum-
vention of university policy, as do Audretsch et al. (2006) and Markman et al. (2006) can be misleading.1
From a policy perspective, one of the interesting university factors we consider is the share of
revenue from licensing that accrues to the inventor when inventions are assigned to and licensed by the
university. If, as in Jensen and Thursby (2001) and Lach and Schankerman (2004) faculty respond to fi-
nancial incentives associated with licensing, faculty would be more likely to disclose inventions to the
university the higher is their share of any revenue the university earns from licensing those inventions.
Further, in Jensen et al.’s (2006) theoretical analysis of consulting, faculty are less likely to consult the
higher is the inventor’s share of revenue. In our regression analysis, a higher inventor share increases the
likelihood of university assignment as compared with assignment to a firm in which the inventor is a
principal but it has no effect on assignment to a university versus other firms or on ownership of the pat-
ent by the inventor (unassigned patents). This suggests two possibilities. First, faculty in low share uni-
versities may be more willing to seek outside remuneration via assignment to a start-up firm in which
1 In Audretsch et al.’s (2006) survey of scientists funded by the National Cancer Institute nearly 30% of the faculty
inventors had at least one patent assigned to a firm rather than a university. Markman et al.’s (2006) study of patents
of faculty in 54 universities finds that 33% of patents are assigned outside the university. Both studies assume these
assignment involve circumvention of the university’s technology transfer office. Thursby and Thursby (2005) report
that 29% of the patents in their sample had been assigned to firms.