NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WALL STREET AND MAIN STREET:
WHAT CONTRIBUTES TO THE RISE IN THE HIGHEST INCOMES?
Steven N. Kaplan
Joshua Rauh
Working Paper 13270
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13270
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2007
University of Chicago Graduate School of Business and NBER. This research has been supported
by the Center for Research in Security Prices, the Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and
the State, and the Global Financial Markets Initiative. We are grateful to Emmanuel Saez for useful
discussions and help with tax data. We thank David Autor, Lucian Bebchuk, Austan Goolsbee, Adam
Looney, Andrew Metrick, Berk Sensoy, Amir Sufi, Robert Topel, Mike Weisbach, and seminar participants
at Berkeley, the Duke-UNC Corporate Finance Conference, Stanford, and the University of Chicago
for helpful discussions and comments. We thank Sol Garger, Cristina Iftimie, James Wang, Michael
Wong, and Jaclyn Yamada for research assistance. Address correspondence to Steven Kaplan, University
of Chicago Graduate School of Business, 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637 or e-mail
at skaplan@uchicago.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Steven N. Kaplan and Joshua Rauh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Wall Street and Main Street: What Contributes to the Rise in the Highest Incomes?
Steven N. Kaplan and Joshua Rauh
NBER Working Paper No. 13270
July 2007
JEL No. G24,G3,H24,J3,J33,M52
ABSTRACT
We consider how much of the top end of the income distribution can be attributed to four sectors --
top executives of non-financial firms (Main Street); financial service sector employees from investment
banks, hedge funds, private equity funds, and mutual funds (Wall Street); corporate lawyers; and professional
athletes and celebrities. Non-financial public company CEOs and top executives do not represent
more than 6.5% of any of the top AGI brackets (the top 0.1%, 0.01%, 0.001%, and 0.0001%). Individuals
in the Wall Street category comprise at least as high a percentage of the top AGI brackets as non-financial
executives of public companies. While the representation of top executives in the top AGI brackets
has increased from 1994 to 2004, the representation of Wall Street has likely increased even more.
While the groups we study represent a substantial portion of the top income groups, they miss a large
number of high-earning individuals. We conclude by considering how our results inform different
explanations for the increased skewness at the top end of the distribution. We argue the evidence is
most consistent with theories of superstars, skill biased technological change, greater scale and their
interaction.
Steven N. Kaplan
Graduate School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
steven.kaplan@gsb.uchicago.edu
Joshua Rauh
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jrauh@ChicagoGSB.edu

I. Introduction
It is well known that the income distribution in the United States has become increasing unequal
over the last two or three decades.1 The sources of this increased inequality, however, are not completely
understood, particularly at the very top end of the distribution. In this paper, we consider in detail how
much of the inequality today at the top end of the income distribution can be attributed to four different
sectors of the economy – top executives of non-financial firms (Main Street); financial service sector
employees from investment banks, hedge funds, private equity funds, and mutual funds (Wall Street);
lawyers; and professional athletes and celebrities.
Where possible, we estimate how those contributions have varied over time. It is well-known and
well-documented that top executive pay has increased substantially over the last twenty-five years (Hall
and Liebman (1998), Hall and Murphy (2003), Jensen et al (2004), Bebchuk and Fried (2004 and 2006)).
Those increases have generated a great deal of controversy and attention. At the same time, the financial
and legal sectors also have experienced substantial growth over the last twenty-five years both in number
of employees and the pay of those employees. As a result, those sectors also include many high income
individuals. Unlike data on the top executives of public companies, however, compensation on
investment bankers, hedge fund employees, private equity partners, and law firm partners are not
disclosed systematically.
We begin with the data in ExecuComp on compensation for top executives of public companies.
We use two measures of compensation. First, we consider realized or actual compensation that includes
options exercised during the year. While realized compensation estimates the compensation an executive
will recognize on his or her income tax return for one year, it may represent option grants from more or
less than one past year. Since income from stock options is taxed upon exercise, this provides a
reasonable measure of the employment-related compensation the executive actually reports to the IRS
that year. Second, we consider ex ante or estimated compensation that uses the estimated value of options
1 See Autor, Katz and Kearney (2005) and (2006), Dew-Becker and Gordon (2005), Piketty and Saez (2003),
(2006a), and (2006b).
1

granted that year rather than the value of options exercised. This provides a better measure of the
compensation the board expected to give the CEO that year and clearly represents just one year of
compensation.
We extrapolate the data on those companies to also include non-ExecuComp companies. We
estimate the contribution of all top executives from non-financial and financial firms to the top ends of the
distributions of adjusted gross income (AGI) from the IRS, both recently and for 1994. We consider both
total AGI and AGI excluding investment income.
We estimate that non-financial executives represent 5.25% of the top 0.01% bracket of AGI in
2004 using realized compensation. Using ex ante compensation, the non-financial executives represent
only 3.9% of the top 0.01% bracket. In both cases, top executives explain only a modest fraction of the
top 0.01% bracket. The results are similar for the top 0.001% and 0.0001% brackets.
At the same time, we find that non-financial executives represent 3.9% of the top 0.01% bracket
of AGI in 1994 using realized compensation, and 3.65% using ex ante compensation. Non-financial
executives, therefore, represent a modestly larger fraction of the very top brackets using realized
compensation, and virtually the same fraction using ex ante compensation. While top executive pay
increased substantially over the ten-year period, the increase in pay appears to explain only a modest
fraction of the increase in the top end of the AGI distribution using actual pay. Furthermore, on an ex
ante or expected basis the pay of top executives did not increase more quickly than that of other highly
paid individuals.
We then use the financial statements of publicly-traded investment banking firms (e.g., Goldman
Sachs and Morgan Stanley), and calibrated assumptions of the distribution of compensation within those
firms, to estimate the distribution of the most highly compensated people (whom we refer to as managing
directors) at those firms. We estimate that the managing directors and top executives of the top
investment banking firms comprise a larger percentage of those individuals in the top 0.01% (but a
smaller percentage in the top 0.001%) than the top executives of non-financial public companies.
2