NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MANAGERIAL OWNERSHIP DYNAMICS AND FIRM VALUE
Rüdiger Fahlenbrach
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 13202
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13202
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2007
Fahlenbrach is Assistant Professor at the Fisher College of Business, Ohio State University. Stulz
is the Everett D. Reese Chair of Banking and Monetary Economics, Fisher College of Business, Ohio
State University, and affiliated with NBER and ECGI. Fahlenbrach acknowledges financial support
from the Dice Center for Financial Research. We thank seminar participants at Boston College and
the Ohio State University as well as Cliff Holderness, Andrew Karolyi, John Persons, and Henri Servaes
for helpful comments and suggestions. We thank Carrie Pan for excellent research assistance. Address
correspondence to René M. Stulz, Fisher College of Business, The Ohio State University, 806 Fisher
Hall, Columbus, OH 43210, stulz@cob.osu.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Rüdiger Fahlenbrach and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Managerial Ownership Dynamics and Firm Value
Rüdiger Fahlenbrach and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 13202
June 2007
JEL No. G20,G32
ABSTRACT
From 1988 to 2003, the average change in managerial ownership is significantly negative every year
for American firms. The probability of large decreases in ownership is strongly increasing in contemporaneous
and past stock returns but the probability of large increases in ownership through managerial purchases
of shares is not. The relation between changes in Tobin's q and past and contemporaneous changes
in ownership depends critically on controlling for past stock returns. When controlling for past stock
returns, past large decreases in managerial ownership are unrelated to current changes in Tobin's q
but there is some evidence that past large increases in managerial ownership are positively related
to current changes in Tobin's q. Because managers sell shares when a firm's stock is performing well,
large contemporaneous decreases in managerial ownership are associated with increases in Tobin's
q. We argue that our evidence is mostly inconsistent with existing theories and propose a managerial
discretion theory of ownership consistent with our evidence.
Rüdiger Fahlenbrach
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
Department of Finance
812 Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
rudi@cob.osu.edu
René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz_1@cob.osu.edu

We examine the dynamics of managerial ownership for American firms from 1988 through
2003. We find that the average and median annual change in managerial ownership during that
period is negative. In others words, a firm’s managerial ownership is expected to decline. Further,
we show that a firm that experiences an economically significant change in ownership is
substantially more likely to experience a decline in ownership than an increase. High past and
concurrent stock returns make it significantly more likely that a firm will experience an
economically significant decrease in managerial ownership. In contrast, there is little evidence
that low past and concurrent stock returns increase the probability of large increases in
managerial ownership.
We investigate how changes in managerial ownership are related to changes in Tobin’s q,
taking into account the relation between managerial ownership and stock returns. We find no
evidence that decreases in managerial ownership are associated with decreases in Tobin’s q. In
sharp contrast to the literature that examines the relation between managerial ownership and firm
value in the cross section, we show that decreases in managerial ownership are associated with
contemporaneous increases in Tobin’s q. Further, there is some evidence that past and
contemporaneous increases in managerial ownership are correlated with increases in Tobin’s q,
so that the contemporaneous relation between changes in Tobin’s q and managerial ownership is
u-shaped. Our findings are difficult to reconcile with existing theories of managerial ownership
and with existing interpretations of the evidence on the firm value/managerial ownership relation.
We argue that a new theory of managerial ownership which emphasizes managerial discretion
and the firm’s lifecycle is required to explain our findings.
There is a considerable literature devoted to understanding the impact of managerial
ownership on firm value. Much of that research draws its inspiration from the agency literature
(e.g., Jensen and Meckling (1976), Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1988), and Stulz (1988)). In that
literature, greater managerial ownership benefits shareholders because it increases managers’
incentives to increase firm value, but when managerial ownership becomes too large, it enables
2

managers to entrench themselves, so that firm value falls as managerial ownership increases.
Because of these countervailing forces, the relation between firm value and managerial ownership
is not monotonic. We call this view the agency approach to managerial ownership.
Following Demsetz (1983) and Demsetz and Lehn (1985), many authors argue that
managerial ownership is endogenously determined. This view has led to an alternative approach,
which we call the contracting theory approach to managerial ownership. The contracting
approach posits that firms have an optimal level of managerial ownership that solves a principal-
agent problem. Shareholders set the terms of a compensation contract for management which
includes management’s ownership in the firm. If actual managerial ownership is the solution to a
contracting problem between management and shareholders and there are no adjustment costs,
firm value would always be maximized given the constraints faced by shareholders. Hence,
everything else constant, firm value could not be increased by changing managerial ownership.
There is considerable controversy as to which view is more appropriate. Recent papers
attempting to differentiate between the two views use fixed-effect models and instrumental
variables to address the problems created by the endogeneity of managerial ownership. Both
approaches have been shown to have serious limitations. Zhou (2001) shows that the fixed effects
approach has limited power because most changes in managerial ownership are small. Coles,
Lemmon, and Meschke (2006) provide examples of instrumental variable estimations in a fully
specified structural model in which the instrumental variable approach finds a relation between q
and managerial ownership when the structural model does not have such a relation. Though one
influential paper (Himmelberg, Hubbard, and Palia (1999)) suggests that focusing on ownership
changes would be useful to understand the relation between Tobin’s q and ownership, the
dynamics of managerial ownership and their relation to changes in Tobin’s q have been neglected
3