NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE WELFARE COST OF ASYMMETRIC INFORMATION:
EVIDENCE FROM THE U.K. ANNUITY MARKET
Liran Einav
Amy Finkelstein
Paul Schrimpf
Working Paper 13228
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13228
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2007
We are grateful to James Banks, Richard Blundell, Jeff Brown, Peter Diamond, Carl Emmerson, Jerry
Hausman, Jonathan Levin, Alessandro Lizzeri, Wojciech Kopczuk, Ben Olken, Casey Rothschild,
and seminar participants at the AEA 2007 annual meeting, Cowles 75th anniversary conference, Chicago,
Hoover, Institute for Fiscal Studies, MIT, Stanford, Washington University, and Wharton for helpful
comments, and to several patient and helpful employees at the firm whose data we analyze. Financial
support from the National Institute of Aging (Finkelstein), the National Science Foundation (Einav),
and the Social Security Administration is greatfully acknowledged. Einav also acknowledges the hospitality
of the Hoover Institution. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Paul Schrimpf. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Welfare Cost of Asymmetric Information: Evidence from the U.K. Annuity Market
Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Paul Schrimpf
NBER Working Paper No. 13228
July 2007
JEL No. C13,C51,D14,D60,D82
ABSTRACT
Much of the extensive empirical literature on insurance markets has focused on whether adverse selection
can be detected. Once detected, however, there has been little attempt to quantify its importance. We
start by showing theoretically that the efficiency cost of adverse selection cannot be inferred from
reduced form evidence of how "adversely selected" an insurance market appears to be. Instead, an
explicit model of insurance contract choice is required. We develop and estimate such a model in the
context of the U.K. annuity market. The model allows for private information about risk type (mortality)
as well as heterogeneity in preferences over different contract options. We focus on the choice of length
of guarantee among individuals who are required to buy annuities. The results suggest that asymmetric
information along the guarantee margin reduces welfare relative to a first-best, symmetric information
benchmark by about £127 million per year, or about 2 percent of annual premiums. We also find that
government mandates, the canonical solution to adverse selection problems, do not necessarily improve
on the asymmetric information equilibrium. Depending on the contract mandated, mandates could
reduce welfare by as much as £107 million annually, or increase it by as much as £127 million. Since
determining which mandates would be welfare improving is empirically difficult, our findings suggest
that achieving welfare gains through mandatory social insurance may be harder in practice than simple
theory may suggest.
Liran Einav Paul Schrimpf
Stanford University Department of Economics
Department of Economics MIT
579 Serra Mall 50 Memorial Drive
Stanford, CA 94305-6072 Cambridge MA 02142
and NBER paul_s@mit.edu
leinav@stanford.edu
Amy Finkelstein
Department of Economics
MIT E52-350
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge MA 02142
and NBER
afink@mit.edu

1 Introduction
Ever since the seminal works of Akerlof (1970) and Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976), a rich theoret-
ical literature has emphasized the negative welfare consequences of adverse selection in insurance
markets and the potential for welfare-improving government intervention. More recently, a grow-
ing empirical literature has developed ways to detect whether asymmetric information exists in
particular insurance markets (Chiappori and Salanie, 2000; Finkelstein and McGarry, 2006). Once
adverse selection is detected, however, there has been no attempt to estimate the magnitude of its
e¢ ciency costs, or to compare welfare in the asymmetric information equilibrium to what would
be achieved by potential government interventions. Motivated by this, the paper develops an em-
pirical approach that can quantify the e¢ ciency cost of asymmetric information and the welfare
consequences of government intervention in an insurance market. We apply our approach to a
particular market in which adverse selection has been detected, the market for annuities in the
United Kingdom.
We begin by establishing a general “impossibility”result that is not speci…c to our application.
We show that even when asymmetric information is known to exist, the reduced form equilibrium
relationship between insurance coverage and risk occurrence does not permit inference about the
magnitude of the e¢ ciency cost of this asymmetric information. Relatedly, the reduced form is
not su¢ cient to determine whether mandatory social insurance could improve welfare, or what
type of mandate would do so. Such inferences require knowledge of the risk type and preferences
of individuals receiving di¤erent insurance allocations in the private market equilibrium. These
results motivate the more structural approach that we take in the rest of the paper.
Our approach uses insurance company data on individual insurance choices and ex-post risk
experience, and it relies on the ability to recover the joint distribution of (unobserved) risk type
and preferences of consumers. This joint distribution allows us to compute welfare at the observed
allocation, as well as to compute allocations and welfare for counterfactual scenarios. We compare
welfareundertheobservedasymmetricinformationallocationtowhatwouldbeachievedunderthe
…rst-best, symmetric information benchmark; this comparison provides our measure of the welfare
cost of asymmetric information. We also compare equilibrium welfare to what would be obtained
undermandatorysocialinsuranceprograms; thiscomparisonshedslightonthepotentialforwelfare
improving government intervention.
Mandatory social insurance is the canonical solution to the problem of adverse selection in
insurance markets (e.g., Akerlof, 1970). Yet, as emphasized by Feldstein (2005) among others,
mandates are not necessarily welfare improving when individuals di¤er in their preferences. When
individuals di¤er in both their preferences and their (privately known) risk types, mandates may
involve a trade-o¤between the allocative ine¢ ciency produced by adverse selection and the alloca-
tive ine¢ ciency produced by the elimination of self-selection. Whether and which mandates can
increase welfare thus becomes an empirical question.
We apply our approach to the semi-compulsory market for annuities in the United Kingdom.
Individuals who have accumulated savings in tax-preferred retirement saving accounts (the equiva-
1

lents of IRA or 401(k) in the United States) are required to annuitize their accumulated lump sum
balances at retirement. These annuity contracts provide a life-contingent stream of payments. As a
result of these requirements, there is a sizable volume in the market. In 1998, new funds annuitized
in this market totalled $6 billion (Association of British Insurers, 1999).
Although they are required to annuitize their balances, individuals are allowed choice in their
annuity contract. In particular, they can choose from among guarantee periods of 0, 5, or 10
years. During a guarantee period, annuity payments are made (to the annuitant or to his estate)
regardless of the annuitant’s survival. All else equal, a guarantee period reduces the amount of
mortality-contingent payments in the annuity and, as a result, the e¤ective amount of insurance.
In the extreme, a 65 year old who purchases a 50 year guaranteed annuity has in essence purchased
a bond with deterministic payments. Presumably for this reason, individuals in this market are
restricted from purchasing a guarantee of more than 10 years.
The pension annuity market provides a particularly interesting setting in which to explore
the welfare costs of asymmetric information and of potential government intervention. Annuity
markets have attracted increasing attention and interest as Social Security reform proposals have
been advanced in various countries. Some proposals call for partly or fully replacing government-
provided de…ned bene…t, pay-as-you-go retirement systems with de…ned contribution systems in
which individuals would accumulate assets in individual accounts. In such systems, an important
question concerns whether the government would require individuals to annuitize some or all of
their balance, and whether it would allow choice over the type of annuity product purchased.
The relative attractiveness of these various options depends critically on consumer welfare in each
alternative equilibrium.
In addition to their substantive interest, several features of annuities make them a particularly
attractive setting in which to operationalize our framework. First, adverse selection has already
been detected and documented in this market along the choice of guarantee period, with pri-
vate information about longevity a¤ecting both the choice of contract and its price in equilibrium
(Finkelstein and Poterba, 2004 and 2006). Second, annuities are relatively simple and clearly de-
…ned contracts, so modeling the contract choice requires less abstraction than in other insurance
settings. Third, the case for moral hazard in annuities is arguably substantially less compelling
than for other forms of insurance; our ability to assume away moral hazard substantially simpli…es
the empirical analysis.
Our empirical object of interest is the joint distribution of risk and preferences. To estimate
it, we rely on two key modeling assumptions. First, to recover risk types (which in the context
of annuities means mortality types), we make a distributional assumption that mortality follows a
Gompertz distribution at the individual level. Individuals’mortality tracks their own individual-
speci…c mortality rates, allowing us to recover the extent of heterogeneity in (ex-ante) mortality
rates from (ex-post) information about mortality realization. Second, to recover preferences, we
use a standard dynamic model of consumption by retirees. We assume that retirees know their
(ex-ante) mortality type, which governs their stochastic time of death. This model allows us to
evaluate the (ex-ante) value-maximizing choice of a guarantee period. A longer guarantee period,
2