NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OPTIMAL RESERVE MANAGEMENT AND SOVEREIGN DEBT
Laura Alfaro
Fabio Kanczuk
Working Paper 13216
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13216
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2007
We thank Joshua Aizenman, Manuel Amador, Jaewoo Lee, Enrique Mendoza, Julio Rotemberg, two
anonymous referees and participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco’s Annual Pacific
Basin Conference and University of São Paulo for valuable comments and suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Laura Alfaro and Fabio Kanczuk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Optimal Reserve Management and Sovereign Debt
Laura Alfaro and Fabio Kanczuk
NBER Working Paper No. 13216
July 2007, Revised October 2008
JEL No. F32,F33,F34,F4
ABSTRACT
To study the joint decision of holding sovereign debt and reserves, we construct a stochastic dynamic
equilibrium model that incorporates willingness-to-pay incentive problems. In this setup, debt and
assets are not perfect substitutes, as reserves can be used even after a country has defaulted. We calibrate
the model to a sample of emerging markets. We obtain that the reserve accumulation does not play
a quantitatively important role in this model. In fact, the optimal policy is not to hold reserves at all.
This finding is robust to considering interest rate shocks, sudden stops, contingent reserves and reserve
dependent output costs.
Laura Alfaro
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 263
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
lalfaro@hbs.edu
Fabio Kanczuk
University of São Paulo
R. Dr Alberto Cardoso de Melo Neto 110/131A
Sao Paulo-S.P.-CEP 01455-100
BRAZIL
kanczuk@usp.br

1 Introduction
There is a renewed interest in policy and academic circles about the optimal level of foreign
reserves sovereign countries should hold. This recent interest follows the rapid rise in international reserves
held by developing countries. In 2006, for example, reserve accumulation amounted to 20% of GDP in low-
and middle-income countries; whereas this number was close to 5% in high-income countries. The increase
in reserve assets is not exclusive of China or the East Asian countries; it has become widespread
phenomenon among emerging markets, including countries that hold a large amount of external debt (see
Figure 1). This practice has raised interesting questions in the literature regarding the cost and benefits of
reserve accumulation. The cost of holding reserves has been estimated at close to 1% of GDP for all
developing countries (Rodrik 2006).1 Against this cost, an explanation commonly advanced is that countries
may have accumulated reserves as an insurance mechanism against the risk of an external crisis—self
protection through increased liquidity.2
Recently, researchers have undertaken the task of writing analytical models to characterize and
quantify the optimal level of reserves and provide policy advice to countries.3 Most of the formal models
used in the current analysis tend to take the level of international debt as given and solve for the optimal
liquidity-insurance services that reserves can provide. In other words, the recent literature has set aside the
joint decision of holding sovereign debt and reserves. Although this strategy has allowed for a better
understanding of the interplay between foreign reserves and a sovereign’s access to international markets,
there are several concerns with this approach. First, some of the implications of this assumption may not be
generalized once one considers the joint decision by a sovereign to hold foreign debt and reserves. For
example, in models a la Eaton and Gersovitz (1981), international debt serves an “insurance” role. That is,
1 Rodrik (2006) estimates the cost of reserves as the spread between the private sector’s cost of short-term borrowing
abroad and the yield the Central Bank earns on its liquid foreign assets.
2 For policy advice in this direction, see Feldstein (1999) and Caballero (2003). The “Greensan-Guidotti-IMF” rule
proposes full coverage of short-term external liabilities to mitigate the risk of currency crises.
3 See for example Aizenman and Lee (2005), Aizenman and Marion (2003), Caballero and Panageas (2005), Jeanne
(2007), and Lee (2004).
2

the demand for international loans derives from a desire to smooth consumption. Given the sovereign’s
willingness-to-pay incentive problems, additional reserves in these types of models tend to reduce
sustainable debt levels.4 Second, the strategy of assuming constant debt levels does not address one of the
puzzles behind the current accumulation of reserves. Sovereign countries have an alternative way of
reducing the probability and negative effects of external crisis: to reduce the level of sovereign debt. That is,
even in the case where reserve accumulation has positive liquidity benefits in terms of reducing the
probability of suffering financial crises and the output costs associated with it, a similar net asset position
can be obtained by reducing instead the level of foreign debt.5
In this paper, we address these concerns by incorporating debt sustainability issues into the optimal
reserve management analysis. Our main objective is to study the implications of the joint decision of
holding sovereign debt and reserves. We construct a stochastic dynamic equilibrium model of a small open
economy with non contingent debt and reserve assets. Our starting setup is a model a la Eaton-Gersovitz and
similar to Arellano (2008) and Aguiar and Gopinath (2006), but where the sovereign has the choice to hold
reserves. In this setup, debt and assets are not perfect substitutes, as reserves can be used even after a
country has defaulted. In other words, both defaultable debt and reserves are means to smooth consumption.
We assess the quantitative implication of the model by calibrating a sample of emerging markets. We obtain
that reserve accumulation does not play a quantitatively important role in the model. In fact, a robust result
that emerges from our numerical exercises is that the optimal policy is not to accumulate reserves.6
We extend the model in several ways. Most of the recent papers advancing the insurance motive
4 The cost to a sovereign of the denial of foreign credit is that the country must resort to other methods for consumption
smoothing (such as building stock piles) or it must accept a greater fluctuation in its consumption. This penalty and
hence the sustainable levels of foreign debt are higher the greater the cost to the borrower of exclusion. This cost in
turn is higher the more limited domestically available options for smoothing consumption are and the lower the cost of
smoothing via the international capital markets is (i.e., the lower the world interest rate); see Eaton et al. (1986).
5 Rodrik (2006) mentions that countries could choose instead to reduce short-term debt in order to gain liquidity. More
generally, countries can reduce foreign debt.
6 We perform several exercises exploring the robustness of the result; see section 4.
3