NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FERTILITY AND THE REAL EXCHANGE RATE
Andrew K. Rose
Saktiandi Supaat
Working Paper 13263
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13263
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2007
We thank: Edward Robinson for encouragement, Lau Wei Ling for data assistance, Ralph Bryant,
Pär Österholm and participants at a MAS workshop for comments. Rose thanks the Monetary Authority
of Singapore and the National University of Singapore for hospitality during the course of this research.
The views expressed below do not necessarily represent those of the Monetary Authority of Singapore
or the National Bureau of Economic Research. A current version of this paper, key output, and the
main STATA data set used in the paper are available at http://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/arose.
© 2007 by Andrew K. Rose and Saktiandi Supaat. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Fertility and the Real Exchange Rate
Andrew K. Rose and Saktiandi Supaat
NBER Working Paper No. 13263
July 2007
JEL No. F32,J13
ABSTRACT
We use a quinquennial data set covering 87 countries between 1975 and 2005 to investigate the relationship
between fertility and the real effective exchange rate. Theoretically a country experiencing a decline
in its fertility rate can be expected to have higher savings, lower investment, a current account surplus,
and accordingly a real depreciation. We test and confirm this hypothesis, controlling for a host of
potential determinants such as PPP deviations and the Balassa-Samuelson effect. We find a statistically
significant and robust link between fertility and the exchange rate. Our point-estimate is that a decline
in the fertility rate of one child per woman is associated with a depreciation of approximately .15%
in the real effective exchange rate.
Andrew K. Rose
Haas School of Business Administration
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
arose@haas.berkeley.edu
Saktiandi Supaat
Monetary Authority of Singapore
10 Shenton Way
Singapore 079117
saktiandi@mas.gov.sg

1. Introduction
Massive demographic changes are in play across the world. UN data show that average
world life expectancy rose from 59.9 years in 1975-1980 to 65.4 just twenty-five years later, an
increase of 9.2%. Even more dramatically, the fertility rate (average births per woman) fell from
3.92 to 2.65 during the same period of time, a larger change of some 48%. This paper is
concerned with the consequences of such demographic issues for international finance. In
particular, we ask “What effect does the fertility rate have on the real exchange rate?”
The theoretical linkage between the fertility rate and the real exchange rate seems
intuitive. Suppose the fertility rate declines for some exogenous reason (e.g., an improvement in
female education or a decrease in the cost of contraception). Life-Cycle theory argues that child-
rearing is associated with increased consumption and thus reduced savings (children tend to
consume more than they produce); a drop in fertility can be expected to raise savings.
Investment may also drop if there is a decline in the future equilibrium capital stock resulting
from a smaller populace. If savings rise and investment falls, the current account improves and a
real depreciation of the exchange rate is part of the equilibrium response to an exogenous decline
in fertility. This much seems straightforward (though there is dispute; more on this below).
However, as with so many theories concerning exchange rates, the real question is whether these
theoretical implications are borne out empirically or remain blurred by a myriad of other factors.
This paper is an exploratory data analysis of the linkage between fertility and the exchange rate.
We gather a broad long panel of data that covers 87 countries between 1975 and 2005, a
sample of great demographic change and cross-country heterogeneity. Unlike many theoretical
predictions for exchange rates, ours seems borne out by the data. We find a strong link between
the real effective exchange rate and the fertility rate. We use fixed-effects panel methods, and
1

account for a number of other reasons why exchange rates adjust, including deviations from
Purchasing Power Parity, the Balassa-Samuelson effect, the effects of trade liberalization,
government spending, net foreign assets, and so on. Yet we still find that a 1-point decline in the
fertility rate is associated with a real effective depreciation of around .15%. This result seems
sensible and plausible; it is also quite robust.
In section 2 we provide a brief survey of the literature; this section can be skipped
without loss. Our data set and methodology are presented in section 3, while section 4 contains
our key results. Section 5 presents extensive sensitivity analysis, followed by a brief
examination of other demographic phenomena. The paper closes with a brief conclusion.
2. Quick Survey of the Literature
Most research that studies the macroeconomic effects of demographic change is
concerned with these phenomena at a national level. For instance, there is a lively debate
concerning the implications of demographic shifts for stock and bond returns; see, e.g., Poterba
(2004). Nevertheless, a strand of the literature has developed recently that is concerned with the
implications of demographic changes for the global economy. Two recent references of value
are FRB Kansas City (2004) and Reserve Bank of Australia (2006); see also the excellent survey
by Bosworth et al (2004).
It seems unnecessary to develop another theoretical model to link fertility to savings,
investment, and the real exchange rate, since these interactions have been well explored in the
literature. For instance, Higgins and Williamson (1996) use an overlapping generations model of
growth to explore the impact of demographics on savings and the macroeconomy. Their model
is entirely conventional except that instead of two it has three periods of life (youth, prime-age,
2