NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIQUIDITY AND TRADING DYNAMICS
Veronica Guerrieri
Guido Lorenzoni
Working Paper 13204
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13204
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2007
We thank for helpful comments Daron Acemoglu, Fernando Alvarez, Marios Angeletos, Boragan
Aruoba, Gabriele Camera, Ricardo Cavalcanti, Chris Edmond, Ricardo Lagos, Robert Lucas, David
Marshall, Robert Shimer, Nancy Stokey, Christopher Waller, Ivàn Werning, Randall Wright, and seminar
participants at MIT, Cleveland Fed (Summer Workshop on Money, Banking, and Payments), University
of Maryland, University of Notre Dame, Bank of Italy, AEA Meetings (Chicago), Chicago Fed, Stanford
University, the Philadelphia Fed Monetary Macro Workshop, UCLA, San Francisco Fed, St. Louis
Fed, and University of Chicago GSB. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Veronica Guerrieri and Guido Lorenzoni. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Liquidity and Trading Dynamics
Veronica Guerrieri and Guido Lorenzoni
NBER Working Paper No. 13204
June 2007
JEL No. D83,E41,E44
ABSTRACT
How do financial frictions affect the response of an economy to aggregate shocks? In this paper, we
address this question, focusing on liquidity constraints and uninsurable idiosyncratic risk. We consider
a search model where agents use liquid assets to smooth individual income shocks. We show that the
response of this economy to aggregate shocks depends on the rate of return on liquid assets. In economies
where liquid assets pay a low return, agents hold smaller liquid reserves and the response of the economy
tends to be larger. In this case, agents expect to be liquidity constrained and, due to a self-insurance
motive, their consumption decisions are more sensitive to changes in expected income. On the other
hand, in economies where liquid assets pay a large return, agents hold larger reserves and their consumption
decisions are more insulated from income uncertainty. Therefore, aggregate shocks tend to have larger
effects if liquid assets pay a lower rate of return.
Veronica Guerrieri
University of Chicago
GSB
vguerrie@chicagogsb.edu
Guido Lorenzoni
MIT Department of Economics
E52-251C
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
glorenzo@mit.edu

1 Introduction
In times of economic distress, the demand for liquid assets typically increases. Facing the
prospect of temporary shortfalls in revenues, agents tend to hold on to their reserves of cash,
government bonds, and other safe assets as a form of self-insurance. An observation consistent
with this type of behavior is that the precautionary motive in consumption decisions is coun-
tercyclical.1 A further symptom of a countercyclical demand for liquidity can be identified in
thepathofseveralmeasuresofliquiditypremia.2 Inextremeepisodes, suchasfinancialmarket
crises, this type of behavior takes the form of an outright “flight to liquidity.” What are the
aggregate implications of a countercyclical demand for liquidity? Can it amplify the response
ofeconomicactivitytoexogenousshocks? Inthispaper,weexplorethesequestionsinageneral
equilibrium model with a single liquid asset and decentralized production and exchange. We
find that the answer depends on the total supply of liquid assets. In economies where liquid
assets are relatively abundant, a negative aggregate shock leads to a mechanical reduction in
activity, butthereisnoadditional effectduetotheagents’ self-insurancemotive. Ineconomies
where, instead, liquid assets are relatively scarce, the aggregate shock has a magnified effect
on the economy, as agents reduce their consumption in an attempt to protect their reserves.
Our amplification mechanism is driven by a form of complementarity in trading decisions.
An agent is less willing to spend his liquid assets when he expects other agents to spend less.
This happens because, in that case, it is harder for him to rebuild his reserves by selling goods
to other agents. The idea that “the difficulty of coordination of trade” may contribute to
aggregate volatility goes back, at least, to Diamond (1982, 1984). The contribution of our
paper is to show that the presence of this coordination problem depends in a crucial way on
the supply of liquid assets. In particular, when they are relatively abundant, the coordination
element vanishes.
We consider a model of decentralized trade in the tradition of search models of money.
There is a large number of households, each with one consumer and one producer. Consumers
and producers from different households meet and trade in spatially separated islands. In each
island the gains from trade are determined by a local productivity shock. Agents make their
trading decisions (consumption and production) without observing the shock realized in the
island visited by their partners. Our focus is on whether trading decisions in a given island
1See Parker and Preston (2005).
2See Krishnamurthy (2002) and Longstaff (2004) and papers reviewed in Cochrane (2005).
1

are affected by agents’ expectations regarding the level of trading in other islands. This is the
sense in which there is a “coordination problem” in our model.
Agents are anonymous and, thus, credit arrangements are not feasible. The government
issuesafixedsupplyofinterest-bearingnotes, “money,”whichareusedfortransactions. These
notes pay a constant interest rate which is financed by lump-sum taxation. As we will see,
the equilibrium value of real money balances is an increasing function of the rate of return
chosen by the government. Therefore, a regime with a high rate of return, is labeled a regime
of “abundant liquidity,” while one with a low rate of return is one of “scarce liquidity.” To
derive our main analytical results, we focus on two extreme cases. In the first one, the rate of
return is equal to the inverse of the agents’ discount factor. This is a “Friedman rule” regime
and, in this case, real balances are large and the economy achieves the first-best allocation. In
the second one, the rate of return and the value of real balances are so low that agents expect
to be liquidity constrained for any realization of the idiosyncratic shocks. We refer to this case
as a “fully constrained” regime.
OurfirstresultisthatundertheFriedmanrulethequantitytradedineachislandisindepen-
dent of what happens in other islands. This result follows from an assumption of separability
in preferences and from the fact that, in the Friedman rule regime, agents are fully insured
against idiosyncratic shocks. This makes the marginal value of money constant, allowing the
consumer and the producer from the same household to make their trading decisions indepen-
dently. Away from the Friedman rule, instead, the decisions of the two agents are linked. The
consumer needs to forecast the earnings of the producer to evaluate the household’s marginal
value of money, while the producer needs to forecast the consumer’s outlays.
Next, we look at the aggregate implications of these “linkages.” We consider an aggregate
shock which shifts the distribution of island-specific productivities, reducing the probability of
low realizations and increasing that of high realizations (a first-order stochastic increase). The
aggregate shock is publicly observed. Under both regimes, there is a positive compositional
effect: as more islands have high productivity, aggregate output increases. However, in the
Friedman rule regime, there is no feedback from this aggregate increase in output to the level
of trading in an island with a given local shock. In the fully constrained regime, instead,
the linkage between the trading decisions in different islands generates an additional effect on
trading and output. A good aggregate shock increases the probability of high earnings for the
producer. This induces the consumer to increase spending and reduce the household’s liquid
2