NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT AND THE EUROPEAN STABILITY AND GROWTH
PACT
Marco Bassetto
Vadym Lepetyuk
Working Paper 13200
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13200
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2007
We thank Gadi Barlevy, Mariacristina De Nardi, Craig Furfine, Leslie McGranahan, and Benoît Mojon
for useful comments, Anna Lööf for help with the data, and the National Science Foundation for its
support through grant #0419771. This paper was prepared for Economic Perspectives, a publication
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago or the Federal Reserve System. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Marco Bassetto and Vadym Lepetyuk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Government Investment and the European Stability and Growth Pact
Marco Bassetto and Vadym Lepetyuk
NBER Working Paper No. 13200
June 2007, Revised August 2007
JEL No. D61,E62,H41,H54,H62
ABSTRACT
We consider the effect of excluding government investment from the deficit subject to the limits of
the European Stability and Growth Pact. In the model we consider, residents of a given country discount
future costs and benefits of government spending more than efficiency would dictate, because they
fail to take into account the portion that will accrue to people that have not yet been born or immigrated
into the country. It is thus in principle desirable to design budget rules that favor long-term investment
(by allowing more borrowing) over other government spending that only carries short-term benefits.
However, given the low rates of population growth, mortality, and mobility across European countries,
we find that the distortions arising from treating all government spending equally are likely to be modest.
We also show that these modest distortions can be alleviated only if net government investment is
excluded from the deficit computation; excluding gross investment may even be counterproductive,
as it promotes overspending in government capital.
Marco Bassetto
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 S. LaSalle Street
Chicago, IL 60604
and NBER
mbassetto@frbchi.org
Vadym Lepetyuk
Department of Economics, University of Minnesota
271 19th Ave S
Minneapolis, MN 55455
lepetyuk@econ.umn.edu

1 Introduction
The European Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) is one of the most controversial pieces of the
institutionalreformsthatledtotheEuropeanMonetaryUnion. Thepactstemsfromtheconcern
that fiscal profligacy in some of the member countries would adversely affect all the others by
undermining the independence of the European Central Bank or by generating instability in the
Eurobond market at large. The SGP was adopted in 1997 to strengthen the provisions of the
Maastricht treaty, and to ensure that the fiscal discipline required for entering into the European
Currency Union would have to be maintained even after the adoption of the new currency.
The key provision of the SGP is a cap of 3 percent on the general government deficit to GDP
ratio that each country is allowed to run in any given year. In its original form, the Pact set the
cap to be independent of the mix of government spending (whether transfers, recurrent expenses,
investment, or interest payments), and allowed for exceptions only in case of an unusual event
outside of the state’s control, or a severe recession.1 From the outset, many criticized the SGP as
imposing a straightjacket on fiscal authorities. In this article, we address a specific criticism: the
argument in favor of special treatment for public investment (see e.g. Blanchard and Giavazzi [7],
Buiter [8], and Monti [18]). The argument starts from the premise that the fiscal authorities have
a bias toward projects that yield immediate gains and postpone the costs. Therefore, applying
the 3 percent cap to both investment and other expenses would lead governments to neglect
their historical role as providers of major infrastructure (such as roads, airports, and schools) in
favor of spending that yields more immediate but less long-lasting benefits (for example, social
insurance or crime prevention). According to this view, appropriate incentives could be restored
if some of the costs of public investment were postponed as well. This would require more
borrowing to pay for public investment than to pay for other expenses.
The notion that public investment ought to be treated differently from other government
expenses is far from new. In fact, the prescription that the government should only be allowed to
borrowtopayforpublicinvestmentisknowninpublicfinanceasthe“goldenrule.”Manynational
governments adopted this rule in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries (see, for example, the
1The pact defines an economic downturn as severe if there is an annual fall of real GDP of at least 2 percent.
1

quotations in Bassetto with Sargent [4]),2 but the rule fell out of favor at the national level
in the twentieth century, and very few countries adopt it nowadays (Germany being a notable
exception). By contrast, this rule approximates well the behavior of most U.S. states: almost all
of the states’ constitutions provide for very strict borrowing limits, but many allow significant
borrowing for public investment (National Association of State Budget Officers [19]).
In recent years, many countries have struggled to meet the strict deficit cap imposed by the
SGP. When the core countries of France and Germany failed to meet it in 2002, 2003, and 2004,
it became clear that the pact was unenforceable, at least in its original form. The pact was
reformed in 2005.3 This reform explicitly acknowledged the role of public investment as well as
“policies to foster research and development and innovation” (European Council on the Stability
and Growth Pact, [14], article 1). Such expenses are cited as one of the factors that should be
taken into account in evaluating whether a deficit is truly excessive.
In this article, we analyze one rationale for the adoption of the golden rule: the conflict
that arises among different generations when the current government policy has the potential
to provide both benefits (through investment) and costs (through borrowing) to future, unborn
cohorts. Giventhelowratesofpopulationgrowth, mobility, andmortalityinEuropeancountries,
we find that including or excluding public investment from the computation of the deficit ceiling
has only moderate implications for the allocation chosen by current generations. We also find
that the distinction between excluding gross or net investment from the computation of the
deficit is relevant.
In section 2 we describe the model we use to analyze efficiency of the government spending
mix. This model is based upon a paper by Bassetto with Sargent [5] that analyzed the same
issue in the context of the U.S. federal and state governments. In section 3 we discuss the data
that we use to calibrate the key parameters of the model, with particular attention to mobility.
2Most of the early provisions distinguished between “extraordinary” and “ordinary” expenses, rather than
between public improvements and other expenses. This distinction is relevant, since the largest extraordinary
expenses were wars, rather than major infrastructures.
3These reforms are widely considered to have significantly watered down the pact (see, for example, Calm-
fors [9]), by giving leeway to postpone sanctions under a wide array of attenuating circumstances.
2