NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DIFFERENCES IN GOVERNANCE PRACTICES BETWEEN U.S. AND FOREIGN FIRMS:
MEASUREMENT, CAUSES, AND CONSEQUENCES
Reena Aggarwal
Isil Erel
René Stulz
Rohan Williamson
Working Paper 13288
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13288
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2007
We are grateful for comments from Marcus Caylor, Art Durnev, Mara Faccio, Allen Ferrell, Wayne
Guay, David Hirshleifer, Jon Karpoff, Christo Karuna, Pedro Matos, Antoinette Schoar, Jérôme Taillard,
Marc Weinstein, and Marc Zenner. We thank participants at seminars at Case Western Reserve University,
McMaster University, MIT, Northeastern University, Queens University, the University of California
at Irvine, the University of Iowa, the University of South Florida, and the University of Southern California,
as well as participants at the NYSE/World Bank/University of Virginia Conference on Emerging Markets,
the Wharton Conference on Corporate Governance and Globalization, and the 2007 Western Finance
Association Meetings. We are grateful to Javier Ayala for research assistance. An earlier version of
the paper was circulated under the title, "Do U.S. firms have the best corporate governance? A cross-country
examination of the relation between corporate governance and shareholder wealth". The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2007 by Reena Aggarwal, Isil Erel, René Stulz, and Rohan Williamson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Differences in Governance Practices between U.S. and Foreign Firms: Measurement, Causes,
and Consequences
Reena Aggarwal, Isil Erel, René Stulz, and Rohan Williamson
NBER Working Paper No. 13288
August 2007
JEL No. G30,G32,G34,G38,K22
ABSTRACT
Using an index which increases as a firm adopts more governance attributes, we find that 12.7% of
foreign firms have a higher index than matching U.S. firms. The best predictor for whether a foreign
firm adopts more governance attributes than a comparable U.S. firm is whether the firm comes from
a common law country. We show that the value of foreign firms is negatively related to the difference
between their governance index and the index of matching U.S. firms. This relation is robust to various
approaches to control for the endogeneity of corporate governance and is consistent with the hypothesis
that foreign firms are valued less because country characteristics make it suboptimal for them to invest
as much in governance as comparable U.S. firms. Overall, our evidence suggests that firm-level governance
attributes are complementary to rather than substitutes for country-level investor protection, so that
better country-level investor protection makes it optimal for firms to invest more in internal governance.
Our evidence supports the view that minority shareholders of a typical foreign firm would benefit
from an increase in investment in governance, but that the firm's controlling shareholder and possibly
other stakeholders would not.
Reena Aggarwal René Stulz
Georgetown University The Ohio State University
Finance Group Fisher College of Business
McDonough School of Business 806A Fisher Hall
G 04, Old North 2100 Neil Avenue
Washington, DC 20057 Columbus, OH 43210-1144
aggarwal@georgetown.edu and NBER
stulz_1@cob.osu.edu
Isil Erel
Department of Finance Rohan Williamson
The Ohio State University Georgetown University
832 Fisher Hall Finance Group
2100 Neil Avenue McDonough School of Business
Columbus, OH 43210 G 04 Old North
erel_1@cob.osu.edu Washington, DC 20057
WILLIARG@georgetown.edu

Differences in Governance Practices between U.S. and Foreign Firms:
Measurement, Causes, and Consequences
Using the well-known definition of Shleifer and Vishny (1997), governance consists of the
mechanisms which insure that shareholders receive a return on their investment. Governance depends
both on country-level as well as firm-level mechanisms. The country-level governance mechanisms
include a country’s laws, its culture and norms, and the institutions which enforce the laws. Firm-level or
internal governance mechanisms are the mechanisms that operate within the firm. Firm-level governance
mechanisms are costly, so that the adoption of internal governance mechanisms or attributes by a firm is
an investment, and the payoffs from that investment differ across countries and across firms (see, e.g.,
Doidge, Karolyi and Stulz (2007), Fulghieri and Suominen (2006), John and Kedia (2006)).
The U.S. is recognized to have extremely high financial and economic development, to have strong
investor protection, and to protect property rights well. On theoretical grounds, it is not clear whether the
characteristics of the U.S. make firm-level investment in governance more or less advantageous for U.S.
firms relative to firms from countries which do not have the same high level of development and investor
protection as the U.S. One possibility is that foreign firms would invest less in firm-level governance if
they were in the U.S. because firm-level governance and country-level investor protection are substitutes.
An alternative possibility is that investment in firm-level governance is less productive in countries with
poor economic development and weak investor protection than it is in the U.S., so that firm-level
governance and investor protection are complements. Though there is a considerable literature that
compares the quality of institutions across countries, there is no systematic comparison of firm-level
investment in governance between the U.S. and foreign countries and furthermore there is no
investigation of whether differences in firm-level governance between foreign firms and comparable U.S.
firms have implications for the valuation of foreign firms.
We find strong evidence that foreign firms invest less in governance than comparable U.S. firms, so
that investment in firm-level governance is higher when a country becomes more economically and
financially developed and better protects investor rights. Further, to the extent that institutional and
2

development weaknesses reduce a foreign firm’s investment in corporate governance compared to a U.S.
firm, we would expect the value of the foreign firm to be lower. As expected, we find that the value of
foreign firms measured by Tobin’s q is negatively related to the size of their governance investment
shortfall relative to U.S. firms.
To conduct our investigation, we need information about firm-level corporate governance attributes
for a large number of firms across a large number of countries. Further, we would like measures of
individual governance attributes to be computed in the same way across all these firms. Two widely
known governance rankings include both U.S. and foreign firms. One of these two rankings, the Standard
and Poor's ranking, focuses on disclosure. The other one, produced by Institutional Shareholder Services
(ISS), uses a comprehensive inventory of governance attributes. We use the ISS governance attributes in
this paper. By doing so, we can analyze 44 common governance attributes for 2,234 non-U.S. firms and
5,296 U.S. firms covering 23 developed countries. To compare firm-level governance across the U.S. and
foreign countries, we have to create our own index making sure that the governance attributes included
are relevant both for U.S. firms and foreign firms. We call it the GOV Index. One can reasonably disagree
both with the governance attributes ISS focuses on and with the index we compute. It is obviously true, as
Jack and Suzy Welch argue, that “Good governance comes down to a lot more than a point system.”1
However, if the index were to convey no information, we would simply find that the index we use is not
related to firm value.
The GOV index satisfies our requirement of providing a firm-level governance measure that is
comparable across countries. To evaluate the governance a foreign firm would have if it were in the U.S.,
we use a propensity score matching method and show that foreign firms generally have a lower GOV
index than if they were U.S. firms. We define the governance gap to be the difference between the
governance index of a foreign firm and the governance index of a comparable U.S. firm, so that a firm
with a positive governance gap has a higher value of the GOV index than its matching U.S. firm. Only
1 “A dangerous division of labor,” by Jack and Suzy Welch, Business Week, November 6, 2006. For an academic
version of this argument, see Arcot and Bruno (2006).
3