AGENCY CONFLICTS, INVESTMENT, AND ASSET
PRICING
Rui Albuquerque
Neng Wang
WORKING PAPER 13251

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AGENCY CONFLICTS, INVESTMENT, AND ASSET PRICING
Rui Albuquerque
Neng Wang
Working Paper 13251
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13251
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2007
We thank an anonymous referee, an anonymous editor, Cam Harvey (Editor), Mike Barclay, and Denis
Gromb (Gerzensee discussant) for detailed and helpful comments. We also thank Heitor Almeida (WFA
discussant), Ravi Bansal, Geert Bekaert, Harjoat Bhamra (UBC/Bank of Canada conference discussant),
Andrea Buraschi, Murray Carlson (AFA discussant), Gian Luca Clementi, Bob Hall, Ping He (FMA
and NBER discussant), Arvind Krishnamurthy, John Long, Jianjun Miao, Suresh Sundaresan, Ross
Watts, seminar participants in Boston University, Columbia, Faculdade de Economia do Porto, the
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and New York, Fuqua (Duke), HEC Paris, HEC Lausanne, ISCTE,
Olin School of Business (Washington University), The Portuguese Catholic University, Simon Graduate
School of Business (University of Rochester), Stern School of Business (NYU), University of Maryland,
Univeristy of Illinois at Urbana/Champaign, University of Wisconsin (Madison), Universidade Nova
de Lisboa, Wharton, the World Bank, and participants at the 2004 SED (Florence), 2005 CEPR/ Gerzensee,
2005 WFA (Portland), UBC/Bank of Canada conference (2005), 2005 FMA (Chicago), 2006 AFA
(Boston) and NBER, and 2006 Wegmans conferences for comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2007 by Rui Albuquerque and Neng Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Agency conflicts, investment, and asset pricing
Rui Albuquerque and Neng Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 13251
July 2007
JEL No. E44,G1,G3,O4
ABSTRACT
The separation of ownership and control allows controlling shareholders to pursue private benefits.
We develop an analytically tractable dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model to study asset pricing
and welfare implications of imperfect investor protection. Consistent with empirical evidence, the
model predicts that countries with weaker investor protection have more incentives to overinvest, lower
Tobin's q, higher return volatility, larger risk premium, and higher interest rate. Calibrating the model
to the Korean economy reveals that perfecting investor protection increases the stock market's value
by 22 percent, a gain for which outside shareholders are willing to pay 11 percent of their capital stock.
Rui Albuquerque
Boston University
School of Management
595 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02215
ralbuque@bu.edu
Neng Wang
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 812
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
nw2128@columbia.edu

It is widely accepted that governance problems are of …rst-order importance in many countries
(La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1998, 2000a)). Corporations in many countries are
run by controlling shareholders whose cash ‡ow rights in the …rm are substantially smaller than
their control rights (La Porta et al. (1999)). For example, controlling shareholders may ac-
quire complete control with cash ‡ow rights signi…cantly lower than 50% via dual-class shares,
pyramid-ownership structures, or cross-ownership (Bebchuk, Kraakman, and Triantis (2000)).
The separation of ownership and control allows controlling shareholders to pursue private ben-
e…ts at the cost of outside shareholders. The size of private bene…ts depends in large part on
the extent of investor protection and corporate governance safeguarding outside investors.1 La
Porta et al. (2002), Claessens et al. (2002), Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004), and Gompers,
Ishii, and Metrick (2003), among others, document how imperfect investor protection lowers
…rm value.
Investor protection in‡uences not only …rm value as emphasized in the literature, but also
equilibrium interest rates, asset returns, and welfare costs. Intuitively, agents’consumption
and savings decisions and …rms’cost of capital are fundamentally linked in general equilibrium,
which depends in turn on …rms’production and investment decisions and the extent of agency
con‡icts. However, to date little theoretical research has been devoted to formulating equilib-
rium asset pricing implications of agency con‡icts. Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002) present a
static model with risk-neutral agents and determine the interest rate in general equilibrium. In
this paper, we present one of the …rst dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models to study
theimplicationsofimperfectinvestorprotectionforrisksharingandassetpricing. Wetherefore
provide one of the …rst quantitative frameworks to assess the magnitudes of both the loss of
investor welfare and the reduction in market value due to imperfect investor protection.