NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RISK SHIFTING VERSUS RISK MANAGEMENT:
INVESTMENT POLICY IN CORPORATE PENSION PLANS
Joshua Rauh
Working Paper 13240
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13240
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2007
I thank James Wang and Michael Wong for excellent research assistance. I am grateful to John Birge,
John Campbell, Murillo Campello, Chris Crevier, Mike Faulkender, Sean Finucane, Charles Hadlock,
Dirk Jenter, Steve Kaplan, Vicky Kiosse, Gordon Latter, Deborah Lucas, Francisco Perez-Gonzalez,
Mitchell Petersen, James Poterba, Michael Roberts, Antoinette Schoar, Berk Sensoy, Morten Sørensen,
Per Strömberg, Amir Sufi, Michael Weisbach, Steve Zeldes, an anonymous referee, and seminar participants
at MIT Sloan, the 2006 Corporate Finance Conference at the Washington University Olin School of
Business, the 2006 NBER Corporate Finance Summer Institute, and the 2006 UBS Pensions Research
Programme Conference at the London School of Economics for helpful comments and discussions.
I thank seminar participants at the Chicago GSB finance faculty lunch, the European Central Bank,
the University of Illinois, and Michigan State University for comments on an earlier version of this
work entitled "Who Manages Pension Fund Risk?" The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Joshua Rauh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Risk Shifting versus Risk Management: Investment Policy in Corporate Pension Plans
Joshua Rauh
NBER Working Paper No. 13240
July 2007
JEL No. G23,G31,G32,H32
ABSTRACT
The asset allocation of defined benefit pension plans is a setting where both risk shifting and risk management
incentives are likely be present. Empirically, firms with poorly funded pension plans and weak credit
ratings allocate a greater share of pension fund assets to safer securities such as government debt and
cash, whereas firms with well-funded pension plans and strong credit ratings invest more heavily in
equity. These relations hold both in the cross-section and within firms and plans over time. The incentive
to limit costly financial distress plays a considerably larger role than risk shifting in explaining variation
in pension fund investment policy among U.S. firms.
Joshua Rauh
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jrauh@ChicagoGSB.edu

Corporations with some probability of defaulting on their debt face conflicting incentives with
respect to the management of cash flow risks. On the one hand, shocks to cash flows for financially
constrained firms can lead to bankruptcy (Smith and Stulz (1985)) or to the inability to take profitable
investment projects in the future (Mayers and Smith (1987), Froot, Scharfstein, and Stein (1993)). In
contrast, the theory of asset substitution (Jensen and Meckling (1976)) suggests that managers can
increase the value of shareholders’ equity by raising the volatility of the firm’s assets when there is a
significant probability of default. In this paper I empirically examine these conflicting motives in a
setting where both risk shifting and risk management incentives are likely to be present: investment
policies of defined benefit (DB) pension plans sponsored by U.S. corporations.
Since Sharpe (1976) and Treynor (1977), it has been argued that the institutional structure of DB
pensions in the U.S. and the control that management exercises over pension fund asset allocation create
moral hazard incentives for firms to underfund pension plans and invest the assets in risky securities. The
liabilities of a DB plan resemble regular corporate debt in that limited liability protects shareholders from
having to transfer or liquidate non-corporate assets to compensate the creditors (or workers) in the event
of bankruptcy. If the assets perform well and the firm avoids bankruptcy, then the resulting improvement
in pension funding reduces the need to fund the pension out of liquid corporate assets. Furthermore, since
the creation of the federal Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC) in 1974, if a firm enters
bankruptcy with insufficient pension assets to cover its liabilities to workers, the U.S. government
provides plan recipients with their annual pensions up to a statutory maximum amount. The security the
PBGC receives is the firm’s dedicated pension assets, and the PBGC has a low priority in bankruptcy
thereafter, so that general corporate assets enjoy some protection.
However, an important constraint on this moral hazard is that should the firm avoid bankruptcy
but face poor performance in its pension fund, it must continue to fund the pension plan with liquid
resources. The Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) of 1974 and several rounds of later
legislation established a system of mandatory pension contributions, intended to ensure adequate funding
of DB pension plans. Such cash requirements increase the probability that the firm will default on its
1

regular nonpension debt and incur costs of financial distress. Furthermore, cash drains from required
contributions depress capital investment at the firm level (Rauh (2006)). The system of required
contributions thus creates an incentive to limit risk taking in pension plans, as large mandatory
contributions may affect the ability to invest in attractive projects. This has been the case for much of the
U.S. airline, automobile, and steel industries. This influence against risk taking in pension funds has been
ignored by previous literature which instead has emphasized the tax benefits of funding with debt (Black
(1980), Tepper (1981)) as a countervailing force against the moral hazard associated with pension
investment (Sweeting (2005), Campbell and Viceira (2005)).
There are therefore theoretical reasons why pension risk might optimally increase as the
sponsoring firm approaches financial distress, and theoretical reasons why it might optimally decrease.
The results in this paper suggest that risk management incentives to avoid costly financial distress
dominate risk shifting on average in pension fund investing. In a large sample of administrative data
covering primarily small to medium sized DB plans during 1988-2003, the better funded pension plans —
which should have less incentive to engage in risk shifting — in fact invest in riskier assets than the more
poorly funded plans which would be the typical risk shifting candidates. This is also the case within plans
over time. After the funding status of a given pension plan improves, the plan assets tend to be invested
more in equities; after the funding status deteriorates the plan assets tends to be invested more in safe
assets such as government debt and cash.
Analysis conducted using survey data on pension fund asset allocation for a smaller sample of the
largest publicly traded DB pension sponsors from 1997-2004 corroborates the importance of risk
management. Firms with better credit ratings and therefore lower expected costs of financial distress take
more risk in pension plans than firms which have higher expected costs of financial distress. The
allocation to safe assets rises and the allocation to risky assets declines within a given firm over time if its
credit rating deteriorates, and vice versa if its credit rating improves. However, there is no evidence that
firms dynamically tailor pension investments to correlate with their own investment opportunities (as
2