NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RANDOM WALK EXPECTATIONS AND THE FORWARD DISCOUNT PUZZLE
Philippe Bacchetta
Eric van Wincoop
Working Paper 13205
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13205
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2007
We are grateful to Adriano Rampini for comments. The paper was written while van Wincoop visited
the Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research. van Wincoop acknowledges financial support from
the institute. Bacchetta acknowledges financial support by the National Centre of Competence in Research
"Financial Valuation and Risk Management" (NCCR FINRISK). The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Philippe Bacchetta and Eric van Wincoop. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Random Walk Expectations and the Forward Discount Puzzle
Philippe Bacchetta and Eric van Wincoop
NBER Working Paper No. 13205
June 2007
JEL No. F3,F31,F41
ABSTRACT
Two well-known, but seemingly contradictory, features of exchange rates are that they are close to
a random walk while at the same time exchange rate changes are predictable by interest rate differentials.
In this paper we investigate whether these two features of the data may in fact be related. In particular,
we ask whether the predictability of exchange rates by interest differentials naturally results when
participants in the FX market adopt random walk expectations. We find that random walk expectations
can explain the forward discount puzzle, but only if FX portfolio positions are revised infrequently.
In contrast, with frequent portfolio adjustment and random walk expectations, we find that high interest
rate currencies depreciate much more than what UIP would predict.
Philippe Bacchetta
Study Center Gerzensee
P.O. Box 21
CH-3115 Gerzensee
Switzerland
PHBACCHETTA@SZGERZENSEE.CH
Eric van Wincoop
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
P.O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
and NBER
vanwincoop@virginia.edu

1 Introduction
Two well-known, but seemingly contradictory, features of exchange rates are that
they are close to a random walk (RW) while at the same time exchange rate
changes are predictable by interest rate di(cid:11)erentials. The RW hypothesis received
strong support from the work of Richard A. Meese and Kenneth Rogo(cid:11) (1983) who
were the (cid:12)rst to show that macro models of exchange rate determination could not
beat the RW in predicting exchange rates. On the other hand, Eugene F. Fama
(1984) showed that high interest rate currencies tend to subsequently appreciate.
This is known as the forward discount puzzle and stands in contrast to Uncovered
Interest Parity (UIP), which says that a positive interest di(cid:11)erential should lead
to an expected depreciation of equal magnitude.
The RW hypothesis and the forward discount puzzle are not as contradictory as
it seems since the predictability of exchange rate changes by interest di(cid:11)erentials is
limited. For example, Fama (1984) reports an average R2 of 0.01 when regressing
monthly exchange rate changes on beginning-of-period interest di(cid:11)erentials. In
this paper we investigate whether these two features of the data may in fact be
related. In particular, we ask whether the predictability of exchange rates by
interest di(cid:11)erentials naturally results when participants in the FX market adopt
RW expectations.
RW expectations in the FX market are quite common, in particular when using
carry trade strategies, i.e. investing in high interest rate currencies and neglecting
potential exchange rate movements. These strategies typically deliver signi(cid:12)cant
excess returns (see Carlos Bazan et al. (2006), Craig Burnside et al. (2006), or
Miguel Villanueva (2006) for recent evidence). Moreover, many observers argue
that recent movements among major currencies are actually caused by carry trade
strategies. The adoption of RW expectations may also be rational. Welfare gains
that can be achieved from full information processing are likely to be small because
the R2 from exchange rate predictability regressions is so small. This needs to be
weighed against the cost of full information processing.
It is sometimes argued informally that purchases of high interest rate curren-
cies should lead to their appreciation. If correct, that would imply that trade
based on RW expectations could indeed lead to the observed predictability of ex-
change rate changes by interest rates. However, we show that this simple intuition
1

is misleading. With frequent trading based on RW expectations, we (cid:12)nd that
high interest rate currencies depreciate much more than what UIP would predict.
However, when agents make infrequent FX portfolio decisions, we (cid:12)nd that high
interest rate currencies do indeed appreciate when investors adopt RW expecta-
tions. Thus, RW expectations can explain the forward premium puzzle, but only
if FX portfolio positions are revised infrequently.
This paper is closely related to Philippe Bacchetta and Eric van Wincoop
(2006). We argue in that paper that less than 1% of global FX positions are ac-
tively managed. We therefore consider a model in which agents make infrequent
FX portfolio decisions. We show that the welfare cost from making infrequent
portfolio decisions is very small, especially in comparison with observed FX man-
agement fees. We also show that when agents make infrequent decisions about FX
positions, high interest rate currencies tend to appreciate. This is particularly the
case when agents process only partial information. In this paper we consider the
particular case of partial information processing whereby agents simply adopt RW
expectations. Apart from being realistic, the simple case of RW expectations also
has the advantage that it leads to some precise analytical results.
Theremainderofthepaperisorganizedasfollows. InSection2weexaminethe
impact of frequent portfolio adjustment based on random walk expectations. In
Section 3 we present the model with infrequent decision making when the forward
discount (interest di(cid:11)erential) follows an autoregressive process. We particularly
focus on an AR(1) process, for which precise analytical results can be obtained.
In section 4 we take the general form of the model to the data and show that it
can account for the forward discount puzzle only when investors make infrequent
portfolio decisions. Section 5 concludes. Some technical details are derived in the
Appendix.
2 Frequent Decision Making
Inthissection,wepresentasimplemodelassumingthatallinvestorsmakeportfolio
decisions each period and expect the exchange rate to follow a RW. We focus on
the implications for the Fama regression s s = (cid:12) +(cid:12)fd +e . Here s = lnS
t+1 t 0 t t t t
(cid:0)
is the log exchange rate and fd is the forward discount. We show that frequent
t
FX trading implies a positive and large Fama regression coe(cid:14)cient (cid:12), i.e., a bias
2