NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INFORMATION DIFFUSION EFFECTS IN INDIVIDUAL INVESTORS' COMMON STOCK PURCHASES:
COVET THY NEIGHBORS' INVESTMENT CHOICES
Zoran Ivkovich
Scott Weisbenner
Working Paper 13201
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13201
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2007
We extend our gratitude to an anonymous discount broker for providing the data on individual investors'
positions, trades, and demographics. Special thanks go to Terry Odean for his help in obtaining and
understanding the data set. Both authors acknowledge the financial support from the College Research
Board at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. We thank Jean Roth of the NBER for assistance
with the 1990 Census data. We also thank seminar participants at the University of Florida and the
University of Illinois for their comments and feedback. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2007 by Zoran Ivkovich and Scott Weisbenner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Information Diffusion Effects in Individual Investors' Common Stock Purchases: Covet Thy
Neighbors' Investment Choices
Zoran Ivkovich and Scott Weisbenner
NBER Working Paper No. 13201
June 2007
JEL No. D14,D83,G11
ABSTRACT
We study the relation between households' stock purchases and stock purchases made by their neighbors.
A ten percentage point increase in neighbors' purchases of stocks from an industry is associated with
a two percentage point increase in households' own purchases of stocks from that industry. The effect
is considerably larger for local stocks and among households in more social states. Controlling for
area sociability, households' and neighbors' investment style preferences, and the industry composition
of local firms, we attribute approximately one-quarter to one-half of the correlation between households'
stock purchases and stock purchases made by their neighbors to word-of-mouth communication.
Zoran Ivkovich
Department of Finance
University of Illinois
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
ivkovich@uiuc.edu
Scott Weisbenner
Department of Finance
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
304C David Kinley Hall
1407 W. Gregory Drive
Urbana, IL 61801
and NBER
weisbenn@uiuc.edu

Despite the fact that individuals collectively hold about one-half of the U.S. stock market,
information diffusion effects among individual investors—the relation between the investment
choices made by an individual investor’s neighborhood and the investor’s own investment
choices—have received relatively little attention in the academic literature, probably because of
the lack of detailed data. If present, such effects undoubtedly can affect individual investors’
asset allocation decisions. Moreover, trades based on information diffusion might be sufficiently
correlated and condensed in time to affect stock prices.
In the domain of institutional investors, Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2005) study word-of-
mouth effects among mutual fund managers and find that “…a manager is more likely to hold (or
buy, or sell) a particular stock in any quarter if other managers in the same city are holding (or
buying, or selling) that same stock.” This study complements their work by ascertaining whether
such trading patterns are a broader phenomenon. For example, individual investors may seek to
reduce search costs and circumvent their lack of expertise by relying on word-of-mouth
communication with those around them. Indeed, Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2004) present a model
in which stock market participation may be influenced by social interaction. Such social
interaction can serve as a mechanism for information exchange via “word-of-mouth” and/or
“observational learning” (Banerjee (1992), Ellison and Fudenberg (1993, 1995)). Duflo and Saez
(2002, 2003) present evidence of peer effects in the context of retirement plans. They find that an
employee’s participation in retirement plans and choices within those plans are affected by
participation decisions and choices made by other employees in the same department.
In the international arena, Feng and Seasholes (2004) present evidence of herding effects
among individual investors who hold individual brokerage accounts in the People’s Republic of
China. A unique feature of their data (investors seeking to place trades in person can` do so only
1

in the brokerage house in which they opened their accounts) enables Feng and Seasholes to
disentangle word-of-mouth effects from common reaction to releases of public information.
They find that common reaction to public information (trades placed across branches in the same
region, local to the company), rather than word-of-mouth effects (trades placed in the same
branch), seems to be a primary determinant of herding in that context.
Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001) find that proximity to corporate headquarters, the
language of communication with investors, and the company’s CEO’s cultural origin are
important determinants of Finnish households’ stock investments. Whereas these findings could
be consistent with word-of-mouth effects influencing portfolio choice, they could also reflect
households’ tastes for familiarity—preference to invest in companies that disseminate annual
financial reports in their native tongues or feature a CEO with the same origin.
We study information diffusion effects among U.S. individual investors by using a
detailed data set of common-stock investments 35,673 U.S. households made through a large
discount brokerage in the period from 1991 to 1996. Throughout the paper, we loosely refer to
the correlation between households’ investments and their neighbors’ investments as
“information diffusion.” This term is intended to encapsulate several potential reasons why such
correlation exists—word-of-mouth effects, similarity in preferences, as well as common local
reaction to news. To further characterize information diffusion and word-of-mouth effects, we
consider state-level measures of sociability and find that the level of sociability prevailing in the
state to which the household belongs (likely a strong correlate of the presence of word-of-mouth
effects) can explain a significant portion of the overall diffusion effect. Moreover, we
disentangle the diffusion into the influences of common preferences, structure of the local
industry, and word-of-mouth effects.
2