NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXPLAINING PRODUCT PRICE DIFFERENCES ACROSS COUNTRIES
Robert E. Lipsey
Birgitta Swedenborg
Working Paper 13239
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13239
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2007
We are indebted to the OECD, and particularly to Annette Koechlin for the detailed country price
data. A succession of skilled research assistants, including Xu Li, Hengyong Mo, and Jing Sun, has
helped us with the statistical analyses as the paper and our ideas have evolved. We gratefully acknowledge
financial support from the Jan Wallander and Tom Hedelius Research Foundation. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2007 by Robert E. Lipsey and Birgitta Swedenborg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Explaining Product Price Differences Across Countries
Robert E. Lipsey and Birgitta Swedenborg
NBER Working Paper No. 13239
July 2007
JEL No. E31,F10,J3
ABSTRACT
A substantial part of international differences in prices of individual products, both goods and services,
can be explained by differences in per capita income, wage compression, or low wage dispersion among
low-wage workers, and short-term exchange rate fluctuations. Higher per capita income is associated
with higher prices and higher wage dispersion with lower prices. The effects of higher income and
wage dispersion are moderated for the more tradable products. The effects of wage dispersion, on
the other hand, are magnified for the more labor-intensive products, particularly low-skill services.
The differences in prices across countries are reflected in differences in the composition of consumption.
Countries in which prices of labor-intensive services are very high, such as the Nordic countries, consume
much less of them. For some services, the shares of GDP consumed in high-price countries are less
than 20 percent of the shares in low-price countries. Since these are services of very low tradability,
the low consumption levels of these services imply low employment in them.
Robert E. Lipsey
NBER
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10016-4309
and NBER
rlipsey@gc.cuny.edu
Birgitta Swedenborg
Center for Business and Policy Studies
Studieförbundet Näringsliv och Samhälle
Box 5629
S-114 86 Stockholm, Sweden
Tel: 46-8-50 70 25 68
birgitta.swedenborg@sns.se

Explaining Product Price Differences Across Countries
Robert E. Lipsey and Birgitta Swedenborg
1. Introduction
International differences in national price levels and prices of individual products are
striking and have persisted over long periods, despite the presumed equalizing influence of
international trade and despite the liberalization of trade and reduction of transport costs that
have occurred. For example, prices in Japan in the 1980s and 1990s were 40 percent higher, on
average, than for the OECD countries as a group. In the Nordic countries and Switzerland, prices
were 15 to 25 percent higher. In the United States, by contrast, prices were 10 percent lower, and
in Portugal 20 percent lower than the OECD average.
Individual product prices often differ even more sharply from one country to another. In
1999, for example, prices for Office Machines and Equipment in Austria were twice as high as in
the United States, and they were almost twice as high in France. Prices for Domestic and Other
Household Services in Norway were 3 to 4 times as high as in the United States and 3 times as
high as in Ireland.
Most explanations of the causes of national price differences focus on factors that affect
the prices of less tradable products, especially services, since price differences tend to be eroded
in the more tradable sectors of the economy. However, most empirical studies have analyzed
differences in national price levels rather than in prices of individual products. In an earlier
paper, the present authors examined the determinants of product prices across countries,
distinguishing between goods prices and service prices. We found that country characteristics
such as per capita income and wage compression, specifically relatively high wages of the least
skilled, raised the price of services somewhat more than the price of goods. But the difference
1

was rather small. We concluded that the dichotomy between goods and services was an
oversimplification, partly because all goods prices had a nontradable component in the form of
domestic transportation and distribution costs. We also suggested, but did not test, that the effect
of per capita income and wage compression would vary depending on the labor intensity of the
final product.
In this paper, we examine how international differences in goods and service prices are
explained by not only country characteristics, but particularly by the interaction between country
characteristics and the characteristics of the individual goods and services. We focus on the role
of a product’s tradability and labor intensity in offsetting or intensifying the effect of country
characteristics such as per capita income and wage compression. Then, we go on to show how
differences in relative prices impact the composition of consumption in different countries and,
in particular, offer an explanation as to why unskilled-labor-intensive activities are less important
in some countries than in others.
The analysis covers about 200 products across 20 OECD countries from 1985 to 1999.
Country characteristics include real per capita income, wage compression, and medium-term
fluctuations in exchange rates. The product characteristics are a product’s tradability and labor
intensity. A novel feature of our calculation of labor intensity is that we add an estimate of the
labor content of distribution to that in production.
The evidence we present indicates that high per capita income and high wage
compression, or low wage dispersion, are associated with high prices of labor-intensive and less
tradable products, reducing both consumption and production of these products in a country. The
effect of wage compression highlights a rather neglected effect of what is sometimes called a
“solidaristic” wage policy, namely, that at least part of the cost of the policy is borne by
2