NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE RELATIVE PERFORMANCE OF REAL ESTATE MARKETING PLATFORMS:
MLS VERSUS FSBOMADISON.COM
Igal Hendel
Aviv Nevo
François Ortalo-Magné
Working Paper 13360
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13360
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2007
We are grateful to the owners of FSBOMadison.com and the South-Central Wisconsin Realtors Association
for providing us with their listing data. We thanks Geoff Ihle and James Robert for valuable research
assistance, and Estelle Cantillon, Leemore Dafny, Morris Davis, Steve Levitt, and seminar participants
for comments. Hendel and Nevo thank the Center for the Study of Industrial Organization and the
Guthrie Center for Real Estate Research at Northwestern University. Ortalo-Magné acknowledges
financial support from the Graduate School at UW--Madison. Hendel and Nevo are in the department
of Economics at Northwestern University and NBER. Ortalo-Magné is in the department of Economics
and the department of Real Estate and Urban Land Economics at the UW-Madison. Contact information:
igal@northwestern.edu, nevo@northwestern.edu, and fom@bus.wisc.edu. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2007 by Igal Hendel, Aviv Nevo, and François Ortalo-Magné. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Relative Performance of Real Estate Marketing Platforms: MLS versus FSBOMadison.com
Igal Hendel, Aviv Nevo, and François Ortalo-Magné
NBER Working Paper No. 13360
September 2007
JEL No. L14,L85,R31
ABSTRACT
We compare outcomes obtained by sellers who listed their home on a newly developed For-Sale-By-Owner
(FSBO) web site versus those who used an agent and the Multiple Listing Service (MLS). We do not
find support for the hypothesis that listing on the MLS helps sellers obtain a significantly higher sale
price. Listing on the MLS shortens the time it takes to sell a house. The diffusion of the new FSBO
platform was quick, with the market share stabilizing after 2 years, suggesting it managed to gain a
critical mass necessary to compete with the MLS. However, the lower effectiveness of FSBO (in terms
of time to sell and probability of a sale) suggests that the increasing returns to network size are not
fully exploited at its current size. We discuss the welfare implications of our findings.
Igal Hendel François Ortalo-Magné
Department of Economics School of Business
Northwestern University University of Wisconsin, Madison
2001 Sheridan Road 5259 Grainger Hall
Evanston, IL 60208 975 University Avenue
and NBER Madison, WI 53706-1323
igal@northwestern.edu fom@bus.wisc.edu
Aviv Nevo
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER
nevo@northwestern.edu

1 Introduction
Alargeproportionofhousingtransactionsarecarriedoutwiththehelpofrealtors.1 Realtors
provideexpertise(onpricing,conditioningthehouseforsaleandbargaining)andconvenience
(byshowingthehouse,advertisingandholdingopenhousesandhelpingwiththepaperwork).
Another advantage of working with a realtor is access to the Multiple Listing Service (MLS),
a database that compiles information on all the properties listed by local realtors. For their
services, sold almost exclusively as a bundle, realtors charge a commission at, or around, 6%.
The commission rate has been stable over time and across regions and has been the subject
of the scrutiny of antitrust authorities (see DOJ, 2007).
The advent of the internet has a¤ected many markets. The real estate market is one
of them. Direct marketing was always possible using newspapers, ‡yers and other forms of
advertising. However, the internet o¤ers a cheaper and potentially more e¤ective platform
that facilitates direct (by owner) marketing. Sellers can post detailed information, photos as
well as virtual tours. For-Sale-By-Owner (FSBO) websites provide an alternative platform,
or two-sided network, that competes directly with the MLS network.
In this paper we study the performance of these two competing platforms: MLS and
FSBO. The established platform o¤ering the bundle of services available from realtors, ver-
sus the newly established no-service platform. The actual cost of MLS transactions is the
commission minus the price premium an MLS transaction might generate and the …nancial
savings from a faster sale. The price premium may largely o¤set, or even more than make
up for, the commission.2 We quantify the actual monetary cost of using an agent by com-
paring the performance of listings by owner to transactions with realtors. We also assess the
platforms’e¤ectiveness, comparing measures like time on the market and the probability of
sale within a time window.
We focus on the city of Madison, Wisconsin, where a single website (FSBOmadison.com)
has become the dominant for-sale-by-owner platform. With the cooperation of FSBOmadi-
1Real estate agents are licensed by the state. A realtor is a real estate agent who is a member of the
Realtor Association.
2The National Association of Realtors website claims, based on the 2005 Home Buyer & Seller Survey
that "the median home price for sellers who use an agent is 16.0 percent higher than a home sold directly
by an owner; $230,000 vs. $198,200; there were no signi…cant di¤erences between the types of homes sold."
2

son.com we gained access to all FSBO listings since the start of the platform. We combined
the FSBO data with data from two other sources. First, from the South-Central Wisconsin
Realtors Association we got access to all MLS listings in the city. Second, we matched every
listing with data from the city of Madison. The city of Madison assessor o¢ ce maintains a
database with the full history of transactions on every property together with an exhaustive
set of property characteristics. By merging these data sets we get a complete history of
events that occurred for virtually every single family home for sale, over 15,000 observations,
betweenJanuary1998andDecember2004. Ahistoryofalistingincludes: dateandplatform
ofinitiallisting, movesacrossplatforms, andoutcome(saledateandpriceifsold, withdrawal
date otherwise).
Aftercontrollingforhousesandsellerheterogeneity, we…ndnosupportforthehypothesis
that the MLS delivers a higher sale price than FSBO. Considering that realtors charge a 6%
commission versus $150 for FSBO, FSBO sellers come ahead …nancially. The lack of a MLS
premium does not mean realtors do not provide value to the seller. It means instead that
the cost of the convenience provided by realtors seems to be the full commission.
MLS does, however, lead to faster transactions. The longer time to sell on FSBO is
driven by two factors. First, over 20% of FSBO listings do not sell on FSBO and have to
list afresh on the MLS. Second, the probability of a quick sale is larger for houses initially
listed on the MLS.
Next, we consider the welfare implications of the results. From the quicker time to
sell we conclude that the MLS is a more e¤ective matching platform. This suggests that
FSBO’s current size does not fully exploit economies of scale in network size. In the context
of homogenous platforms welfare would increase if all transactions were consolidated into
a single network. The countervailing force, which calls for multiple platforms, is product
di¤erentiation (Armstrong, 2006, and Rochet and Tirole, forthcoming). In this case, the
platformsaredi¤erentiatedbytheservicelevel. Full servicebyagentsandnofrillsbyFSBO.
Therefore, itmightbee¢ cientforbothplatformstocoexist. Thebundlingofagents’services
with the MLS, the source of di¤erentiation, is the current practice, but is not technologically
dictated. It might be bene…cial to unbundle the platformfromthe additional services o¤ered
3