NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OPTIMAL PROPERTY RIGHTS IN FINANCIAL CONTRACTING
Kenneth Ayotte
Patrick Bolton
Working Paper 13316
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13316
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2007
We would like to thank law audiences at Columbia, Virginia, Northwestern, Berkeley, Chicago, Yale
and ALEA 2007, business/finance audiences at Columbia, Haas, Fuqua, and Oxford. Special thanks
to Jesse Fried, Henry Hansmann, Avery Katz, Ed Morrison, Eric Posner, and Eric Talley for helpful
discussions and feedback. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Kenneth Ayotte and Patrick Bolton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Optimal Property Rights in Financial Contracting
Kenneth Ayotte and Patrick Bolton
NBER Working Paper No. 13316
August 2007
JEL No. K11,K12
ABSTRACT
In this paper we propose a theory of optimal property rights in a financial contracting setting. Following
recent contributions in the property law literature, we emphasize the distinction between contractual
rights, that are only enforceable against the parties themselves, and property rights, that are also enforeceable
against third parties outside the contract. Our analysis starts with the following question: which contractual
agreements should the law allow parties to enforce as property rights? Our proposed answer to this
question is shaped by the overall objective of minimizing due diligence (reading) costs and investment
distortions that follow from the inability of third-party lenders to costlessly observe pre-existing rights
in a borrower's property. Borrowers cannot reduce these costs without the law's help, due to an inability
to commit to protecting third-parties from redistribution. We find that the law should take a more
restrictive approach to enforcing rights against third-parties when these rights are i) more costly for
third-parties to discover, ii) more likely to redistribute value from third-parties, and iii) less likely to
increase efficiency. We find that these qualitative principles are often reflected in observed legal rules,
including the enforceability of negative covenants; fraudulent conveyance; corporate veil-piercing;
and limits on assignability.
Kenneth Ayotte
Northwestern University
School of Law
357 East Chicago Avenue
Chicago, IL 60611
ka2051@columbia.edu
Patrick Bolton
Columbia Business School
804 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
pb2208@columbia.edu

1 Introduction
The economics of contracting literature and legal scholarship conceive of property rights in
very different ways. Economists, starting with the seminal contribution of Coase (1960), em-
phasize the role of property rights as a starting point for contracting. While the traditional
statement of the “Coase theorem” stresses the irrelevance of the allocation of property rights
for economic efficiency, later contributions by Alchian and Demsetz (1972) and Jensen and
Meckling (1976) on the one hand argue that property rights can affect incentives, due to the
status of the propertyowner as a residual claimant, andWilliamson (1979) andKlein, Craw-
ford and Alchian (1978) on the other argue that property rights provide protection against
ex-post opportunism. Subsequently, Grossman and Hart (1986) and Hart and Moore (1990)
have defined property rights instead as residual rights of control, and have shown that al-
locations of property rights can be valuable in alleviating holdup problems when contracts
are incomplete. These formal analyses of property rights have been used to explain firm
boundaries, capital structure, and authority relationships within organizations.
Although there may be differences in their conceptions of property rights, economists
usually start from the perspective that property rights are optimal allocations of rights
within a contracting coalition. This perspective, and its implication for the role of the legal
system, is important. When all affected parties start around a common bargaining table, as
is often assumed in economic models, there is no role for a legal system beyond enforcing the
contractualagreementsreachedbytheparties. Lefttotheirowndevices, rationalpartieswill
be expected to allocate all relevant rights contractually, in a way that maximizes total social
surplus.1 As a result, the economist’s framework to date has little to offer in the way of a
positiveanalysisthatexplainsfeaturesofpropertyandcontractlaw, nordoesthisframework
offer normative prescriptions for the design of these laws, other than the recommendation
that voluntary agreements should always be strictly enforced.
The economist’s conception of property rights stands in sharp contrast to the concept
1Economists’ viewpoint often presupposes that the law is also necessary to defend an initial allocation of
ownership rights to assets (however they may be determined), but this is not entirely obvious. Even if the
law is completely silent on this issue and all assets are in the “public domain” at the outset, if all parties
are available to bargain over the uses of assets going forward, efficiency is achievable. This implies that
legalinterventionintherealmofpropertyrights(overandaboveenforcingcontracts)isnecessaryonlywhen
third-parties outside the initial contracting coalition are affected.
2

of property as defined in recent legal scholarship (Merrill and Smith 2000, 2001a, 2001b,
HansmannandKraakman2002). Thisliteraturedistinguishespropertyrightsfromordinary
contractual rights by defining property rights as rights in rem (rights to assets that are good
against third-parties), while contractual rightsarerights in personam (goodonlyagainstthe
contractingpartiesthemselves). Inotherwords,propertyrightsareuniquebecausetheybind
not only the parties to a contract, but also bind third-parties who lie outside a contracting
coalition. In this paper, we create the first formal model to explore the consequences of this
definition of a property right. Specifically, our definition of a property right follows the one
used by Hansmann and Kraakman (2002):
“Property rights differ from contract rights in that a property right in an asset,
unlike a contract right, can be enforced against subsequent transferees of other
rights in the asset.”
The importance of this definition of property rights is that the law can play a more
active role in increasing the efficiency of contractual agreements when third-parties outside
a contracting coalition become relevant.2 When information about pre-existing rights is
costly to acquire, these third-parties may be unknowingly affected by the rights of others.
As a result, the law, as these authors argue, might optimally standardize the property rights
that can be created to limit externalities to unrelated parties (Merrill and Smith 2000), and
it may also set limits on the notice required to make property rights enforceable (Hansmann
and Kraakman 2002).
With this in rem feature of property in mind, we formally analyze the design of property
laws in a financial contracting setting. We start with a firm run by an agent (call the
agent A) that requires funding from two lenders, who each provide valuable capital to an
investment project, but each lender contracts with the firm at a different point in time. As a
result, the lenders may have competing claims to the firm’s cash flows, and knowledge of the
rights of pre-existing loan contracts may be imperfect.3 The financial contracting context
2We should note that there are alternative definitions of what constitutes a “property right” in legal
scholarship. Forexample, somedefineapropertyrightasarightthatisenforcedthrougha“propertyrule”
suchasspecificperformance,whileacontractualrightisarightthatisenforcedthroughmonetarydamages.
(Calabresi and Melamed 1972; Ayres and Talley 1995; Kaplow and Shavell 1995) This definition gives rise
to different legal design problems than the one we consider here, however.
3Our model assumes a sharp difference regarding the information about the contracts of other parties,
3