NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MORTGAGE TIMING
Ralph S.J Koijen
Otto Van Hemert
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Working Paper 13361
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13361
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2007
The authors would like to thank Yakov Amihud, Sandro Andrade, Andrew Ang, Jules van Binsbergen,
Michael Brandt, Alon Brav, Markus Brunnermeier, John Campbell, Jennifer Carpenter, Michael Chernov,
Jo\~ao Cocco, John Cochrane, Thomas Davidoff, Joost Driessen, Gregory Duffee, Darrell Duffie,
John Graham, Andrea Heuson, Dwight Jaffee, Ron Kaniel, Anthony Lynch, Theo Nijman, Chris Mayer,
Frank Northaft, Francois Ortalo-Magne, Lasse Pedersen, Ludovic Phalippou, Adriano Rampini, Matthew
Richardson, David Robinson, Walter Torous, Ross Valkanov, James Vickery, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen,
Nancy Wallace, Bas Werker, Jeff Wurgler, Alex Ziegler, Stan Zin, and seminar participants at Carnegie
Mellon University, the University of Amsterdam, Princeton University, the University of Southern
California, New York University, the University of California at Berkeley, the Federal Reserve Bank
of St.-Louis, Duke University, Florida State University, the University of Wisconsin at Madison, the
AREUEA Mid-Year Meeting in DC, the New York area real estate meeting, the Summer Real Estate
Symposium in Big Sky, the Portfolio Theory conference in Toronto, the Asian Finance Association
meeting in Chengdu, the Behavioral Finance conference in Singapore, the NBER Summer Institute
Asset Pricing meeting, the CEPR Financial Markets conference in Gerzensee, and the European Finance
Association conference in Ljubljana for comments. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support
from the FDIC's Center for Financial Research. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Ralph S.J Koijen, Otto Van Hemert, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Mortgage Timing
Ralph S.J Koijen, Otto Van Hemert, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
NBER Working Paper No. 13361
September 2007
JEL No. D14,E43,G11,G12,R2
ABSTRACT
The fraction of newly-originated mortgages that are of the adjustable-rate (ARM) versus the fixed-rate
(FRM) type exhibits a surprising amount of time variation. A simple utility framework of mortgage
choice points to the bond risk premium as theoretical determinant: when the bond risk premium is
high, FRM payments are high, making ARMs more attractive. We confirm empirically that the bulk
of the time variation in household mortgage choice can be explained by time variation in the bond
risk premium. This is true regardless of whether bond risk premia are measured using forecasters' data,
a VAR term structure model, or a simple rule-of-thumb based on adaptive expectations. This simple
rule-of-thumb moves in lock-step with mortgage choice, thereby lending further credibility to a theory
of strategic mortgage timing by households.
Ralph S.J Koijen Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Tilburg University Stern School of Business
r.s.j.koijen@uvt.nl New York University
44 W 4th Street, suite 9-190
Otto Van Hemert New York, NY 10012
Leonard Stern School of Business and NBER
New York University svnieuwe@stern.nyu.edu
44 West 4th Street, Room 9-81
New York, NY 10012
ovanheme@stern.nyu.edu

One of the most important financial decisions any household has to make during its lifetime is
whether to own a house and, if so, how to finance it. There are two broad categories of housing
finance: adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) and fixed-rate mortgages (FRMs). Figure 1 plots the
share of newly-originated mortgages that is of the ARM-type in the US economy between January
1985 and June 2006. This ARM share shows a surprisingly large variation; it varies between 10%
and 70% over time. This paper seeks to explain this variation in households’ mortgage choice.
[Figure 1 about here.]
Our premise is that the time variation in the ARM share is driven by time variation in bond
risk premia, defined as the difference between the long-term interest rate and the expected future
short-term interest rates. By now there is abundant evidence that the expectations hypothesis of
the term structure of interest rates fails to hold empirically.1 Time variation in bond risk premia
affects the FRM rate, which is linked to the long-term interest rate, but not the ARM rate. A
simple utility framework formalizes that when the risk premium on long-term bonds is high, the
expected payments on the FRM are large relative to those on the ARM, making the ARM more
attractive.
Empiricallywetestthispredictionusingthreealternativemethodstodetermineexpectedfuture
short rates, which are needed to compute the bond risk premium: (i) using professional forecasters’
data, (ii)constructing aterm-structuremodel, and(iii)employing anadaptiveexpectations scheme
that uses a short history of short rates. We show that a large fraction of the time variation in the
ARM share can be attributed to time variation in bond risk premia. All three measures deliver the
same economic effect: a one standard deviation increase in bond risk premia increases the ARM
share by 8%.
Figure 2 illustrates our main result. It plots the ARM share (solid line, measured against the
left axis) alongside the five-year bond risk premium (dashed line, measured against the right axis).
We construct the bond risk premium as the difference between the five-year nominal Treasury
bond yield and the forecasters’ consensus expectation about the average nominal one-year rate
over the next five years. The nominal yield data are from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
and forecaster data from Blue Chip. The correlation between the two series is 64%.
[Figure 2 about here.]
In Section 1, we formalize the utility-based mortgage choice argument. The model extends the
work of Campbell (2006) by allowing for time variation in bond risk premia. It strips out some of
1Fama and French (1989), Campbell and Shiller (1991), Dai and Singleton (2002), Buraschi and Jiltsov (2005),
AngandPiazzesi(2003),CochraneandPiazzesi(2005),andAng,Bekaert,andWei(2006),amongothers,document
and study time variation in bond risk premia.
1

the rich life-cycle dynamics of Cocco (2005) and Campbell and Cocco (2003) in order to focus on
the role of time-varying risk premia. Risk-averse borrowers not only care about expected mortgage
payments, but also about the variability of these payments. The ARM payments vary with the
real short rate, while the presence of inflation uncertainty makes the real FRM payments variable.
This analysis points to three term structure determinants of mortgage choice: (i) the nominal risk
premium, (ii) the variability of the real rate, and (iii) the variability of expected inflation.
InSection2, weturntothedata,andregresstheARMshareonvariousmeasures ofthenominal
bond risk premium. The first such analysis is based on the forecasters’ data shown in Figure 2
(Section 2.2). Section 2.3 develops a vector auto-regressive (VAR) term structure model, which
provides a second way to compute expectations of future nominal interest rates. In addition, the
VAR framework provides a way to compute the variability of the real rate and expected inflation.
The VAR-based bond risk premium is strongly related to the ARM share, and the variability of
the real rate and the expected inflation enter with the sign predicted by the model.
Section 2.4 considers a third way to measure the bond risk premium, which we label the rule-
of-thumb. This rule-of-thumb approximates the theoretical bond risk premium, which contains
forward-looking expectations of future short rates, as the difference between the current long-term
nominal interest rate and a backward-looking average of nominal short rates. Our motivation for
this simple rule is a suspicion that households may not have the required financial sophistication to
solve complex investment problems (Campbell (2006)).2 This proxy for bond risk premia is much
easier to compute; it only requires calculation of an average short rate over the recent past. Yet,
it captures the dynamics of the bond risk premia that we extract from the VAR model. Figure
3 displays the ARM share alongside the rule-of-thumb for five-year bond risk premia, which uses
three years of past short rate data. The figure documents a striking co-movement between the
ARM share (solid line, left axis) and the rule-of-thumb for bond risk premia (dashed line, right
axis), and suggests that making a close-to-optimal mortgage choice may be within reach of the
average household.
[Figure 3 about here.]
Section 2.5 studies predictors of the ARM share proposed in the literature, such as the slope
of the yield curve, the spread between an FRM rate and an ARM rate, or the long yield. In
our empirical work, we find lower explanatory power for these variables than for the bond risk
premium. Our model suggests an explanation for the yield spread and the long yield. The yield
spread not only measures the nominal bond risk premium but also deviations of expected future
2Onebranchoftherealestatefinanceliteraturedocumentsslowprepaymentbehavior(e.g.,SchwartzandTorous
(1989),Stanton(1995),Boudoukh,Whitelaw,Richardson,andStanton(1997),andSchwartz(2007)). Otherrelevant
papers in real estate are Brunnermeier and Julliard (2006), who study the effect of money illusion on house prices,
and Gabaix, Krishnamurthy, and Vigneron (2006), who study limits to arbitrage in mortgage-backed securities
markets.
2