NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PROFIT SHARING BETWEEN GOVERNMENTS AND MULTINATIONALS IN
NATURAL RESOURCE EXTRACTION: EVIDENCE FROM A FIRM-LEVEL PANEL
Margaret S. McMillan
Andrew R. Waxman
Working Paper 13332
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13332
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2007
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Margaret S. McMillan and Andrew R. Waxman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Profit Sharing Between Governments and Multinationals in Natural Resource Extraction: Evidence
From a Firm-Level Panel
Margaret S. McMillan and Andrew R. Waxman
NBER Working Paper No. 13332
August 2007
JEL No. F23
ABSTRACT
The "fairness" of negotiations between countries and resource extracting firms is subject to many accusations
and counter-accusations and may be argued, in many instances, to impact the subsequent economic
benefit to a host country from extraction. This paper examines the role of host country governance
on the share of government take from extraction revenue. We attempt to disentangle a number of competing
hypotheses regarding the relationship between governance and government take using panel data for
US resource extracting multinational corporations (MNCs) operating abroad from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis of the US Department of Commerce over 1982-1999. Using fixed effects regression, we
find a statistically significant positive impact of institutional quality on government take. The nature
of this relationship -- whether this represents the result of a "corruption premium" paid by US MNCs
or the exploitation of poor governance in negotiating government take -- is not completely clear. The
evidence presented does, however, indicate that potential forms of bargaining power other than institutional
quality (e.g., outside options to the deal) do increase government take, indicating that bargaining power
may nonetheless be an important factor.
Margaret S. McMillan
Tufts University
Department of Economics
114a Braker Hall
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
margaret.mcmillan@tufts.edu
Andrew R. Waxman
World Bank
andrew.waxman@wolfson.ox.ac.uk

In matters of mining taxation, governments rarely believe that companies pay too
much tax; companies rarely believe that they pay too little tax; and citizens rarely believe
that they actually see tangible benefits from the taxes that are paid.
—Otto et al. 2006
At the beginning of the last century, Venezuela, with its rudimentary agricultural
economy, had the reputation as being one of the most backward nations in the Western
Hemisphere. The country was run by Juan Vicente Gómez, put into power in 1908 by a
U.S.-backed coup d’etat, and the first in a line of caudillo, military-style dictators. Seven
years after the coup, the Mene Grande oil field was discovered and in 1917 Venezuela
began exporting petroleum. The “understanding” that Gómez had with the U.S. oil
companies and government allowed him to use revenues to equip the first national army,
expand the bureaucracy, and expand his repressive regime in exchange for cheap oil
concessions and accommodating legislation (Karl, 1987).
Yet, from the beginning, the Venezuelan authorities and the oil companies were
engaged in a “tug-of-war” over the terms of profit-sharing. By the 1950s, Venezuela
enjoyed greater bargaining power than its Middle Eastern competitors (Mommer 1998).
In 1958, the government increased the tax rate on oil extraction ten percentage points
over the U.S. rate shattering its amiable business relationship with the U.S.. This
precipitated the formation of OPEC in 1960, with Venezuela playing a lead role. With
the up-tick in oil prices, the Venezuelans were again able to increase their share of
economic rents through contract renegotiation. On the tails of OPEC came the
establishment of the national Venezuelan oil company (Corporación Venezolana de
1

Petróleo). By developing technical ability and expertise in oil extraction, the
Venezuelans were able to play a bigger role in upstream negotiations and put extra
leverage on negotiations.3 In 1973, the Acción Democrática government of Carlos
Andrés Pérez nationalized the petroleum sector after taking power.
Chad has not been as successful as Venezuela at protecting the rents associated
with natural resource extraction. It is a landlocked Saharan country with one of the lowest
per capita income levels in Africa. It suffers major security problems from incursion on
its borders with Sudan and Libya and substantial refugee influxes from the Darfur region.
The country is universally considered a failed state with consistently some of the highest
levels of corruption in the world. Nevertheless, the World Bank undertook an effort with
a petroleum consortium in 1995 to begin to take advantage of the country’s oil resources
in an effort to reduce the drastic levels of poverty in the country.
Construction began in 2000, with oil flows beginning in 2004. The revenues
accruing to the government were set up in such a way as to promote transparency and
poverty reduction.4 According to an article in the Guardian newspaper the government’s
original take was 28% of the total oil value, far smaller than that of other oil-producing
countries in the region with comparable levels of low governance: Equatorial Guinea,
Angola, Congo-Brazzaville, and Gabon.5 In addition, the consortium of foreign
petroleum companies seems to have been able to negotiate contracts such that when
national laws conflicted with any contracts, the contracts would supersede. In an attempt
3 This was later followed by the 1967 Hydrocarbon Law, which also allowed the government to get
improved concessions (Mommer 1998).
4 The issue of how and to what extent these petrodollars will promote development of Chad is an
interesting issue, but one beyond the scope of this paper. Here we will be concerned with the question of
how bargaining over economic rents proceeded.
5 Rice, X. “Fuels to Ourselves.” The Guardian. September 1, 2006.
2