NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INVESTMENT DURING THE KOREAN FINANCIAL CRISIS:
A STRUCTURAL ECONOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Simon Gilchrist
Jae W. Sim
Working Paper 13315
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13315
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2007
We thank Kevin Cowan, Philippe Bachetta, seminar participants at the Bank of Canada, the Bank
of Japan, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve,
Boston University, Brandeis University, the IIE at Stockholm University, the LSE, MIT, the University
of Pennsylvania, and conference participants at the CEPR/Bank of Finland, the NBER Summer Institute,
and Pennsylvania State University. Simon Gilchrist thanks the National Science Foundation for financial
support. The views expressed in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not
be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, anyone
associated with the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Simon Gilchrist and Jae W. Sim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Investment during the Korean Financial Crisis: A Structural Econometric Analysis
Simon Gilchrist and Jae W. Sim
NBER Working Paper No. 13315
August 2007
JEL No. E22,E44,F34,G31
ABSTRACT
This paper uses firm-level panel data to analyze the role of financial factors in determining investment
outcomes during the Korean financial crisis. Our identification strategy exploits the presence of foreign-denominated
debt to measure shocks to the financial position of firms following the devaluation that occurred during
the crisis period. Structural parameter estimates imply that financial factors may account for 50% to
80% of the overall drop in investment observed during this episode. Our estimates also imply that
foreign-denominated debt had relatively little effect on aggregate investment spending. Counterfactual
experiments suggest sizeable contractions in investment through this mechanism for economies that
are more heavily dependent on foreign-denominated debt however.
Simon Gilchrist
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
sgilchri@bu.edu
Jae W. Sim
Federal Reserve Board
jwsim@frb.gov

1 Introduction
Without capital market imperfections, the capital structure of a firm, including the size, the
maturity, and the currency composition of debts, should not matter for investment decisions.
The Asian financial crises provide a good opportunity to test this hypothesis, i.e., the irrele-
vance of finance in investment decisions. The devaluations that occurred during these crises
abruptly and massively altered the debt burdens of firms with foreign-denominated debts.
Because devaluations are exogenous events, at least from the perspectives of individual firms,
such episodes make it easier to identify a distinct role for financial factors in investment
decisions during financial crises.
This paper tests for the existence of a finance channel in the propagation of the Korean
financial crisis. It also provides a quantitative assessment of the effect of foreign-denominated
debt on investment. This analysis provides a useful perspective on the likely benefits to fixed
versus flexible exchange rates during a financial crisis. A primary argument for maintaining
a fixed exchange rate is that a devaluation may adversely affect balance sheets owing to the
presenceofforeign-denominateddebt.2 Ourresultsimplythatforeign-denominateddebtplays
an important role in explaining heterogenous outcomes across firms during the crisis period.
The presence of foreign-denominated debt explains only a small fraction of the aggregate
investment decline that occurred during this episode however. Although foreign-denominated
debt was not an important determinant of aggregate investment spending, the financial crisis
does appear to work through the balance sheet. In particular, high interest rates combined
with low profits weakened firm balance sheets and exacerbated the crisis. Overall, financial
frictions can account for 50 to 80% of the observed drop in investment during this episode.
Theoretically, a devaluation can affect investment through two distinct channels. First,
the devaluation increases competitiveness and raises the marginal profitability of capital for
firms that export. This increase in the marginal profitability of capital stimulates the invest-
ment of export-oriented firms.3 Second, the devaluation influences the debt burden of firms
— the value of debt relative to a firm’s ability to repay the debt. In the presence of financial
market imperfections, an increase in the debt burden causes a deterioration of the balance
sheetand anincreasein the costof external finance. Asexternal financebecomes more costly,
firms reduce their investment.
2Frankel (2003) summarizes the relative benefits of fixed versus flexible exchange rates. Cepedes, Chang
andVelasco(2000),Aghion,BachettaandBanerjee(2001),andGertler,GilchristandNatalucci(2007)analyze
these issues using small open-economy models.
3Thedevaluationmayalsoaffectinvestmentbychangingthepriceindexofinvestmentgoods. Theincrease
in the domestic price of foreign investment goods was offset by a decline in the price of domestic investment
goods so that the relative price of investment goods stayed relatively constant throughout this period.
1

Understanding the effect of foreign-denominated debt for investment spending requires
firm-level data. We use a newly available panel-data set of Korean manufacturing firms to
assess the strength of the finance channel discussed above. Importantly, the data set provides
detailed information on the foreign exchange-rate exposure of the firm, both in terms of the
amount of exports and in terms of the amount of foreign-denominated debt.
We begin with a reduced-form regression analysis. The exchange rate crisis and ensuing
devaluation provide a natural experiment with which one can measure the combined effect of
the devaluation on firm-level investment spending. A key point to this identification strategy
is that firms should respond differently to the devaluation depending on both the level of
foreign sales and the amount of foreign-denominated debt. Following the devaluation, firms
with high levels of foreign sales should increase their investment relative to other firms, while
firms with high levels of foreign-denominated debt should decrease their investment relative
to other firms. By controlling for exports, we cleanly identify the balance-sheet effect of
foreign-denominated debt on investment spending.
The second part of the paper adopts a structural approach. It specifies a dynamic opti-
mization problem of a firm which produces for both domestic and foreign markets and issues
both domestic and foreign-denominated debt. The firm operates under a set of financial
and non-financial constraints. The dynamic program is used to estimate the structural rela-
tionship characterizing investment, profitability and financial conditions. We then conduct
counterfactualsimulationstounderstandtherolethatforeign-denominateddebtandfinancial
frictions played during the crisis period.
Severalrecentpapersestimatetheeffectofforeign-denominateddebtonfirm-level invest-
ment during currency devaluations. Using a sample of Latin American firms over the 1990’s,
Bleakley and Cowan (2002) find that the net effect of the devaluation was likely positive
for firms with high levels of foreign-denominated debt. Because these authors do not have
separate information on the export status of firms, they are unable to distinguish balance-
sheet effects from competitiveness effects however. Aguiar (2004) examines the investment
behavior of Mexican firms during the 1994 pesos devaluation.4 By controlling for export
status, this study finds a negative effect of foreign-denominated debt that is distinct from
the competitiveness effect. Similarly, Desai, Foley and Forbes (2007) document a negative
response of firm-level investment to devaluations for local but not multi-national firms. These
papers adopt a reduced-form approach and therefore cannot formally quantify the effect that
foreign-denominated debt exerts on investment.
Our paper is also related to the extensive literature on firm-level investment and capital
4Relatedly, Pratap and Urrutia (2003) calibrate a model to fit this episode.
2