NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A CALIBRATABLE MODEL OF OPTIMAL CEO INCENTIVES IN MARKET EQUILIBRIUM
Alex Edmans
Xavier Gabaix
Augustin Landier
Working Paper 13372
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13372
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2007
For helpful commments, we thank John Core, Carola Frydman, Bob Gibbons, Ben Hermalin (a discussant),
Dirk Jenter, Holger Mueller, Michael Roberts, Yuliy Sannikov, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, Youngsuk
Yook and seminar participants at MIT, NYU and the NBER Summer Institute. XG thanks the NSF
(DRU-0527518) for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Alex Edmans, Xavier Gabaix, and Augustin Landier. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Calibratable Model of Optimal CEO Incentives in Market Equilibrium
Alex Edmans, Xavier Gabaix, and Augustin Landier
NBER Working Paper No. 13372
September 2007
JEL No. D2,D3,G34,J3,J41
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a unified framework for understanding the determinants of both CEO incentives
and total pay levels in competitive market equilibrium. It embeds a modified principal-agent problem
into a talent assignment model to endogenize both elements of compensation. The model's closed form
solutions yield testable predictions for how incentives should vary across firms under optimal contracting.
In particular, our calibrations show that the negative relationship between the CEO's effective equity
stake and firm size is quantitatively consistent with efficiency and need not reflect rent extraction.
Our model and data both also imply that the dollar change in wealth for a percentage change in firm
value, scaled by annual pay, is independent of firm size. This may render it an attractive incentive
measure as it is comparable between firms and over time. The theory also predicts a positive relationship
between pay volatility and firm volatility, and that risk and effort affect total pay along the cross-section
but not in the aggregate. Finally, we demonstrate that incentive compensation is effective at solving
large agency problems, such as selecting corporate strategy, but smaller issues such as perk consumption
are best addressed through direct monitoring.
Alex Edmans Augustin Landier
The Wharton School Stern School of Business
University of Pennsylvania New York University
2428 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall 44 West 4th Street, 9th floor
3620 Locust Walk New York, NY 10012
Philadelphia, PA 19104 alandier@stern.nyu.edu
aedmans@wharton.upenn.edu
Xavier Gabaix
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, 9th floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
xgabaix@stern.nyu.edu

Thispaperpresentsauni…edframeworkforunderstandingthedeterminantsofboththelevel
and sensitivity of CEO pay in neoclassical market equilibrium. In our model, both elements
of compensation are simultaneously governed by the market for scarce talent and the nature
of the agency con‡ict. Holding total pay constant, e¤ort considerations determine its division
into …xed and performance-sensitive components. To endogenize the level of total pay, and
thus fully solve for the absolute level of incentive compensation, we embed this result into a
general equilibrium model of the competitive assignment of CEO talent. As in Gabaix and
Landier (2008), the most skilled CEOs are matched with the largest …rms and earn the highest
salaries, leading to a positive association between total pay and …rm size. Dollar incentive
compensation therefore also varies with size. We further extend the competitive assignment
model to incorporate risk aversion and allow for general contracts, deriving further implications
onthee¤ectofriskonpayandthee¤ectivenessofcompensationinaddressingagencyproblems.
The model has two key contributions over and above existing theories. First, while many
incentive models are partial equilibrium, taking the level of pay as given, we endogenize it
in market equilibrium to produce a single, parsimonious model of both incentives and total
pay. The model therefore combines many issues related to executive compensation in a single
framework, demonstrating how incentives and salary should optimally vary across companies,
between countries, and over time according to managerial talent, …rm size, volatility and the
cost of e¤ort. Second, our model is particularly tractable and yields closed-form solutions.
These features remain when allowing for general incentive contracts and general risk-averse
utility functions. Indeed, the full market equilibrium can be summarized in just three simple
equations. Notonlymaythismakethemodel anattractivebenchmarkonwhichfuturetheories
can build, but it also leads to clear, quantitative empirical implications and thus readily lends
the model to empirical analysis.
We explore three such implications. The …rst is the relationship between …rm size and
wealth-performance sensitivity. This issue is important for at least two reasons. It has been
widely documented that the CEO’s “e¤ective equity stake”or “dollar-dollar incentives”(the
dollar change in wealth for a dollar change in …rm value) are signi…cantly decreasing in …rm
size (e.g. Jensen and Murphy (1990), Schaefer (1998)). Why is this? One interpretation is
that rent extraction is particularly pronounced in large …rms, thus allowing incentives to be
suboptimally low (e.g. Bebchuk and Fried (2004)). If this argument is correct, the implications
are profound. If the CEOs in charge of the largest companies have the weakest incentives to
exert e¤ort, then billions of dollars of value may be lost each year. This explanation would also
imply a pressing need for intervention: the current system of pay determination is broken, and
must be …xed.
Our model can be used to evaluate this hypothesis as it provide a quantitative benchmark
for how incentives should scale with size under optimal contracting. In our theory, e¤ort has
a multiplicative e¤ect on …rm value, and so the dollar gains from working are proportional to
2

size. The CEO’s utility gain from shirking (in dollar terms) rises with wealth, but wealth only
has a 1/3 elasticity with size. Therefore, dollar-dollar incentives should have a size elasticity of
-2/3, which is very close to our empirical estimate of -0.58. Therefore, the observed negative
relationshipisexactlywhatafrictionlessmodelwouldpredict–asmallere¤ectiveequityshareis
su¢ cient to induce e¤ort in large companies. Note that unlike other determinants of incentives
studied by the literature, size can be measured with little error. This limits our ‡exibility in
calibration, allowing the model to be subject to particularly close empirical scrutiny, and its
predictions to be rejectable.
Understanding the scaling of incentive measures with …rm size is also important to evaluate
the various metrics available to empiricists. We demonstrate both theoretically and empirically
that “scaled wealth-performance sensitivity” (the dollar change in wealth for a percentage
change in …rm value, scaled by annual pay) is invariant to …rm size, unlike other commonly
used measures. This property may make it particularly attractive for empirical analysis, as it
is comparable across …rms and over time.
Second, we examine the model’s implications for the e¤ect of …rm risk on total pay, the level
of incentives, and pay volatility. Traditional theories have an unbounded level of e¤ort and so
optimal incentives are a trade-o¤between the gains from working and the cost of risk-bearing.
Firm risk therefore reduces both the level of incentives and pay volatility. Our model features
a maximum level of e¤ort, which the …rm always wishes to implement as the gains from e¤ort
are proportional to …rm size, but the cost imposed on the CEO is proportional to his wage,
which is substantially smaller. Incentives are set to induce maximum e¤ort regardless of risk,
and so are independent of volatility. Since pay volatility equals the product of incentives and
…rm risk, we predict a positive link between pay volatility and risk, contrary to existing models
but supported by our data.
For total pay, the theory predicts that variations in volatility generate cross-sectional salary
di¤erences as riskier …rms have to pay a compensating di¤erential. We con…rm this empirically.
However, market-wide increases in risk have negligible impact on the pay of the most talented
CEOs. Since the pay of top CEOs is only driven by …rm size and the scarcity of CEO talent, it
is not compensation for aggregate-level risk. The e¤ects of disutility of e¤ort are very similar –
it explains pay di¤erences along the cross-section, but has no aggregate impact.
The third application of the model is to assess whether observed levels of incentive com-
pensation are e¤ective in solving agency problems. Jensen and Murphy (1990) …nd that CEO
wealth falls by only $3.25 for every $1,000 loss in shareholder value. As this …gure appears low,
it is frequently interpreted as evidence that current practices are inadequate to induce share-
holder value maximization (see however Hall and Liebman (1998)). Since this issue concerns
magnitudes, not directions, a calibratable model is particularly suited to shed light upon the
debate. We …nd that observed incentives are able to deter suboptimal actions (such as shirking,
pursuit of pet projects, or empire-building acquisitions) if such behavior increases the CEO’s
3