NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IMPUTING RISK TOLERANCE FROM SURVEY RESPONSES
Miles S. Kimball
Claudia R. Sahm
Matthew D. Shapiro
Working Paper 13337
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13337
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2007
We are grateful to Dan Benjamin, John Bound, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, John Laitner, Atsushi Inoue,
Lutz Kilian, Tyler Shumway, Martha Starr-McCluer, Serena Ng, Gary Solon, seminar participants
at Osaka University, and anonymous referees for helpful comments. Kimball and Shapiro gratefully
acknowledge the support of National Institute on Aging grants 2-P01-AG10179 and 5-R01-AG020638.
Sahm gratefully acknowledges the support of a NIA Pre-Doctoral Training Fellowship and an Innovation
in Social Research Award from the University of Michigan Institute for Social Research. The views
presented are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve
Board or its staff or of the National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper subsumes an earlier
working paper by Kimball and Shapiro, "Estimating a Cardinal Attribute from Ordered Categorical
Responses Subject to Noise."
© 2007 by Miles S. Kimball, Claudia R. Sahm, and Matthew D. Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Imputing Risk Tolerance from Survey Responses
Miles S. Kimball, Claudia R. Sahm, and Matthew D. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 13337
August 2007
JEL No. C24,C42,E21,G11
ABSTRACT
Economic theory assigns a central role to risk preferences. This paper develops a measure of relative
risk tolerance using responses to hypothetical income gambles in the Health and Retirement Study.
In contrast to most survey measures that produce an ordinal metric, this paper shows how to construct
a cardinal proxy for the risk tolerance of each survey respondent. The paper also shows how to account
for measurement error in estimating this proxy and how to obtain consistent regression estimates despite
the measurement error. The risk tolerance proxy is shown to explain differences in asset allocation
across households.
Miles S. Kimball Matthew D. Shapiro
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of Michigan University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220 Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER and NBER
mkimball@umich.edu shapiro@umich.edu
Claudia R. Sahm
Federal Reserve Board
Washington DC 20551
Claudia.R.Sahm@frb.gov

1. INTRODUCTION
Choices with uncertain outcomes, such as financial investments, career paths, and health
practices, are numerous and important to welfare. Empirical studies of these behaviors
often suffer from a common weakness — the inability to take into account heterogeneity
in preferences. In this paper, we develop a quantitative proxy for risk tolerance based on
responses from a large-scale survey to account for this heterogeneity. We then use the proxy
to study asset allocation.
Our measurement of risk tolerance is based on individuals’ responses to questions about
hypothetical risky choices. In particular, we ask them to choose between a job with a certain
lifetime income and a job with a random, but higher mean lifetime income. We show how
to translate these ordinal responses into a cardinal proxy for risk tolerance. To construct
this proxy and use it to study behavior, we confront a number of issues. First, the survey
responses about gambles over lifetime income imply a range instead of a point value for
the unobserved cardinal preference parameter. Second, the survey responses are likely to
be subject to measurement error. We develop a statistical model addressing both issues.
Multiple responses from some individuals and refinements to the survey questions isolate
the true variation in risk preferences. With the maximum-likelihood estimates, we compute
the proxy value — the expectation of risk tolerance conditional on survey responses — for
each individual. Based on a small set of survey questions, the proxy may not fully capture
the systematic variation in risk preferences. This induces a nonstandard errors-in-variables
problem in regression estimates that use the proxy as an explanatory variable. We provide
an estimator using the proxy that is consistent despite errors in variables.
The plan of the paper is as follows. Section 2 discusses the survey questions on life-
time income gambles and the distribution of responses in the Health and Retirement Study.
(See http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu for information on the survey.) Section 3 shows how to
construct the cardinal proxy for risk tolerance from these survey responses and Section 4
addresses the presence of survey response error. Researchers will be able to use such a proxy

as an explanatory variable in studying a wide range of behaviors. In Section 5, we show
how to estimate consistently the effect of the preference parameter on behavior. Section 6
applies these procedures to study the asset allocation decision. Our results show that our
improved measure of risk preference significantly alters the estimated effects of risk tolerance
and other observable characteristics on asset allocation. The final section offers conclusions.
2. SURVEYING RISK PREFERENCES
The Health and Retirement Study (HRS) is a large-scale, biennial survey, which began in
1992 with a representative sample of individuals between ages 51 to 61 and their spouses. In
addition to detailed financial and demographic information, the study elicits risk preferences
using a battery of questions developed by Barsky, Juster, Kimball, and Shapiro (1997).
The Panel Study of Income Dynamics, National Longitudinal Study, Surveys of Consumers,
Dutch CentERpanel, and Chilean Social Security Survey have also fielded these gambles over
lifetime income. In hypothetical scenarios, respondents choose between a certain job and
a risky job. With equal chances, the risky job will double lifetime income or cut lifetime
income by a specific fraction (or downside risk). Varying the downside risk on the new job
in subsequent questions refines the measure of risk preferences.
Specifically, in 1992 the HRS poses the following scenario:
Suppose that you are the only income earner in the family, and you have a good
job guaranteed to give you your current (family) income every year for life. You
are given the opportunity to take a new and equally good job, with a 50-50
chance it will double your (family) income and a 50-50 chance that it will cut
your (family) income by a third. Would you take the new job?
Individuals accepting this new, risky job then consider one with a higher downside risk:
Suppose the chances were 50-50 that it would double your (family) income, and
50-50 that it would cut it in half. Would you still take the new job?
Those initially declining the new job consider one with a lower downside risk:
2