NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CLOSE TO YOU? BIAS AND PRECISION IN PATENT-BASED MEASURES OF
TECHNOLOGICAL PROXIMITY
Mary Benner
Joel Waldfogel
Working Paper 13322
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13322
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2007
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Mary Benner and Joel Waldfogel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Close to You? Bias and Precision in Patent-Based Measures of Technological Proximity
Mary Benner and Joel Waldfogel
NBER Working Paper No. 13322
August 2007
JEL No. O31
ABSTRACT
Patent data have been widely used in research on technological innovation to characterize firms' locations
as well as the proximities among firms in knowledge space. Researchers could measure proximity
among firms with a variety of measures based on patent class data, including Euclidean distance, correlation,
and angle between firms' patent class distributions. Alternatively, one could measure proximity using
overlap in cited patents. We point out that measures of proximity based on small numbers of patents
are imprecisely measured random variables. Measures computed on samples with few patents generate
both biased and imprecise measures of proximity. We explore the effects of larger sample sizes and
coarser patent class breakdowns in mitigating these problems. Where possible, we suggest that researchers
increase their sample sizes by aggregating years or using all of the listed patent classes on a patent,
rather than just the first.
Mary Benner
Management Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
benner@wharton.upenn.edu
Joel Waldfogel
Business and Public Policy
University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School
1400 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6372
and NBER
waldfogj@wharton.upenn.edu

Patent data have been widely used in organizational research in recent years to study
firms’ technological innovation (e.g. Rosenkopf & Nerkar, 2001; Benner & Tushman, 2002;
Sorenson & Stuart, 2000; Helfat, 1994; Ahuja, 2000; Ahuja & Katila, 2001), knowledge flows
between firms (e.g. Rosenkopf & Almeida, 2003; Song, Wu, & Almeida, 2003; Mowery, Oxley,
& Silverman, 1996), diversification (e.g. Silverman, 1999; Miller, 2004; Argyres, 1996;
Piscitello, 2004), and technological spillovers (e.g. Jaffe, 1989; 1986; Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and
Henderson, 1993). A common use of patent data has been to characterize firms’ technological
positions and calculate the proximities of firms in technological space (e.g. Jaffe, 1986; 1989;
Stuart & Podolny, 1996; Rosenkopf & Almeida, 2003).
This research frequently makes use of one of two approaches for measuring proximity.
First, researchers use the 3-digit patent classifications listed on each firm’s patents, provided by
the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). The distribution of patents across classes is
taken to characterize a firms’ location in knowledge space, and the distance between firms’
technological resources is frequently assessed by calculating the distance between vectors of
patent class listings (e.g. Jaffe, 1986; Ahuja, 2000; Song, Almeida & Wu, 2004). Two firms are
close if they tend to patent in the same technological domains, that is, if their shares of patents in
various patent classes are similar. Second, researchers use measures of overlap in patent
citations between firms (Stuart & Podolny, 1996; Mowery, Oxley, & Silverman, 1996).
The increasing use of patent data in strategy and technology research has given rise to a
need to better understand the accuracy and appropriate use of such data. In this paper we explore
the bias and imprecision of estimates of various measures of proximity between firms when the
measures are calculated on small samples. We start with firms holding large patent portfolios,
allowing us to estimate their distances relatively accurately from the large number of patents in
3

their full samples. We then compute inter-firm distance measures based on random samples of
the patent classes listed on each firm’s patents. The resulting proximity measures are random
variables, and the apparent distance between two firms depends on the samples drawn. To
evaluate the performance of estimates of proximity measures based on, say, 25 patent class
listings per firm, we calculate measures repeatedly using different random samples of the firms’
listings, a process known as “bootstrap sampling.” This method, which has seen increasing use
in social science recently, allows us to examine properties of estimators empirically even when –
as is the case here – analytical derivations would be tedious or difficult. The resulting empirical
distribution of proximity measures shows how estimators of proximity perform, in bias and
precision, relative to the full-sample values. We perform this exercise for increasingly large
sample sizes, from 25 to 5000, to allow us to compare how bias and precision improve with
larger samples.
The main result in this paper is that for sample sizes commonly employed in the
literature, patent-based proximity measures have substantial bias and imprecision. Using larger
samples of patents or patent class listings, aggregating data across years, or aggregating to
coarser groupings of patent classifications can mitigate some of these problems.
Our paper joins recent studies, including Alcacer and Gittleman (2006) and Fogarty, Jaffe
and Trajtenberg (2000) in providing insight into current practice and caveats associated with the
use of patent data. We are interested in better understanding the consequences for typical uses of
proximity measures based on patent data. Our goal is to guide future research using patent data
by outlining the conditions under which bias and precision issues might emerge. To the extent
the potential for these issues can be recognized and mitigated, patent information can become
even more reliable and valuable in research.
4