NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CULTURE AS LEARNING:
THE EVOLUTION OF FEMALE LABOR FORCE PARTICIPATION OVER A CENTURY
Raquel Fernandez
Working Paper 13373
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13373
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2007
An earlier version of the model and simulation in this paper were presented in my Marshall Lecture
at the EEA, Vienna, August 2006. The slides for this presentation are available at http://homepages.nyu.edu/
~rf2/Research/EEAslidesFinal.pdf (pp 48-52). I thank Liz Potamites for excellent research assistance,
and Christophe Chamley, John Knowles, Gianluca Violante, Elisabeth Schulte, and George Tridimas
for helpful comments. I also wish to thank seminar audiences at the LAEF "Households, Gender and
Fertility" conference, the NY/Philadelphia feds.' "Quantitative Macroeconomics" Workshop, the NBER
Summer Institute, the Silvaplana Political Economy workshop, and the "Family Behavior and the Aggregate
Economy" SITE workshop for many helpful remarks. Lastly, I thank the NSF for financial support
and the Russell Sage Foundation for its hospitality. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Raquel Fernandez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Culture as Learning: The Evolution of Female Labor Force Participation over a Century
Raquel Fernandez
NBER Working Paper No. 13373
September 2007
JEL No. E2,J21,Z1
ABSTRACT
Married women's labor force participation has increased dramatically over the last century. Why this
has occurred has been the subject of much debate. This paper investigates the role of culture as learning
in this change. To do so, it develops a dynamic model of culture in which individuals hold heterogeneous
beliefs regarding the relative long-run payoffs for women who work in the market versus the home.
These beliefs evolve rationally via an intergenerational learning process. Women are assumed to learn
about the long-term payoffs of working by observing (noisy) private and public signals. They then
make a work decision. This process generically generates an S-shaped figure for female labor force
participation, which is what is found in the data. The S shape results from the dynamics of learning.
I calibrate the model to several key statistics and show that it does a good job in replicating the quantitative
evolution of female LFP in the US over the last 120 years. The model highlights a new dynamic role
for changes in wages via their effect on intergenerational learning. The calibration shows that this
role was quantitatively important in several decades.
Raquel Fernandez
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
raquel.fernandez@nyu.edu

1 Introduction
A fundamental change over the last century has been the vast increase in female labor force
participation. In particular, married women’s participation in the formal labor market
increased dramatically–from around 2% in 1880 to over 70% in 2000–though the pace of
change was markedly uneven. As shown in …gure 1, married women’s labor force partici-
pation increased very slowly from 1880 to 1920, grew a bit more rapidly between 1920 and
1950, then accelerated between 1950 and 1990, and has since stayed relatively constant.1
Many explanations have been given for this transformation. Depending on the par-
ticular time period under consideration, potential causal factors have included structural
changeintheeconomy(theriseoftheclericalsector), technologicalchangeintheworkplace
and in the household, medical advances (including the introduction and dissemination of
the oral contraceptive), decreases in discrimination, institutional changes in divorce law,
and the greater availability of childcare.2
A popular alternative explanation (though not with economists) is that changes in cul-
ture or social norms have exerted great in‡uence on the evolution of women’s role in the
market work.3 And, from multiple sources of evidence, it certainly appears that opinions
about the role of women in the workplace have changed radically over time. Figure 2,
for example, shows the evolution of the percentage of the population that answered a¢ r-
matively to the question "Do you approve of a married woman earning money in business
or industry if she has a husband capable of supporting her?"4 In 1936 fewer than 20%
of individuals sampled agreed with the statement; in 1998 fewer than 20% of individuals
disagreed with it.5
Merely pointing to the fact that society has changed the way in which it regards women,
however,isnotparticularlyenlightening. Itbegsthequestionastowhyculturechangedand
whythesechangesa¤ectedworkbehaviorinsuchagradualandunevenfashion. Indeed,one
1These LFP numbers were calculated by the author from the US Census for white, married women
between the ages of 25-44, born in the US, not in agriculture, non-farm, non-institutional quarters.
2The classic source for an economic history of female labor force participation is Goldin (1990). For
variousexplanationsforthischangesee,amongothers,Goldin(1990),GalorandWeil(1996),Costa(2000),
Goldin and Katz (2002), Jones, Manuelli, and McGrattan (2003), Greenwood, Seshadri, and Yorukoglu
(2005), Gayle and Golan (2006), Albanesi and Olivetti (2006, 2007), and Knowles (2007).
3The reluctance of economists to believe in cultural explanations stems, in large part, from the absence
of empirical evidence that convincingly isolates cultural in‡uences from their economic and institutional
environment. There has been recent progress in this area, however (see Fernández (2007a) and Guiso,
Sapienza, and Zingales (2006) for partial reviews of this literature). For example, Fernández and Fogli
(2005)showthatthevariationintheworkbehaviorofsecond-generationAmericanwomencanbeexplained,
in part, by the level of female LFP in their parents’country of origin (see also Antecol (2000)). Moreover,
Fernández (2007b) shows that the attitudes towards women’s work in the parental country of origin has
important explanatory value for second-generation American women’s work behavior in the US. These
papers show that there are di¤erences in culture across societies that matter for women’s work decisions,
but they are silent on the evolution of culture. Fernández, Fogli, and Olivetti (2004) give an indication for
one way that culture may evolve over time by showing that working mothers seem to transmit a di¤erent
set of beliefs or preferences to their sons, which then makes it more attractive for the wives of these men to
work (relative to the wives of men whose mothers did not work).
4The exact wording of this question varied a bit over time. See The Gallup Poll; public opinion, 1935-
1971.
5For additional evidence that individual attitudes and work behavior are correlated see, for example,
Levine (1993), Vella (1994) , Fortin (2005), and Farré-Olalla and Vella (2007).
1

Figure 1: U.S. Census data 1880-2000. Percentage of white, married (spouse present)
women born in the U.S., 25-44 years old (non-agricultural, non-group quarters), who report
being in the labor force.
might be tempted, as surely some are, to dismiss the evolution of beliefs as mere changes
in the superstructure of the economy that simply accompany and re‡ect the changes in
material conditions brought about by technological change.6 Viewed from this perspective,
astechnologicaladvancesalteredwomen’sworkbehavior,beliefssimplymarchedrightalong
in step and changed with them. An alternative view of culture often provided in economic
theory—thatofaselectionmechanismamongmultipleequilibria—likewisedoesnotprovide
a very useful framework in which to think about questions of cultural change. Without a
more developed theory of why culture changes, one is left with either sunspots causing a
switch among equilibria or an evolutionary theory of gradual changes over time.7
Taking inspiration from the fact that women’s labor force participation changed in a
veryunevenfashionovertimeinaformthatresemblesan"S-shape",thispaperexploresthe
idea that in some contexts it may be useful to think about cultural change as the evolution
of beliefs that occurs over time as part of a rational, intergenerational learning process.8
In particular, the S-shaped curve of female labor force dynamics is reminiscent of similarly
6See, e.g., Guner and Greenwood (2006) who argue that the change in sexual mores re‡ect changes in
the e¢ cacy of contraception.
7For an interesting example of evolutionary theory applied to culture see Bowles (1998). Alternatively,
social norms can be passed on from parents to children in an optimizing fashion as in Bisin and Verdier
(2000) and Tabellini (2007).
8The idea that cultural change may be modelled as a learning process is already present in the seminal
paper of Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer, and Welch (1992), though the focus there is on information cascades in
which individuals stop learning.
2