NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REASSESSING THE INS AND OUTS OF UNEMPLOYMENT
Robert Shimer
Working Paper 13421
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13421
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2007
My title borrows from Darby, Haltiwanger, and Plant (1986). I am grateful for comments from Fernando
Alvarez, Gadi Barlevy, Francesco Belviso, Tito Boeri, Steven Davis, Jason Faberman, Robert Hall,
David Laibson, Gary Solon, and Randall Wright and from seminar participants at the Bank of Italy,
Bocconi University, the Chicago Fed, Harvard University, the St.\ Louis Fed, and the University of
Texas-Austin on an earlier version of this paper. This paper is supported by grants from the National
Science Foundation and the Sloan Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Robert Shimer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment
Robert Shimer
NBER Working Paper No. 13421
September 2007
JEL No. J6,E24,E32
ABSTRACT
This paper uses readily accessible data to measure the probability that an employed worker becomes
unemployed and the probability that an unemployed worker finds a job, the ins and outs of unemployment.
Since 1948, the job finding probability has accounted for three-quarters of the fluctuations in the unemployment
rate in the United States and the employment exit probability for one-quarter. Fluctuations in the employment
exit probability are quantitatively irrelevant during the last two decades. Using the underlying microeconomic
data, the paper shows that these results are not due to compositional changes in the pool of searching
workers, nor are they due to movements of workers in and out of the labor force. These results contradict
the conventional wisdom that has guided the development of macroeconomic models of the labor market
during the last fifteen years.
Robert Shimer
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
shimer@uchicago.edu

This paper measures the probability that an employed worker becomes unemployed and
the probability that an unemployed worker finds a job. Using United States data from 1948
to 2007, I find that there are substantial fluctuations in unemployed workers’ job finding
probability at business cycle frequencies, while the probability a worker exits employment is
comparatively acyclic. This is particularly true in the last two decades, during which period
theemployment exitprobabilityhassteadilydeclineddespitetwospikes intheunemployment
rate. Ninety-five percent of the increase in the unemployment rate during the 1991 and 2001
recessions was a consequence of a reduction in the job finding probability. This suggests that
if one wants to understand fluctuations in unemployment, one must understand fluctuations
in the transition rate from unemployment to employment, the ‘outs of unemployment’. This
conclusion is in opposition to the conventional wisdom, built around research by Darby,
Haltiwanger, and Plant (1985) and (1986), Blanchard and Diamond (1990), and Davis and
Haltiwanger (1990) and (1992), that recessions are periods characterized primarily by a high
exit rate from employment.
I base my conclusion onnovel but simple measures of the job finding and employment exit
probabilities. These measures rely on two strong assumptions: workers neither enter nor exit
the labor force but simply transit between employment and unemployment; and all workers
are ex ante identical, and in particular in any period all unemployed workers have the same
job finding probability and all employed workers have the same exit probability. Given these
assumptions, I show that the probability that an unemployed worker finds a job during a
period can be expressed as a function of the number of unemployed workers at the start of
the period, the number of unemployed workers at the end of the period, and the number
of unemployed workers at the end of the period who were employed at some point during
the period (‘short-term unemployment’). The probability that a worker exits employment to
become unemployed can be found using the same data and the number of employed workers
at the start of the period. Calculations using these data give me my preferred measures
of the job finding probability and employment exit probability, shown in Figure 1. I find
that movements in the job finding probability account for 75 percent of fluctuations in the
unemployment rate since 1948, rising to 95 percent during the last two decades.
It is not surprising that strong assumptions deliver strong results, so this paper also ex-
plores what happens if I relax these assumptions. Consider first the restriction that workers
neither enter nor exit the labor force. Once I relax this assumption, I can no longer use pub-
licly available aggregate data on employment, unemployment, and short-term employment
to construct the job finding and exit probabilities. Instead, I follow a standard methodology
(Abowd and Zellner, 1985; Poterba and Summers, 1986; Blanchard and Diamond, 1990) and
use microeconomic data on individuals’ employment status in consecutive months from 1967
1

to 2007 to construct time series for the gross flow of workers between employment, unemploy-
ment, and inactivity (out of the labor force). I then compute the job finding probability for
unemployed workers and the probability of exiting employment for unemployment from these
data. Althoughthischangesthelevelofthejobfindingandexitprobabilities, Ifinditscarcely
affects their fluctuations. Fluctuations in the unemployment-to-employment transition rate
are more than twice as important as fluctuations in the employment-to-unemployment tran-
sition rate for explaining movements in both the unemployment rate and the employment-
population ratio.1
Ithenrelaxtherestrictionthatallworkersarehomogeneous. Thefirstquestionthatarises
is what exactly the job finding probability measures if different workers have a different
job finding probability. I show that my methodology measures the probability that the
average worker who is unemployed at the start of period t finds a job during period t. Other
alternatives would give an identical measure of the job finding probability if workers were
homogeneous, but have a predictable bias if workers are heterogeneous. United States data
are consistent with the predicted bias.
Another issue that arises when workers are heterogeneous is whether that heterogeneity
can explain fluctuations in the job finding probability. Darby, Haltiwanger, and Plant (1985)
and (1986) argue that the job finding probability declines during recessions because workers
who are unemployed during recessions are different than workers who unemployed during
expansions. According to this theory, recessions are periods when prime-age workers suffer
permanent job loss in particularly large numbers. Such workers have a low probability of
finding a job, but they would have had a low job finding probability regardless of when
they became unemployed. Darby, Haltiwanger, and Plant argue that this compositional
effect drives down the measured job finding probability during recessions, a possibility that
Baker (1992) labeled the “heterogeneity hypothesis.” I test this hypothesis by examining
the compositional variation of the unemployment pool along several different dimensions and
find scant evidence in support of it.
Many previous authors have measured the cyclicality of the job finding and employment
exit probabilities, but this paper offers several contributions to the existing literature. First,
I use data from the long booms of the 1980s and 1990s, during which period the employment
exit probability has become noticeably less cyclical. Second, I use publicly available data
whenever possible, making it easy for others to verify my results, extend them as more data
1Arelatedassumption,whichIdonotrelaxinthispaper,isthatworkersonlyseparatefromtheiremployer
to become unemployed or exit the labor force. Using United States data from 1994 to 2003, Fallick and
Fleischman (2004) find that employer-to-employer transitions are “markedly procyclical.” If this is correct,
the total separation rate, either out of employment or directly to another employer, may be acyclic or even
procyclical. See Shimer (2005) for more discussion of this point. Previous version of this paper referred to
the ‘exit rate’ as the ‘separation rate’; the change in nomenclature is intended to reduce confusion.
2