NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECTS OF MANDATORY SEATBELT LAWS ON SEATBELT USE, MOTOR
VEHICLE FATALITIES, AND CRASH-RELATED INJURIES AMONG YOUTHS
Christopher S. Carpenter
Mark Stehr
Working Paper 13408
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13408
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2007
We are grateful to Steven Kinchen and Shari Shanklin at the Centers for Disease Control for assistance
in obtaining the data. Daniel Eisenberg, Anindya Sen, and anonymous referees provided very useful
comments. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Christopher S. Carpenter and Mark Stehr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Effects of Mandatory Seatbelt Laws on Seatbelt Use, Motor Vehicle Fatalities, and Crash-Related
Injuries among Youths
Christopher S. Carpenter and Mark Stehr
NBER Working Paper No. 13408
September 2007
JEL No. I1
ABSTRACT
We provide the first comprehensive assessment of the effects of mandatory seatbelt laws on self-reported
seatbelt use, highway fatalities, and crash-related injuries among high school age youths using data
from the Centers for Disease Control's (CDC) national, state, and local Youth Risk Behavior Surveys
(YRBS) and the Fatality Analysis Reporting System (FARS) from 1991 to 2005, a period spanning
over 20 changes in state seatbelt laws. Our quasi-experimental approaches isolate the independent
effects of seatbelt laws net of demographic characteristics, area and year fixed effects, and smooth
area-specific trends. Across all data sources, we find consistent evidence that state mandatory seatbelt
laws -- particularly those permitting primary enforcement -- significantly increased seatbelt use among
high school age youths by 45-80 percent, primarily at the extensive margin. Unlike previous research
for adults, however, we find evidence against the selective recruitment hypothesis: seatbelt laws had
consistently larger effects on those most likely to be involved in traffic accidents (drinkers, alcohol-involved
drivers). We also find that mandatory seatbelt laws significantly reduced traffic fatalities and serious
injuries resulting from fatal crashes by 8 and 9 percent, respectively. Our results suggest that if all
states had primary enforcement seatbelt laws then regular youth seatbelt use would be nearly universal
and youth fatalities would fall by about 120 per year.
Christopher S. Carpenter
University of California, Irvine
The Paul Merage School of Business
443 SB
Irvine, CA 92697-3125
and NBER
kittc@uci.edu
Mark Stehr
Drexel University
LeBow College of Business
Matheson Hall 504E
3141 Chestnut Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104-2875
stehr@drexel.edu

p.1
1. Introduction
An enormous body of research shows that seatbelts save lives, in large part by reducing
the severity of injuries in traffic collisions (NHTSA 2003). States began adopting
mandatory seatbelt laws in the 1980’s, and research has shown that these laws have been
effective at reducing highway fatalities, primarily by inducing very large increases in
regular seatbelt use among adults (Cohen and Einav 2003, Dee 1999 and others).1
Research has also shown that laws permitting primary enforcement of seatbelt laws –
whereby police authorities can cite violators of the seatbelt law even in the absence of
other violations – have been relatively more effective than weaker laws mandating only
secondary enforcement (see, for example, Houston and Richardson 2006, and others).
In contrast to the large body of evidence on the effects of mandatory seatbelt laws
on adults, there is very little evaluation research focusing on youths. Youths, however,
are of heightened interest in the context of seatbelt use for two key reasons. First, rates of
seatbelt use among high school age youths are much lower than the associated rates for
adults (Womack et al. 1997, Williams et al. 2003, and others). In our national data
covering the period 1991-2005 (described below), only about one third of high school age
youths report always wearing a seatbelt when riding in someone else’s car, while data
from the University of Michigan’s Monitoring the Future Study over the period 1986-
2000 show that only one quarter of high school seniors report always wearing a seatbelt
when driving a car. These figures are less than half the associated rate for adults
according to surveys fielded by the National Highway Transportation Safety
Administration (NHTSA), which produce seatbelt use rates of over 70% for adults by
1 A similar relationship has also been documented throughout provinces in Canada. See, for example, Sen
2001 and 2006.

p.2
2001. Second, traffic fatalities are disturbingly common among youths, both in absolute
and relative terms: fatal crash rates of youths age 16-19 are about four times higher than
the associated rates for older adults age 25-69 (NHTSA 2003), and motor vehicle crashes
are the leading cause of death for 15-20 year olds in the United States (according to 2002
mortality data from the National Center for Health Statistics). Finally, previous research
has argued that youths are unlikely to be strongly responsive to seatbelt laws because of
“selective recruitment” – whereby those most likely to be in accidents are those least
likely to increase seatbelt use in response to a law. These facts heighten the importance
of understanding the relationship between seatbelt laws and seatbelt use among youths.
We provide the first comprehensive evaluation of the effects of mandatory
seatbelt laws on youth seatbelt use, traffic fatalities, and crash-related injuries. To do so,
we use area-identified versions of the 1991-2005 national Youth Risk Behavior Surveys
(YRBS), the 1993-2005 state YRBS, and the 1993-2005 local YRBS, all coordinated by
the Centers for Disease Control (CDC). The national YRBS microdata provide the
benefit of large sample sizes, multiple meaningful measures of seatbelt use, the ability to
directly control for individual demographic characteristics, and the ability to test
hypotheses about selective recruitment among youths using information on other risky
behaviors such as drinking and alcohol-involved driving. The state and local YRBS
samples improve on previous research because the majority of these surveys are designed
to be representative of the larger high school student population.2 We complement the
analyses of self-reported seatbelt use – which may suffer from endogenous reporting bias
– with more objectively measured evidence on traffic fatalities and crash-related injuries
2 For a similar example of the state and local representative YRBS data used in this way, see Carpenter and
Cook (2007, forthcoming).