NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RISKS AND PRICES:
THE ROLE OF USER SANCTIONS IN MARIJUANA MARKETS
Rosalie Liccardo Pacula
Beau Kilmer
Michael Grossman
Frank J. Chaloupka
Working Paper 13415
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13415
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2007
This research was supported by grant number 49977 from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation to
the National Bureau of Economic Research. A version of this paper was presented at the International
Society for the Study of Drug Policy, the International Health Economics Association 5th World Congress,
the NBER Summer Institute, and the Association of Public Policy and Management Conference. We
appreciate helpful comments received by Martin Bouchard, Jon Caulkins, Isaac Ehrlich, Mark Kleiman,
Peter Reuter, Jody Sindelar, Neeraj Sood, and participants at all of these conferences. This paper has
not undergone the review accorded official National Bureau of Economic Research Publications; in
particular, it has not been submitted for approval by the Board of Directors. All opinions expressed
in the paper are those of the authors and should neither be attributed to the funding source, nor the
mentioned institutions, nor the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, Beau Kilmer, Michael Grossman, and Frank J. Chaloupka. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Risks and Prices: The Role of User Sanctions in Marijuana Markets
Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, Beau Kilmer, Michael Grossman, and Frank J. Chaloupka
NBER Working Paper No. 13415
September 2007
JEL No. I18,K42
ABSTRACT
User sanctions influence the legal risk for participants in illegal drug markets. A change in user sanctions
may change retail drug prices, depending on how it changes the legal risk to users, how it changes
the legal risk to dealers, and the slope of the supply curve. Using a novel dataset with rich transaction-level
information, this paper evaluates the impact of recent changes in user sanctions for marijuana on marijuana
prices. The results suggest that lower legal risks for users are associated with higher marijuana prices
in the short-run, which ceteris paribus, implies higher profits for drug dealers. Additionally, the findings
have important implications for thinking about the slope of the supply curve and interpreting previous
research on the effect of drug laws on demand for marijuana.
Rosalie Liccardo Pacula Michael Grossman
RAND City University of New York Graduate Center
1776 Main Street 365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
P.O. Box 2138 New York, NY 10016-4309
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138 and NBER
and NBER mgrossman@gc.cuny.edu
pacula@rand.org
Frank J. Chaloupka
Beau Kilmer University of Illinois, Department of Economics
RAND College of Business Administration
1776 Main Street 601 S. Morgan Street, Room 2103
P.O. Box 2138 Chicago, IL 60607-7121
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138 and NBER
kilmer@rand.org fjc@uic.edu

Over 25 million Americans consumed marijuana in 2005 and there have been over 4
million arrests for marijuana possession since 2000 (SAMHSA, 2006; FBI, annual). Given its
popularity and the widespread belief that its harms are low relative to other illicit substances, a
significant debate has continued regarding marijuana policy reform in the United States and
abroad (MacCoun & Reuter, 2001). The only successful policy reforms that have come out of
the recent debate involve modified sanctions facing users. Canada, Germany, Great Britain,
Portugal, and Spain have all recently adopted policies that dramatically reduce the penalties and
sanctions faced by users of marijuana (Hall and Pacula, 2003). Even in the United States there
has been a softening of sanctions toward individuals caught in possession of small amounts of
marijuana in many states (Chriqui et al., 2002; Pacula et al., 2003).
A modest literature has developed examining how these small differences in sanctions
observed across states in the United States are correlated with differences in marijuana use
(Saffer and Chaloupka, 1999; Farrelly et al., 2001; Pacula et al., 2003; Williams et al, 2004).
Many studies find that lower sanctions, typically indicated through reduced jail time and lower
fines, are associated with greater use although the effect sizes are small and occasionally
insignificant. The small or insignificant effect may be explained by one of three possibilities.
First, the policies may truly have little impact on demand, especially if enforcement is negligible.
Second, people may not be aware of the sanctions or if they have changed, again suggesting that
the policies will not affect demand (Pacula, et al., 2005). Third, if supply is upward sloping as
with other normal goods there could be an offsetting price effect that reduces the net effect of the
policies observed in analyses.
This paper considers this last possibility by examining the role of user sanctions in
marijuana markets and whether changes in these sanctions, believed to shift demand, influence
the prices paid by users in local markets. Economic theory suggests that price will be affected by
demand side policies if supply is upward sloping, a perfectly reasonable assumption for
marijuana. To date virtually no work has been done examining the slope of the supply curve for
marijuana, presumably due to lack of reliable data given the illegal nature of the good. However,
it is possible to infer basic information on the slope of the supply curve by understanding how
shifts in the demand for marijuana influence the equilibrium level of prices observed in the
market.

In this paper, we use rich transaction-level information from recent marijuana purchases
made by arrestees who are part of the Arrestee Drug Abuse Monitoring (ADAM) Program to
estimate the impact of state marijuana policies on self-reported price per bulk gram paid. We
first develop a model focused exclusively on proximal measures of transaction risk, and then use
natural variation in state marijuana laws over time and within states to evaluate the impact of
these demand-side policies on the equilibrium prices of marijuana observed in illegal markets.
Because it is possible that demand-side policies influence sellers’ risk as well, we test the
robustness of our findings with respect to these state-policies by considering the impact of other
demand shifters on price, in particular the beer tax. The sensitivity analyses support the
interpretation that reductions in user risk raise price. There are three implications of these
findings. First, the findings support the conclusion that marijuana use is sensitive to changes in
the legal risks targeting users. A reduction in sanctions will increase use of marijuana. Second,
the supply of marijuana is upward sloping at least in the short run, implying that temporary
shortages caused by a reduction in supply or an increase in demand will impact market price.
Third, shortages caused by shifts in demand (such as that generated by a reduction in user
sanctions) will raise sellers’ profits, ceteris paribus.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section we provide some
background literature about state marijuana laws, the operation of marijuana markets, and
marijuana prices. In Section 3 we discuss how policies targeting users of marijuana might
influence marijuana prices under alternative assumptions about supply. In Section 4 we discuss
the data used for this analysis and present our empirical model in Section 5. Section 6 presents
the results from these models and in Section 7 we offer some discussion and conclusion.
1.0 Marijuana Laws, Markets and Price
1.1 State marijuana laws
Even though the U.S. federal government retains a strict prohibition on the possession of
even small amounts of marijuana, there is significant variation across the states in the legal
penalties associated with this offense (Pacula et al., 2003; Chriqui et al., 2001). Given that the
majority of marijuana possession offenses are tried in state courts, state law applies (Ostrom and
Kauder, 1999). The proportion of these arrests leading to conviction is unknown, but those
convicted of marijuana possession are often sentenced to probation and/or a fine, not jail
4