NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EQUILIBRIUM PORTFOLIO STRATEGIES IN THE PRESENCE OF SENTIMENT
RISK AND EXCESS VOLATILITY
Bernard Dumas
Alexander Kurshev
Raman Uppal
Working Paper 13401
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13401
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2007
We are grateful to Wei Xiong, Tony Berrada, Julien Hugonnier and Erwan Morellec for useful discussions.
We are also grateful for comments from Andrew Abel, Nick Barberis, Suleyman Basak, Tomas Bj¨ork,
Andrea Buraschi, Joao Cocco, John Cochrane, George Constantinides, John Cotter, Alexander David,
Mike Gallmeyer, Xavier Gabaix, Francisco Gomes, Lorenzo Garlappi, Joao Gomes, Tim Johnson,
Leonid Kogan, Kostas Koufopoulos, Karen Lewis, Deborah Lucas, Pascal Maenhout, Massimo Massa,
Stavros Panageas, Anna Pavlova, Ludovic Phalippou, Valery Polkovnichencko, Bryan Routledge,
Andrew Scott, Jose Scheinkman, Hersh Shefrin, Matt Spiegel, Alex Stomper, Allan Timmermann,
Skander van den Heuvel, Luis Viceira, Jiang Wang, Pierre-Olivier Weill, Hongjun Yan, Amir Yaron,
Moto Yogo, Joseph Zechner, Stanley Zin and participants at presentations given at Bank of England,
Columbia University, HEC Paris, INSEAD, Judge Institute at Cambridge University, London Business
School, London School of Economics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Oxford University,
Princeton University, Stanford University, University of California at Berkeley, University College
Dublin, University of Frankfurt, University of Piraeus, University of Texas at Austin, University of
Toulouse, University of Vienna, University of Zurich, Wharton School, Yale University, American
Finance Association Meeting, Citigroup Smith Barney Quantitative Conference, Duke/UNC Asset
Pricing Conference, European Finance Association Meeting, European Summer Symposium in Financial
Markets at Gerzensee, European Central Bank, Isaac Newton Institute at Cambridge University, NBER
workshop on Capital Markets and the Economy, NBER Summer Institute, NBER Asset Pricing Meeting,
the Swiss Finance Institute and the Swiss National Bank. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Bernard Dumas, Alexander Kurshev, and Raman Uppal. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Equilibrium Portfolio Strategies in the Presence of Sentiment Risk and Excess Volatility
Bernard Dumas, Alexander Kurshev, and Raman Uppal
NBER Working Paper No. 13401
September 2007
JEL No. C11,D58,D84,D91
ABSTRACT
Our objective is to identify the trading strategy that would allow an investor to take advantage of "excessive"
stock price volatility and "sentiment" fluctuations. We construct a general-equilibrium model of sentiment.
In it, there are two classes of agents and stock prices are excessively volatile because one class is overconfident
about a public signal. As a result, this class of overconfident agents changes its expectations too often,
sometimes being excessively optimistic, sometimes being excessively pessimistic. We determine and
analyze the trading strategy of the rational investors who are not overconfident about the signal. We
find that, because overconfident traders introduce an additional source of risk, rational investors are
deterred by their presence and reduce the proportion of wealth invested into equity except when they
are extremely optimistic about future growth. Moreover, their optimal portfolio strategy is based not
just on a current price divergence but also on their expectation of future sentiment behavior and a prediction
concerning the speed of convergence of prices. Thus, the portfolio strategy includes a protection in
case there is a deviation from that prediction. We find that long maturity bonds are an essential accompaniment
of equity investment, as they serve to hedge this "sentiment risk."
Bernard Dumas Raman Uppal
Université de Lausanne London Business School
Institut de Banque et Finance Regents Park
Bâtiment Extranef London NW1 4SA
1015 Lausanne UK
Switzerland ruppal@london.edu
and NBER
bernard.dumas@unil.ch
Alexander Kurshev
London Business School
akurshev.PHD2003@london.edu

1 Introduction
The excess-volatility puzzle – identified by Shiller (1981) and LeRoy and Porter (1981) – points to
a form of market inefficiency. But, so far, the investment strategy that would serve to exploit that
form of inefficiency and would cause those responsible for excess volatility to part with their wealth
has not been identified. Suppose that a financial market is deemed to be affected by fluctuations
in market “sentiment” so that sentiment volatility causes prices to be more volatile than what
would be justified by dividend volatility alone.1 Suppose further that a Bayesian, intertemporally
optimizing investor trades in that market. We would like to know what investment policy this
person will undertake in equilibrium.
To address this question, we build a general-equilibrium model of a financial market in which a
subpopulationofinvestorstradeson“sentiment”andgeneratesexcessvolatility. Inourmodel,some
investors are overconfident in the sense that they give too much credence to a public information
signal. One way to capture that behavioral feature has recently been proposed by Scheinkman and
Xiong (2003). In their model of a “tree” economy, a stream of dividends is paid. Some aspect
of the stochastic process of dividends is not observable by anyone. All investors are risk neutral,
are constrained from short selling, and receive information in the form of the current dividend
and some public signals. Agents have different beliefs about the correlation between innovations
in the signal and innovations in the unobserved variables: “overconfident”agents are people who
steadfastly believe that this correlation is a positive number when, in fact, it is equal to zero. This
causes them to give too much weight to the signals.
Here, we consider a similar setting except that all investors are risk averse and are allowed to
sell short. One class of agents knows the true correlation. They form “proper” beliefs by using
Bayes’ formula. A second class of investors are overconfident about the public signal. As a result,
they change their beliefs too often about economic prospects: when they receive a signal, they
overreact to it, which then generates excessive stock price movements. We say that volatility is
“excessive” when, for the given utility functions of agents, the level of volatility is larger than it
wouldbeifallagentsknewthecorrelationtobeequaltozero,andwerefertothefluctuationsinthe
1Whetherfinancial-marketvolatilityisactuallyexcessivehasbeendebated. Theliteratureontheequity-premium
puzzle has developed a number of models, such as habit-formation models (see Constantinides (1990); Abel (1990);
Campbell and Cochrane (1999)), in which the effective discount rate is strongly time varying even though the
consumption stream remains very smooth. Using models of that kind, Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2004) have
recently calibrated a model of the U.S. stock market in which the volatility of stock returns is larger than the one
observed in the data. In another line of investigation, Bansal and Yaron (2004) and Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2005)
findthatallowingforasmalllong-runpredictablecomponentindividendgrowthratesandforveryhighelasticityof
intertemporalsubstitutioncangenerateseveralobservedasset-pricingphenomenon,includingvolatilityofthemarket
return. Spiegel (1998) shows that excess volatility can be explained also in an overlapping-generations model with
small shocks to the supply of the multiple risky assets. Bhamra and Uppal (2007) show that differences in risk
aversions can also lead to large volatility.
1

probability beliefs of overconfident agents relative to agents with the proper beliefs as fluctuations
in “sentiment.” The non-zero correlation number to which overconfident investors adhere, is the
singleparameter inourmodelthatcausesittodifferfromatraditionalrational-expectationsgeneral
equilibrium model.
In their contest with investors who process information rationally under the proper beliefs, we
want the traders who are overconfident to be full-fledged intertemporal optimizers nonetheless. It
iswell-knownthatcompleteirrationalityinthemannerofpositive“feedbacktraders”`alaDeLong,
Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990b) can amplify the volatility of stock prices and that the
additional volatility creates “noise-trader risk” for rational arbitrageurs, thereby creating a limit to
arbitrage. However,feedbacktradersortradersactingrandomlymaynotbethebestrepresentation
of irrational behavior because they are “sitting ducks” for rational investors. Furthermore, it is not
clear where the consumption units they are losing are coming from. For this reason, we prefer to
model a general equilibrium economy where the overconfident traders are intertemporal optimizers
with fully specified budget constraints, even if they have overconfident beliefs. In this way, welfare
analysis and the analysis of gains and losses of the two groups of traders remain meaningful.2
We identify three distinct aspects of the portfolio strategy of the investors who process infor-
mation properly.3 First, these investors may not agree today with the market about its current
estimate of the growth rate of dividends: there is a difference of opinion. When the investors with
the proper beliefs are more optimistic than the market, they increase their investment in equity,
while decreasing their investment in bonds (because equity and bonds are positively correlated).
Second, all investors, whether they agree today or not, know that they will revise their forecasts
of growth, with consequent future changes in the rate of interest. Third, if there is a difference
of opinion today, investors with the proper beliefs are aware that the overconfident investors will
revise their probability beliefs differently from the way their own will be revised: the difference
of opinion drives sentiment, which is stochastic, and sentiment risk carries a risk premium. The
second and third effects cause investors with the proper beliefs to hedge; they hold fewer shares of
equity than would be optimal in a market without excess volatility. Thus, our analysis illustrates
how “risk arbitrage” must be based not just on a current price divergence but also on a model of
overconfident behavior, so that a protection can be put in place.
2Models of feedback trading do not discuss the budget constraint of the feedback traders and, therefore, leave
unclear the origin of the gains that the rational arbitrageurs would make. And, even when noise traders pursue an
explicit objective, as is done in De Long, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990a), one must be careful not to
confuse“noiserisk”withsomeoutputriskinducedbythenoiserisk,ashasbeenpointedoutrecentlybyLoewenstein
and Willard (2006). Restricting our analysis to a pure exchange general equilibrium economy allows us to maintain
a clean distinction between output risk and noise risk.
3ThequestionbeingansweredinourpaperisthesameastheonethatwasraisedbyWilliams(1977)andZiegler
(2000) in a simpler setting in which the expected growth rate of dividends is constant (although unobserved) and in
whichtherearefewersecurities. Inthesetwopapers,theinvestorwhosestrategyoneisstudyingisassumedtobeof
negligible weight in the market, in contrast to our setting.
2