NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOUSING, CREDIT MARKETS AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE
Martin S. Feldstein
Working Paper 13471
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13471
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2007
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Martin S. Feldstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Housing, Credit Markets and the Business Cycle
Martin S. Feldstein
NBER Working Paper No. 13471
October 2007
JEL No. E3,E4
ABSTRACT
The housing sector is now (September 2007) at the root of three distinct but related problems: (1)
a sharp decline in house prices and the related fall in home building; (2) a subprime mortgage problem
that has triggered a substantial widening of all credit spreads and the freezing of much of the credit
markets; and (3) a decline in home equity loans and mortgage refinancing that could cause greater
declines in consumer spending. Each of these could by itself be powerful enough to cause an economic
downturn. The combination could cause a very serious recession unless there are other offsetting forces.
In this paper, I discuss each of these and then comment on the implications for monetary policy.
Martin S. Feldstein
President and Chief Executive Officer
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138-5398
msfeldst@nber.org

Housing, Credit Markets and the Business Cycle
Martin Feldstein*
The housing sector is now (September 2007) at the root of three distinct but related
problems: (1) a sharp decline in house prices and the related fall in home building ; (2) a
subprime mortgage problem that has triggered a substantial widening of all credit spreads and
the freezing of much of the credit markets; and (3) a decline in home equity loans and mortgage
refinancing that could cause greater declines in consumer spending. Each of these could by itself
be powerful enough to cause an economic downturn. The combination could cause a very
serious recession unless there are other offsetting forces. In this paper, I discuss each of these
and then comment on the implications for monetary policy .
Falling House Prices
Robert Shiller (2007) presents evidence of a sharp surge in house prices after the year
2000. More specifically, national indexes of real house prices., real rents and real construction
costs moved together for 25 years until the year 2000. After that, while construction costs and
rents continued to move in parallel, real house prices then rose rapidly so that by 2006 they were
70 percent higher than equivalent rents., driven in part by a widespread popular belief that
houses were an irresistible investment opportunity. How else could an average American family
buy an asset appreciating at 9 percent a year , with 80 percent of that investment financed by a
mortgage with a tax deductible interest rate of 6 percent, implying an annual rate of return on the
initial equity of more than 25 percent?
*Professor of Economics, Harvard University and President of the National Bureau of
Economic Research. This text is based on remarks that were presented as a final summary and
personal commentary at the Jackson Hole conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City on Housing, Housing Finance and Monetary Policy, September 1, 2007. All 2007
references in this paper are to the papers in the conference volume that is available on the web
site of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
-1-
Housing, Credit Markets & the Business Cycle.092307

But at a certain point home owners recognized that house prices – really the price of land
– wouldn’t keep rising so rapidly and may decline. That fall has now begun, with a 3.4 percent
decline in housing prices over the past 12 months and an estimated 9 percent annual rate of
decline in the most recent month for which data are available (a Goldman-Sachs estimate for
June 2007.) The decline in house prices accelerates offers to sell and slows home buying,
causing a rise in the inventory of unsold homes and a decision by home builders to slow the rate
of construction. Home building has now collapsed, down 20 percent from a year ago, to the
lowest level in a decade.
Edward Leamer (2007) explained that such declines in housing construction were a
precursor to 8 of the past 10 recessions. Moreover, major falls in home building were followed
by a recession in every case except when the Korean and Vietnam wars provided an offsetting
stimulus to demand..
Why did home prices surge in the past 5 years? While a frenzy of irrational house price
expectations may have contributed, there were also fundamental reasons. Credit became both
cheap and relatively easy to obtain. When the Fed worried about deflation it cut the Fed funds
rate to one percent in 2003 and promised that it would rise only very slowly. That caused
medium term rates to fall, inducing a drop in mortgage rates and a widespread promotion of
mortgages with very low temporary “teaser” rates.
Mortgage money also became more abundant as a result of various institutional changes
as Ben Bernanke (2007), Ned Gramlich (2007) , and Richard Green and Susan Wachter (2007)
explained. Subprime mortgages were the result of legislative changes (especially the
Community Reinvestment Act) and of the widespread use of statistical risk assessment models
by lenders,. In addition, securitization induced a lowering of standards by lenders who did not
hold the mortgages they created. Mortgage brokers came to replace banks and thrifts as the
primary mortgage originators. All of this had been developing since the 1990s but these
developments contributed to the current mortgage problems when rates fell after 2000.
If house prices now decline enough to reestablish the traditional price-rent relation1 ,
1Shiller(2007) commented that a 50 percent decline in real house prices is “entirely
possible”. A Goldman-Sachs US Economic Research Report (August 29, 2007 concluded that
-2-
Housing, Credit Markets & the Business Cycle.092307