NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PARENTAL EDUCATION AND CHILD HEALTH:
EVIDENCE FROM A NATURAL EXPERIMENT IN TAIWAN
Shin-Yi Chou
Jin-Tan Liu
Michael Grossman
Theodore J. Joyce
Working Paper 13466
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13466
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2007
This paper was presented at the Sixth World Congress of the International Health Economics Association
in Copenhagen, Denmark, July 9-11, 2007. Research for the paper was supported by grant number
5 R01 HD045603 from the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development to the National
Bureau of Economic Research. The paper has had a long gestation period due to problems encountered
in using Taiwanese birth and infant death certificates and in accurately measuring new junior high
school openings. Preliminary versions of the paper with empirical results that turned out to be incorrect
after inconsistencies in the data were uncovered and resolved were presented at the 2004 Annual Meeting
of the Population Association of America, the Fourth World Congress of the International Health Economics
Association, the 2005 NIA/NICHD Intergenerational Research Workshop and at seminars at Harvard
University, Cornell University, the State University of New York at Buffalo, National Taiwan University,
the University of South Florida, and the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey School
of Public Health. We wish to thank the participants in those forums for helpful comments and suggestions.
We also wish to thank Silvie Colman, Ryan Conrad, Danielle Ferry, and Wehn-Jyuan Tsai for research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development.
© 2007 by Shin-Yi Chou, Jin-Tan Liu, Michael Grossman, and Theodore J. Joyce. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Parental Education and Child Health: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Taiwan
Shin-Yi Chou, Jin-Tan Liu, Michael Grossman, and Theodore J. Joyce
NBER Working Paper No. 13466
October 2007
JEL No. I10,I20
ABSTRACT
This paper exploits a natural experiment to estimate the causal impact of parental education on child
health in Taiwan. In 1968, the Taiwanese government extended compulsory education from six to
nine years. From that year through 1973, the government opened 254 new junior high schools, an
80 percent increase, at a differential rate among regions. We form treatment and control groups of
women or men who were age 12 or under on the one hand and between the ages of 13 and 20 or 25
on the other hand in 1968. Within each region, we exploit variations across cohorts in new junior
high school openings to construct an instrument for schooling. We employ this instrument to estimate
the causal effects of mother's or father's schooling on the incidence of low birthweight and mortality
of infants born to women in the treatment and control groups or the wives of men in these groups in
the period from 1978 through 1999. Parents' schooling, especially mother's schooling, does indeed
cause favorable infant health outcomes. The increase in schooling associated with the reform saved
almost 1 infant life in 1,000 live births, resulting in a decline in infant mortality of approximately 11
percent.
Shin-Yi Chou Michael Grossman
Department of Economics Ph.D. Program in Economics
College of Business and Economics City University of New York Graduate Center
Lehigh University 365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
621 Taylor Street New York, NY 10016-4309
Bethlehem, PA 18015-3117 and NBER
and NBER mgrossman@gc.cuny.edu
syc2@lehigh.edu
Theodore J. Joyce
Jin-Tan Liu Baruch College and NBER
Department of Economics 365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
National Taiwan University New York, NY 10016-4309
21 Hsu-Chow Road and NBER
Taipei (100), TAIWAN Ted_Joyce@baruch.cuny.edu
and NBER
liujt@ccms.ntu.edu.tw

“The one social factor that researchers agree is consistently linked to
longer lives in every country where it has been studied is education. It is
more important than race; it obliterates any effects of income.” Gina
Kolata, “A Surprising Secret to Long Life: Stay in School,” New York
Times, January 3, 2007, p. 1.
I. Introduction
This paper is a contribution to the literature on the relationship between years of formal
schooling completed and good health. In particular we investigate whether the positive
relationship between these two variables implies causality from the former to the latter. As the
quotation from Kolata indicates, there is a large literature, reviewed in detail by Kaestner and
Grossman (1997) and Grossman (2000, 2006), that shows that an individual’s own schooling is
the most important correlate of his or her health and that parents’ schooling, especially mother’s
schooling, is the most important correlate of child health. This finding emerges whether health
levels are measured by mortality rates, morbidity rates, self-evaluation of health status, or
physiological indicators of health, and whether the units of observation are individuals or groups.
Improvements in child health are widely accepted public policy goals in developing and
developed countries. The positive correlation between mother’s schooling and child health in
numerous studies was one factor behind the World Bank’s campaign in the 1990s to encourage
increases in maternal education in developing countries (World Bank 1993). In a 2002 issue of
Health Affairs devoted primarily to the nonmedical determinants of health, Deaton (2002) argues
that policies to increase education in the U.S. and to increase income in developing countries are
very likely to have larger payoffs in terms of health than those that focus on health care, even if
inequalities in health rise. The same proposition with regard to the U.S. can be found in a much
earlier study by Auster, Leveson, and Sarachek (1969). Since more education typically leads to
higher income, policies to increase the former appear to have large returns for more than one
1

generation throughout the world.
Efforts to improve the health of an individual by increasing the amount of formal
schooling that he or she acquires or that try to improve child health by raising maternal schooling
assume that the schooling effects reported in the literature are causal. A number of investigators
have argued, however, that reverse causality from health to schooling or omitted “third
variables” may cause schooling and health to vary in the same direction. Governments can
employ a variety of policies to raise the educational levels of their citizens. These include
compulsory schooling laws, new school construction, and targeted subsidies to parents and
students. If proponents of the third-variable hypothesis are correct or if health causes schooling,
evaluations of these policies should not be based on studies that relate adult health or child health
to actual measures of schooling because these measures may be correlated with unmeasured
determinants of the outcomes at issue.
In this paper we propose to use techniques that correct for biases due to the endogeneity
of schooling to evaluate the effects of a policy initiative that radically altered the school system
in Taiwan and led to an increase in the amount of formal schooling acquired by the citizens of
that country during a period of very rapid economic growth. In 1968 Taiwan extended
compulsory schooling from six years to nine years. In the period from that year through 1973,
many new junior high schools were opened at a differential rate among regions of the country.
We form treatment and control groups of women or men who were age 12 or under on the one
hand and between the ages of 13 and 20 or 25 on the other hand in 1968. Within each region,
we exploit variations across cohorts in new junior high school openings to construct an
instrument for schooling. We employ this instrument to estimate the causal effects of mother’s
or father’s schooling on the incidence of low birthweight and mortality of infants born to women
2