NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SHOCKS, STRUCTURES OR MONETARY POLICIES? THE EURO AREA AND
US AFTER 2001
Lawrence Christiano
Roberto Motto
Massimo Rostagno
Working Paper 13521
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13521
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2007
This paper expresses the views of the authors and not necessarily those of the European Central Bank.
We are grateful for the comments of Matthew Canzonieri, Mark Gertler, Dale Henderson, Klaus Masuch,
Philippe Moutot, Frank Smets and an anonymous referee, and for reactions of participants at the conference
organized by the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, Federal Reserve Board of Governors,
December 1-2, 2005. We also thank Helen James for editorial assistance. The first author is grateful
to the National Science Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Lawrence Christiano, Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Shocks, Structures or Monetary Policies? The Euro Area and US After 2001
Lawrence Christiano, Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno
NBER Working Paper No. 13521
October 2007
JEL No. C51,E47,E52,E58,F0,F00
ABSTRACT
The US Federal Reserve cut interest rates more vigorously in the recent recession than the European
Central Bank did. By comparison with the Fed, the ECB followed a more measured course of action.
We use an estimated dynamic general equilibrium model with financial frictions to show that comparisons
based on such simple metrics as the variance of policy rates are misleading. We find that - because
there is greater inertia in the ECB's policy rule - the ECB's policy actions actually had a greater stabilizing
effect than did those of the Fed. As a consequence, a potentially severe recession turned out to be only
a slowdown, and inflation never departed from leve l s consistent with the ECB's quantitative definition
of price stability. Other factors that account for th e different economic outcomes in the Euro Area
and US include differences in shocks and differen c es in the degree of wage and price flexibility.
Lawrence Christiano Massimo Rostagno
Department of Economics European Central Bank
Northwestern University Postfach 16-03-19
2003 Sheridan Road D-60066 Frankfurt am Main
Evanston, IL 60208 GERMANY
and NBER Massimo.Rostagno@ecb.int
l-christiano@northwestern.edu
Roberto Motto
European Central Bank
Postfach 16 03 19
D-60066 Frankfurt am Main
GERMANY
roberto.motto@ecb.int

1 Introduction
It is sometimes tempting to establish comparisons across central banks’ policies over the cy-
cle on the basis of the extent to which they move their instruments in a fraction of time. A
central bank that moves its policy rate around abruptly would under this measure be viewed
as very responsive to the state of the economy. Instead, a central bank which follows an ob-
servationallymoremoderatepathwouldqualifyas"passive"andunresponsive. Inthispaper
we use a medium-scale dynamic general equilibrium model with financial frictions to show
that comparisons based on such simple metrics are misleading. Comparative assessments of
monetary policies cannot abstract from a careful analysis of the shocks and the underlying
economic structures that shape the macroeconomic landscape which central banks face.
We concentrate on the most recent international downturn, after 2001, in the US and the
EuroArea(EA,henceforth). WeuseestimatedversionsofourmodelonUSand,respectively,
EA data and we reach three conclusions. First, a central bank that moves its policy rate
sharply in response to each twist and turn in the data would have only a limited impact
on economic activity. This is because policy shifts that lack persistence have little impact
on longer-term interest rates.1 According to our estimates ECB policy is characterized by
greaterpersistencethanFedpolicyis. Asaresult,toachieveagiveneconomiceffecttheECB
must move its policy rate by much less than the Fed must. This is why we find that interest
rate actions by the ECB had a greater stabilizing effect on output than the Fed interest
rate actions did, even though the latter were bigger. The slowdown in economic activity
after 2000 in the EA was so mild that it technically does not even meet the definition of a
recession (see log, per capita real GDP in the EA and the US in Figure 1).2 We estimate
that, had it not been for the supportive monetary policy shocks implemented by the ECB,
the EA growth slowdown after 2000 would instead have been a substantial recession.
A second finding is that the US and EA were hit by different shocks. For example,
it is true that the Fed’s response to the 2001 recession was very aggressive. Indeed, we
find that the Fed’s reaction was greater than what one would have predicted on the basis
of its past behavior in recessions. It is true that the ECB did not spring into action at
the same time and with the same abruptness as the Fed. But, that is because the shocks
that produced the EA recession did not occur until later (see Figure 1b). When the bad
shocks that produced the EA slowdown finally did strike one year later, the ECB reacted
by deviating from past patterns. The ECB continued to keep rates low longer than the Fed
did, because unfavourable shocks lingered longer in the EA than in the US (see Figure 1).
The ECB was able to provide support to economic activity, without violating its definition
of price stability (see Figure 1).
1ThisprinciplehasbeenanalyzedextensivelybyRotembergandWoodford(1999),and
Woodford (1999,2003).
2We never see two consecutive quarters of negative growth.
2

A third factor also helps to account for the differences between the US and the EA. Our
estimatesindicatethatwagesandpricesaremoreflexibleintheUSthanintheEA.IftheEA
were instead characterized by the same price flexibility as the US, inflation in the EA would
have exhibited more of the volatility evident in the US data (see Figure 1). This volatility
would have increased the volatility in the ECB’s policy rate, causing the movements in the
EA interest rate to more closely resemble those in the US. At the same time, we find that
differences in wage and price flexibility do relatively little to explain the differences in real
output between the EA and the US, according to our estimates.
In order to quantify the macroeconomic outcome of a different and more activist policy
inthe EA, we conduct a simple test. We simulated the post 2000 period inthe EA, replacing
the ECB monetary policy rule by the Fed’s policy rule. To our initial surprise, we found
that inflation would have been substantially higher and output would have been lower in the
EA, if the ECB had adopted the Fed’s monetary policy.3
Our analysis requires disentangling the components of the data due to shocks, structure
and monetary policy.4 The formal tools we use are designed to do this. We use models
that have been estimated using EA and US data in Christiano, Motto and Rostagno (2007).
The estimation exercise provides us with estimates of the shocks driving the two economies,
as well as parameter values for their economic structures and monetary policy rules. Our
analysis is based on simulations of our EA model under various counterfactual scenarios.
These simulations allow us to investigate how the EA economy would have evolved if it had
been struck by the US shocks, or if it were characterized by the US wage/price flexibility, or
if it had adopted US monetary policy.
The models we use must be fairly elaborate if the results of our simulations are to be
credible. For example, we want to include standard shocks such as disturbances to technol-
3It is useful to differentiate the question we study from an alternative question: “what
would have happened if the Fed had been in charge of the ECB?” Because the US and
EA economies have somewhat different structures and shocks, it is possible that if the
Fed were literally in charge of the ECB, it might not have applied the same monetary
policy strategy that it uses in the US. To answer the alternative question would require
identifyingtheFed’sobjectivefunctionandthencomputingthemonetarypolicyrulethat
optimizes it, conditional on the economy corresponding to the estimated EA economy.
The question of what the Fed would have done, had it been in charge of the ECB, would
beansweredbysimulatingourEAmodeleconomywiththeoptimizedpolicyrule. Wedid
not do this. When we investigate what the Fed would have done, had it been in charge of
theECB,wesimulatethemonetarypolicyrulethatweestimatedtheFed to haveusedin
the US.
4A similar exercise is conducted in Sahuc and Smets (2007). They also find that
differences in shocks were important in determining the different economic outcomes in
the twoareas, whiletheyfind that differences in thenature of monetarypolicyand in the
degree of nominal rigidities in the two areas did not matter.
3