NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AVERTING REGULATORY ENFORCEMENT:
EVIDENCE FROM NEW SOURCE REVIEW
Nathaniel Keohane
Erin T. Mansur
Andrey Voynov
Working Paper 13512
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13512
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2007
We thank Jim Bushnell and Catherine Wolfram for many helpful discussions. We also thank Catherine
Wolfram for data on firms' financial statistics. Michael Greenstone and Ken Chay are thanked for
data on attainment counties. We also thank two anonymous referees and seminar participants at Yale
University, Rice University, University of Houston, Texas A&M University, Resources for the Future,
Dartmouth College, and NBER. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Nathaniel Keohane, Erin T. Mansur, and Andrey Voynov. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Averting Regulatory Enforcement: Evidence from New Source Review
Nathaniel Keohane, Erin T. Mansur, and Andrey Voynov
NBER Working Paper No. 13512
October 2007
JEL No. L51,L94,Q52,Q58
ABSTRACT
This paper explores firms' response to regulatory enforcement. New Source Review, a provision of
the Clean Air Act, imposes stringent emissions limitations on significantly modified older power plants.
In 1999, the EPA sued owners of 46 plants for NSR violations. We study how electricity companies
respond to both the perceived threat of future action, and the action itself. A discrete choice model
estimates plants likelihood of being named in lawsuits increases with large historic emissions and
investments. On the eve of the lawsuits, emissions at plants with a one standard deviation greater probability
of being sued fell approximately ten percent.
Nathaniel Keohane Andrey Voynov
Yale University, School of Management Yale School of Forestry and Environmental Studies
135 Prospect St. 205 Prospect Street
Box 208200 New Haven, CT 06511
New Haven, CT 06520-8264 andrey.voynov@aya.yale.edu
nathaniel.keohane@yale.edu
Erin T. Mansur
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
erin.mansur@yale.edu

1 Introduction
This paper uses data from the U.S. electric power industry to explore the strategic responses
of regulated firms to government enforcement. We focus on the provisions of the Clean Air
Act that impose stringent emissions limitations on new sources and extend these new-source
limits to aging power plants that undergo substantial modification. In November 1999, the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced a sweeping enforcement action against
24 electric power plants. The agency announced additional lawsuits in the following year,
bringing the total to 46 plants owned by nine utilities. The lawsuits charged that the plants’
parent utilities had failed to seek regulatory approval for major modifications that should
have been reviewed by the agency to determine whether they triggered the more stringent
emissions limits applicable to new sources.
These“NewSourceReview”(NSR)regulationsofferavaluabletestcaseforstudyinghow
the threat of enforcement affects the behavior of regulated firms, because we can identify
precisely when that threat became salient. Although the law had been in place for decades,
it was never vigorously enforced. In the sole prominent enforcement action brought by the
EPA prior to the period we study, the court handed down a ruling that strongly favored
the industry. Before 1998, therefore, there was little to make the industry concerned about
the threat of a regulatory crackdown. In that year, however, the EPA announced a more
aggressive stance. The industry did not know in advance which plants would be named in
thesuits; theambiguityoverhowthelawwouldbeinterpretedallowedtheEPAconsiderable
scope in deciding whom to target. But there was widespread expectation by the end of 1998
that the EPA was about to enforce the law more vigorously.
In this paper, we explore howelectric utilities responded to the perceived threat of future
action, as well as to the lawsuits themselves. Our measure of “response” focuses on plants’
emissions, since those were not only a known trigger of regulatory action but also the source
of concern that motivated the regulations in the first place. Of course, power plants were
not equally vulnerable to the imminent enforcement. For example, power plants that had
1

made major capital investments in previous years might have fallen under greater regulatory
scrutiny.
To distinguish among power plants in the severity of the threat, therefore, we first in-
vestigate the determinants of the EPA’s choice of which plants to name in the lawsuit: in
particular, wewanttodeterminewhichhistoric, exogenous factorsfirmsmighthaveexpected
to have influenced the likelihood of their plants being named in a lawsuit. In line with the
official agencystance, wefindthat theprobabilityof enforcementactionwashigheratplants
withlargeincreasesinemissionsandlargecapital investments(excludinginvestments inpol-
lution control equipment) over the previous fifteen years. However, the EPA was also more
likely to target plants owned by large utilities.
In the second part of our analysis, we use the estimated coefficients from our model of
the agency’s choice to construct a predicted enforcement probability for each plant. Using
a panel data set of monthly plant-level emissions from January 1996 to December 2000, we
run a fixed effects regression of emissions on this measure of the perceived threat during
the threat of enforcement period. We also examine how the emissions of plants named in
lawsuits changed after the lawsuits were announced.
Here we focus exclusively on power plants that were required to participate in the first
phase of the sulfur dioxide (SO ) allowance market created by Title IV of the 1990 Clean
2
Air Act Amendments. These were the oldest and dirtiest plants, and therefore among the
most likely to be sued; moreover, they faced a constant regulatory regime over the period
of interest, since Phase I lasted from 1995 through 1999. (In contrast, plants that entered
the allowance market only in Phase II, starting in 2000, experienced a sharp change in air
pollution regulation at just the same time as EPAwas stepping up its enforcement.) We find
strong evidence that firms sought to avert enforcement. Plants that were more likely to be
sued show greater reductions in emissions, even controlling for plant and month-year fixed
effects. On the eve of the lawsuits, emissions at plants with a one standard deviation greater
probability of being sued fell approximately ten percent. The plants named in lawsuits also
2