NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A MULTIPLIER APPROACH TO UNDERSTANDING THE MACRO IMPLICATIONS
OF HOUSEHOLD FINANCE
YiLi Chien
Harold Cole
Hanno Lustig
Working Paper 13555
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13555
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2007
We would like to thank Bernard Dumas, Francisco Gomes, Mark Hugget, Urban Jermann, Narayana
Kocherlakota, Dirk Krueger, Pete Kyle, Mark Loewenstein, Joseph Ostroy, Nikolai Roussanov, Viktor
Tsyrennikov, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh and Amir Yaron for comments. Andrew Hollenhurst provided
excellent research assistance. We would also like to especially thank the editor Kjetil Storesletten and
two anonymous referees for their efforts to improve our paper. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by YiLi Chien, Harold Cole, and Hanno Lustig. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

A Multiplier Approach to Understanding the Macro Implications of Household Finance
YiLi Chien, Harold Cole, and Hanno Lustig
NBER Working Paper No. 13555
November 2007, Revised January 2010
JEL No. G12
ABSTRACT
Our paper examines the impact of heterogeneous trading technologies for households on asset prices
and the distribution of wealth. We distinguish between passive traders who hold fixed portfolios of
stocks and bonds, and active traders who adjust their portfolios to changes in expected returns. To
solve the model, we derive an optimal consumption sharing rule that does not depend on the trading
technology, and we derive an aggregation result for state prices. This allows us to solve for equilibrium
prices and allocations without having to search for market-clearing prices in each asset market separately.
We show that the fraction of total wealth held by active traders, not the fraction held by all participants,
is critical for asset prices, because only these traders respond to variation in state prices and hence
absorb the residual aggregate risk created by non-participants. We calibrate the heterogeneity in trading
technologies to match the equity premium and the risk-free rate. The calibrated model reproduces
the skewness and kurtosis of the wealth distribution in the data. In contrast to existing models with
heterogeneous agents, our model matches the high volatility of returns and the low volatility of the
risk-free rate.
YiLi Chien Hanno Lustig
403 West State Street UCLA Anderson School of Management
Krannert School of Management 110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C413
Purdue University Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
West Lafayette and NBER
IN 47907 hlustig@anderson.ucla.edu
yilichien@gmail.com
Harold Cole
Economics Department
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
160 McNeil Building
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
colehl@sas.upenn.edu

1 Introduction
Incompletemarketmodelsinwhichallhouseholdscanonlytradeahighlylimitedmenuoftradeable
assets were initially embraced to explain the strong correlation in the data between household
consumption and income. However, the actual menu of assets that household can trade is very
rich. At the same time, there is a growing body of empirical evidence that different households
behave as if they had access to different menus of tradeable assets.1 A majority of households does
notinvest directlyinequity, inspiteofthesizeablehistoricalequitypremium, butevenamongthose
who participate in equity markets, sophisticated investors invest a larger share of their wealth in
equity and realize higher returns, while less sophisticated investors take a more cautious approach.
As a result, sophisticated investors load up on aggregate consumption risk. The consumption of
the 10 % wealthiest households is five times more exposed to aggregate consumption growth than
that of the average US household (Parker and Vissing-Jorgensen (2009)).
Heterogeneity in preferences cannot explain these differences. In a complete markets environ-
ment, when agents have constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) preferences, the most risk averse
end up being the poorest households in equilibrium, only because they are the least willing to
substitute intertemporally, not because of the risk preferences per se (Dumas (1989)). However, in
an incomplete markets environment, the least risk averse tend to accumulate less wealth because
their precautionary motive to save is not as strong, and hence they will be most exposed to both
aggregate consumption and idiosyncratic risk, while the wealthiest households would end up hold-
ing less equity and be less exposed to aggregate and idiosyncratic consumption growth risk. In the
data, the consumption of the wealthy is more exposed to aggregate but less to idiosyncratic risk.
These empiricalfindings leadustointroduceheterogeneoustradingtechnologies inanotherwise
standard incomplete markets model. To solve this model, we develop a new method that does
not rely on a price adjustment algorithm to clear each asset market separately. We introduce
heterogeneity in trading technologies into an endowment economy with a large number of agents
who are subject to both aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks, and who have CRRA preferences with
coefficient α. Our model distinguishes between passive traders, who trade fixed-weighted portfolios
ofbondsandequities, andactivetraders, whooptimallyre-adjusttheirportfolioholdingsovertime.
We capture the differences in trading technologies by imposing different measurability restrictions
on the household’s time-zero trading problem. These restrictions govern how net wealth is allowed
to vary across different states of the world. We use the multipliers on these constraints to derive a
consumption sharing rule for households and an analytical expression for the stochastic discount
factor. Importantly, the household’s consumption sharing rule does not depend on the trading
technology, only the dynamics of the multipliers do. The equilibrium stochastic discount factor
only depends on aggregate consumption growth and a weighted average of these multipliers –the
1Campbell (2006) refers to the body of literature that documents this heterogeneity as “household finance”.
2

−1/α-th moment. We refer to this simply as the aggregate multiplier.
In our approach, this household multiplier is a new state variable that replaces wealth. We
characterize its dynamics by means of a simple updating rule that depends on the trading technol-
ogy of the household. The individual’s multiplier updating rule and the implied updating rule for
theaggregatemultipliers completely characterize equilibrium allocationsandprices. Incontinuous-
time finance, Cuoco and He (2001) and Basak and Cuoco (1998) used stochastic weighting schemes
to characterize allocations and prices. Our approach differs because it provides a tractable and
computationally efficient algorithm for computing equilibria in environments with a large number
of agents subject to idiosyncratic risk as well as aggregate risk, and heterogeneity in trading op-
portunities. The use of cumulative multipliers in solving macro-economic equilibrium models was
pioneered by Kehoe and Perri (2002), building on earlier work by Marcet and Marimon (1999).
Our use of measurability constraints to capture portfolio restrictions is similar to that in Aiyagari,
Marcet, Sargent, and Seppala (2002) and Lustig, Sleet, and Yeltekin (2007), who consider an op-
timal taxation problem, while the aggregation result extends that in Chien and Lustig (2009) and
Lustig and Nieuwerburgh (2005) to an incomplete markets environment.
Our paper is closely related to work by Krusell and Smith (1997) and (1998). Krusell and
Smith (1998) consider a production economy with a large number of agents in which individual
labor supply is subject to exogenous idiosyncratic shocks, while the aggregate production function
is subject to aggregate productivity shocks. Households in this economy only trade claims to the
physical capital stock. In this model with a single asset, KS only need to solve a forecasting
problem for the return on capital. Similarly, we solve a forecasting problem for the growth rate of
this aggregate multiplier. However, as soon as KS add an additional asset ( e.g. a risk-free bond
in Krusell and Smith (1997)), KS need to solve for the market-clearing pricing function for this
asset.2 Applying this KS method in our model would require searching for a new pricing function
for each additional aggregate state in each iteration, not knowing the mapping from the wealth
distribution to state prices. Our aggregation result implies that we only need to forecast a single
moment of the multiplier distribution, regardless of the number and the nature of the different
trading technologies. We can directly compute the pricing kernel as a function of this moment.
Hence, there is no need to search for the vector of state prices that clears the various asset markets.
Finally, solving for the multiplier updating rule turns out to be simpler and faster than solving the
household’s Bellman equation or consumption Euler equation.
We apply our method in a calibrated version of the model. To capture some of the richness
of trading behavior in the data, we distinguish between passive traders who hold no stocks, the
non-participants, and buy-and-hold passive traders who can only trade a fixed-weighted portfolio
of stocks and bonds. The heterogeneity in trading technologies is calibrated to match the equity
2Storesletten, Telmer,andYaron(2007)implement this procedurein anOLGmodelwith tradingin capitaland
risk-free bonds.
3