NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE IMPACT OF RESEARCH GRANT FUNDING ON SCIENTIFIC PRODUCTIVITY
Brian Jacob
Lars Lefgren
Working Paper 13519
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13519
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2007
We would like to thank Andrew Arnott, Andrew Canter, Jessica Goldberg, Lisa Kolovich, J.D. LaRock,
Stephanie Rennae and Thomas Wei for their excellent research assistance. We thank Richard Suzman,
Robin Barr, Wally Schafer, Lyn Neil, Georgeanne Patmios, Angie-Chon Lee, Don McMaster, Vaishali
Joshi and others at NIH for their assistance. We gratefully acknowledge support provided by NIH
Express Evaluation Award 263-MD-514421. All remaining errors are our own. Jacob can be contacted
at: Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy, University of Michigan, 735 S. State Street, Ann Arbor,
48109-3091; email: bajacob@umich.edu. Lefgren can be contacted at: Department of Economics,
Brigham Young University, 130 Faculty Office Building, Provo, UT 84602-2363; email: l-lefgren@byu.edu.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Brian Jacob and Lars Lefgren. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Impact of Research Grant Funding on Scientific Productivity
Brian Jacob and Lars Lefgren
NBER Working Paper No. 13519
October 2007
JEL No. H0,H51,I1,I12,I18,O3,O38
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we estimate the impact of receiving an NIH grant on subsequent publications and citations.
Our sample consists of all applications (unsuccessful as well as successful) to the NIH from 1980
to 2000 for postdoctoral training grants (F32s) and standard research grants (R01s). Both OLS and
regression discontinuity estimates show that receipt of either an NIH postdoctoral fellowship or research
grant leads to about one additional publication over the next five years. The estimates represent about
20 and 7 percent increases in research productivity for F32 and R01 recipients respectively. The limited
research impact of NIH grants may be explained in part by a model in which the market for research
funding is competitive, so that the loss of an NIH grant simply causes researchers to shift to another
source of funding.
Brian Jacob
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
bajacob@umich.edu
Lars Lefgren
130 Faculty Office Bulding
Brigham Young University
Provo, UT 84602-2363
l-lefgren@byu.edu

I. Introduction
Technological innovation is one of the primary forces driving economic growth. Yet
many economists have noted that the social rate of return to research and development (R&D)
expenditures is likely higher than the private rate of return, which will result in a suboptimal
level of investment in such activities (Jaffe 2002). As a result, governments devote
considerable resources to subsidize R&D, either through tax policy or direct investment. In
the United States, for example, the National Insittutes of Health (NIH) and the National
Science Foundation (NSF) allocate over $30 billion annually for basic and applied research in
the sciences.
Despite the magnitude of this investment and its importance for long-run economic
growth, there is suprisingly little evidence on the effectiveness of government expenditures in
R&D (Jaffe 2002). While economists have studied the labor market for scientists and the
productivity of scientists over the life cycle, they have not devoted as much energy to
understanding the effect of resources on the production of scientific output (Stephan 1996).
Moreover, studies that have attempted to examine this question have faced difficult selection
concerns – namely, researchers and organizations that receive funding likely differ from those
that do not receive funding on a host of unobservable as well as observable dimensions.
There are several reasons why understanding the impact of government expenditure is
critical. First, it is not obvious that such expenditures are effective. Waste or inefficiency may
result in the unproductive use of government resources, and public support for R&D may crowd
out private support (David et al. 2000). Insofar as taxes impose costs on the economy, society
may be worse off if the total level of R&D expenditure remains the same and public funding
simply replaces private funding. Second, the efficient allocation of government expenditures
1

requires an understanding of the circumstances under which investment is likely to be most
productive. For example, the social planner would like to know how the marginal impact of a
dollar of research funding varies across discipline, field, researcher and institution.
Government funding for scientific research may influence the size of the research
sector as well as the productivity of researchers within the sector. A comprehensive cost-
benefit analysis would examine the R&D consequences of government funding on both of
these margins. In this analysis, however, our focus is somewhat narrower. Here we attempt to
identify the causal effect of receiving an NIH grant on subsequent research productivity. This
effect reflects a combination of the marginal impact of financial resources on researcher
productivity and the ability of researchers to make alternative funding arrangements when one
source becomes unavailable.
In addition to regression analyses in which we control for demographics, prior research
productivity, and reviewers’ perception of application quality, we utilize a regression
discontinuity design to estimate the causal impact of NIH funding on scientific output. Our
sample consists of all applications (unsuccessful as well as successful) to the NIH from 1980
to 2000 for postdoctoral training grants (F32s) and standard research grants (R01s). Unlike
the NSF and most foundations, the NIH allocates research funding in a largely formulaic way
on the basis of priority scores derived from independent scientific reviews. We first show that
there is a highly nonlinear relationship between a proposal’s priority score and the likelihood it
is funded. We then use this nonlinearity in an instrumental variables framework to estimate
the effect of funding on a variety of outcomes, including publications, citations, and future
research funding.
2