NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AN AGENCY THEORY OF DIVIDEND TAXATION
Raj Chetty
Emmanuel Saez
Working Paper 13538
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13538
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2007
We thank Alan Auerbach, Martin Feldstein, Roger Gordon, Kevin Hassett, James Poterba, and numerous
seminar participants for very helpful comments. Joseph Rosenberg and Ity Shurtz provided outstanding
research assistance. Financial support from National Science Foundation grants SES-0134946 and
SES-0452605 is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Raj Chetty and Emmanuel Saez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

An Agency Theory of Dividend Taxation
Raj Chetty and Emmanuel Saez
NBER Working Paper No. 13538
October 2007
JEL No. G3,H20
ABSTRACT
Recent empirical studies of dividend taxation have found that: (1) dividend tax cuts cause large, immediate
increases in dividend payouts, and (2) the increases are driven by firms with high levels of shareownership
among top executives or the board of directors. These findings are inconsistent with existing "old view"
and "new view" theories of dividend taxation. We propose a simple alternative theory of dividend
taxation in which managers and shareholders have conflicting interests, and show that it can explain
the evidence. Using this agency model, we develop an empirically implementable formula for the
efficiency cost of dividend taxation. The key determinant of the efficiency cost is the nature of private
contracting. If the contract between shareholders and the manager is second-best efficient, deadweight
burden follows the standard Harberger formula and is second-order (small) despite the pre-existing
distortion of over-investment by the manager. If the contract is second-best inefficient -- as is likely
when firms are owned by diffuse shareholders because of incentives to free-ride when monitoring
managers -- dividend taxation generates a first-order (large) efficiency cost. An illustrative calibration
of the formula using empirical estimates from the 2003 dividend tax reform in the U.S. suggests that
the efficiency cost of raising the dividend tax rate could be close to the amount of revenue raised.
Raj Chetty
Department of Economics
UC- Berkeley
521 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
chetty@econ.berkeley.edu
Emmanuel Saez
University of California
549 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
saez@econ.berkeley.edu

1 Introduction
The taxation of dividend income has generated substantial interest and controversy in both
academic and policy circles. This paper aims to contribute to this debate by proposing a
new theory of dividend taxation based on the agency theory of the …rm (Jensen and Meckling
1976). Our model builds on two leading theories of dividend taxation and corporate behavior:
the “old view”(Harberger 1962, 1966, Feldstein 1970, Poterba and Summers 1985) and the
“new view”(Auerbach 1979, Bradford 1981, King 1977). The old view assumes that marginal
investment is …nanced by the external capital market through new equity issues. Under this
assumption, the taxation of dividends raises the cost of capital and, as a result, has a negative
e¤ect on corporate investment, dividend payouts, and overall economic e¢ ciency. The new
view assumes that marginal investment is …nanced from the …rm’s retained earnings. In
this case, the dividend tax rate does not a¤ect the cost of capital because the dividend tax
applies equally to current and future distributions. Therefore, the dividend tax rate does not
a¤ect the investment and dividend payout decisions of the …rm, and has no e¤ect on economic
e¢ ciency.1
There has been a longstanding debate in the empirical literature testing between the old
and new views. Feldstein (1970), Poterba and Summers (1985), Hines (1996), and Poterba
(2004) document a negative association between dividend payments and the dividend tax rate
inthetimeseriesintheU.S.andU.K.,consistentwiththeoldview. Incontrast,Auerbachand
Hassett (2002) present evidence that retained earnings are the marginal source of investment
funds for most corporations in the U.S., a …nding that points in favor of the new view.
More recently, several papers have studied the e¤ect of the large dividend tax cut enacted
in 2003 in the U.S. (Chetty and Saez (2005), Brown et al. (2007), Nam et al. (2005)). Chetty
and Saez documented four patterns: (1) Regular dividends rose sharply after the 2003 tax cut,
with an implied net-of-tax elasticity of dividend payments of 0.75. (2) The response was very
rapid –total dividend payouts rose by 20% within one year of enactment –and was stronger
among …rms with high levels of accumulated assets. (3) The response was much larger among
…rms where top executives owned a larger fraction of outstanding shares (see also Brown et
al. (2007) and Nam et al. (2005)). (4) The response was much larger among …rms with large
1See Auerbach (2003) for a summary of these models and the neoclassical literature on taxes and corporate
behavior.
1

shareholders on the board of directors.
It is di¢ cult to reconcile these four …ndings with the old view, new view, or other existing
theories of dividend taxation. The increase in dividends appears to support the old view
because dividends should not respond to permanent dividend tax changes under the new
view.2 However, the speed of the response is too large for a supply-side mechanism where
dividend payouts rise because of increased investment eventually leading to higher pro…ts and
dividend payouts.3 The rapid dividend payout response could be explained by building in a
signaling value for dividends as in John and Williams (1985), Poterba and Summers (1985),
or Bernheim (1991). However, neither the signaling model nor the standard old and new view
modelsdirectlypredict…ndings(3)and(4)onthecross-sectionalheterogeneityinthedividend
payout response by …rm ownership structure.4
In this paper, we propose a simple alternative model of dividend taxation that matches
the four empirical …ndings described above. The model is motivated by agency models
of …rm behavior that have been a cornerstone of the corporate …nance literature since the
pioneering work of Jensen and Meckling (1976), Grossman and Hart (1980), Easterbrook
(1984), and Jensen (1986).5 Our model nests the neoclassical old view and new view models
but incorporates agency e¤ects: managers have a preference for retaining earnings beyond the
optimal level from the shareholders’perspective. We model this preference as arising from
perks and pet projects, although the underlying source of the con‡ict between managers and
shareholdersdoesnotmatterforouranalysis. Shareholderscanprovideincentivestomanagers
2Onewayofreconcilingthedividendincreasewiththenewviewisifthetaxcutwasperceivedastemporary
by …rms. However, Auerbach and Hassett (2005) document that the share prices of immature …rms that are
predicted to pay dividends in the future rose when the reform was announced, suggesting that …rms perceived
the tax cut as fairly permanent. In any case, the basic new view model would not explain …ndings (3) and (4)
even for a temporary tax cut.
3Poterba’s(2004)estimatesusinganoldviewmodelimpliedthatthe2003taxreformwouldincreasedividend
paymentsby20percentin thelongrun,butthattheadjustmentprocesswouldbeslow,with onlyaquarterof
the long-run e¤ect taking place within three years.
4The empirical evidence is also not fully explained by Sinn’s (1991) “life cycle”theory, which synthesizes
the old view and new view in a model where …rms start as old view …rms and become new view …rms once
they have accumulated su¢ cient internal funds, at which point they start paying dividends. In that model,
the payout response should be very small among mature …rms with high levels of accumulated assets, but the
data exhibit the opposite pattern.
5Several empirical studies have provided support for the agency theory as an explanation of why …rms pay
dividends (see e.g., Christie and Nanda 1994, LaPorta et al. 2000, Fenn and Liang 2001, Desai, Foley, and
Hines 2007). Empirical studies have provided support for the predictions of the signalling theory of dividends
as well (e.g. Bernheim and Wantz 1995, Bernheim and Redding 2001). See Allen and Michaely (2003) for a
critical survey of these two literatures. It is of course possible that both signalling and agency e¤ects are at
play empirically.
2