NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ADVISORS AND ASSET PRICES:
A MODEL OF THE ORIGINS OF BUBBLES
Harrison Hong
Jose A. Scheinkman
Wei Xiong
Working Paper 13504
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13504
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2007
We thank Kerry Back, Henry Cao, John Eatwell, Simon Gervais, Ming Huang, Robert Jarrow, Maureen
O'Hara, Jacob Sagi, Robert Shiller, Sheridan Titman, Pietro Veronesi, and seminar participants at the
Bank of England, Cornell University, St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank, 2006 American Finance Association
Annual Meeting in Philadelphia, 12th Mitsui Life Symposium at University of Michigan, Cambridge-Princeton
Conference on Finance, CEPR/Pompeu Fabra Bubble Conference, Duke-UNC Asset Pricing Conference,
Financial Intermediation Research Society Conference in Shanghai and NBER Behavioral Finance
Conference for helpful comments. We thank the National Science Foundation for financial support
under grants SES0350770 and SES0718407. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Harrison Hong, Jose A. Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Advisors and Asset Prices: A Model of the Origins of Bubbles
Harrison Hong, Jose A. Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 13504
October 2007
JEL No. G1,G14,G2
ABSTRACT
We develop a model of asset price bubbles based on the communication process between advisors
and investors. Advisors are well-intentioned and want to maximize the welfare of their advisees (like
a parent treats a child). But only some advisors understand the new technology (the tech-savvies);
others do not and can only make a downward-biased recommendation (the old-fogies). While smart
investors recognize the heterogeneity in advisors, naive ones mistakenly take whatever is said at face
value. Tech-savvies inflate their forecasts to signal that they are not old-fogies, since more accurate
information about their type improves the welfare of investors in the future. A bubble arises for a wide
range of parameters, and its size is maximized when there is a mix of smart and naive investors in
the economy. Our model suggests an alternative sou rce for stock over-valuation in addition to investor
overreaction to news and sell-side bias.
Harrison Hong Wei Xiong
Berndheim Center for Finance Princeton University
Princeton University Department of Economics
26 Prospect Avenue Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton, NJ 08540 Princeton, NJ 08450
hhong@Princeton.EDU and NBER
wxiong@princeton.edu
Jose A. Scheinkman
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
joses@princeton.edu

“To be against what is new is not to be modern. Not to be modern is to write
yourself out of the scene. Not to be in the scene is to be nowhere.” Tom Wolfe,
The Painted Word
1. Introduction
What are the origins of speculative asset price bubbles? This question remains unanswered
despite a large and growing literature on speculative trading and asset price bubbles in
economics. Motivated in part by the behavior of internet stocks during the late nineties, a
surge in new research has arrived at two conclusions. The first is that differences of opinion
among investors and short sales constraints are sufficient to generate a price bubble.1 The
second is that once a bubble begins, it is difficult for smart money to eliminate the mispricing
(i.e. there are limits of arbitrage).2 All these studies take as given that investors disagree
about asset values. But where does this divergence of opinion come from?
In this paper, we develop a model of the origins of bubbles. Two sets of stylized facts
motivate our analysis. The first is that asset price bubbles tend to occur during periods of
excitementaboutnewtechnologies.3 IntheU.S.,speculativeepisodeshavecoincidedwiththe
following major technological breakthroughs: (1) railroads, (2) electricity, (3) automobiles,
(4) radio, (5) micro-electronics, (6) personal computers, (7) biotechnology, and most recently
(8) the Internet.4 The second is that in the aftermath of the Internet bubble, the media and
regulators placed much of the blame on biased advisors for manipulating the expectations
of naive investors. While not directly related to the Internet experience, indirect evidence
from academic research in support of this view held by the media and regulators include:
(1) analyst incentives to generate biased, optimistic forecasts; (2) naive individual investors
who do not recognize that these biased recommendations are motivated by incentives to sell
1See, e.g., Miller (1977), Harrison and Kreps (1978), Chen, Hong and Stein (2002), and Scheinkman and
Xiong(2003). ExtensiveempiricalworkconfirmingthispremiseincludeDiether,MalloyandScherbina(2002),
LamontandThaler(2003),andOfekandRichardson(2003). Thisliteraturestandsincontrasttotherational
bubble literature (see, e.g., Blanchard and Watson, 1982) in which these two ingredients are not crucial in
an infinite horizon setting. However, Allen, Morris, and Postlewaite (1993) show that these two ingredients
emerge as relevant again to generate a rational bubble in a finite horizon setting.
2See, e.g., Shleifer and Vishny (1997), Abreu and Brunnermeier (2003).
3See, e.g., Malkiel (2003), Nairn (2002), Shiller (2000).
4SeeDeMarzo,KanielandKremer(2006)andPastorandVeronesi(2006)forrationalexplanationsofhigh
stock prices for new technologies.
1

stocks; and (3) analysts’ optimistic forecasts have an impact on prices.5
We focus on the role of advisors and their communication process with investors in gen-
erating divergence of opinion and asset price bubbles. Building on the existing literature, we
assumethattherearetwotypesofinvestors,smartandnaive,whoareshortsalesconstrained.
While smart investors recognize the heterogeneity in advisors, naive ones take whatever rec-
ommendations they receive at face value. Importantly, all advisors are well-intentioned in
that they care about the welfare of their advisees and want to honestly disclose their signals
to investors. We also assume that at times of technological innovation, only some advi-
sors understand the new technology (the tech-savvies); others do not and can only make
a downward-biased recommendation (the old-fogies). We also consider an alternative as-
sumption in which the old-fogies are replaced by dreamers who only issue upward-biased
recommendations. The divergence of opinion and price bias results do not depend on this as-
sumption but the old-fogey assumption is more theoretically interesting and there is evidence
that it is relevant at a minimum for the recent internet experience.6
A key contribution of our model is that it serves as a warning that even if a stock appears
over-valued, it may not be due to investors overreacting to news nor to sell-side bias. We
are not disclaiming the role of sell-side bias in the dot-com bubble—only that such bias is
not needed to generate asset price bubbles. Indeed, it is not clear that such bias can explain
bubbles that have occurred during earlier periods. We observe that during the dot-com
period, even so-called objective research firms with no investment-banking business, such as
Sanford and Bernstein, issued recommendations every bit as optimistic as investment banks
5See,e.g.,LinandMcNichols(1998),HongandKubik(2003)forevidenceonanalystincentives,Malmendier
and Shantikumar (2004) for evidence on investor reaction to recommendations and Michaely and Womack
(1999) for evidence on price impact.
6Throughout The Painted Word, from which our epigraph is drawn, Tom Wolfe describes the loss of
credibility suffered by art critics who were perceived as not ”getting” the new pop art movement of the late
fifties. There is ample anecdotal evidence suggesting that advisors during the dot-com bubble faced similar
concerns. For instance, Stanley Druckenmiller, a self-confessed old economy dinosaur and value investor,
reversedcourseduringtheInternetboomperiodanddeclaredthatheunderstoodtheInternetafterameeting
with guru Andrew Grove (see Pacelle, 2000). Famous examples of old-fogies include Jonathan Cohen, a
sell-side analyst covering Internet stocks for Merrill Lynch who was fired for his skeptical reports about the
Internet. In contrast, Mary Meeker, a vocal proponent of the Internet revolution, not only prospered during
the Internet era but continues to be an influential voice in technology even after the bursting of the bubble.
Finally, there also is evidence that young mutual fund managers were more aggressively holding technology
stocks during the dot-com bubble as compared to their older counterparts (see, e.g. Greenwood and Nagel,
2006).
2