NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNDERSTANDING THE ACCRUAL ANOMALY
Jin Ginger Wu
Lu Zhang
X. Frank Zhang
Working Paper 13525
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13525
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2007
For helpful comments, we thank Andrew Ang, Sreedhar Bharath, Long Chen, Mozaffar Khan (discussant),
Paolo Pasquariello, Amiyatosh Purnanandam, Reuven Lehavy, and seminar participants at Emory
University and the 18th Annual Conference on Financial Economics and Accounting at New York
University. Lu Zhang acknowledges the financial support provided by the NTT Program of Asian
Finance and Economics at the Stephen M. Ross School of Business at the University of Michigan.
This manuscript supersedes our previous working paper circulated as "The accrual anomaly: Exploring
the optimal investment hypothesis." All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2007 by Jin Ginger Wu, Lu Zhang, and X. Frank Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Understanding the Accrual Anomaly
Jin Ginger Wu, Lu Zhang, and X. Frank Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 13525
September 2007, Revised May 2008
JEL No. G12,G14,G31,G34,M41
ABSTRACT
Interpreting accruals as working capital investment, we hypothesize that firms rationally adjust their
investment to respond to discount rate changes. Consistent with the optimal investment hypothesis,
we document that (i) the predictive power of accruals for future stock returns increases with the covariations
of accruals with past and current stock returns, and (ii) adding investment- based factors into standard
factor regressions substantially reduces the magnitude of the accrual anomaly. High accrual firms
also have similar corporate governance and entrenchment indexes as low accrual firms. This evidence
suggests that the accrual anomaly is more likely to be driven by optimal investment than by investor
overreaction to excessive growth or over-investment.
Jin Ginger Wu X. Frank Zhang
Terry College of Business Yale School of Management
University of Georgia 135 Prospect Street
Athens, GA 30602 New Haven CT 06520
jinw@terry.uga.edu frank.zhang@yale.edu
Lu Zhang
Finance Department
Stephen M. Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street, ER 7605 Bus Ad
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
zhanglu@bus.umich.edu

1 Introduction
In a path-breaking contribution, Sloan (1996) documents that firms with high accruals earn abnor-
mallylowerreturnsonaverage thanfirmswithlowaccruals,andinterpretstheevidenceasinvestors
overestimatingthepersistenceoftheaccrualcomponentofearningswhenformingearningsexpecta-
tions. He argues thatnaive investors are systematically surprisedlater on whenrealized earnings of
highaccrualfirmsfallshortof,andthoseoflowaccrualfirmsexceed,priorexpectations. Thisexpla-
nationisrootedinthefunctionalfixationhypothesis,whichisconsistentwithirrationalinvestorbe-
havior(e.g.,WattsandZimmerman1986). Sloan’sworkhasspurredalargebodyofliteratureinem-
piricalfinanceandcapitalmarketsresearchinaccounting. OnestrandoftheliteraturefollowsSloan
in linking accruals to earnings persistence and security mispricing.1 Another strand links accruals
to growth attributes and argues that investors fail to account for the unsustainability of growth.2
Most, ifnotall, existingexplanations fortheaccrualanomaly relyonsomeformofinvestor irra-
tionality. Incontrast, we proposeandempirically test adiscount-rate hypothesis that is potentially
consistentwithrationality. Interpretingaccrualsasworkingcapitalinvestment,wehypothesizethat
firms rationally adjust investment in response to discount rate changes, as predicted by the neo-
classical q-theory of investment (e.g., Tobin 1969, Abel 1979, Hayashi 1982, and Cochrane 1991).
When discount rates fall, more investment projects become profitable and accruals increase. At
the same time, current returns should increase because stock prices increase from lower discount
rates. But future returns should decrease because lower discount rates mean low expected returns
going forward. Thus, if capital investment optimally adjusts to discount rate changes, accruals
should be positively related to current returns and negatively related to future returns. To the
extent that investment adjusts with time lags (investment projects can take multiple periods to
complete, see, e.g., Kydland and Prescott 1982, Lamont 2000, and Lettau and Ludvigson 2002),
accruals alsoshouldbepositively correlated withpastreturns. Because discountratechanges affect
past, current, and futurereturnssimultaneously, the magnitude of the accrual anomaly in the cross
section should increase with the correlations between accruals and current and past returns.
1Xie (2001) shows that the relation between total accruals and average returns is largely due to discretionary
accruals. Richardson, Sloan, Soliman, and Tuna (2005) develop a comprehensive balance sheet categorization of
accrualsandshowthatlessreliableaccrualsleadtolowerearningspersistenceandabnormallyloweraveragereturns.
However, Francis and Smith (2005) show that accruals are reliably less persistent than cash flows for only about
15% of firms, a result that casts doubt on thepersistence explanation of the accrual anomaly.
2ThomasandZhang(2002)reportthattheaccrualanomalyisrelatedtoinventorychanges. Fairfield,Whisenant,
and Yohn (2003) and Hirshleifer, Hou, Teoh, and Zhang (2004) document that accruals and net operating assets
predict long-run stock returnsnegatively.
2

Our empirical tests support the discount-rate hypothesis. While replicating previous findings
that accruals are negatively related to future returns, we show that accruals also are positively
related to past and current returns. In cross-sectional regressions, the magnitude of the predictive
relation of accruals for futurereturnsincreases with the correlations between accruals and past and
current returns and with the correlations between investment and past and current returns. We
document these results using different accrual measures such as Sloan’s (1996) total accruals, Xie’s
(2001) discretionary accruals, and Hirshleifer, Hou, Teoh, and Zhang’s (2004) net operating assets.
The discount-rate hypothesis predicts that controlling for capital investment should go a long
way in reducing the magnitude of the accrual anomaly. Using calendar-time factor regressions `a la
Fama and French (1993), we document that adding investment-based return factors into standard
factor models such as theCAPMand theFama-French three-factor modelreducesthe total accrual
anomaly by 46%, the discretionary accrual anomaly by 50%, and the net operating assets anomaly
by 82% on average. Further, relative to the magnitude of abnormal performance measured as the
averagesize-adjustedabnormalreturnsasinSloan(1996),matchingoninvestment-to-assetsinaddi-
tiontosizeonaveragereducesthetotalaccrualanomalybyaround50%and35%inthefirstandthe
second post-formation years, respectively. Doing soalso reducesthe magnitudeof thediscretionary
accrual anomaly by 32% in the first post-formation year and by 41% in the second, and reduces the
magnitude of the net operating assets anomaly by 59% in the first year and by 46% in the second.
Several researchers have argued that the average return can be a noisy or even biased estimate
of the ex-ante expected return (e.g., Elton 1999, Fama and French 2002, and Pastor, Sinha, and
Swaminathan 2007). Following Blanchard (1993) and Fama and French, we use dividend growth
rates to measure expected rates of capital gain in constructing the ex-ante discount rates for ac-
crual portfolios. Consistent with the discount-rate hypothesis, we find that high accrual firms have
reliably lower ex-ante discount rates than low accrual firms. For example, the low total accrual
quintile has a high discount rate of 8% per annum, whereas the high total accrual quintile has a
low discount rate of 2.3%. The discount-rate spread of 5.8% is highly significant (t = 27.75). The
expectedlong-term dividendgrowthaccounts for75% ofthediscount-ratespread,andtheexpected
dividend-to-price ratio accounts for the remaining 25%. Finally, the ex-ante profitability of various
accrual strategies has been largely stable at around 5% per annum over the past 35 years.
Richardson, Sloan, Soliman, and Tuna (2005) develop a comprehensive balance sheet catego-
rization ofaccrualsandrankeach category basedonitsaccounting reliability. Theirtests showthat
3