NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ESTIMATING MARGINAL RETURNS TO HIGHER EDUCATION IN THE UK
Robert Moffitt
Working Paper 13534
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13534
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2007
The author would like to thank Marc Chan for research assistance and Lorraine Dearden for generous
help in obtaining and using the data. Comments from Joshua Angrist, James Heckman, Guido Imbens,
Matthew White, Tiemen Woutersen, and participants at workshops at several universities, research
institutes, and conferences are appreciated, as well as comments from two anonymous referees, Thierry
Magnac, and other participants at the "Conference on Econometric Evaluation of Public Policies: Methods
and Applications," Paris, December, 2005 on an earlier closely related paper. The author also thanks
Steffen Reinhold for correcting two errors in the Appendix. Research support from the National Institute
of Child Health and Human Development is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2007 by Robert Moffitt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Estimating Marginal Returns to Higher Education in the UK
Robert Moffitt
NBER Working Paper No. 13534
October 2007
JEL No. C21,J24
ABSTRACT
A long-standing issue in the literature on education is whether marginal returns to education fall as
education rises. If the population differs in its rate of return, a closely related question is whether marginal
returns to higher education fall as a greater fraction of the population enrolls. This paper proposes
a nonparametric method of estimating marginal treatment effects in heterogeneous populations, and
applies it to this question, examining returns to higher education in the UK. The results indicate that
marginal returns to higher education fall as the proportion of the population with higher education
rises, consistent with the Becker Woytinsky Lecture hypothesis.
Robert Moffitt
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
3400 North Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
moffitt@jhu.edu

The possible existence of individual heterogeneity in the effect of a treatment on
outcomes in a population has been a focus of much work in the causal effects literature. In
economics, heterogeneity in the effect of a binary endogenous regressor was introduced in the
literature on switching regression models by Quandt (1972), Heckman (1978), and Lee (1979),
while in the statistics literature the causal model of potential outcomes of Rubin (1974) also
allows full heterogeneity in treatment effects. This heterogeneity was reformulated as a random
coefficient by Heckman and Robb (1985) and by Björklund and Moffitt (1987). The latter paper
also introduced the concept of the marginal treatment effect (termed the ‘marginal gain’) in the
context of a multivariate-normal switching regression model and showed that the model was
observationally equivalent to the Lee switching regression model. Imbens and Angrist (1994)
showed that the treatment effect in a heterogeneous population across two points in the
distribution, termed the Local Average Treatment Effect (LATE), could be nonparametrically
estimated with instrumental variables (IV) and Angrist et al. (1996) elaborated and clarified this
method. Heckman and Vytlacil (1999, 2005) have clarified the distinctions between the
marginal treatment effect (MTE), the LATE, and other treatment effects of interest.
In this paper, we build upon a remark by Heckman and Vytlacil (2005, p.691) that the
treatment effects model with heterogeneous effects of a binary treatment implies that outcomes
are simply a nonlinear function of participation probabilities. A model is set up in this paper
which demonstrates that point in a slightly reformulated random coefficients model which makes
minimal identifying assumptions for the identification of the nonlinearity. A simple series

estimation method is proposed to nonparametrically estimate the shape of the outcome-
participation-probability relationship, and hence marginal returns to treatment, which can be
implemented with widely-available software packages.
An empirical illustration is provided for the effect of a binary higher education indicator
on earnings in the UK using the data from a study by Blundell et al. (2005). The literature on the
effect of education on earnings has seen the largest number of discussions of heterogeneity in the
return, a concept discussed in the Woytinsky Lecture of Becker (1975) and in Mincer (1974).
Surveys of the empirical literature by Card (1999, 2001) have emphasized the impact of possible
heterogeneity in the return on the interpretation of the estimates in that literature (see also Lang
(1993)). The large majority of these estimates use only a binary instrument and hence only one
piece of the marginal return function can be nonparametrically identified, whereas in this paper a
wider portion of the return function is estimated because multiple, multi-valued instruments are
used. Carneiro et al. (2003) and Aakvik et al. (2005) also obtained a wider range of estimates of
the return function but partly because of parametric assumptions; however, Carneiro et al. (2006)
used a wide range of instruments to nonparametrically estimate the full range of returns to
education, similar to the exercise here. Oreopoulos (2006) examined heterogeneity in returns to
education by comparing LATE estimates based on compulsory schooling laws between two
countries which have different fractions of the population affected by the laws, which implicitly
uses a three-valued instrument rather than a binary one.
The next section lays out the model and estimation method, and the subsequent section
provides the illustration. A summary appears at the end.
2