NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK FAILURES IN THEORY AND HISTORY:
THE GREAT DEPRESSION AND OTHER "CONTAGIOUS" EVENTS
Charles W. Calomiris
Working Paper 13597
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13597
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2007
This paper was prepared for the Oxford Handbook of Banking, edited by Allen Berger, Phil Molyneux,
and John Wilson. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Charles W. Calomiris. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Bank Failures in Theory and History: The Great Depression and Other "Contagious" Events
Charles W. Calomiris
NBER Working Paper No. 13597
November 2007
JEL No. E5,G2,N2
ABSTRACT
Bank failures during banking crises, in theory, can result either from unwarranted depositor withdrawals
during events characterized by contagion or panic, or as the result of fundamental bank insolvency.
Various views of contagion are described and compared to historical evidence from banking crises,
with special emphasis on the U.S. experience during and prior to the Great Depression. Panics or "contagion"
played a small role in bank failure, during or before the Great Depression-era distress. Ironically, the
government safety net, which was designed to forestall the (overestimated) risks of contagion, seems
to have become the primary source of systemic instability in banking in the current era.
Charles W. Calomiris
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu

“Contagion” vs. Fundamentals as Causes of Bank Failures
Concerns about the susceptibility of banks to unwarranted withdrawals of
deposits during panics, the possibility of bank failures and contractions of bank
credit resulting from unwarranted withdrawals of deposits (which is sometimes
described as the result of “contagious” weakness among banks), and the attendant
adverse macroeconomic consequences of bank disappearance or bank balance sheet
contraction have motivated much of the public policies toward banks. Those policies
include assistance mechanisms intended to protect banks from unwarranted
withdrawals of deposits (central bank lending during crises, deposit insurance, and
government-sponsored bank bailouts), and a host of prudential regulatory policies
(intended to promote banking system stability, and especially to prevent banks from
taking advantage of government protection by increasing their riskiness – the so-
called “moral-hazard” problem of protection).
Theoretical models have been devised in which banking crises result from
systemic “contagion,” when banks that are intrinsically solvent are subjected to
large unwarranted withdrawals, and may fail as a consequence of this withdrawal
pressure. Advocates of the view that banking systems are inherently vulnerable to
such contagion often emphasize that the structure of banks – the financing of
illiquid assets with demandable debts, and the “sequential service constraint”
(which mandates that depositors who are first in line receive all of their deposits)
– tends to aggravate the tendency for unwarranted withdrawals (see Douglas W.
Diamond and Phillip H. Dybvig 1983, Franklin Allen and Douglas Gale 2000,
Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram Rajan 2002).
3

Unwarranted withdrawals (that is, those unrelated to the solvency of the bank)
can occur, in theory, for a number of reasons. Diamond and Dybvig (1983) develop a
banking model with multiple equilibria, where one of the equilibria is a systemic
bank run, which occurs simply because depositors believe that others will run. More
generally, observers of historical panics sometimes document depositors imitating
each other’s withdrawal behavior; depositors may line up to withdraw their funds
simply because others are doing so, particularly in light of the incentives implied by
the sequential service constraint. It is important to recognize, however, that evidence
about mimetic withdrawals does not generally confirm the all-or-nothing runs by all
depositors imagined by some theoretical models; rather, mimesis may be partial and
gradual (see O’Grada and White 2003, and Bruner and Carr 2007).
A second possibility, which is particularly relevant for understanding pre-
World War I banking panics in the U.S. (e.g., the nationwide U.S. Panics of 1857,
1873, 1884, 1890, 1893, 1907, and some events during the Great Depression,
including the Chicago banking panic of June 1932), is that a signal is received by
depositors, which contains noisy information about the health of the various banks.
Depositors have reason to believe that a loss has occurred that might cause a bank to
become insolvent, but they cannot observe which bank has suffered the loss. In that
circumstance, depositors may withdraw large amounts of funds from all banks,
including those that are (unobservably) solvent, simply because they would rather
not risk leaving their money in a bank that turns out to be insolvent.
Third, exogenous shocks to depositors’ liquidity preferences, or to the supply
of reserves in the banking system, unrelated to banks’ asset condition, may cause an
4