NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCIAL STRUCTURE, LIQUIDITY, AND FIRM LOCATIONS
Andres Almazan
Adolfo de Motta
Sheridan Titman
Vahap Uysal
Working Paper 13660
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13660
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2007
We would like to thank Aydogan Alti, Charles Hadlock, Simi Kedia, Roberto Rigobon and seminar
participants at Baylor University, Boston College, BYU, UC-Irvine, Columbia University, Drexel
University, Fundacion Rafael del Pino, Princeton University, Rutgers University, University of Michigan,
University of Southern California, UT-Dallas and UT-Austin for helpful comments. Corresponding
author: andres.almazan@mccombs.utexas.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Andres Almazan, Adolfo de Motta, Sheridan Titman, and Vahap Uysal. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Structure, Liquidity, and Firm Locations
Andres Almazan, Adolfo de Motta, Sheridan Titman, and Vahap Uysal
NBER Working Paper No. 13660
December 2007
JEL No. G30,G32,G34,R3
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the relation between a firm's location and its corporate finance decisions. We
develop a simple model where being located within an industry cluster increases opportunities to make
acquisitions, and to facilitate those acquisitions, firms within clusters maintain more financial slack.
Consistent with our model we find that firms that are located within industry clusters tend to make
more acquisitions, and have lower debt ratios and larger cash balances than their industry peers located
outside clusters. In addition, we document that firms in growing cities and technology centers also
maintain more financial slack. Overall, these findings, which reveal systematic patterns between geography
and corporate finance choices, suggest the importance of growth opportunities in firms’ financial decisions.
Andres Almazan Sheridan Titman
Finance Department Finance Department
McCombs School of Business McCombs School of Business
University of Texas at Austin University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712-1179 Austin, TX 78712-1179
andres.almazan@mccombs.utexas.edu and NBER
titman@mail.utexas.edu
Adolfo de Motta
McGill University Vahap Uysal
Bronfman Building, Rm 581 Michael F. Price College of Business
1001 Sherbrooke Street West Division of Finance
Montreal, Quebec, Canada University of Oklahoma
adolfo.demotta@mcgill.ca 307 W. Brooks, Suite 252
Norman, Oklahoma 73019-4005
uysal@ou.edu

1 Introduction
In 1992 the Apache Corporation, then a small oil and gas firm located in Denver (CO), ac-
quiredMWPetroleum,asubsidiaryofAmocoCorporation,amajorintegratedoilcompany.
This acquisition, which more than doubled the size of its oil and gas reserves, was viewed
by Apache’s top management as a major success, and to a large extent defined Apache’s
future strategy: to grow by acquiring mature oil and gas fields from the major integrated
oil firms. To implement this strategy Apache moved from Denver to Houston (TX), where
most of the major oil firms had operations, and reduced its debt ratio to improve its credit
rating. BylocatinginHouston, Apache’smanagementbelievedthattheywouldhavebetter
access and knowledge about potential deals. Maintaining an investment grade bond rating
(Apache had a B rating when they acquired MW Petroleum and reached an A rating a
few years later) was viewed by Apache’s management as essential, since their acquisition
strategy required an ability to raise capital on relatively short notice.1
This paper examines whether, as suggested by the Apache case, a firm’s acquisition and
financial policies are related to its location. More specifically, we examine whether a firm’s
tendencytomakeacquisitionsanditscapitalstructurechoicesarerelatedtowhetherornot
the firm is located within an industry cluster, that is, close to its industry peers. To study
these issues, we start by developing a simple model that describes the relation between a
firm’s location, financial structure and acquisition activities. Consistent with the Apache’s
experience, our model assumes that firms located in industry clusters have more acquisition
opportunities but also face greater competition from other potential acquirers. To take
advantage of these opportunities, the firms in our model maintain more financial slack if
they are located in clusters, which allows them to bid more aggressively for acquisitions.2
We initially examine the model’s assumptions, and find that after controlling for indus-
try affiliation, firms located in clusters do tend to make more acquisitions. In addition,
consistent with previous research (e.g., Hartford, 1999), we document that firms with more
1TheabovediscussionisbasedonthreeHarvardBusinessCases,(“MWPetroleumCorp. A”and“MW
Petroleum Corp. B” and “Risk Management at Apache”) and extensive discussions with Tom Chambers,
Apache’sExecutive VicePresident.
2This aspect of the model is related to Clayton and Ravid (2002) and Morellec and Zhdanov (2006),
whichshow that moreleveredbidders tend to bidlessaggressively.
1

financialslacktendtomakemoreacquisitions. Moreover, weshowthatthepositiverelation
between acquisition activity and financial slack is stronger in clusters, which is consistent
with the presence of greater competition for targets in clusters.
While the evidence on the relation between location and acquisition activity supports
the assumptions of our model, the main focus of our empirical analysis is on the relation
between a firm’s choice of financial slack and whether or not the firm is located in a cluster.
As we just discussed, our model focuses on an “acquisition” channel, which predicts a
positive relation between being located in a cluster and having financial slack. However,
there is an existing literature that suggests a “collateral” channel, which generates the
opposite prediction. In particular, Williamson (1986) suggests that when firms have assets
that are redeployable, which is more likely to be the case when they are located in clusters,
they are able to obtain more debt financing.3
To assess the importance of these competing theories we extend the literature on the
empirical determinants of capital structure, (e.g., Titman and Wessels 1988 and Rajan and
Zingales 1995) and cash holdings (e.g., Opler et al. 1999), by considering the effects of
location proxies in the traditional regressions. Our results indicate that firms in clusters
have lower debt ratios and maintain higher cash balances. Our tests also show that firm
characteristics like size and profitability, which are related to leverage and cash balances in
the cross-section, have a weaker effect on these choices in clusters.
The empirical evidence in this paper–which rejects the null hypothesis that firms’ cor-
porate finance decisions are independent of location–can be interpreted in at least two
ways. First, the evidence is consistent with the idea that location affects investment op-
portunities and that these in turn influence capital structure choices, (i.e., a direct cluster
effect). Alternatively, these findings may reflect the possibility that firms that choose to
locate either within or outside of clusters have fundamentally different characteristics (i.e.,
a cluster-selection effect), and that these characteristics are related to both the tendency of
3Shleifer andVishny (1992) also discusses how a liquidasset market increases the ability of firms to use
assets as collateral for loans. Myers and Rajan (1998), however, suggest a negative effect of liquidity on
borrowing capacity that arises because a more liquid asset market makes it easier for firms to substitute
morerisky assets for safe assets.
2