NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DID FIRMS SUBSTITUTE DIVIDENDS FOR SHARE REPURCHASES AFTER
THE 2003 REDUCTIONS IN SHAREHOLDER TAX RATES?
Jennifer L. Blouin
Jana Smith Raedy
Douglas A. Shackelford
Working Paper 13601
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13601
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2007
The authors have benefited greatly from discussions with Jeff Brown, Raj Chetty, Emmanuel Saez,
and Scott Weisbenner and research assistance from Kevin Markle. We are responsible for all remaining
errors. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Jennifer L. Blouin, Jana Smith Raedy, and Douglas A. Shackelford. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Did Firms Substitute Dividends for Share Repurchases after the 2003 Reductions in Shareholder
Tax Rates?
Jennifer L. Blouin, Jana Smith Raedy, and Douglas A. Shackelford
NBER Working Paper No. 13601
November 2007
JEL No. G3,G35,H24,H25
ABSTRACT
This paper tests whether firms altered their dividend and share repurchase policies in response to the
2003 reductions in shareholder tax rates. We predict that firms substituted dividends for repurchases,
because the reduction in dividend tax rates exceeded the reduction in the capital gains tax rates. As
expected, we find substitution and find that it is increasing in the percentage of the company owned
by individual investors, the only shareholders affected by the legislation. These findings are consistent
with boards of directors considering the tax preferences of individual stockholders (particularly officers
and managers) when setting dividend and share repurchase policies.
Jennifer L. Blouin Douglas A. Shackelford
University of Pennsylvania Kenan-Flagler Business School
The Wharton School University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
3620 Locust Walk Campus Box 3490, McColl Building
1315 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3490
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6365 and NBER
blouin@wharton.upenn.edu doug_shack@unc.edu
Jana Smith Raedy
Kenan-Flagler Business School
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
Campus Box 3490, McColl Building
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3490
jana_raedy@unc.edu

Did Firms Substitute Dividends for Share Repurchases after the
2003 Reductions in Shareholder Tax Rates?
1. Introduction
This paper examines the extent to which shareholder taxes affect dividends and share
repurchases. Specifically, we study changes in the mix of dividends and share repurchases
following the enactment of the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003 (2003
Act). The 2003 Act reduced dividend tax rates from 38.6 percent to 15 percent and the capital
gains tax rates (which apply to share repurchases) from 20 percent to 15 percent for individual
investors. Because the dividend tax cut exceeded the capital gains tax cut, we predict a shift
from repurchases to dividends following enactment of the 2003 Act. We also predict that,
because the legislation only affected individual investors, the shift increased in the probability
that the distributions would be taxed on individual tax returns.
Our prediction that managers substituted dividends for repurchases does not mean that we
expect that total share repurchases declined. To the contrary, since capital gains tax rates fell,
share repurchases should have risen. However, for firms with large individual ownership, we
expect an even greater percentage increase in dividends (because the dividend tax rate reductions
exceeded the capital gains tax rate reductions), resulting in dividends comprising a larger
percentage of total payouts. That said, we could envision an alternative outcome. If firms are
less responsive to a cut in the dividend tax rate (e.g., because dividends are stickier than
repurchases) than to a cut in the capital gains tax rate (albeit a smaller reduction), then we could
find that substitution flowed in the opposite direction—from dividends to repurchases.
While understanding the extent to which taxes affect corporate decisions (in this case,
payouts) is central to accounting, finance, and economics, we know relatively little about the

substitution of dividends and repurchases. The reason is that it is difficult to construct tests that
can link taxes to an increase in dividends and a corresponding decrease in repurchases (or vice
versa). Consequently, scholars observe payout patterns and attempt to attribute them to taxes.
For example, Bagwell and Shoven (1989) document an increase in repurchases in the 1980s,
which they attribute to firms finally learning the tax advantages of repurchases vis a vis
dividends. In other words, they infer substitution from an increase in repurchases. However,
Fama and French (2001) show that most repurchases are undertaken by dividend issuers who do
not reduce their dividends. They conclude that firms increase repurchases to provide additional
distributions, rather than substitute for dividends. That said, Grullon and Michaely (2002) look
at similar data and conclude that those repurchases are supplanting dividends and that taxes are
driving the substitution. This lack of consensus arises partly because none of the studies can
directly link changes in payouts to changes in taxes.
The Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA86) seemed to provide an opportunity to link taxes
and substitution. TRA86 reduced the dividend tax rate from 50 percent to 28 percent and
increased the capital gains tax rate from 20 percent to 28 percent. Using the same logic as in this
paper, researchers expected dividends to soar and repurchases to tumble. Yet, DeAngelo et al.
(2000), Jagannathan et al. (2000), and others point out that, after TRA86, aggregate repurchases
soared, while dividends languished; prima facie evidence that TRA86 did not lead to
substitution. Grullon and Michaely (2002), however, report tax-motivated substitution at the
firm level. They study market responses to announcements of repurchase programs around
TRA86, find lower returns after passage, (consistent with a decline in the tax advantages of
repurchases), and conclude that substitution increased following the enactment of TRA86. Lie
2