NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
VOTES OR MONEY? THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM THE US CONGRESS.
Matilde Bombardini
Francesco Trebbi
Working Paper 13672
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13672
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2007
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Matilde Bombardini and Francesco Trebbi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Votes or Money? Theory and Evidence from the US Congress.
Matilde Bombardini and Francesco Trebbi
NBER Working Paper No. 13672
December 2007
JEL No. D72,H7,P48
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the relationship between the size of interest groups in terms of voter representation
and the interest group's campaign contributions to politicians. We uncover a robust hump-shaped relationship
between the voting share of an interest group and its contributions to a legislator. This pattern is rationalized
in a simultaneous bilateral bargaining model where the larger size of an interest group affects the amount
of surplus to be split with the politician (thereby increasing contributions), but is also correlated with
the strength of direct voter support the group can offer instead of monetary funds (thereby decreasing
contributions). The model yields simple structural equations that we estimate at the district level employing
data on individual and PAC donations and local employment by sector. This procedure yields estimates
of electoral uncertainty and politicians effectiveness as perceived by the interest groups. Our approach
also implicitly delivers a novel method for estimating the impact of campaign spending on election
outcomes: we find that an additional vote costs a politician between 100 and 400 dollars depending
on the district.
Matilde Bombardini
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997 - 1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
Canada
matildeb@interchange.ubc.ca
Francesco Trebbi
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
ftrebbi@chicagogsb.edu

1 Introduction
The role played by special interest groups in shaping policy-making is hard to ignore. One simple
reason is the considerable size of the amounts the special interest groups (SIGs) inject into the
political system. During the 1999-2000 election cycle the first 50 donor industries disbursed to
incumbents of the 106th Congress a cumulated $368,438,170, about the size of the GDP of a (not
so)smalldevelopingeconomy. Inthe2005-2006electioncyclethefirst50donorindustriesdisbursed
the109thCongress$444,505,353. Muchresearchefforthasgonetowardsunderstandingthewayin
which special interest groups (SIGs) affect the political process and policy formulation, if and how
SIGsbuyinfluence. Inparticular, withinthisliteratureonespecificpathhasbeentoinvestigatethe
importance of campaign contributions by SIGs to politicians who value such donations as inputs
that increase their probability of electoral success.
One aspect that has received little attention along this path of research is that, since the prob-
ability of being (re-)elected ultimately depends on the number of votes a politician can attract,
the legislator should take into account both the electoral strength of an interest group (i.e. the
share of voting population it represents) and its contributing possibilities when deciding whether
to support or not legislation in favor of such group.1 On the one hand, SIGs that represent a large
number of voters in a district also benefit more from a given policy and therefore might contribute
more. On the other hand, such interest groups might be required to make fewer contributions if
they can pledge voter support.2 The ability of employers to affect the electoral orientation of their
1Thepoweroffirmsintermsofvoterrepresentationhasbeenatthecenterofdiscussionfollowingarecentmoveby
Wal-Mart: “InAugust,Wal-MartdistributedalettertoitsemployeesinIowaandthreeotherstates,highlightingwhat
itsaidwereinaccuraciesincriticismbyGovernorTomVilsack,aswellasSenatorsEvanBayhofIndianaandJoseph
Biden of Delaware and New Mexico’s Governor Bill Richardson. The letter encouraged employees to talk to ‘friends,
neighboursandfamilyaboutthegoodthatWal-Martdoes’. Italsopromisedthatthecompanywould‘keepyouinformed
about what these political candidates are saying about your company while on the campaign trail’. Wal-Mart has also
highlightedthesignificantnumberofitsemployeesinbothswingstates. InOhioits50,000workersrepresentroughly1
per cent of voters in the 2004 presidential election, enough to be a factor in the current Senate battle between Sherrod
Brown - a Wal-Mart critic - and Mike DeWine, the Republican incumbent. Wal-Mart’s political action committee is
also one of the largest corporate donors to Mr DeWine’s campaign.” (Financial Times - September 30, 2006)
2The idea that politicians may accept lower contributions by firms that represent a large number of voters is
clearly expressed in the following interview to Representative Guy Vander Jagt (R-Michigan): “I have one Fortune
500 company in my district that was so fuddy-duddy that they would never ever, ever do anything to help me. If their
plane was going back to Michigan, they wouldn’t let me ride on it. And that was before we got all these rules in.
Nobodywoulddoitnow [acceptarideonacorporatejet], butbackthen, everyonewoulddoit. When theWashington
Senators were still here, instead of [this company] getting me tickets, I’d scramble around and get them tickets. In
other words, I could not have been treated more shabbily in terms of anything they might do for me. And yet I always
2

employees is illustrated by initiatives like the NAM (National Association of Manufacturers) Pros-
perity Project, which provides employers with the tools to inform workers of how their legislators
are voting on issues of concern to their sector. 3
This turns out to be a quantitatively important mechanism at play in the data. The main
contribution of the paper is to show that the number of voters represented by interest groups is an
important variable in explaining the pattern of campaign contributions. The data indicate that an
inverted-U shape describes the relationship between the share of voters represented by an interest
group and the contributions to a legislator.
As a departure point, the paper exploits the variation in economic structure across US states
and congressional districts to investigate the relationship between the electoral strength of a given
interest group and the political contributions to a given politician. For each US House Representa-
tiveandeachSenator, wematchPACandindividualcontributionsbyeacheconomicinterestgroup
(e.g. tobacco, insurance, steel producers, textiles) to the number of employees in the corresponding
sector.4 We find that, within each Congressional District and each State, an inverted-U describes
the relationship between campaign contributions and the number of employees in the sector repre-
sented by the corresponding interest group. At low employment levels (i.e. fewer voters), interest
group contributions to the politician increase with the number of employees in a sector. At higher
employmentlevelstheinterestgroupcontributionsdecreasewith thenumberof employees. Indeed,
thedatashowthatthelargestemployersarepracticallyneverthelargestcontributors. Thispattern
knocked myself out for them because they were the biggest employer in that county. Their health was essential to the
health of my constituents, the people who worked there.” - Speaking Freely by Martin Schram for the Center for
Responsive Politics (1995, First Edition)
ThefollowingquotebySenatorDennisDeConcini(D-Arizona)clarifiesfurthertheconcept: “IfIgetacontribution
from, say, Allied-Signal, a big defense contractor, and they’ve raised money for me. And then they come in and say,
‘Senator, we need legislation that would extend some rule of contracting that’s good for us.’ They lay out the case.
My staff goes over it. I’m trying to help them. Why am I trying to help them? The cynic can say: ‘Well, it’s because
they gave you 5,000 bucks. And if you ran again, they’ll give you another 5,000 bucks.’ Or is it because they have
15,000 jobs in Arizona and this will help keep those jobs in Arizona? Now to me, the far greater motivation is those
jobs, because those are the people that are going to vote for me. But I can’t ignore the fact that they have given me
money... Now the ideal situation is if I was motivated only by the jobs and the merits and there was no money here -
that’s the way it ought to be - or if the money was so minimal that nobody would think it was a factor. If I could only
spend a half a million dollars in a Senate campaign and they could only give me $1,000, it would not be a factor.”
3See the project web site at http://www.bipac.net/page.asp?content=nam&g=nam&parent=p2demo.
In2004NAMreports“By Election Day, the program reached more than 19 million employees, delivered more than
40 million messages and helped 1.7 million employees with voter registration and early ballot information.”
4It seems reasonable to proxy the number ofvoters an interest group represents with the number of employees in
the sector.
3