NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW SOVEREIGN IS SOVEREIGN CREDIT RISK?
Francis A. Longstaff
Jun Pan
Lasse H. Pedersen
Kenneth J. Singleton
Working Paper 13658
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13658
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2007
We are grateful for valuable comments and suggestions received from Andrew Atkeson, Engelbert
Dockner, Sebastian Edwards, Robert Engle, Don Morrison, Alex Reyfman, Walter Torous, and seminar
participants at Barclays Global Investors, the Moody's and Copenhagen Business School Credit Conference,
UCLA, and the University of Vienna. We are also grateful for the research assistance of Xiaolong
Cheng, Priyank Gandhi, Brent Longstaff, and Scott Longstaff. All errors are our responsibility. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Francis A. Longstaff, Jun Pan, Lasse H. Pedersen, and Kenneth J. Singleton. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Sovereign is Sovereign Credit Risk?
Francis A. Longstaff, Jun Pan, Lasse H. Pedersen, and Kenneth J. Singleton
NBER Working Paper No. 13658
December 2007
JEL No. G12,G15
ABSTRACT
We study the nature of sovereign credit risk using an extensive sample of CDS spreads for 26 developed
and emerging-market countries. Sovereign credit spreads are surprisingly highly correlated, with just
three principal components accounting for more than 50 percent of their variation. Sovereign credit
spreads are generally more related to the U.S. stock and high-yield bond markets, global risk premia,
and capital flows than they are to their own local economic measures. We find that the excess returns
from investing in sovereign credit are largely compensation for bearing global risk, and that there is
little or no country-specific credit risk premium. A significant amount of the variation in sovereign
credit returns can be forecast using U.S. equity, volatility, and bond market risk premia.¸
Francis A. Longstaff Lasse H. Pedersen
UCLA Two Greenwich Plaza, 3rd Floor
Anderson Graduate School of Management AQR
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481 Greenwich CT 06830
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481 and NBER
and NBER lpederse@stern.nyu.edu
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu
Kenneth J. Singleton
Jun Pan Graduate School of Business
MIT Sloan School of Management Stanford University
50 Memorial Drive Stanford, CA 94305
Rm E52-435 and NBER
Cambridge, MA 02142 ken@future.stanford.edu
and NBER
junpan@mit.edu

Sovereignty: Supreme power . . .
Freedom from external control . . .
Autonomy.
— Miriam-Webster Dictionary.
1. INTRODUCTION
Is sovereign credit risk primarily an idiosyncratic or country-specific risk? Or is
sovereigncredit moresystematic anddrivenprimarilyby regionaland globaleconomic
forces external to the country?
Thisissueisof key importancesince the natureof sovereigncredit riskdetermines
the characteristics of returns in sovereign debt markets and directly affects the ability
of investors, banks, and other financial institutions to diversify the risk of global debt
portfolios. Portfolio theory implies that the correlation structure of sovereign credit
risk shouldplay a central role in determiningglobalportfolio positionsand influencing
the flow of capital across countries. Furthermore, the nature of a sovereign’s credit
risk may affect both its ability to access global debt markets and the risk premium
it must then pay to obtain capital. Also, this issue has fundamental implications for
how the international lending community should deal with distressed debtor nations.
Despite its importance, relatively little research on this topic has appeared in
the literature. Previous theoretical work focuses primarily on the incentives faced by
sovereign debtors to repay their debt. Examples include Eaton and Gersovitz (1981),
Grossman and Van Huyck (1988), Bulow and Rogoff (1989a, b), Atkeson (1991),
Dooley and Svenson (1994), Cole and Kehoe (1996, 2000), Dooley (2000), and many
others. A number of empirical studies focus on the factors that determine individual
sovereign credit spreads. These include Edwards (1984, 1986, 2002), Berg and Sachs
(1988), Boehmer and Megginson (1990), Duffie, Pedersen, and Singleton (2003), and
Zhang(2003). Otherimportantempiricalworkfocusesonthe investmentreturnsasso-
ciatedwithBradybondsandemergingmarketdebt, suchasErb,Harvey,andViskanta
(1996, 1997, 1999), and Dahiya (1997). Some recent research provides evidence that
1
sovereign credit spreads are related to common global factors. In particular, Pan and
Singleton (2007) show that the credit spreads for Mexico, Turkey, and Korea share a
strong commonrelation to U.S. stock market volatility as measuredby the VIX index.
1
Forexample, see KaminandvonKleist (1999), EichengreenandMody (2000), Geyer,
Kossmeier, and Pichler (2004), Rozada and Yeyati (2005), and Remolona, Scatigna,
and Wu (2007).
1

This result is important since it demonstrates how common dependence of this type
could induce significant correlations among sovereign credit spreads.
To shed light on the underlying nature of sovereign credit risk, we begin by
examining the correlation structure of credit spreads for an extensive set of sovereigns
and investigating the underlying sources of commonality. The data for the study
consist of market quotations for sovereign credit default swap (CDS) contracts on the
external debt of 26 developed and less-developed countries. Sovereign credit default
swaps function as insurance contracts that allow investors to buy protection against
2
the event that a sovereign defaults on or restructures its debt. As such, sovereign
CDS spreads directly reflect the market’s assessment of the sovereign’s credit risk.
An important advantage of using sovereign CDS data is that it allows us to “factor
out” the component of sovereign bond returns due to changes in interest rates and
focus instead on the returns due exclusively to sovereign credit risk. Furthermore,the
sovereignCDSmarketmayoftenbemoreliquidthanthecorrespondingsovereignbond
3
market, resulting in more accurate estimates of credit spreads. Also, CDS spreads
are often implicitly spreads on bonds that are less encumbered by covenants and
guarantees.
A number of surprising results emerge from the analysis. First, most of the
variation in sovereign credit spreads is due to common regional and global factors;
idiosyncratic country-specific variation represents only a minority fraction of the total
variation in sovereign credit spreads. In particular, a simple principal components
analysis reveals that more than 30 percent of the variation in sovereign CDS spreads
is explained by a single global factor that affects almost every country in the sample.
Thisfirstfactor hasacorrelationof −70percentwithU.S.stock marketreturnsand66
percent with changes in the VIX volatility index. Furthermore, more than 50 percent
of the variationinsovereignCDSspreadsisexplainedbyjust threecommonfactors. A
multivariate cluster analysis based on the correlation matrix also indicates that there
is a strong regional or geographical structure to sovereign credit risk.
Next, to explore the determinants of sovereign credit risk, we regress changes in
CDS spreads on four categories of explanatory variables: local economic variables,
global financial market variables, global risk premia measures, and net investment
2
Typically, sovereign financial distress results in a restructuring or rescheduling of
debt. For convenience, we refer to this process simply as sovereign default throughout
the paper.
3
While CDS spreadsgenerally approximatethe spreadsof the underlyingbonds, there
areseveralreasonswhythe two neednot be identical. Forexample, there are cashflow
differences between bonds and CDS contracts that can induce differences in spreads
(see Duffie and Liu (2001), Duffie and Singleton (2003), and Longstaff, Mithal, and
Neis (2005)). Also, there can be bond- or contract-specific liquidity effects that create
time-varying differences or basis risk between CDS and sovereign bond spreads.
2