NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MORTGAGE BROKER REGULATIONS THAT MATTER:
ANALYZING EARNINGS, EMPLOYMENT, AND OUTCOMES FOR CONSUMERS
Morris M. Kleiner
Richard M. Todd
Working Paper 13684
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13684
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2007
We thank Hwikwon Ham, Patricia Haswell, Matthew Hendricks, Thomas LaMalfa, Alexander Lefter,
Heidi Liu, Cynthia Pahl, Dan Rozycki, Michael Weisbrot and JW Bond Consultants for their assistance
with the paper and staff at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System for providing much
of our data. We also thank David Autor, Richard Freeman, Alexandre Mas, and two referees for comments
that greatly improved the paper. In addition, we benefited from suggestions from Susan Woodward
and participants at seminars hosted by the Aarhus School of Business, the Federal Reserve Board,
the Federal Trade Commission, the London School of Economics, the National Bureau of Economic
Research, and the University of Minnesota. The views expressed here are those of the authors, and
not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Morris M. Kleiner and Richard M. Todd. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Mortgage Broker Regulations That Matter: Analyzing Earnings, Employment, and Outcomes
for Consumers
Morris M. Kleiner and Richard M. Todd
NBER Working Paper No. 13684
December 2007, Revised September 2008
JEL No. H77,J18,J4,J44,J8,K2,K31,L22,L38,L51,L84
ABSTRACT
As the role of mortgage brokers in mortgage origination grew from insignificant in the 1980s to dominant
in recent years, questions have arisen about whether its services help or harm consumers. In response,
states have increasingly regulated the business, largely by creating and tightening occupational licensing
requirements for mortgage brokers. The question of whether increased occupational licensing of mortgage
brokers improves consumer outcomes is theoretically ambiguous and has been little studied empirically.
This study introduces a new database of mortgage broker licensing requirements and assesses the relationships
between these requirements and outcomes in both the labor market for brokers and the consumer market
for mortgages. We find that one typical regulation—the requirement in many states that mortgage
brokers maintain a surety bond or minimum net worth—has a significant and fairly consistent statistical
relationship with both labor and consumer market outcomes. In particular, we find that tighter bonding/net
worth requirements are associated with slightly higher broker earnings, fewer brokers, fewer subprime
mortgages, higher foreclosure rates, and a greater percentage of high-interest-rate mortgages. Although
we do not provide a full causal interpretation of these results, we take seriously the possibility that
restrictive bonding requirements for mortgage brokers have unintended negative consequences for
many consumers. On balance, our results also seem to support the relevance of theories of occupational
licensing that stress the importance of financial entry and exit barriers.
Morris M. Kleiner
University of Minnesota
Humphrey Institute
260 Humphrey Center
301 19th Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
kleiner@umn.edu
Richard M. Todd
Federal Reserve Board of Minneapolis
dick.todd@mpls.frb.org

I. Introduction
Mortgage brokers are intermediaries who both match potential mortgage borrowers and
lenders and assist them in completing the loan origination process. Brokers have typically operated
as independent service providers, not as agents or employees of either borrowers or lenders, and
they are compensated by fees paid by the borrower and sometimes the lender as well.1 Their role in
the U.S. mortgage market has mushroomed from insignificant in 1980 to predominant in recent
years. By 2004, about 53,000 mortgage broker firms were operating in the United States and were
directly or indirectly involved in the origination of as many as 68% of all mortgages that year
(Wholesale Access 2005).2 As the mortgage broker business grew, so did questions about the
industry’s role and its effects on consumer welfare.
From one perspective, the rise of mortgage brokering was just one part of a broader vertical
disintegration of the lending business that is widely thought to have made mortgage credit more
widely and cheaply available to many households (Jacobides 2005; Gerardi, Rosen, and Willen
2007). According to both the general theory of brokers (Yavas 1994) and mortgage market scholars
(El Anshasy, Elliehausen, and Shimazaki 2005; U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development 2002, Guttentag 2000), mortgage brokers have played a role in the evolution of the
highly specialized and efficient mortgage market. In particular, brokers can make the complicated
task of shopping and applying for the increasingly wide array of mortgage products more
manageable and efficient for borrowers and lenders alike. Millions of households, including many
affluent and sophisticated consumers, have arranged mortgages through brokers, frequently more
1 Some states have recently moved to enact or more strictly enforce laws that make the broker an agent of the borrower,
but this was not a factor during our study period.
2 By 2006, the number of firms had changed little but their share of originations was estimated to have declined to about
58% (Wholesale Access 2007). With the volume of subprime lending apparently falling significantly in 2007, mortgage
broker numbers may be declining further, as the brokers had originated the majority of subprime mortgages (Olson
2007).
2

than once. It seems likely that many if not most of them found value in the brokers’ services, which
is what we would expect in honest, competitive markets.
On the other hand, critics have argued that too many mortgage brokers are not honest or,
more broadly, that market failures prevent competition from effectively disciplining brokers’ profits
and quality of service. According to these critics (Guttentag 2000, LaCour-Little and Chun 1999,
Alexander et al. 2002, Kim-Sung and Hermanson 2003, Jackson and Burlingame 2007), market
failures (chiefly in the form of information asymmetries) allow mortgage brokers to profit unduly at
the expense of mortgage borrowers as well as lenders. These issues are said to be especially
problematic in the subprime mortgage market, where mortgage brokers have dominated originations
in recent years (Schloemer 2006).
In response to these concerns, a range of policy measures have been discussed. One of the
most common responses has been to increase the occupational licensing standards for mortgage
brokers. Pahl (2007) documents how state licensing of mortgage brokers increased at both the
extensive (more states) and intensive (more restrictions per state) margins between 1996 and 2006,
and since then a surge in mortgage foreclosures has provided political momentum for the enactment
of further regulation. Policymakers seem to have concluded that a lack of market discipline and
regulatory oversight has allowed many mortgage brokers to originate excessively expensive and
risky mortgages (Gramlich 2007), and a more comprehensive system of mortgage broker licensing
is often viewed as part of the solution (Kroszner 2007, Conference of State Bank Supervisors 2007,
Shumer 2007).
Despite the growing attractiveness of mortgage broker licensing to policymakers, both
theory and empirical evidence suggest that licensing will not necessarily improve outcomes for
consumers (Kleiner 2006). Even theories that emphasize the role of occupational licensing in
enhancing the quality of services provided find that licensing tends to also raise the average price of
3