NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHEN DOES A MUTUAL FUND'S TRADE REVEAL ITS SKILL?
Zhi Da
Pengjie Gao
Ravi Jagannathan
Working Paper 13625
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13625
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2007
We thank Robert Battalio, Roger Edelen, Craig Holden, Paul Irvine, Tim Loughran, Rick Mendenhall,
David Musto, Lubos Pástor, Paul Schultz, Clemens Sialm, Laura Starks, Sheridan Titman, Charles
Trzcinka, Lance Young and seminar participants at Barclays Global Investors, FRA 2007 Annual Meeting,
IU/ND/Purdue Finance Symposium, Northwestern University, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
University of Michigan, Tilburg University, and the 4th Vienna Symposium on Asset Management
for comments. An earlier version of this paper was titled .Informed Trading, Liquidity Provision and
Stock Selection by Mutual Funds. Patricia Andersen provides excellent editorial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Zhi Da, Pengjie Gao, and Ravi Jagannathan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

When Does a Mutual Fund's Trade Reveal its Skill?
Zhi Da, Pengjie Gao, and Ravi Jagannathan
NBER Working Paper No. 13625
November 2007, Revised April 2008
JEL No. G1,G11,G12,G14,G23
ABSTRACT
We conjecture that a mutual fund manager with superior stock selection ability is more likely to benefit
from trading in stocks affected by information-events. Taking the probability of informed trading (PIN,
Easley, Kiefer, O'Hara, and Paperman, 1996) to measure the amount of informed trading in a stock,
and inferring mutual fund trades from a large sample of mutual fund holdings, we provide empirical
support for the conjecture. Funds trading high-PIN stocks exhibit superior performance on average,
and superior performance that is more likely to persist. The findings are not due to price momentum
or the higher returns earned by high-PIN stocks on average. Conclusions remain the same after testing
for alternative measures for the amount of informed trading. Decomposing a fund's stock selection
ability into "informed trading" and "liquidity provision" adds further insight into fund's underlying
strengths. Impatient informed trading is a significant source of alpha for funds trading high-PIN stocks,
while liquidity provision is more important as a source of alpha for funds trading low-PIN stocks.
Zhi Da Ravi Jagannathan
University of Notre Dame J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of Management
239 Mendoza College of Business 2001 Sheridan Road
Notre Dame, Indiana 46556-5646 Leverone/Anderson Complex
zda@nd.edu Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
Pengjie Gao rjaganna@northwestern.edu
Department of Finance
Mendoza College of Business
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, Indiana 46556-5646
pgao@nd.edu

As of 2006, US mutual funds collectively managed $10 trillion, and almost $6 trillion of that in
equity funds. A signi…cant portion of this amount is actively managed. According to a survey by
the Mutual Fund Institute, in 2006 alone, US mutual funds bought and sold common stocks worth
over$6trillion. Over1980to2006, investorspaidatleast0:67percentofportfoliovalueperyearto
the active portfolio managers (French, 2008). Naturally, investors want to identify fund managers
with superior skills and to understand how these managers add su¢ cient value to justify their
fees. Ultimately, an active mutual fund manager’s success derives from his or her superior skill in
processing valuation-relevant information about a stock, a skill that should allow the identi…cation
of potential mispricing. Thus, it is reasonable to expect such skills to be more valuable when stocks
the manager can invest in are a¤ected by more value-relevant information events. To the extent
that rational managers have the option not to trade such stocks when they know that they do not
have an advantage in analyzing the information a¤ecting a stock, we should expect to …nd that
managers who choose to trade in this case earn higher returns on average.
To examine this conjecture we need (1) a measure of the number of information events a¤ecting
a stock during a given period; and (2) information that facilitates identifying a manager’s trades in
those stocks during those periods. We use the probability of informed trading (PIN) - proposed
by Easley, Kiefer, O’Hara, and Paperman (1996) - to proxy for the extent of information events
a¤ecting a stock. We infer a mutual fund’s trades by comparing its quarter-end holdings with its
holdings at the end of the quarter before.
Using quarterly holdings data from 1983 to 2004 for a large sample of US active equity mutual
funds, we …nd that funds trading high-PIN stocks indeed outperform those trading low-PIN
stocks. That is, if we sort funds according to the average PIN of stocks they trade during quarter
t (de…ned as trade_PIN), funds in the top trade_PIN decile outperform those in the bottom
decile by more than 50 basis points per quarter on a risk-adjusted basis during quarter t+1. The
risk-adjusted performance does not depend on whether we adjust for risk using a factor model or
a holding-based characteristics model.
Easley, Hvidkjaer, andO’Hara(2002)documentthathigh-PIN stocksearnhigherreturns–for
conveniencewewillrefertothisphenomenonascompensationforPIN risk. Our…ndings,however,
are not driven by this phenomenon for the several reasons. First, we obtain very similar results
after we control for PIN risk when we examine risk adjusted-returns. Second, our conclusions do
1

not change when we replace PIN with several alternative measures of the amount of information
a¤ecting a stock. To account for the illiquidity associated with high-PIN stocks, we examine the
information asymmetry component of the PIN (adjPIN; see Duarte and Young, 2007). To ensure
that our results are not driven by the correlation between trading volume and PIN, we directly
examine abnormal turnover in stock trading (aturn; see Chordia, Huh, and Subrahmanyam, 2006).
Wealsoconsidertheinformationasymmetrycomponentofthebid-askspread(theta;seeMadhavan,
Richardson and Roomans, 1997) which captures the impact of information events on stock price.
Third, stocks recently bought by mutual funds outperform those sold by mutual funds, although
they have very similar PIN measures.
We …nd that the ability of trade_PIN to predict future mutual fund performance is not
driven by its correlation with other fund characteristics. In a cross-sectional regression framework,
trade_PIN provides additional explanatory power on the next-quarter risk-adjusted mutual fund
returneveninthepresenceofmanyotherfundlevelcharacteristics. Weshowthatsuchpredictabil-
ity is not due to potential momentum trading by mutual funds.
While fund managers who choose to trade high-PIN stocks on average outperform the rest,
we would expect outperformance to be concentrated among managers who in fact have superior
skills. Using a four-factor-adjusted fund return or alpha as a proxy for manager skill, we provide
supporting evidence for such conjecture. Sorting on trade_PIN variable generates signi…cant
spreads in future fund performance only among funds with large alpha. In particular, amongst
funds associated with high alphas, only those that also trade high-PIN stocks during quarter t
produce positive and signi…cant alpha of 33 basis points during quarter t+1 after accounting for
feesandexpenses. Moreover,totheextentthatamanager’sskillsarelikelytopersistforsometime,
past superior performance is more likely to be an indication of future performance for a manager
who attained that performance by trading high-PIN stocks. Consistent with this conjecture, we
…nd that sorting on fund alphas in quarter t within funds with high trade_PIN generates a much
wider spread in fund risk-adjusted returns in quarter t+1 (91 basis points on average). Controlling
for PIN risk does not alter our results in any signi…cant way.
We also investigate the speci…c channels through which a fund manager’s trades add value. In
general, how a manager with superior skill trades to add value will depend on how long it takes for
the market to realize that the manager is correct. Based on how long the informational advantage
2