NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
NEW FRAMEWORK FOR MEASURING AND MANAGING MACROFINANCIAL
RISK AND FINANCIAL STABILITY
Dale F. Gray
Robert C. Merton
Zvi Bodie
Working Paper 13607
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13607
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2007
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Dale F. Gray, Robert C. Merton, and Zvi Bodie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

New Framework for Measuring and Managing Macrofinancial Risk and Financial Stability
Dale F. Gray, Robert C. Merton, and Zvi Bodie
NBER Working Paper No. 13607
November 2007
JEL No. E44,G0
ABSTRACT
This paper proposes a new approach to improve the way central banks can analyze and manage the
financial risks of a national economy. It is based on the modern theory and practice of contingent
claims analysis (CCA), which is successfully used today at the level of individual banks by managers,
investors, and regulators. The basic analytical tool is the risk-adjusted balance sheet, which shows
the sensitivity of the enterprise's assets and liabilities to external "shocks." At the national level, the
sectors of an economy are viewed as interconnected portfolios of assets, liabilities, and guarantees
-- some explicit and others implicit. Traditional approaches have difficulty analyzing how risks can
accumulate gradually and then suddenly erupt in a full-blown crisis. The CCA approach is well-suited
to capturing such "non-linearities" and to quantifying the effects of asset-liability mismatches within
and across institutions. Risk-adjusted CCA balance sheets facilitate simulations and stress testing
to evaluate the potential impact of policies to manage systemic risk.
Dale F. Gray Zvi Bodie
International Monetary Fund and MF Risk School of Management
5921 Searl Terace Boston University
Bethesda, MD 20816 704 Commonwealth Avenue
dgray@imf.org Boston, MA 02215
zbodie@bu.edu
Robert C. Merton
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University, Baker Library 353
Soldiers Field Road
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
rmerton@hbs.edu

New Framework for Measuring and Managing
Macrofinancial Risk and Financial Stability
By
Dale F. Gray, Robert C. Merton, Zvi Bodie
Introduction
Vulnerability of a national economy to volatility in the global markets for credit,
currencies, commodities, and other assets has become a central concern of policymakers.
The responsibility for managing these risks at the national level often is given to the
central bank. However, the conventional models and analytical tools used by central
banks today are ill suited for analyzing these types of risk. This paper proposes a new
approach to improve the way central banks can analyze and manage the financial risks of
a national economy. It is based on the modern theory and practice of contingent claims
analysis (CCA), which is successfully used today at the level of individual banks by
managers, investors, and regulators. When applied to the analysis and measurement of
credit risk, CCA is commonly called the Merton Model.1 The basic analytical tool is the
risk-adjusted balance sheet, which shows the sensitivity of the enterprise’s assets and
liabilities to external “shocks.” At the national level, the sectors of an economy are
viewed as interconnected portfolios of assets, liabilities, and guarantees—some explicit
and others implicit. Traditional approaches have difficulty analyzing how risks can
accumulate gradually and then suddenly erupt in a full-blown crisis. The CCA approach
is well-suited to capturing such “non-linearities” and to quantifying the effects of asset-
liability mismatches within and across institutions. Risk-adjusted CCA balance sheets
facilitate simulations and stress testing to evaluate the potential impact of policies to
manage systemic risk.
In addition to their traditional focus on inflation and output, central banks are
increasingly focusing on the resilience of the national financial system. The CCA
framework provides a forward-looking market-based set of indicators to measure the
vulnerability of various sectors of the economy and is well-suited to capturing non-
linearities and to quantifying the effects of asset-liability mismatches within and across
institutions.
The paper starts with a simple framework of CCA balance sheets for four key
sectors (sovereign, financial, corporate, and household sectors). It describes how the
sectoral CCA balance sheets can be constructed and linked together. Several different
types of risk transmission channels are discussed.
1 See Merton (1973, 1974, 1977, 1992, 1998). Initially developed for valuation of corporate firms, CCA
has been adapted to financial institutions and sovereigns.
4

Contingent Claims Analysis
A contingent claim is any financial asset whose future payoff depends on the
value of another asset. The prototypical contingent claim is an option – the right to buy
or sell the underlying asset at a specified exercise price by a certain expiration date. A
call is an option to buy; a put is an option to sell. Contingent claims analysis is a
generalization of the option pricing theory pioneered by Black-Scholes (1973) and
Merton (1973). Since 1973, option pricing methodology has been applied to a wide
variety of contingent claims. In this paper we focus on its application to the analysis of
credit risk and guarantees against the risk of default.
The contingent claims approach is based on three principles: (i) the values of
liabilities are derived from assets; (ii) liabilities have different priority (i.e. senior and
junior claims); and, (iii) assets follow a stochastic process. The liabilities consist of
senior claims (such as senior debt), subordinated claims (such as subordinated debt) and
the junior claims (equity or the most junior claim). As total assets decline, the value of
risky debt declines and credit spreads on risky debt rise.
Balance sheet risk is the key to understanding credit risk and crisis probabilities.
Default happens when assets cannot service debt payments. Uncertain changes in future
asset value, relative to promised payments on debt, is the driver of default risk. Figure 1
illustrates the key relationships. The uncertainty in asset value is represented by a
probability distribution at time horizon T. At the end of the period the value of assets
may be above the promised payments indicating that debt service can be made, or below
the promised payments leading to default. The area below the distribution in Figure 1(a)
is the “actual” probability of default. The asset-return probability distribution used to
value contingent claims is not the “actual” one but the “risk-adjusted” or “risk-neutral”
probability distribution, which substitutes the risk-free interest rate for the actual
expected return in the distribution. This risk-neutral distribution is the dashed line in
Figure 1(b) with expected rate of return r, the risk-free rate. Thus, the “risk-adjusted”
probability of default calculated using the “risk-neutral” distribution is larger than the
actual probability of default for all assets which have an actual expected return (µ) greater
than the risk-free rate r (that is, a positive risk premium).2
The calculations of the “actual” probability of default is outside the CCA/Merton
Model but it can be combined with an equilibrium model of underlying asset expected
returns to produce estimates that are consistent for expected returns on all derivatives,
conditional on the expected return on the asset. The reason being that one does not have
to know expected returns to use the CCA/Merton models for the purpose of value or risk
calculations.
2 See Merton (1992, pp.334-343; 448-450).
5