NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO STOCK PRICES INFLUENCE CORPORATE DECISIONS? EVIDENCE FROM
THE TECHNOLOGY BUBBLE
Murillo Campello
John Graham
Working Paper 13640
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13640
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2007
We thank Heitor Almeida, Nittai Bergman, Markus Brunnermeier, Judy Chevalier, Long Chen, Martijn
Cremers, Dirk Hackbarth, Eliezer Fich, Antônio Galvão, Vidhan Goyal, Robin Greenwood, Cam Harvey,
Massimo Massa, Joel Peress, Paul Tetlock (our WFA discussant), Selim Topaloglu, Mike Weisbach,
and Jeff Wurgler for their useful suggestions. Comments from seminar participants at INSEAD, Michigan
State University, MIT, Ohio State University, Queen's University, University of Toronto, Washington
University in St-Louis, Yale University, and the 2007 WFA meetings are also appreciated. Marek
Jochec and Bruno Laranjeira provided excellent research assistance. We are responsible for all remaining
errors. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Murillo Campello and John Graham. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Do Stock Prices Influence Corporate Decisions? Evidence from the Technology Bubble
Murillo Campello and John Graham
NBER Working Paper No. 13640
November 2007
JEL No. G31
ABSTRACT
Do firms issue stock when prices seem irrationally high? Do they invest or save the proceeds from
the sale of overvalued stocks? Is value created or destroyed in the process? This paper uses a novel
identification strategy to tackle these questions. We examine the capital investment, stock issuance,
and cash savings behavior of financially constrained and unconstrained non-tech manufacturers ("old
economy firms") around the 1990's technology bubble. Our results suggest that, because they relax
financing constraints, high stock prices affect corporate policies. In particular, during the bubble, constrained
non-tech firms issued equity in response to mispricing and used the proceeds to invest. They also saved
part of those funds in their cash accounts. We do not find similar patterns for unconstrained non-tech
firms, neither for tech firms. Our findings do not support the notion that managers systematically issue
overvalued stocks and invest in ways that transfer wealth from new to old shareholders, destroying
economic value. Rather, our evidence implies that what appears to be overvaluation in one sector of
the economy may have welfare-increasing effects across other sectors.
Murillo Campello
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Department of Finance
430A Wohlers Hall, MC-706
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
campello@uiuc.edu
John Graham
Duke University
Fuqua School of Business
One Towerview Drive
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
john.graham@duke.edu

1 Introduction
Financial economists have increasingly cast doubt on the view that market prices e¢ ciently re‡ect
fundamental …rm values. While most of the literature emphasizes the asset pricing implications of
market misvaluation, few studies look at whether mispricing has real-side consequences. In a sem-
inal article, Fischer and Merton (1984) argue that managers should take advantage of irrationally
low discount rates for their …rms’equity by issuing stocks and investing the proceeds. Subsequent
studies by Morck et al. (1990), Barro (1990), Blanchard et al. (1993), Galeotti and Schiantarelli
(1994), Chirinko and Schaller (1996), and Lamont (2000), among others, test the idea that stock
market ‡uctuations a¤ect …rm investment over and above fundamentals. Using mostly aggregate
data, these studies report mixed results. Morck et al. and Blanchard et al., for example, argue that
the “irrational”component of stock valuation does not a¤ect real investment. In essence, they …nd
that the component of prices that is not summarized by standard proxies for the marginal product
of investment (e.g., pro…tability and sales growth) fails to explain corporate spending. In contrast,
Barro and Galeotti and Schiantarelli, …nd explanatory power in the irrational component of prices.1
Whether stock prices in‡uence the real economy becomes a relevant concern when markets expe-
riencepricebubbles.Inthefaceofwidespreadmispricing, itcanberatherdi¢ cultforarbitrageursto
bring values back to fundamentals (see Morck et al. (1990)). Arbitrage trading is a risky, costly ac-
tivity,andinaworldwheretradershavelimitedresources,mispricingmayemergeandquicklyspread
across di¤erent securities and sectors (Shleifer and Vishny (1997)). Crucially, …rms have a natural
monopolyoverthesupplyofnewsecurities. Inthiscontext,anumberofquestionsarise:Docorporate
managerstakeadvantageofmispricingduringbubbles? Ifso,whatdo…rmsdowiththeproceedsfrom
the sale of overvalued stocks? Do they save or invest? Is value created or destroyed in the process?
Theanswerstothesequestionscanshedlightontheeconomicconsequencesofmarket(mis)valuation.
Whenmanagersworkinthebestinterestofshareholders,theFischer-Mertonargumentgoes,they
should sell their …rms’stocks whenever equity is “overvalued.”Managers should do so even when
their private assessment of investment productivity is lower than that of investors. As discussed by
Blanchard et al. (1993), one problem with this arbitrage argument is that the sale of overvalued
stocks may bene…t only current shareholders. To wit, at the rational cost of funds, the marginal
investment has a zero NPV. Issuing overvalued stocks and investing the proceeds destroys value, as
additional investment drives the marginal product of capital below optimal levels. As old sharehold-
ers sell their positions, new shareholders are made worse o¤by paying a high price for stakes in …rms
that, on the margin, will invest in negative NPV projects. Unless new shareholders, too, expect to
1More recent papers use direct, ad hoc proxies for mispricing (based, e.g., on discretionary accruals, momentum
returns, and analysts’forecasts) and argue that those proxies a¤ect investment (see Polk and Sapienza (2003) and
Gilchristetal. (2005)). Proxiesforpriceinformativenesshavealsobeenfoundtoa¤ectinvestment(Chenetal. (2006)).
1

sell overvalued stocks in the future (a “rational bubble”), managers will have con‡icting incentives
when selling overvalued stocks (see also Stein (1996)).2 Alternatively, managers could issue over-
valued stocks and invest the proceeds in cash and interest-bearing securities (“zero-NPV projects”).
However, this poses another problem: investors may burst the price bubble if they observe …rms
allocating the proceeds from new issues into savings as opposed to capital acquisition. It follows that
not only might bubbles in‡uence …rm investment, but …rm investment might also in‡uence bubbles.
This discussion highlights important di¢ culties in determining whether market misvaluation
drives corporate investment. Firstly, value-maximizing managers might (optimally) respond to mar-
ket mispricing by issuing equity and investing only if their …rms do not face the rational cost of
capital; that is, if their …rms are otherwise “…nancially constrained.”Secondly, one must recognize
that …rm investment and valuation might be endogenously determined when equity is mispriced.
Unfortunately, studies on the real e¤ects of market valuation often fail to distinguish between …rms
with and without rational demand for investment and, just as importantly, pursue testing strategies
that overlook relevant simultaneity concerns.
This paper examines the impact of market (mis)valuation on corporate behavior in a way that
sidesteps the di¢ culties just noted. To accomplish this, we exploit …rm heterogeneity in tests that
combine intertemporal and cross-sectional contrasts. In essence we ask: When is mispricing most
likely to a¤ect …rm policies and which …rms are most likely torespond to mispricing? By contrasting
various managerial decisions (investment, issuance, and savings) across …nancially constrained and
unconstrained …rms, across di¤erent sectors of the economy, in and out of bubbles, our tests address
concerns about identi…cation and endogeneity, in the process of uncovering new results on the e¤ect
of equity valuation on corporate behavior.
We use the late 1990’s “tech bubble”as a laboratory in which to implement our tests.3 In the
context of that bubble, one might like to determine if tech …rms’policies were consistent with a
drive to take advantage of irrationally high stock prices. Unfortunately, this is di¢ cult to ascertain.
In the tech sector, equity prices and investment levels might seem high ex post. Yet both might
be explained by unobserved, technology-driven revisions of expected pro…tability occurring at that
time (see Pastor and Veronesi (2006)) — little can be said about a causal link between prices and
investment in that sector. What is unique about the late 1990’s is that the rise in technology stocks
fueled a run-up in equity prices in other (non-tech) sectors of the economy (see Brooks and Katsaris
2Stein provides a novel treatment of the con‡icting incentives that managers have when deciding whether to sell
overvalued stocks. According to his theory, managers that face short-term (long-term) time horizons are more (less)
inclinedtosellstocksatpricesthatdonotre‡ect…rmfundamentals. Steinalsoconsidersthee¤ectof…nancingfrictions
on thepropensity to issue stock in the face of mispricing. Our resultsare consistent with this dimension of histheory.
3Whileitisinherentlydi¢ culttoidentifybubbles,variousstudieseitherassumeorconcludethatabubbleoccurred
around that period (e.g., Ofek and Richardson (2003), Brunnemeier and Nagel (2004), and Gri¢ n et al. (2006)). To
simplify the language, we refer to the price run-up in the tech sector during the late 1990’s as the “tech bubble.”
2