NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FIRMS' STAKEHOLDERS AND THE COSTS OF TRANSPARENCY
Andres Almazan
Javier Suarez
Sheridan Titman
Working Paper 13647
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13647
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2007
We are grateful to comments from Aydogan Alti, Kent Daniel, Adolfo de Motta, Mark Flannery, Xavier
Freixas, Ron Giammarino, Maria Gutierrez, Thomas Hellmann, David Hirshleifer, Giovanna Nicodano,
Robert Prentice, Chris Parsons, Todd Pulvino, Scott Stern, Siew Hong Teoh, and seminar participants
at University of Amsterdam, Arizona State University, ESCP-EAP, INSEAD, Instituto de Empresa,
LSE, McGill University, NYU, Northwestern University, Ohio State University, Oxford, Pompeu
Fabra, UCLA, University of Texas, Tulane University, the CEPR Workshop on European Corporate
Governance and the New Economy, the WFA meetings, and the NBER Entrepreneurship: Strategy
and Structure Conference. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Andres Almazan, Javier Suarez, and Sheridan Titman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Firms' Stakeholders and the Costs of Transparency
Andres Almazan, Javier Suarez, and Sheridan Titman
NBER Working Paper No. 13647
November 2007
JEL No. D21,D23
ABSTRACT
We develop a model of a firm whose production process requires it to start and nurture a relationship
with its stakeholders. Because there are spillover benefits associated with being associated with a "winner,"
the perceptions of stakeholders and potential stakeholders can affect firm value. Our analysis indicates
that while transparency (i.e., generating information about a firm's quality) may improve the allocation
of resources, a firm may have a higher ex ante value if information about its quality is not prematurely
generated. The costs associated with transparency arise because of asymmetric information regarding
the extent to which stakeholders benefit from having a relationship with a high quality firm. These
costs are higher when firms can initiate non-contractible innovative investments that enhance the value
of their stakeholder relationships. Stakeholder effects of transparency are especially important for
younger firms with less established track records (e.g., start-ups).
Andres Almazan Sheridan Titman
Finance Department Finance Department
McCombs School of Business McCombs School of Business
University of Texas at Austin University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712-1179 Austin, TX 78712-1179
andres.almazan@mccombs.utexas.edu and NBER
titman@mail.utexas.edu
Javier Suarez
CEMFI
Casado del Alisal 5
28014 Madrid, SPAIN
suarez@cemfi.es

1 Introduction
The entrepreneurship literature recognizes that a prior relationship with a leading firm pro-
vides individuals with valuable entrepreneurial opportunities. For example, the papers re-
viewedinAudiaandRider(2005)provideevidencethatisconsistentwiththeideathatfirms
operatingatthetechnologicalfrontieraremorelikelytoprovidetheiremployeeswithgreater
access to valuable entrepreneurial opportunities. In particular, proxies for the technological
success of firms, such as early entry in a new market (Brittain and Freeman 1986), superior
technology (Franco and Filson 2000) or highly-cited patents (Gompers et al 2005), have a
statistically significant positive effect on the likelihood that the firm’s employees create new
firms.1
This paper starts with the dual premise that a firm’s stakeholders are essential for the
firm’s success and that they appreciate the benefits of being associated with a successful
firm, i.e., a winner. Given this premise, a firm’s success is closely tied to how it is perceived,
both internally, by its employees, and externally, by its customers and suppliers. This is
especially true for younger firms with less established track records, and perhaps a greater
need to attract stakeholders.2
Inordertomanagehowtheirfirmsareperceived, entrepreneursmakeanumberofchoices
that influence the extent to which information about the firm is generated and disseminated
both internally and externally. These choices determine what we call the degree of trans-
parency of the firm. For example, a firm’s decision to go public is likely to increase its
transparency due to the disclosure requirements associated with an IPO, the due diligence
of the underwriters, and the scrutiny brought by market participants (e.g., analysts).
Althoughthereareanumberofreasonswhytransparencyislikelytocontributepositively
to firm value, in this paper we stress the offsetting cost that it may have for a young firm,
1A paramount example of this process is provided by Fairchild Semiconductors, the firm producing the
first integrated circuit in 1959. As reported by Saxenian (1994), at least 23 out of 67 entrants to the
semiconductor industry between 1957 and 1976 had at least one founder who worked for Fairchild.
2ForaexcellentdiscussionoftheimportanceofattractingstakeholderstoentrepreneurialfirmsseeBhide
and Stevenson (1999).
1

whose success depends on its capacity to attract and retain key stakeholders. In particular,
these firms face the risk that their potential as industry winners is prematurely revealed,
which may in turn jeopardize their appeal to potential employees, customers and suppliers.
Ofcourse, positivenewswillhelpthefirm,butasweshow,thecostsassociatedwiththeearly
revelationofnegativeinformationcanexceedthebenefitsassociatedwiththeearlyrevelation
of positive information, tilting entrepreneurs towards choices that reduce transparency.
To illustrate these value-reducing effects of transparency we develop a model in which
the firm and its stakeholders can be of different classes. The firm may or may not be an
innovator that sets future standards in its industry and the stakeholders can either realize
substantial benefits or modest benefits from being exposed to the firm’s innovations. The
model assumes that initially everyone is uncertain about the firm’s quality, but depending
upon its transparency, the firm’s quality is revealed either sooner or later to all. In contrast,
stakeholders have private information about their own types, and this information is not
revealed during the course of their relationship with the firm.3 This last point implies that
all stakeholders must be offered the same terms of trade with the firm, which in turn means
thatifthefirmdealswithbothtypesofstakeholders, oneortheothertypewillobtainarent.
In particular, when the firm is likely to be an innovator the stakeholders who benefit from
their exposure to innovation earn rents and, when the firm is not likely to be an innovator
stakeholders who do not benefit frombeing exposed to innovation receive rents. As we show,
these expected rents are lower when less is known about the firm.
Transparencyisespeciallycostlywhenthefirmcanmakenon-contractibleinvestmentsin
innovative activities that increase the spillover gains to its stakeholders. For example, a soft-
ware firm might enhance the design of its programs in ways that benefit sophisticated users
or offer training to workers and customers about the internal architecture of its programs.
By doing this, the firm becomes a more attractive partner and can thus attract stakeholders
on more favorable terms. However, as we show, the stakeholders capture a greater portion
3We refer to stakeholders’ “types” and potential firm “qualities” to emphasize that while stakeholders
haveprivateinformationaboutthemselvestheinformationaboutthefirm,whileimperfect,issymmetrically
held by all.
2