NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHAT DETERMINES THE STRUCTURE OF CORPORATE DEBT ISSUES?
Brandon Julio
Woojin Kim
Michael Weisbach
Working Paper 13706
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13706
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2007
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Brandon Julio, Woojin Kim, and Michael Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What Determines the Structure of Corporate Debt Issues?
Brandon Julio, Woojin Kim, and Michael Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 13706
December 2007
JEL No. G30,G32
ABSTRACT
Publicly-traded debt securities differ on a number of dimensions, including quality, maturity, seniority,
security, and convertibility. Finance research has provided a number of theories as to why firms should
issue debt with different features; yet, there is very little empirical work testing these theories. We
consider a sample of 14,867 debt issues in the U.S. between 1971 and 2004. Our goal is to test the
implications of these theories, and, more generally, to establish a set of stylized facts regarding the
circumstances under which firms issue different types of debt.
Our results suggest that there are three main types of factors that affect the structure of debt issues:
First, firm-specific factors such as leverage, growth opportunities and cash holdings are related with
the convertibility, maturity and security structure of issued bonds. Second, economy-wide factors,
in particular the state of the macroeconomy, affect the quality distribution of securities offered; in
particular, during recessions, firms issue fewer poor quality bonds than in good times but similar numbers
of high-quality bonds. Finally, controlling for firm characteristics and economy-wide factors, project
specific factors appear to influence the types of securities that are issued. Consistent with commonly
stated 'maturity-matching' arguments, long-term, nonconvertible bonds are more likely to be issued
by firms investing in fixed assets, while convertible and short-term bonds are more likely to finance
investment in R&D.
Brandon Julio Michael Weisbach
London Business School University Of Illinois
Regent's Park 340 Wohlers Hall
London NW1 4SA 1206 S. Sixth Street
United Kingdom Champaign, IL 61820
bjulio@london.edu and NBER
weisbach@uiuc.edu
Woojin Kim
Korea University Business School
Anam-Dong, Seongbuk-Gu,
Seoul 136-701
South Korea
woojinkim@korea.ac.kr

Firms face a complex menu of choices when making financing decisions. Managers must decide
whether to finance investment projects with retained earnings, outside equity, or one of many possible types of
debt. Prior research related to the choice of financing has focused mostly on the broad choice between debt
and equity in general such as theories based on optimal leverage ratios, asymmetric information, and market
timing. However, firms most often use debt rather than equity to finance projects; Bolton and Scharfstein
(1996) observe that from 1946 to 1987, 85 percent of total U.S. external financing was raised through debt
offerings, compared to only 7 percent through equity offerings. Therefore, to understand how firms finance
investments, the choice between alternative types of debt financing is likely to be equally, or even more
important than the choice between equity and debt.
Debt contracts differ on a number of dimensions, including maturity, security, seniority, covenants, and
different types of embedded options such as convertible features and call options. These features vary both
across different firms’ debt issues and over time within the same firm’s issues, even when institutions,
regulations, taxation, and market conditions remain relatively constant. While there are many theories
discussing the possible reasons why firms structure debt in particular ways, there has been surprisingly little
empirical work testing the implications of these theories.
This paper attempts to fill this void, by empirically investigating the structure of public debt financing.
We rely on the Mergent database, which provides detailed information on the bond contracts of 14,867
publicly-traded U.S. debt issues between 1971 and 2004. We focus on five specific characteristics of bond
contracts: convertibility, maturity, security, callability, and credit quality. In doing so, we have two main goals.
First, we hope to establish a set of stylized facts on the use of various types of bonds by U.S. corporations over
time. Second, we wish to test the predictions of theories that provide explanations for why firms will use
alternative types of public debt.
The explanations we focus on for observed differences in debt contracts fall into three categories.
First, corporate finance theory has argued that certain firm characteristics are likely to affect the structure of
debt contracts. In particular, a firm’s size, the nature of its growth options, as well as its cash flows and cash
holdings are all potential determinants of the type of features included in a bond contract. In addition, the state
2

of the macroeconomy can also influence the characteristics of observed debt offerings. Financial constraints
are likely to be exacerbated during a recession, limiting firms’ ability to issue anything but the highest quality
debt. Finally, holding firm characteristics and economic conditions constant, firms also potentially issue
different types of debt over time as a function of the type of project the debt is used to finance. Thus, theory
suggests that the properties of debt issues should be a function of firm-level, economy-level, and project-level
factors.
We first summarize the various characteristics of public debt issues, and document how they have
changed over time. The overall quantity of public debt issues has increased dramatically in recent years. The
$2 trillion issued in the 2000-2004 period represents almost a six-fold increase in total issuance relative to the
sub-period beginning only ten years earlier, 1990 to 1994. In addition, recent debt issues have become shorter-
term, more likely to be convertible, and less likely to be callable than they were in the 1971-1984 period.
The main focus of the paper is on the factors that lead firms to use alternative kinds of debt. We first
perform univariate comparisons of the characteristics of firms issuing different kinds of debt. These
comparisons are suggestive, but do not control for other factors that are correlated with both the issuance’s type
and firm-level factors. We therefore use a multivariate approach to estimate the marginal effect of firm
characteristics on security choice. This problem is complicated by the fact that firms can choose when and
whether to issue a security at all, and by the fact that they can substitute for some security features with other
characteristics. Because of these statistical issues, we use a probit model with an explicit correction for
selection bias. The results are largely consistent with the univariate specification. Thus, we are relatively
confident that our conclusions come from the actual economics of security choice rather than from econometric
mismeasurement.
Finally, we consider the possibility that funds raised from different kinds of debt are used for different
purposes. To do so, we estimate equations similar to those in Kim and Weisbach (2007), which predict the
uses of an incremental dollar raised from different sources. We estimate these equations for different kinds of
debt, and find that capital from different kinds of debt does in fact get used for different purposes, even when
we control for other firm characteristics by including firm fixed effects in the equation.
3