NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CEO CENTRALITY
Lucian A. Bebchuk
Martijn Cremers
Urs Peyer
Working Paper 13701
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13701
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2007
For helpful comments, we are grateful to Alma Cohen, Will Goetzmann, Yaniv Grinstein, Steve Kaplan,
Paul Oyer, Charu Raheja, Eric Rasmusen, and seminar and conference participants at Amsterdam,
Columbia, Frankfurt, Harvard, INSEAD, Oslo, the NYU-Penn Law & Finance conference, the annual
Stern Conference of Finance and Accounting, the Conference on Empirical Legal Studies, and the
ALEA annual meeting. We are also grateful to Dirk Jenter for sharing with us his data on CEO turnover
and to Ronald Masulis for sharing with us his data on acquirer returns. For financial support, we would
like to thank the Guggenheim Foundation, the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business,
and the Harvard Law School Program on Corporate Governance. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Lucian A. Bebchuk, Martijn Cremers, and Urs Peyer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

CEO Centrality
Lucian A. Bebchuk, Martijn Cremers, and Urs Peyer
NBER Working Paper No. 13701
December 2007
JEL No. D23,G32,G38,J33,J44,K22,M14
ABSTRACT
We investigate the relationship between CEO centrality -- the relative importance of the CEO within
the top executive team in terms of ability, contribution, or power -- and the value and behavior of public
firms. Our proxy for CEO centrality is the fraction of the top-five compensation captured by the CEO.
We find that CEO centrality is negatively associated with firm value (as measured by industry-adjusted
Tobin's Q). Greater CEO centrality is also correlated with (i) lower (industry-adjusted) accounting
profitability, (ii) lower stock returns accompanying acquisitions announced by the firm and higher
likelihood of a negative stock return accompanying such announcements, (iii) higher odds of the CEO’s
receiving a “lucky” option grant at the lowest price of the month, (iv) greater tendency to reward the
CEO for luck in the form of positive industry-wide shocks, (v) lower likelihood of CEO turnover controlling
for performance, and (vi) lower firm-specific variability of stock returns over time. Overall, our results
indicate that differences in CEO centrality are an aspect of firm management and governance that
deserves the attention of researchers.
Lucian A. Bebchuk Urs Peyer
Harvard Law School INSEAD - Finance
1545 Massachusetts Avenue Boulevard de Constance
Cambridge, MA 02138 F-77305 Fontainebleau Cedex FRANCE
and NBER urs.peyer@insead.edu
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu
Martijn Cremers
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
martijn.cremers@yale.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
Public firms are likely to vary in terms of how central the CEO is within the top
executive team. We use the term ‘CEO centrality’ to refer to relative importance – in terms of
ability, contribution, or power – that the CEO has within the team of top executives. This paper
is an empirical study of CEO centrality and how it relates to firm value and behavior. We find
that the level of CEO centrality has a rich set of relations with firm outcomes, including
correlation with lower firm value as measured by Tobin’s Q, lower accounting profitability,
lower quality of acquisition decisions, lower CEO turnover, more luck-based pay, and lower
firm-specific variability of stock returns.
Our proxy for CEO centrality is the CEO's pay slice (CPS), which we define as the
percentage of aggregate top-five total compensation captured by the CEO. Because higher CPS
will tend to reflect a greater relative importance of the CEO within the executive team, CPS can
serve as a proxy for the CEO’s centrality within the top team. Moreover, as CPS is calculated
using compensation information from executives that are all at the same firm, this controls for
any firm-specific characteristics that affect the average level of compensation in the firm’s top
executive team.
Firms might differ in their CPS levels for two reasons. First, the firms might differ in
their optimal (or “appropriate”) CPS level. This optimal CPS level in a given firm reflects the
extent to which the CEO is a "star CEO" -- a CEO having superior talents or qualifications that
enhance the CEO's relative contribution to the firm as well as the value of outside opportunities.
The optimal CPS level also depends on incentive considerations. The higher the CPS level, the
stronger the "tournament incentives" for the other executives in the top management team who
might be promoted to the CEO post (Lazear and Rosen (1981)). Furthermore, the extent to which
it is optimal for the firm to have a management model based on a “dominant player” might well
depend on the firm’s circumstances.
Second, firms might differ in how their CPS levels depart (if at all) from the optimal level
for the firm. To the extent that the CEO has power and influence over the board and company
decision-making, the CEO might use this power and influence to raise CPS above its optimal
level. In such a case, the “excess CPS” – that is, the excess of the actual CPS over the optimal
1

CPS – will reflect rents captured by the CEO. Excess CPS can be viewed as a product of
agency/governance problems.
This separation of CPS into two components, optimal (or appropriate) CPS and excess
CPS, is relevant for interpreting any identified association of CPS with firm characteristics or
behavior. A correlation of a given variable with firm differences in observed CPS levels may be
due to (i) a correlation of the variable with the optimal level of CPS for a given firm, or (ii) a
correlation of the variable with excess CPS (or, of course, a correlation with both).
Our investigation of the relation between CPS levels and firm outcomes and behavior
has two parts. The first part examines the relationship between CPS and firm value as measured
by Tobin's Q. As will be explained, theory allows for alternative, competing predictions as to
whether CPS and Q will be systematically correlated and, if so, in what direction. We find a
strong empirical relation between CPS and Q. Controlling for the various factors that prior work
has shown to be correlated with Q, there is a significant – and economically meaningful –
negative correlation between CPS and Q.
These findings are inconsistent with the hypothesis that firm value and the selection of
CPS levels are uncorrelated or with the hypothesis that high-value firms find it optimal to choose
high CPS levels. Rather, there are two, not mutually exclusive, explanations. First, an “optimal
selection” explanation: the optimal level of CPS might be higher for low-value firms, and the
identified pattern might be due to the tendency of such firms to choose high CPS levels. Second,
a “governance” explanation: the identified pattern might be due to the correlation between low
value and excess CPS; having a high excess CPS might reflect agency and governance problems
that in turn bring about a reduction in firm value.
Exploring whether the negative correlation between CPS and value is fully driven by
optimal selection, we find that the negative relation is robust to controlling for lagged Q. We also
find that increases in CPS are related to decreases in Q, and lower Tobin’s Q does not lead to
increases in CPS. These results do not enable rejecting the governance/causality explanation in
favor of an optimal selection explanation.
Furthermore, we investigate how Q depends on the interaction between CPS and
measures of shareholder rights (Gompers et al (2003); Bebchuk et al (2004). Consistent with the
governance explanation, we find that the negative association between Q and CPS is
concentrated among firms whose boards are entrenched. Because entrenchment itself is
2