NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INVESTOR PROTECTION AND INTEREST GROUP POLITICS
Lucian A. Bebchuk
Zvika Neeman
Working Paper 13702
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13702
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2007
We have benefited from the helpful comments of Jennifer Arlen, Michal Barzuza, Laura Beny, John
Ferejohn, Dennis Gromb, Marcel Kahan, Randy Kroszner, Stuart Myers, Holger Spamann, Fausto
Panunzi, Enrico Perrotti, Andrea Prat, Mark Roe, Paulo Volpin, and participants in workshops and
conferences at Beijing, Columbia, Georgetown, Harvard, LBS, LSE, Moscow, NYU, Oxford, Shanghai,
Stockholm, Toronto, the AFA meeting, the ALEA meeting, and the NBER-RFS corporate governance
conference. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Lucian A. Bebchuk and Zvika Neeman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Investor Protection and Interest Group Politics
Lucian A. Bebchuk and Zvika Neeman
NBER Working Paper No. 13702
December 2007
JEL No. D72,G20,G30,K22,O16
ABSTRACT
We model how lobbying by interest groups affects the level of investor protection. In our model, insiders
in existing public companies, institutional investors (financial intermediaries), and entrepreneurs who
plan to take companies public in the future, compete for influence over the politicians setting the level
of investor protection. We identify conditions under which this lobbying game has an inefficiently
low equilibrium level of investor protection. Factors that operate to reduce investor protection below
its efficient level include the ability of corporate insiders to use the corporate assets they control to
influence politicians, as well as the inability of institutional investors to capture the full value that
efficient investor protection would produce for outside investors. The interest that entrepreneurs (and
existing public firms) have in raising equity capital in the future reduces but does not eliminate the
distortions arising from insiders' interest in extracting rents from the capital public firms already have.
Our analysis generates testable predictions, and can explain existing empirical evidence, regarding
the way in which investor protection varies over time and around the world.
Lucian A. Bebchuk
Harvard Law School
1545 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu
Zvika Neeman
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
Zvika@BU.edu

1. Introduction
It is now well recognized that the legal rules that govern corporate law matter a great deal for the
economy. There is a large body of both empirical and theoretical literature that suggests that a
country's level of investor protection has a substantial effect on the value of firms, the development
of stock markets, and economic growth (see, e.g., the survey by La Porta et al. (2000)).
Because insufficient investor protection can be costly for an economy’s performance, it is
important to understand what determines the level of investor protection and the reason that such
protection might fall short of being optimal. Why do countries vary so much in their level of investor
protection? Why do levels of investor protection within any given country change over time? When
investor protection is too low, is such suboptimality generally due to insufficient understanding by
public officials, which should be expected to disappear as officials become more knowledgeable
about which governance arrangements are optimal? Or are there some structural political
impediments that might enable excessively lax corporate rules to persist even after they are
recognized to be inefficient?
The aim of this paper is to contribute to an understanding of the answers to these questions by
developing a model of how interest group politics affects the level of investor protection. To be sure,
a country's level of investor protection might be influenced by long-standing factors such as the
country's legal origin (La Porta et al., 1998; Glaezer and Shleifer, 2003), culture and ideology (Roe
(2003), Allen (2005)), or the religion of its population (Stulz and Williamson, 2003), all of which lie
outside the realm of current interest group politics. However, given that countries do change their
investor protection arrangements considerably over time, the level of investor protection at any point
in time might also at least partly be the product of recent decisions by pubic officials. We seek, in
this paper, to contribute to understanding these decisions.
In particular, we focus on analyzing how politicians’ decisions about investor protection are
affected by interest group lobbying. We view lobbying on investor protection as important because,
in the ordinary course of events, most corporate issues are intensely followed by the interest group
with sufficient stake and expertise but are not sufficiently understood and salient to most. When this
1

is the case, politicians cannot expect their investor protection decisions to have a large direct effect
on voting behavior, which implies that voters do not typically affect politicians’ investor protection
decisions by much. In contrast, politicians’ investor protection decisions might still be significantly
affected by the influence activities of organized interest groups.
The politicians’ choices in which we are interested are those determining the level of investor
protection in publicly traded firms. This level of investor protection determines the extent to which
“corporate insiders” -- managers and controlling shareholders who have some control over corporate
decisions -- can extract private benefits of control. The laxer the corporate governance system, the
larger these private benefits of control. Beyond a certain point, any further weakening of investor
protection is inefficient. Assuming that politicians do recognize the efficient level of investor
protection, we focus on the question of whether they will generally choose to set investor protection
at this efficient level.
In our model, three organized interest groups compete for influence over the politicians who
determine the level of investor protection. The first group, which benefits from rules that are laxer
than optimal, consists of the corporate insiders of existing firms. The second group is made up of
institutional investors (financial intermediaries) that use funds received from individuals to invest in
public companies, and whose interests might overlap with those of "outsider" shareholders in
existing companies. The third group consists of owners of private firms (“entrepreneurs”) who plan
to take them public. We also allow for the possibility of insiders who plan to raise equity capital for
their existing public firms (or for new firms that they will take public) and thus have interests that
partly overlap with those of the entrepreneurs. We assume that individual investors, who invest in
publicly traded firms either directly or indirectly through institutional investors, are too dispersed to
become part of an effective organized interest group with respect to investor protection.
We identify and study the equilibrium outcome of the lobbying game between the interest
groups and the politician setting the level of investor protection (for simplicity we assume that this
choice is made by a single politician). Our analysis identifies factors that might lead to inefficiently
low levels of investor protection and excessive private benefits of control. First, corporate insiders
2