NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO PROFESSIONAL CURRENCY MANAGERS BEAT THE BENCHMARK?
Momtchil Pojarliev
Richard M. Levich
Working Paper 13714
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13714
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2007
We acknowledge helpful comments from Mark Anson and Robert Whitelaw on earlier drafts of this
paper. Any errors that remain are our own responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Momtchil Pojarliev and Richard M. Levich. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Professional Currency Managers Beat the Benchmark?
Momtchil Pojarliev and Richard M. Levich
NBER Working Paper No. 13714
December 2007
JEL No. F31
ABSTRACT
We investigate an index of returns on professionally managed currency funds and a subset of returns
from 34 individual currency fund managers. Over the period 1990-2006, excess returns earned by
currency fund managers have averaged 25 basis points per month. We examine the relationship of
these returns to four factors representing returns based on carry trading, trend-following, value trading
and currency volatility. These four factors explain a substantial portion of the variability in index returns
in the entire period and in sub-periods. We perform similar regressions for the 34 individual funds,
and find many funds where returns are significantly related to these four factors. Our approach impacts
the definition of alpha returns from currency speculation, modifying it from the excess return earned
by the fund, to only that portion of the excess returns not explained by the four factors. While the impact
on measured alpha is substantial, we find that some currency fund managers continued to generate
alpha returns in the most recent sample period.
Momtchil Pojarliev
Hermes Investment Management Limited
Lloyds Chambers, 1 Portsoken Street
London E1 8HZ England
m.pojarliev@hermes.co.uk
Richard M. Levich
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
rlevich@stern.nyu.edu

Do Professional Currency Managers
Beat the Benchmark?
1. Introduction
Over the last twenty years, the notion of currency as an asset class has gained a wider
following. Inspired, perhaps, by numerous studies reporting profitability in various types
of currency trading strategies, investment consultants have promoted currency products
as a potential source of alpha.1 Taking one measure, the number of funds in the Barclay
Currency Trader Index (BCTI) has grown from 44 in 1993 to 106 in 2006 (see Exhibit
1). While returns on the BCTI (an equally-weighted composite of managed programs
that trade in currency futures and forwards) were initially in the healthy double-digit
range, those returns have tended to diminish over time, especially over the last few
years.
If currency is indeed an asset class, we should be able to identify a set of factors that
correlate with managers’ realized returns from currency investment. In this paper, we
measure the extent to which currency managers’ returns correlate with four factors that
are intended to represent feasible benchmark returns from distinct styles of currency
1 Poole (1967), Dooley and Shafer (1984), Sweeney (1986), Levich and Thomas (1993), and Neely,
Weller and Dittmar (1997), among others have documented the profitability of technical trend following
models in currency markets. Bilson (1981) demonstrated that a persistent forward rate bias could be
exploited for trading profits, and many others have shown the general tendency for currencies with high
interest rates to appreciate. See Froot and Thaler (1990) for a survey and Burnside, et al. (2006) for a
1

trading – carry, trend, value and volatility. Our results show that a substantial part of
currency returns (both for the overall index and for 34 individual currency managers)
can be explained by systematic exposure to these alternative trading strategies, i.e. style
betas. We examine the stability of these relationships over time and find that both carry
and trend played a significant role in the 1990s. However, the impact of the carry factor
increased somewhat after 2000, while the impact of the trend factor declined.
Nevertheless, the trend factor remained the most dominant factor in terms of R-squared.
It explains more than 65% in the variability of the excess currency returns in the 1990s
and after 2000. In the 1990s, currency manager returns were, at the margin, significantly
negatively related to the value factor, meaning that currency managers as a group tended
to bet against Purchasing Power Parity and were the worse off for it. After 2000,
currency manager returns are positively and significantly related to the volatility factor.
Post-2000, nearly 77% of the variability in monthly returns on the BCTI can be
explained by our four factors.
The results for individual managers are naturally more diverse than for the overall index.
In the six-year period ending in 2006, we find that 8 of 34 currency fund managers
produced excess returns (over and above the returns associated with the four factors) that
are statistically significant and average about 104 bps per month. While overall managed
currency returns have declined sharply over the last 20 years, some individual managers
appear still capable of generating alpha compared to our four factor benchmarks.
recent study. Studies prepared at Citibank (2003) and Deutsche Bank (2007) suggest that simple trading
strategies based on mean reversion to long run PPP exchange rates have been profitable.
2