NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CORPORATE MISREPORTING AND BANK LOAN CONTRACTING
John R. Graham
Si Li
Jiaping Qiu
Working Paper 13708
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13708
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2007
We thank Avri Ravid, Michael Roberts, and participants in seminars at McMaster University, Wilfrid
Laurier University, and the 2006 Northern Finance Association conference for helpful comments.
Qiu acknowledges financial support from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of
Canada and Li acknowledges financial support from the Clarica Financial Services Research Center
at Wilfrid Laurier University. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by John R. Graham, Si Li, and Jiaping Qiu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Corporate Misreporting and Bank Loan Contracting
John R. Graham, Si Li, and Jiaping Qiu
NBER Working Paper No. 13708
December 2007
JEL No. G21,G32,K22,K42
ABSTRACT
This paper is the first to study the effect of financial restatement on bank loan contracting. Compared
with loans initiated before restatement, loans initiated after restatement have significantly higher spreads,
shorter maturities, higher likelihood of being secured, and more covenant restrictions. The increase
in loan spread is significantly larger for fraudulent restating firms than other restating firms. We also
find that after restatement, the number of lenders per loan declines and firms pay higher upfront and
annual fees. These results are consistent with the view that banks use tighter loan contract terms to
overcome risk and information problems arising from financial restatements.
John R. Graham Jiaping Qiu
Duke University DeGroote School of Business
Fuqua School of Business McMaster University
One Towerview Drive Hamilton, ON
Durham, NC 27708-0120 L8S 4M4, Canada
and NBER qiu@mcmaster.ca
john.graham@duke.edu
Si Li
School of Business and Economics
Wilfrid Laurier University
Waterloo, ON
N2L 3C5, Canada
sli@wlu.ca

1. Introduction
In recent years, a number of high-profile financial restatements by companies such as
Worldcom and Xerox have reduced previously reported earnings by billions of dollars.1
According to the United States General Accounting Office, the number of restatements
grew by 145% from 1997 through 2002. From January 1997 through June 2002, about 10%
of all listed companies restated one or more times. The size and visibility of restating
companies also increased: The average market value of a restating company increased from
$500 million in 1997 to $2 billion in 2002. Financial restatements are potentially very
costly to the firms involved. They may shake investor confidence in the credibility of
corporate disclosure, depress demand for a firm’s securities, and constrain corporate
opportunities thereby leading to a substantial loss in market value.
With the increasing importance of restatements, their effect on the welfare of
shareholders has attracted a great deal of attention. Palmrose, Richardson and Scholz (2004)
document a -9.2% abnormal stock return over a 2-day event window around restatement
announcements. Anderson and Yohn (2002) find a -3.5% cumulative abnormal return
during a 7-day window. Hribar and Jenkins (2004) estimate that, depending on the model
used, the relative percentage increase in the cost of equity capital averages between 10.8%
and 19.5% in the month immediately following a restatement. These studies indicate that
restatements lead to significant loss in shareholder value and an increase in the cost of
equity.
The extant literature has focused on the consequences of restatements from the
perspective of equity holders. To date there is no evidence on the reactions of debt holders.
1 As stated by the U.S. General Accounting Office, a financial restatement occurs when a company, either
voluntarily or prompted by auditors or regulators, revises public financial information that has been
previously reported.
1

This paper attempts to fill this gap by analyzing the impact of financial restatements on
debt contracting. We focus on a firm’s bank loan contracting for two primary reasons. First,
bank loans are an important source of corporate financing. The flow of funds data from the
Federal Reserve System indicate that over the past decade, there have been $780 billion in
net debt security issuances and only $2 billion for equities. Among the debt issues, bank
loans play a significant role (about 54% of total debt since 1980). Given the significance of
private bank debt as well as the growing number of financial restatements, it is important to
understand how the structure and pricing of private debt change after a firm discloses
financial misreporting.
The second reason that we study bank loan contracts is that they provide multi-
dimensional information about debt, and the reactions of banks to restatements can be
observed explicitly through various features of loan contracts. These contract terms allow
us to investigate the effects of restatements on the direct (interest rate) and indirect (loan
maturity, collateral requirements, and covenant restrictions) costs of debt. Moreover, loan
contracts allow us to uniquely analyze the impact of restatements on the structure of bank
loans, such as the number of lenders in a syndicate loan and loan transaction fees.
To analyze the impact of financial restatements on bank debt contracting, we begin
by examining the effect on the loan spread. We measure loan spread as the amount the
borrower pays in basis points over LIBOR (London Interbank Offered Rate) or LIBOR
equivalent. After refiling financial statements, the loan spread increases by approximately
one half. Depending on the model specification, the magnitude of the increase is 65 to 72
2