NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PRODUCT MARKET SYNERGIES AND COMPETITION IN MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS:
A TEXT-BASED ANALYSIS
Gerard Hoberg
Gordon M. Phillips
Working Paper 14289
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14289
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2008
This paper was previously circulated as "Product Market Synergies and Competition in Mergers and
Acquisitions." Hoberg can be reached at ghoberg@rhsmith.umd.edu and Phillips can be reached at
gphillips@rhsmith.umd.edu. We thank Michael Faulkender, Kathleen Hanley, Nagpurnanand Prabhala,
David Robinson and seminar participants at Duke University, Ohio State University, the Securities
Exchange Commission, and the University of Maryland for helpful comments. All errors are the authors
alone. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Gerard Hoberg and Gordon M. Phillips. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Product Market Synergies and Competition in Mergers and Acquisitions: A Text-Based Analysis
Gerard Hoberg and Gordon M. Phillips
NBER Working Paper No. 14289
August 2008, Revised February 2012
JEL No. G3,G34
ABSTRACT
We examine how product differentiation influences mergers and acquisitions and the ability of firms
to exploit product market synergies. Using novel text-based analysis of firm 10K product descriptions,
we find three key results. (1) Firms are more likely to enter restructuring transactions when the language
describing their assets is similar to all other firms, consistent with their assets being more redeployable.
(2) Targets earn lower announcement returns when similar alternative target firms exist. (3) Acquiring
firms in competitive product markets experience increased profitability, higher sales growth, and increased
changes in their product descriptions when they buy target firms that are similar to them and different
from rival firms. Our findings are consistent with similar merging firms exploiting synergies to create
new products and increase their product differentiation relative to ex-ante rivals.
Gerard Hoberg
Robert H. Smith School of Business
University of Maryland
4423 Van Munching Hall
College Park, MD 20742
ghoberg@rhsmith.umd.edu
Gordon M. Phillips
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
Citigroup Center
Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER
Gordon.Phillips@marshall.usc.edu

It has long been viewed that product market synergies and competition are key
drivers of mergers.1 One important dimension of synergies is the ability of merging
firms to create new products and differentiate themselves from rivals when merging
firms have complementary assets. This dimension of synergies is frequently cited as
being important for mergers but has not been documented as being an important
factor for mergers.2 We examine whether product market measures of similarity and
competition affect firms’ propensity to merge and whether firms use mergers and
acquisitions to increase profits and introduce new products given asset complemen-
tarities.3
In competitive markets, mergers are a quick way to potentially increase product
offerings if synergies arise from asset complementarities. Thus, firms may have in-
centives to merge with firms that have different skills or technologies that increase
the ability to introduce new products. Another important concern to acquirers is to
introduce new products that differentiate them from existing rival firms. There is
thus a potential tension between merging with a firm whose products are very sim-
ilar, and a firm whose skills or technologies are different enough from rivals to help
differentiate the acquirer.
We explore this “similar but different” tension in examining the likelihood of
mergers and ex post merger outcomes. Our paper provides direct evidence on asset
complementarities and synergies as a source of gains from merging. We provide
evidence on how similar firms are with respect to their existing products and also
measure new product creation and the extent that product differentiation from rival
firms increases post merger.
1See Andrade, Mitchell, and Stafford (2001) and Betton, Eckbo, and Thorburn (2007) for two
surveys on different motives for mergers.
2Rhodes-Kropf and Robinson (2008) model asset complementarity and synergies as a motive for
mergers and provide evidence that merging firms have similar market-to-book valuations. However,
given they do not have product data or descriptions, they are unable to provide direct evidence
that firms with asset complementarities combine to exploit potential synergies. Healy, Palepu, and
Ruback (1992) and Andrade, Mitchell, and Stafford (2001) have documented increased industry-
adjusted cash flows following mergers. However, the literature has not been able to identify if asset
complementarities allowing firms to introduce new products are responsible for gains in cash flows.
3Chamberlain (1933) and Hotelling (1929) famously show that the notion of product differentia-
tionisfundamentaltotheoriesofindustrialorganization,withproductdifferentiationincreasingthe
profitability of firms. The Hotelling model allows for a concept of distance and makes a distinction
between “close” rivals versus “distant” rivals, a concept that we exploit. In Chamberlain, product
differentiationexistsbutallrivalsareequallyclose. SeealsothesurveybyEatonandLipsey(1989).

We employ a novel empirical design using text-based analysis of firm product de-
scriptions obtained from web-crawling algorithms that read and process 49,408 10-K
filings from the SEC Edgar website. From firm product descriptions we calculate
measures of product similarity and product market competition. Our product based
measures capture the degree to which products are different from rivals - while inde-
pendently measuring the similarity between the acquirer and target. Our framework
also permits analysis of product descriptions in time series, and we can thus analyze
likely synergies in the form of new product introductions.
We test how competition and product similarity affect the likelihood of mergers
and acquisitions, the size of stock-market gains, and which transactions are most suc-
cessful in the long-run. Our similarity measures allow us to directly address the dual
role of competition and relatedness in merger decisions and outcomes, and permit us
to test whether new product synergies are closely tied to the positive real outcomes
we report. Our hypotheses relating ex post outcomes of mergers to product mar-
ket competition and product similarity cannot be tested using similarity measures
based on traditional SIC codes, given that they are too granular and do not capture
similarity both within and across industries.
Wereportthreemajorfindings. First,wefindthatthedistributionofrivalsaround
a given firm strongly predicts the likelihood that it will merge. Second, transactions
in competitive product markets with similar acquirer and target firms experience
increased stock returns and real longer-term gains including higher profitability and
increased changes in their product descriptions. Third, these findings are especially
strong when the target is less similar to the acquirer’s closest rivals. These results
are robust to the inclusion of measures of horizontal and vertical relatedness using
SIC codes and the product input-output matrix. We now summarize each of these
findings in more detail.
Regardingtransactionlikelihood, wefindthatfirmshavingproductsthataremore
broadly similar to all other firms in the economy are more likely to restructure, and
firms having more very close rivals are less likely to restructure. We interpret the first
effect as an “asset deployability effect”, as firms with more broadly similar products
likely have assets that can be more easily deployed in other product markets, and
2