NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERVIEWING IN TWO-SIDED MATCHING MARKETS
Robin S. Lee
Michael Schwarz
Working Paper 14922
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14922
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2009, Revised March 2017
We thank Neil Thakral for exceptional research assistance, and Itay Fainmesser, Kyna Fong,
Rachel Kranton, David McAdams, Michael Ostrovsky, Al Roth, Lones Smith, two anonymous
referees and the editor for helpful comments. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2009 by Robin S. Lee and Michael Schwarz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Interviewing in Two-Sided Matching Markets
Robin S. Lee and Michael Schwarz
NBER Working Paper No. 14922
April 2009, Revised March 2017
JEL No. C78,D85,J01
ABSTRACT
We introduce the interview assignment problem, which generalizes the one-to-one matching
model of Gale and Shapley (1962) by introducing a stage of costly information acquisition. Firms
learn preferences over workers via costly interviews. Even if all firms and workers conduct the
same number of interviews, realized unemployment depends also on the extent to which agents
share common interviewing partners. We introduce the concept of overlap that captures this
notion, and prove that unemployment is minimized with perfect overlap: i.e., if two firms
interview any common worker, they interview the exact same set of workers.
Robin S. Lee
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 120
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
robinlee@fas.harvard.edu
Michael Schwarz
Googe
schwarz.m@gmail.com

1 Introduction
The theory of two-sided matching generally assumes that agents know their true preferences over
potential partners prior to engaging in a match.1 However, in many matching markets, information
acquisitionplaysanimportantrole: inlabormarkets, firmsinterviewworkers; inmarriagemarkets,
men and women date; and in real estate markets, buyers attend open-houses. Such interviews,
dates, and meetings are often costly and scarce—e.g., firms pay up to a third of an employee’s
annualsalaryascommissiontoheadhuntersjusttonarrowdownthepotentialfieldofcandidatesto
interview (cf. Coles et al., 2008)— and because these interviews affect the formation of preferences,
their assignment can crucially affect the outcome of the eventual matching process.
Our article generalizes the one-to-one matching model of Gale and Shapley (1962) to allow for a
stage of costly information acquisition. To our knowledge, this article is one of the first to analyze
the interview assignment problem in the context of two-sided matching. Throughout this article
we will refer to agents as “firms” and “workers,” but this label can be changed to men and women,
colleges and students, hospitals and doctors, and so forth. Firms and workers do not ex ante know
their idiosyncratic preferences over potential matching partners and must discover them through a
costly interviewing process.
We analyze a two-stage game: in the first stage, firms simultaneously choose a subset of work-
ers to interview, and in the second stage firms and workers are matched one-to-one using a firm-
proposing deferred acceptance algorithm in which firms make “job offers” to workers. We primarily
focus on the first stage interviewing decisions, and use standard results from the one-to-one match-
ing literature to analyze the second stage assignment. Even so, the interview assignment problem
is generally difficult and possibly intractable. To allow for analysis while still maintaining a model
rich enough to yield meaningful results, we make the following assumptions: firms bear the full
cost of interviewing; a firm and worker must interview in order to be matched; workers prefer being
matched to any firm than to being unemployed; firms may find some workers unacceptable and
choose to remain unmatched; and workers and firms are ex ante homogeneous, with preferences
over partners independent and idiosyncratic to each agent.2
Even if all firms and workers are ex ante identical (prior to the realization of their idiosyncratic
preferences), our model emphasizes that agents are not indifferent over whom they interview with.
As interviews are costly, firms care about how many interviews a potential interviewee has: as
the number of interviews a worker has increases, the probability of a job offer being accepted
declines as the worker might obtain and accept an offer from another firm. All else being equal,
workers who have few interviews are more attractive to interview because they are more likely
1For a survey, see Roth and Sotomayor (1990).
2Althoughhomogeneityisastrongassumptiontoapplyforanentiremarket,itispotentiallyplausibleifamarket
is partitioned into subsets of workers and firms of similar quality. For example, although workers in general may
have a greater likelihood of preferring a “top-tier” firm in the entire market over a “bottom-tier” firm, within a tier
worker preferences may be fairly evenly distributed; this also may be true with firm preferences over workers within
a tier. Thus, in the sense that workers and firms of similar quality are the only ones that interview and match with
each other, and—conditional on all available information—worker and firm preferences are generally uniform and
i.i.d. among a particular subset of agents, our model is less restrictive than it might appear.
2

to accept if an offer is made. As a result, even though there are equilibria in which firms all
conduct the same number of interviews, firms would prefer not to randomize over workers but
instead coordinate so that all workers receive the same number of interviews. We prove that for
any number of interviews conducted by all firms, there are values of interviewing costs where firms
randomly choosing workers to interview comprise an equilibrium of our game; additionally, there
are (potentially different) values of interviewing costs so that all firms and workers conducting the
same number of interviews is also an equilibrium.
We then investigate a more subtle form of coordination which also proves to have significant
effects on equilibrium employment. For our analysis, we focus on symmetric interview assignments,
which we define to be interview assignments in which each firm and worker has the same number
of interviews, and even if two firms or two workers swap their interview assignments, the original
interview assignment can be obtained via a renaming of other agents. Although there may exist
manyequilibriainwhichallagentsconductthesamenumberofinterviews, thenumberofexpected
hires in the match can be very different depending on whether or not the interview assignment
exhibits greater overlap—a partial ordering that we define formally which captures the number of
common interview partners among agents.
To illustrate why overlap matters, consider two firms, f and f(cid:48), who are the only firms that
interview workers w and w(cid:48): if f has an offer rejected by w, it must be that the worker accepted an
offer from f(cid:48); consequently, f will then face no “competition” for w(cid:48) and obtain him for certain if
it makes him an offer. If f and f(cid:48) did not interview the same set of workers, then f could possibly
be rejected by both w and w(cid:48) and not be matched despite making offers to both workers (because
being rejected by w no longer implies obtaining w(cid:48) for certain). Thus, a firm’s expected payoff
depends not only on the number of interviews its workers receive, but also the identities of the
firms interviewing those workers.
The main result of this article is that if the ex ante probability that a worker is found to be
unacceptable to a firm is sufficiently small, then among all symmetric interview assignments in
which every firm and worker conducts the same number of interviews, any assignment with perfect
overlap—i.e., if any two firms interview the same worker, they interview exactly the same set of
workers—minimizes unemployment for any firm or worker. We note that this result is also not
fragile to the i.i.d. assumption over preferences: e.g., an interview assignment with perfect overlap
also minimizes unemployment when firm preferences over workers are perfectly correlated.
We also use simulation results to quantify the impact on unemployment from two forms of
coordination if all firms interview the same number of workers: (i) allowing firms to ensure that
all workers receive the same number of interviews (as opposed to randomly assigning interviews),
and (ii) conditional on all workers receiving the same number of interviews, increasing the amount
of overlap in the interview assignment. We find that unemployment reductions from both forms of
coordination can be substantial.
Ouranalysissuggeststhatinstitutionswhich,conditionalonthetotalnumberofinterviewsthat
are conducted, limit the number of interviews that candidates receive or segment the market such
3