NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LAND AND CREDIT:
A STUDY OF THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF BANKING IN THE UNITED STATES IN THE EARLY 20TH CENTURY
Raghuram G. Rajan
Rodney Ramcharan
Working Paper 15083
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15083
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2009
We thank Lakshmi Aiyar, Shawn Cole, Stijn Claessens, Oded Galor, Adair Morse, Mark
Rosenzweig, Jeremy Stein, as well as participants in seminars at the IMF, the NBER Political
Economy, Corporate Finance, and Growth Workshops, M.I.T., Northwestern University, the
University of Chicago, the WFA Meetings, and Yale University for comments. Rajan benefited
from grants from the Stigler Center for the Study of the State and the Economy, from the
Initiative on Global Markets, and from the National Science Foundation. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Raghuram G. Rajan and Rodney Ramcharan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Land and Credit: A Study of the Political Economy of Banking in the United States in the
Early 20th Century
Raghuram G. Rajan and Rodney Ramcharan
NBER Working Paper No. 15083
June 2009, Revised June 2020
JEL No. G20,O16,O43
ABSTRACT
We thank Lakshmi Aiyar, Shawn Cole, Stijn Claessens, Oded Galor, Adair Morse, Mark
Rosenzweig, Jeremy Stein, as well as participants in seminars at the IMF, the NBER Political
Economy, Corporate Finance, and Growth Workshops, M.I.T., Northwestern University, the
University of Chicago, the WFA Meetings, and Yale University for comments. Rajan benefited
from grants from the Stigler Center for the Study of the State and the Economy, from the
Initiative on Global Markets, and from the National Science Foundation. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Raghuram G. Rajan
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
raghuram.rajan@ChicagoBooth.edu
Rodney Ramcharan
University of Southern California
rramchar@marshall.usc.edu

A recent literature emphasizes the political economy underpinnings of economic underdevelopment. It
notes that powerful constituencies, which arise for example from the pattern of land holdings in a country,
can drive the development of economic institutions, and growth more generally (see, for example,
Engermann and Sokoloff (2002)). Banks are clearly important economic institutions. While historians
have argued that political forces have shaped banking systems (see, for example, Haber (2005a)), there
has been little systematic examination of the evidence. In this paper we examine more systematically
whether the constituencies or interest groups that emerge in a country as a result of the distribution of land
holdings – often the earliest and most important form of wealth -- can shape the development of the
banking system. 1
The precise channel through which constituencies or interest groups operate is also a matter of
some debate. Some (see, for example, Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2005)) argue that the
mediating channel is political institutions, as elite interest groups create coercive political institutions that
give them the power to hold back the development of economic institutions, and hence economic growth.
Others (see, for example, Engerman and Sokoloff (2003), Rajan and Zingales (2003a, chapter 6) or Rajan
(2009)) argue that a divided society may be sufficient to hold back the development of economic
institutions, even if political institutions are broadly egalitarian.
One way to make progress on both questions (whether landed interest groups affect financial
development and whether this can happen even in broadly democratic societies) is to examine patterns
within broad political units such as countries or states, where political institutions are held relatively
constant. To this end, we explore how the structure of banking across counties in the United States in the
early part of the 20th century was driven by the distribution of land within the county. We focus on banks
because they were, and in many areas still are, the most important source of local finance, and thus are
important economic institutions. Likewise, we focus on the distribution of land because it represents the
distribution of agricultural wealth and interests at a time when agriculture was still a key sector in the U.S.
economy.
2

Why Did Landlords Restrict Credit?
Clearly, large landowners may have had the money and power to influence county politics even
in a flourishing democracy. But why would they want to restrict access to credit for others, especially
small farmers and tenants, by limiting the spread of banks? The contemporary literature suggests a
number of reasons. First, large landowners generated loanable surpluses. Formal credit institutions could
be competition for their business of lending to tenants and small farmers.
Second, tenants and small farmers needed credit to buy supplies from the local store. By limiting
credit from alternative sources – for instance, by keeping banks out -- the local merchant could lock the
farmer in and charge exorbitant prices. Indeed, such lock-in was formalized in a “crop-lien” loan,
whereby the merchant required that in return for an advance of goods, the contracting farmer would
sign over, as a guarantee that the account would be paid, his “entire crop of cotton,
cotton-seed, fodder, peas, and potatoes”. His personal property, chattels, and real estate,
if he had any, might also be included in the mortgage, and in case he should find it
impossible to pay his entire indebtedness out of the proceeds of the season’s crop, he was
legally obligated to continue trading with the merchant who held the lien until the
account should be settled in full….The farmer … must pay whatever prices the merchant
chose to ask. He must market his crop through the merchant he owed until the debt was
satisfied, and only then had he any right to determine the time and method of its
disposal…2
Initially, there was a conflict of interest between large landlords and the local merchant because they both
had an interest in tenant farmers. But, “as time went on, the two classes tended more and more to become
one.” Landlords were drawn into the store business by “the desirability of supplying their tenants,” while
“storekeepers frequently became landowners by taking over the farms of those who were indebted to
them or by direct purchase at the prevailing low price.”3
Among landlords, large landowners had an incentive to “accommodate” their own tenants, as
doing so gave them greater control over tenants. By contrast, small and medium farmers did not have
surpluses to lend out, and one detailed study of Texas concludes that “on the whole, they [owners of small
and medium farms] would rather the tenant would get his money in his own way.”4
3