NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INVESTMENT AND CAPITAL CONSTRAINTS:
REPATRIATIONS UNDER THE AMERICAN JOBS CREATION ACT
Michael Faulkender
Mitchell Petersen
Working Paper 15248
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15248
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2009
Petersen thanks the Heizer Center at Northwestern University’s Kellogg School for support. The views
expressed in this paper are those of the authors. We appreciate the suggestions and advice of Jerry
Hoberg, Vojislav Maksimovic, David Matsa, Gordon Phillips, Michael Roberts, Jun Yang, and seminar
participants at Aalto University, American Finance Association Meetings, Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve, Baruch College, Boston University, Duke University, Drexel University, Emory
University, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Georgia State
University, Indiana University, London Business School, London School of Economics, Northwestern
University, Ohio State University, Queens University, Rotterdam School of Management, Stanford
Institute for Theoretical Economics, Tilberg University, Washington University in St Louis, the Universities
of Arizona, British Columbia, California-San Diego, Maryland, Montreal, North Carolina, Oklahoma,
Pennsylvania (Wharton), Southern California, Texas at Dallas, Virginia, and Yale University for their
helpful comments. The research assistance of Katherine Ashley, Julie Chen, Michelle Lee, Roxanne
Luk, Ryan Morrisroe, Joyce Pang, Kenny Quattrocchi, Alex Williamson, Lu Xie, Shirley Xu, and
Calvin Zhang is greatly appreciated. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Michael Faulkender and Mitchell Petersen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Investment and Capital Constraints: Repatriations Under the American Jobs Creation Act
Michael Faulkender and Mitchell Petersen
NBER Working Paper No. 15248
August 2009, Revised May 2012
JEL No. G31,G32,G38,K34
ABSTRACT
The American Jobs Creation Act (AJCA) significantly lowered US firms' tax cost when accessing
their unrepatriated foreign earnings. Using this temporary shock to the cost of internal financing, we
examine the role of capital constraints in firms' investment decisions. Controlling for the capacity
to repatriate foreign earnings under the AJCA, we find that a majority of the funds repatriated by capital
constrained firms were allocated to approved domestic investment. While unconstrained firms account
for a majority of repatriated funds, no increase in investment resulted. Contrary to other examinations
of the AJCA, we find little change in leverage and equity payouts.
Michael Faulkender
University of Maryland
RH Smith School of Business
4411 Van Munching Hall
College Park, MD 20742
mfaulken@rhsmith.umd.edu
Mitchell Petersen
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
mpetersen@northwestern.edu

I) Introduction
To what extent do financing frictions constrain investments that firms would otherwise
make? This question is arguably one of the most important in corporate finance, and one about
which there continues to be significant debate. Since Fazzari, Hubbard, and Peterson (1988) first
estimated the sensitivity of investment to internal cash flow generation, the literature has argued
about whether their finding that greater internal capital corresponds to greater investment was driven
by the relaxing of financing constraints enabling investment that would otherwise have been forgone
or whether the higher internal cash flow merely proxied for improvements in investment
opportunities beyond the controls in their specification (Kaplan and Zingales, 2000, and Erickson
and Whited, 2000). This literature has primarily focused on the cost of external financing, and thus
assumed that all internal capital is fungible and equally cheap. Although this is a reasonable
assumption for many firms, it can be flawed when firms have cash in foreign subsidiaries (Foley et
al, 2007). In these cases, there can be a significant tax cost to bringing the cash home to fund
domestic investment.
The American Jobs Creation Act (AJCA) was passed in 2004 with the explicit purpose of
promoting domestic investment and employment. The act significantly and temporarily lowered the
cost of repatriating foreign capital and thus the cost of funding domestic investments with internal
foreign cash. American multinational firms had large stockpiles of unrepatriated foreign earnings.
Since firms owe US tax on their foreign earnings only when they repatriate the income, this raises
the cost of funding domestic investment with the foreign cash. Congress believed that the US tax
code was distorting the domestic investment decisions of US firms by discouraging them from
repatriating foreign earnings and investing this capital in the US. By temporarily reducing the tax
cost of repatriating foreign earnings, Congress hoped to increase domestic investment. The capital
was already inside the firm. The law only temporarily lowered the cost of using this internal capital
to fund domestic investment. This paper examines whether the tax holiday in the AJCA worked: did
firms that repatriated under the act significantly increase their domestic investment?
1

To analyze the effects of the American Jobs Creation Act, we examined firms' 10-K filings
and collected: the amount of unrepatriated foreign earnings reported by each firm, whether the firm
repatriated funds under the Act, and if so, how much they repatriated. To estimate the extent to
which firms who repatriated foreign earnings under the AJCA responded to the incentives, we
supplemented this data with changes in the firms' investment, financing, and equity payout decisions
in the years prior to and following the repatriation. If the legislative intent of the Act was achieved,
we would expect to see that investment increased for those firms that repatriated income relative to
those firms that did not repatriate but which had foreign earnings that could have been repatriated.
Finance theory predicts, however, that firms with unfettered access to the capital markets
would already be optimizing their investment. In other words, a crucial and unstated assumption
underlying the Act is that firms were unable to raise sufficient funds from external markets at
reasonable prices and were not generating sufficient internal domestic funds to finance all available
domestic investment opportunities. If a firm can access external capital or generate sufficient
internal domestic capital to fully fund their domestic investments, we would not expect the Act to
have any effect on the firm's investment. We can test this hypothesis by examining whether firms
that were least able to generate internal funds prior to the law change, or inexpensively access
external capital markets, saw significantly higher increases in investment relative to the financially
unconstrained firms that also repatriated foreign earnings under the Act.
We are not the first to empirically examine the American Jobs Creation Act (AJCA).
Dharmapala, Foley, and Forbes (2011) and Blouin and Krull (2009), among others, examine the use
of funds repatriated under the AJCA. Both papers conclude that the majority of repatriated funds
were used to increase payments to shareholders (their estimates range from 50 to 90%). Dharmapala,
Foley, and Forbes find no increase in investment due to repatriation. We find the opposite. We find
the AJCA led to large increases in investment, but only among the subset of firm which are capital
constrained. These firms increased their investment by 11 percent, investing 78 percent of the capital
they repatriated. While these firms represent 44 percent of repatriating firms, they account for only
2