NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RATIONAL ATTENTION ALLOCATION OVER THE BUSINESS CYCLE
Marcin Kacperczyk
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Laura Veldkamp
Working Paper 15450
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15450
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2009
We thank John Campbell, Joseph Chen, Xavier Gabaix, Vincent Glode, Lars Hansen, Christian Hellwig,
Ralph Koijen, Jeremy Stein, Matthijs van Dijk, Robert Whitelaw, as well as three anonymous referees,
and participants in several seminars and conferences for valuable comments and suggestions. We thank
Isaac Baley and Nic Kozeniauskas for outstanding research assistance. Finally, we thank the Q-group
for their generous financial support. A previous version of this paper was entitled “Rational Attention
Allocation over the Business Cycle”. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Marcin Kacperczyk, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Laura Veldkamp. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Rational Attention Allocation Over the Business Cycle
Marcin Kacperczyk, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Laura Veldkamp
NBER Working Paper No. 15450
October 2009, Revised October 2015
JEL No. E3,G2
ABSTRACT
The question of whether and how mutual fund managers provide valuable services for their clients
motivates one of the largest literatures in finance. One candidate explanation is that funds process
information about future asset values and use that information to invest in high-valued assets. But
formal theories are scarce because information choice models with many assets are difficult to solve
as well as difficult to test. This paper tackles both problems by developing a new attention allocation
model that uses the state of the business cycle to predict information choices, which in turn, predict
observable patterns of portfolio investments and returns. The predictions about fund portfolios’ covariance
with payoff shocks, cross-fund portfolio and return dispersion, and their excess returns are all supported
by the data. These findings offer new evidence that some investment managers have skill and that
attention is allocated rationally.
Marcin Kacperczyk Laura Veldkamp
Imperial College Business School Stern School of Business
Tanaka Building New York University
South Kensington Campus 44 W Fourth Street,Suite 7-77
London SW7 2AZ New York, NY 10012
United Kingdom and NBER
m.kacperczyk@imperial.ac.uk lveldkam@stern.nyu.edu
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 W 4th Street, Suite 9-120
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
svnieuwe@stern.nyu.edu
A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w15450

“What information consumes is rather obvious: It consumes the attention of its re-
cipients. Hence a wealth of information creates a poverty of attention, and a need
to allocate that attention efficiently among the overabundance of information sources
that might consume it.” Simon (1971)
The question of whether and how mutual fund managers provide valuable services for their
clients motivates one of the largest literatures in empirical finance. A natural candidate
explanation is that funds process information about future asset values and use that infor-
mation to invest in high-valued assets. But few such theories have been written because
information choice models with many assets are difficult to solve and difficult to test. This
paper tackles both of these problems by developing a new model that uses an observable
variable–the state of the business cycle–to predict information choices and that links those
information choices to observable patterns in portfolio investments and returns.
We use business cycle variation as our observable state because of recent empirical evi-
dence suggesting that the way funds provide value changes over the cycle (Kosowski (2011),
Glode (2011), Kacperczyk, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp (2014)). We explore a fund
manager’s choice of what information to process in different states of the business cycle. We
find that fund managers optimally choose to process information about aggregate shocks in
recessions and idiosyncratic shocks in booms. The resulting fund portfolios exhibit the same
kind of “time-varying skill” as do those in the data.
To understand how fund information strategies depend on the cycle, we build a new
model. Existingmutualfundtheoriesexplainfundflowsandfees, butdonottellushowfunds
add value.1 Existing models of information processing and portfolio choice either prohibit
managers from choosing between aggregate or idiosyncratic information (Van Nieuwerburgh
and Veldkamp 2010), or require that there are only two assets (Mondria 2010), rendering
all shocks aggregate. Therefore, we develop a new methodology that can accommodate N
assets and information choices with a more general asset payoff and signal structure.
The model’s solution offers a rich set of predictions, which we test with mutual fund
data. Just as importantly, the model is a building block. It can be extended to allow for
asymmetric initial information across investors, multiple countries with home and foreign
1Fortheoreticalmodelsoffeesandflows,assetpriceeffects,managerincentiveproblems,andotheraspects
ofmutualfunds, seee.g.,MamayskyandSpiegel(2002),BerkandGreen(2004),KanielandKondor(2013),
CuocoandKaniel(2011),Chien,Cole,andLustig(2011),Chapman,Evans,andXu(2010),andP´astorand
Stambaugh (2012). A number of recent papers in the empirical mutual fund literature also find that some
managershaveskill,e.g.,Kacperczyk,Sialm,andZheng(2005,2008),KacperczykandSeru(2007),Cremers
and Petajisto (2009), Huang, Sialm, and Zhang (2011), Koijen (2014), Baker, Litov, Wachter, and Wurgler
(2010).
1

funds, high and low-capacity funds, a choice over the quantity of information capacity, etc.
The framework provides a new lens through which to analyze the empirical literature and to
study which empirical patterns are consistent with optimal information-processing behavior.
In the model, a fraction of investment managers have skill. These skilled managers can
observeafixednumberofsignalsaboutassetpayoffsandchoosewhatfractionofthosesignals
will contain aggregate versus stock-specific information. We think of aggregate signals as
macroeconomic data that affect future cash flows of all firms, and of stock-specific signals as
firm-level data that forecast the part of firms’ future cash flows that is independent of the
aggregate shocks. Based on their signals, skilled managers form portfolios, choosing larger
portfolio weights for assets that are more likely to have high returns. In the data, recessions
are times when aggregate volatility rises and the price of risk surges. When we embed these
two forces in our model, both govern attention allocation.
The model generates six main predictions. It predicts how volatility and the price of
risk each affect attention allocation, portfolio dispersion, and portfolio returns. The first
pair of predictions tell us that attention should be reallocated over the business cycle. In
recessions, more volatile aggregate shocks should draw more attention, because it is more
valuable to pay attention to more uncertain outcomes. The elevated price of risk amplifies
thisreallocation: Since aggregateshocks affect alargefractionoftheportfolio’svalue, paying
attention to aggregate shocks resolves more portfolio risk than learning about stock-specific
risks. When the price of risk is high, such risk-minimizing attention choices become more
valuable. While the idea that it is more valuable to shift attention to more volatile shocks is
straightforward, whether changes in the price of risk would amplify or counteract this effect
is not obvious.
The remaining predictions do not come from the reallocation of attention. Rather, they
help to distinguish this theory from non-informational alternatives and support the idea that
atleast someportfoliomanagersareengaginginvalue-maximizing behavior. Thesecondpair
of results predict business cycle effects on cross-fund portfolio and profit dispersion. Since
recessions are times when large aggregate shocks to asset payoffs create more comovement in
assetpayoffs, passiveportfolioswouldhavereturnsthatalsocomovemoreinrecessions, which
wouldimplylessdispersion. Incontrast, wheninvestment managerslearnaboutasset payoffs
and manage their portfolios according to what they learn, fund returns comove less and
dispersion increases in recessions. One reason is that when aggregate shocks become more
volatile, managers who learn about aggregate shocks put less weight on their common prior
beliefs, which have less predictive power, and more weight on their heterogeneous signals.
2