NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RISK PRICE DYNAMICS
Jaroslav Borovi…ka
Lars Peter Hansen
Mark Hendricks
José A. Scheinkman
WORKING PAPER 15506
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15506
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2009
This paper was originally presented as the Journal of Financial Econometrics Lecture at the June 2008
SoFiE conference. We gratefully acknowledge support by the National Science Foundation under
Award Numbers SES0519372 (Borovi…ka, Hansen and Hendricks) and SES0718407 (Scheinkman)
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2009 by Jaroslav Borovi…ka, Lars Peter Hansen, Mark Hendricks, and José A. Scheinkman. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Risk Price Dynamics
Jaroslav Borovi…ka, Lars Peter Hansen, Mark Hendricks, and José A. Scheinkman
NBER Working Paper No. 15506
November 2009
JEL No. C52,E44,G12
ABSTRACT
We present a novel approach to depicting asset pricing dynamics by characterizing shock exposures
and prices for alternative investment horizons. We quantify the shock exposures in terms of elasticities
that measure the impact of a current shock on future cash-flow growth. The elasticities are designed
to accommodate nonlinearities in the stochastic evolution modeled as a Markov process. Stochastic
growth in the underlying macroeconomy and stochastic discounting in the representation of asset
values are central ingredients in our investigation. We provide elasticity calculations in a series of
examples featuring consumption externalities, recursive utility, and jump risk.
Jaroslav Borovi…ka Mark Hendricks
Department of Economics Department of Economics
The University of Chicago The University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street 1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637 Chicago, IL 60637
borovicka@uchicago.edu hendricks@uchicago.edu
Lars Peter Hansen José A. Scheinkman
Department of Economics Department of Economics
The University of Chicago Princeton University
1126 East 59th Street Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
Chicago, IL 60637 and NBER
and NBER joses@princeton.edu
l-hansen@uchicago.edu

1 Introduction
We propose a new way to characterize risk price dynamics. In the methods of mathematical
finance, risk prices are encoded using the familiar risk neutral transformation and the in-
stantaneous risk-free rate. In structural models of macroeconomic risk, they are encoded in
the stochastic discount factor process used to represent prices at alternative payoff horizons.
As an alternative, we depict asset pricing dynamics by extending two types of methods:
local risk prices and impulse response functions. Local risk prices give the reward expressed
in terms of expected returns for alternative local exposures to risk such as shocks to the
macro-economy. Impulse response functions characterize how shocks today contribute to
future values of a stochastic process such as macroeconomic growth or future cash flows.
First we develop a related concept but tailored to the pricing of the exposure to macroeco-
nomic risk, and then we extend the concept of a local risk price by asking how the reward to
shock exposure changes as we alter the terminal or maturity date for the payoff. This leads
us to construct shock-exposure and shock-price elasticities as functions of payoff horizons.
Structural asset pricing models feature state dependence in risk premia as well as sensitivity
to the payoff horizon. These risk premia depend on shock exposures and prices, and the
elasticities we propose reflect both dependencies.
We believe that uncertainty about macroeconomic growth has important welfare impli-
cations and major consequences to market valuations of forward-looking assets. To explore
these phenomena requires the simultaneous study of stochastic growth and discounting, in
contrast to the extensive literature on fixed income securities and the term structure of in-
terest rates that abstracts from growth. Previous work has sought to provide informative
characterizations of risk premia for cash flows that grow stochastically over time and to
extract the distinct contributions of risk exposure (the asset pricing counterpart to a quan-
tity) and risk prices. See, for instance, Lettau and Wachter (2007), Hansen and Scheinkman
(2009a,b) and Hansen (2009).
While there have been quantitative and empirical successes through the use of ad hoc
models of stochastic discount factors specified flexibly to enforce the absence of arbitrage,
we continue to be interested in structural models that allow us to truly answer the question
“howdoes risk or uncertainty get priced?” The promise of such models is that theywill allow
researchers to assign values to the shocks identified in macroeconomic models and support
welfare analyses that are linked to uncertainty. While reduced-form models continue to
provide aconvenient shortcut for presenting empirical evidence, we aimto provide adynamic
characterization ofrisk pricing thatwill support structuralinvestigations that stretch models
beyond the support of the existing data.
The methods we develop are applicable to models with small shocks, increments to Brow-
2

nianmotions, aswellaslargeshocks, jumpswithPoissonarrivals. Weillustrateourapproach
with a series of examples. For lognormal models we derive shock exposure elasticities which
coincide with impulse response functions familiar from the VAR literature. In more com-
plicated models, our methodology allows us to characterize nonlinearities in the dynamics
of asset prices. We contrast the habit formation models of Campbell and Cochrane (1999)
and Santos and Veronesi (2008), and we document important differences in the risk price
elasticities across investment horizons. We also derive elasticities for a model with recursive
utility in the spirit of Hansen et al. (2008), and for a model with jump risk where the state
variable evolves as a finite state Markov chain.
2 Markov pricing with Brownian information struc-
tures
We follow the construction in Hansen and Scheinkman (2009a,b) and Hansen (2009). Con-
sider a Markov diffusion that solves:
dX = μ(X )dt+σ(X )dW .
t t t t
where W is a multivariate standard Brownian motion. In this model nonlinearity is captured
by the specification of μ and σ. While the state variable X may well be stationary, we will
use it as a building block for processes that grow or decay over time.
2.1 Growth and discounting
In econometric practice we often build models for the logarithms of processes. An example
of such a model is (cid:2) (cid:2)
t t
A = β(X )du+ α(X )·dW .
t u u u
0 0
We call the resulting process, denoted by A, an additive functional because it depends
entirely on the underlying Markov process and it is constructed by integrating over the time
scale. Nonlinearity may be present in the specification of β and α.
While it is convenient to take logarithms when building time series models, to represent
values and prices it is necessary to study levels instead of logarithms. Thus to represent
growth or decay, we use the exponential of an additive functional, M = exp(A ). We will
t t
refer to M as a multiplicative functional parameterized by (β,α). Ito’s Lemma guarantees
3