NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE INTERNAL GOVERNANCE OF FIRMS
Viral V. Acharya
Stewart C. Myers
Raghuram Rajan
Working Paper 15568
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15568
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2009
We thank Ashwini Agrawal, Franklin Allen, Effi Benmelech, John Coates, Douglas Diamond, Alex
Edmans, Maryam Farboodi, Milton Harris, Roni Kisin, Mark Rubinstein, Amit Seru, Jeremy Stein,
Raghu Sundaram, Rob Vishny, Michael Weisbach, Luigi Zingales; and seminar participants at AEA
Meetings (2010), Canadian Corporate Governance Institute, UC Berkeley, Chicago Booth, Harvard,
Michigan State, MIT, NBER Corporate Finance Workshop (Fall 2008), NBER Law and Economics
(Spring 2010), NYU Financial Economics Workshop, NYU-Stern, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia,
Tuck, UCLA, and the Western Finance Association (WFA 2009) for helpful conversations and comments.
Ramin Baghai and Hanh Le provided excellent research assistance. Raghuram Rajan acknowledges
support from the Center for Research on Securities Prices at the University of Chicago, the National
Science Foundation, the Stigler Center, and the Initiative on Global Markets. Acharya is grateful for
research support from the ESRC (Grant No. R060230004 awarded to the London Business School
Corporate Governance Center). The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Viral V. Acharya, Stewart C. Myers, and Raghuram Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Internal Governance of Firms
Viral V. Acharya, Stewart C. Myers, and Raghuram Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 15568
December 2009, Revised June 2014
JEL No. G31,G34,G35
ABSTRACT
We develop a model of internal governance where the self-serving actions of top management are
limited by the potential reaction of subordinates. Internal governance can mitigate agency problems
and ensure that firms have substantial value, even with little or no external governance by investors.
External governance, even if crude and uninformed, can complement internal governance and improve
efficiency. This leads to a theory of investment and dividend policy, where dividends are paid by self-interested
CEOs to maintain a balance between internal and external control.
Viral V. Acharya Raghuram Rajan
Stern School of Business Booth School of Business
New York University University of Chicago
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-84 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
New York, NY 10012 Chicago, IL 60637
and CEPR and NBER
and also NBER raghuram.rajan@ChicagoBooth.edu
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu
Stewart C. Myers
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-620
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
scmyers@mit.edu

The people you pay are more important over time than the people who pay you.i
A public corporation is commonly viewed as an organization run by CEOs and monitored by a board
of directors on behalf of shareholders. This view separates decision management (by the CEO and
other managers) from decision control (by the board) and from investment and risk-bearing (by public
shareholders). This governance structure is viewed as reasonable and efficient (Fama and Jensen
(1983a, b) and Jensen (2000)), provided that decisions are made to maximize the value of
shareholders’ residual claim. Many public corporations thrive with this governance structure.
Yet the clear evidence that public corporations “work” has to be set against the equally clear
evidence that most shareholders have little control over boards (Monks (2008)) and that many boards
treat CEOs generously (Bebchuk and Fried (2004)). CEOs are self interested, not automatically
faithful servants of the shareholders (Jensen (1986, 1993); Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1990); and
Shleifer and Vishny (1989, 1997)). The market for corporate control can provide some discipline, but
it is hard to see it as effective in controlling operational decisions. How then can one reconcile the
survival and apparent efficiency of the public corporation with the weak channels through which it is
supposedly governed?
In this paper, we argue that there are important stakeholders in the firm, particularly
subordinate managers, who care about its future. These stakeholders, because of their power to
withdraw their contributions to the firm, can force the CEO to act in a more public-spirited and far-
sighted way, even if the CEO acts in his or her short-term self interest and shareholders are dispersed
and powerless. We call this process internal governance.
The main departure of this paper from most of the existing literature is to see the firm as a
composition of diverse agents with different horizons, different interests, and different opportunities
for misappropriation and growth.ii To understand how the differences among diverse agents lead to
internal governance, we first consider a partnership run by an old CEO who is about to retire. The
CEO has a young manager working under him who will be the future CEO. Three ingredients go into
producing the firm’s cash flow: the firm’s capital stock; the CEO’s ability to manage the firm, based
1

on his skill and firm-specific knowledge; and the young manager’s effort, which allows her to learn
and prepare for promotion.
We assume the CEO can commit to an investment plan, which means the CEO will leave
behind a predetermined amount of capital stock. The CEO can appropriate everything else: he can
divert cash out of the firm, consume perks, or convert cash to leisure by shirking. The CEO cannot
directly commit future CEOs to any course of action in this period or in the future. iii
Because the CEO has a short horizon, he could simply decide to take all of the cash flow,
investing nothing for the future. But, he needs the young manager’s effort in order to generate the
cash flow. If the manager sees that the CEO will leave nothing behind, she has scant incentive to
exert effort, and cash flow falls significantly. To forestall this, the CEO commits to investing some
fraction of current cash flow, building or enhancing the firm’s capital stock in order to create a future
for his young employee, thereby motivating her. This allows the firm to build substantial value,
despite being led by a sequence of myopic and rapacious CEOs.iv
We show that internal governance is most effective when both the CEO and the manager
contribute to the firm’s cash flows. If the CEO’s contributions dominate, he has no desire to limit his
capture of cash flow in order to provide incentives for the manager. If the manager’s contributions
dominate, she has little incentive to learn, because she cannot capture value today, and learning will
be of little use when she does become the CEO.
We extend the basic model by allowing the CEO to commit to sell the firm to the manager
when he retires. We show that if the manager’s ability to pay were not limited (because the manager
cannot fully borrow against future cash flows), then the CEO’s horizon can effectively be lengthened
to coincide with that of the firm. This rolling partnership, therefore, increases investment to a
constrained efficient level -- it essentially reduces the agency problem at the firm down to the problem
of incentivizing managerial effort. Of course, many junior managers will lack the wealth or borrowing
capacity to buy the firm from the CEO, and, therefore, the rolling partnership will often not be
feasible. Outside equity can help recover some of the effects of the rolling partnership, however. We
show that a combination of internal governance and a rudimentary form of outside governance by
shareholders can improve the efficiency of the firm dramatically.
2