NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE CROSS-SECTION AND TIME-SERIES OF STOCK AND BOND RETURNS
Ralph S.J. Koijen
Hanno Lustig
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Working Paper 15688
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15688
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2010
First version: February 2009. For excellent research assistance, we thank Rustom Irani and Michelle
Zemel. We thank Jaewon Choi and Ed Altman for sharing data with us. We thank Jules van Binsbergen,
John Campbell, John Cochrane, George Constantinides, Greg Duffee, Eugene Fama, Lars Hansen,
John Heaton, Martin Lettau, Lars Lochstoer, Tobias Moskowitz, Stavros Panageas, Lubos Pastor,
Monika Piazzesi, Maxim Ulrich, Pietro Veronesi, Bas Werker, Mungo Wilson, and seminar participants
at Tilburg University, APG Investments, ULB ECARES, Temple University, University of Texas
at Austin, New York University Stern finance, Boston University, Chicago Booth, University of Vienna,
Erasmus University of Rotterdam, U.C. Berkeley Haas, New York University Stern's macro lunch,
Washington University at St. Louis, the Adam Smith Asset Pricing Conference in Oxford, the macro-finance
conference at the University of Minnesota, the Amsterdam Asset Pricing Retreat, the Society for Economic
Dynamics in Istanbul, the CEPR Financial Markets conference in Gerzensee, the European Finance
Association conference in Bergen, and the American Finance Association conference in Atlanta for
useful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Ralph S.J. Koijen, Hanno Lustig, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Cross-Section and Time-Series of Stock and Bond Returns
Ralph S.J. Koijen, Hanno Lustig, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
NBER Working Paper No. 15688
January 2010, Revised September 2013
JEL No. E21,E43,G00,G12
ABSTRACT
Value stocks have higher exposure to innovations in the nominal bond risk premium, which measures
the markets' perception of cyclical variation in future output growth, than growth stocks. The ICAPM
then predicts a value risk premium provided that good news about future output lowers the marginal
utility of investors' wealth today. In support of the business cycle as a priced state variable, we show
that low value minus growth returns, typically realized at the start of recessions when nominal bond
risk premia are low and declining, are associated with lower future dividend growth rates on value
minus growth and with lower future output growth in the short term. Because of this new nexus between
stock and bond returns, a parsimonious three-factor model can jointly price the book-to-market stock
and maturity-sorted bond portfolios and reproduce the time-series variation in expected bond returns.
Structural dynamic asset pricing models need to impute a central role to the business cycle as a priced
state variable to be quantitatively consistent with the observed value, equity, and nominal bond risk
premia.
Ralph S.J. Koijen Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
London Business School Stern School of Business
Regent's Park New York University
London NW1 4SA 44 W 4th Street, Suite 9-120
United Kingdom New York, NY 10012
and NBER and NBER
rkoijen@london.edu svnieuwe@stern.nyu.edu
Hanno Lustig
UCLA Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C413
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
hlustig@anderson.ucla.edu

Value strategies buy stocks that have low prices relative to measures of fundamentals such as
dividends or book assets, and sell stocks that have high prices relative to fundamentals. These
strategies earns high returns that appear anomalous relative to standard models such as the CAPM
(e.g., Basu,1977;FamaandFrench,1992). Theprofessionhashotlydebatedwhetherthesesuperior
returns reflect a compensation for systematic risk or a behavioral bias. Under the behavioral
hypothesis, extrapolative investors push up the price of growth (“glamour”) stocks that performed
well in the recent past, allowing contrarian investors to profit from their over-optimism by investing
in out-of-favor value stocks and/or shorting the growth stocks (De Bondt and Thaler, 1985). In
support of a risk-based explanation, Cochrane (2008) points out that “Our lives would be so much
easier if we could trace price movements back to visible news about dividends or cash flows.”
Early attempts to connect the cash flows of value and growth firms to macro-economic sources
of risk came up empty handed (Lakonishok, Schleifer, and Vishny, 1994, LSV). Our paper provides
new evidence that links the excess return on high minus low book-to-market stock portfolios to cash
flow and output risk at business cycle frequencies. We make progress on this same issue because
we study a much longer sample with more adverse macroeconomic events (1926-2011 compared to
1968-1989 in LSV, or 15 recessions compared to 4), and because we use a new methododology to
study macroeconomic events.
The connection between the value spread and the macro-economy is easiest to detect in the
bond market. We study several linear combinations of bond yields which forecast future economic
activity: the slope of the term structure (YSP), the Cochrane-Piazzesi factor (CP), and the best
linear predictor of economic activity at the one-year horizon (YGR). Innovations in these bond
market factors co-move strongly with returns on the value-minus-growth strategy. Our findings
assign a central role to the business cycle itself as a priced state variable.
We discern three contributions. The first contribution of the paper is to document that value
portfolio returns have a higher covariance with innovations in the bond factors CP, YSP, and YGR
than growth portfolio returns. Figure 1 shows covariances between unexpected returns on each of
the quintile book-to-market portfolios, ordered from growth (low B/M) to value (high B/M), with
1

innovationstothesefactors. Themonotonicallyincreasingpatterninexposureswillgenerateavalue
premium if the price of risk associated with innovations in the bond factors is positive. Standard
ICAPM logic implies that this price of risk is positive provided that innovations to the factors lower
the marginal utility of wealth for the average investor. This is natural because innovations to CP,
YSP, and YGR represent good news about future economic performance. Indeed, all are strong
predictors of the level of economic activity 12 to 24 months ahead.
CP YSP YGR
0.35 0.4 0.5
0.45
0.3 0.35
0.4
0.3
0.25 0.35
0.25
0.3
0.2
0.2 0.25
0.15
0.2
0.15
0.1 0.15
0.1
0.1
0.05 0.05
0.05
0 0 0
1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5
Figure 1: Exposure of value and growth portfolio returns to bond risk premium innovations.
Thefigureshowsthecovarianceofinnovationstoreturnsonfivequintileportfoliossortedonthebook-to-marketratiowithinnovations
to three bond market factors. In the left panel, the bond factor is the Cochrane and Piazzesi (CP) factor. In the middle panel, it is
the yield spread (YSP). In the right panel, it is the bond factor that maximally predicts economic activity CFNAI twelve months out
(YGR). Innovations to bond factors and returns are described in detail in Section 3. On the horizontal axes, Portfolio 1 denotes the
lowestbook-to-market(growth)portfolio;portfolio5isthehighestbook-to-market(value)portfolio. Thecovariancesaremultipliedby
10,000. ThesampleismonthlyfromJune1952untilDecember2012.
The second contribution of the paper is to attribute these different bond exposures to differences
in the underlying cash flow dynamics. We find that value stocks experience negative cash-flow
shocks in economic downturns (Section 2), and we find large differences in the behavior of cash-
flow growth on value and growth over the macroeconomic cycle. For example, over the course of
the average NBER recession, dividends on value stocks fall 21% while dividends on growth stocks
increase by 3%. The 24% average gap hides interesting differences across recessions. During the
Great Recession of 2007-2009, the fall in value-minus-growth dividends was 45%. During the Great
Depression the relative log change was -318%. The drop measured during the NBER recession
months understates the drop during the broader bust period because the NBER dates may neither
coincide with the peak nor the trough for real dividends, and because dividends may be sluggish
2