NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TEXT-BASED NETWORK INDUSTRIES AND ENDOGENOUS PRODUCT DI˙FFERENTIATION
Gerard Hoberg
Gordon M. Phillips
Working Paper 15991
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15991
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2010
This paper was previously circulated as "Dynamic Text-Based Industry Classifications and Endogenous
Product Differentiation." We especially thank Dan Kovenock, Steve Martin, John Sutton and seminar
participants at Aalto (Helsinki) School of Economics, HEC, IFN (Stockholm), Insead, ISTCE (Lisbon),
London Business School, Notre Dame, Northwestern, Stanford, Stockholm School of Economics,
University of Amsterdam, University of Southern California, University of Vienna and the Academy
of Management meetings for helpful comments. All errors are the authors alone. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Gerard Hoberg and Gordon M. Phillips. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Text-Based Network Industries and Endogenous Product Di˙fferentiation
Gerard Hoberg and Gordon M. Phillips
NBER Working Paper No. 15991
May 2010, Revised February 2012
JEL No. D21,D23,L12,L13,L16,L22,L23
ABSTRACT
We study how firms differ from their competitors using new time-varying measures of product differentiation
based on text-based analysis of product descriptions from 50,673 firm 10-K statements filed yearly
with the Securities and Exchange Commission. This year-by-year set of product differentiation measures
allows us to generate a new set of industries and corresponding new measures of industry competition
where firms can have their own distinct set of competitors. Our new sets of industry competitors better
explain specific discussion of high competition by management, rivals identified by managers as peer
firms and firm characteristics such as profitability and leverage than do existing classifications. We
also find evidence that firm R&D and advertising are associated with subsequent differentiation from
competitors, consistent with theories of endogenous product differentiation.
Gerard Hoberg
Robert H. Smith School of Business
University of Maryland
4423 Van Munching Hall
College Park, MD 20742
ghoberg@rhsmith.umd.edu
Gordon M. Phillips
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
Citigroup Center
Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER
Gordon.Phillips@marshall.usc.edu

Defining industry boundaries and industry competitiveness is central to the study
of industrial organization. It is also central to broader disciplines in Economics and
Finance, where the study of industries, or the need to control for industry, is perva-
sive. Our paper is based on the premise that product similarity is core to classifying
industries, and that empirical work can benefit from the ability to measure indus-
try memberships and product differentiation in every year. Using new time-varying
industry classifications, we find that firm R&D and advertising are associated with
subsequentdifferentiationfromcompetitorsandincreasedprofitability. Theseresults
are consistent with Sutton’s (1991) theory of endogenous product differentiation.
Our starting point to form new industries is to gather business descriptions from
50,673 firm annual 10-Ks filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission using
web crawling algorithms. The vector representations of the text in each firm’s prod-
uct description generate a Hotelling-like product location space for U.S. firms.1 We
process the text in these product descriptions to calculate new industry classifica-
tions based on the strong tendency of product market vocabulary to cluster among
firms operating in the same markets. Because they are a function of 10-K business
descriptions, our classifications are based on the products that firms supply to the
market, rather than production processes (as is the case for some existing industry
classification schemes).2
These tools enable us to examine how industry structure changes over time, and
how firms react to such changes within and around their product markets. A key
advantage of our analysis is that firms must file a 10-K in each year, allowing us to
build classifications that change over time. The framework also provides a continu-
ous measure of product similarity between firms both within and across industries,
allowing us to create general network representations of industry competition, with
each firm having its own distinct set of competitors. Although numerous studies
use industry classifications as control variables, only a few studies examine the clas-
1Chamberlin (1933) and Hotelling (1929) famously show that product differentiation is funda-
mentaltoprofitabilityandtheoriesofindustrialorganization,andalsothatproductmarketscanbe
viewedashavingaspatialrepresentationthataccountsforproductdifferentiation. Empirically,the
spatial characteristics of our measures can also be viewed as analogous to the patent technology-
based space of Jaffe (1986), although Jaffe’s space is applicable for patent filing firms and is not
generated using product description text.
2See http://www.naics.com/info.htm.
1

sification schemes themselves and these do not consider the possibility of industry
classifications that change materially over time.3
We create new industry classification systems based on 10K product similarities
using two methods: one historically motivated, and one that allows industry com-
petition to be firm centric and change over time. The first, which we name “fixed
industry classifications” (FIC), is analogous to SIC and NAICS industries.4 Here,
firms are grouped together either over fixed periods of time and membership in an
industry is required to be transitive. Thus this method requires that if firms B and C
are in firm A’s industry, then firms B and C are also in the same industry. We assign
firms to industries using clustering algorithms that maximize total within-industry
similarity where similarity is based on word usage in 10-K product descriptions.
Our second classification system is more general. In this classification, we allow
firm competitors to change every year and we relax the membership transitivity re-
quirements of FIC industries and view industries like flexible networks. We name
these new generalized network industries “text-based network industry classifica-
tions” (TNIC). In this classification system, each firm can have its own set of distinct
competitors analogous to a social network, where each individual has a distinct set
of friends, with friends of one individual not necessarily being friends of each other.
To illustrate why transitivity is restrictive, suppose firms A and B both view firm
C as a rival. If A and B have each have products with different distinct features or
enhancements that C does not have, then A and B may not compete against each
other as they may serve different product segments.
Relative to existing industry classifications, these new text-based classifications
offer economically large improvements in their ability to explain managerial discus-
sion of high competition, the specific firms mentioned by managers as being com-
3KahleandWalkling(1996)comparetheinformativenessofSICcodesobtainedfromtheCRSP
and COMPUSTAT databases, and Fama and French (1997) create new industry classifications
based on a new way of grouping existing four digit SIC codes. Krishnan and Press (2003) compare
SIC codes to NAICS codes, and Bhojraj, Lee, and Oler (2003) also compare various fixed industry
classifications. Although these studies are informative, and suggest that existing static classifica-
tions can be used in better ways, they do not explore whether the core methodology underlying
static classifications can be improved upon.
4We make these industry classifications and corresponding firm memberships available to re-
searchers via the internet.
2