NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DIVIDENDS, SHARE REPURCHASES, AND TAX CLIENTELES:
EVIDENCE FROM THE 2003 REDUCTIONS IN SHAREHOLDER TAXES
Jennifer Blouin
Jana Raedy
Douglas Shackelford
Working Paper 16129
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16129
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2010
The authors have benefited greatly from comments from Dan Dhaliwal and two anonymous referees,
discussions with Jeff Brown, Raj Chetty, Emmanuel Saez, and Scott Weisbenner and research assistance
from Kevin Markle. We are responsible for all remaining errors. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Jennifer Blouin, Jana Raedy, and Douglas Shackelford. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Dividends, Share Repurchases, and Tax Clienteles: Evidence from the 2003 Reductions in
Shareholder Taxes
Jennifer Blouin, Jana Raedy, and Douglas Shackelford
NBER Working Paper No. 16129
June 2010
JEL No. G34,G35,H24,K34
ABSTRACT
This paper jointly evaluates firm-level changes in investor composition and shareholder distributions
following a 2003 reduction in the dividend and capital gains tax rates for individuals. We find that
directors and officers, but not other individual investors, rebalanced their portfolios to maximize after-tax
returns in light of the new tax rules. We also find that firms adjusted their distribution policy (specifically,
dividends versus share repurchases) in a manner consistent with the altered tax incentives for individual
investors. To our knowledge, this is the first paper to employ simultaneous equations to estimate both
investor and managerial responses to the 2003 rate reductions. We find that estimating a system of
equations leads to different inferences.
Jennifer Blouin Douglas Shackelford
University of Pennsylvania University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
The Wharton School Kenan-Flagler Business School
3620 Locust Walk Campus Box 3490, McColl Building
1315 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3490
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6365 and NBER
blouin@wharton.upenn.edu doug_shack@unc.edu
Jana Raedy
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
Kenan-Flagler Business School
Campus Box 3490, McColl Building
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3490
jana_raedy@unc.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
This paper jointly evaluates firm-level changes in investor composition and shareholder
distributions following a 2003 reduction in dividend and capital gains tax rates. We predict that
individual investors, the only ones affected by the reduction in shareholder taxes, rebalanced
their portfolios to maximize after-tax returns in light of the new tax rules. We also predict that
firms adjusted their distribution policy (specifically, dividends versus share repurchases) to
maximize share value, i.e., distributing profits in a manner that was most attractive to their
investors after considering shareholder taxes. With regard to investor responses, we find
evidence that insiders (i.e., directors and officers) increased holdings in their own companies if
their dividend-repurchase mix reflected the new tax incentives. However, we find no evidence
that other individual investors rebalanced their portfolios. With regard to managerial responses,
we find that firms with disproportionately large individual holdings modified their payouts in a
manner consistent with the altered tax incentives. However, changes in dividend and repurchase
policy were not immediate; firms deferred widespread, substantial changes until the second
quarter following enactment.
To our knowledge, this is the first paper to jointly estimate investor and firm responses to
changes in shareholder taxes. The fact that both investors and firms can change their behavior
following a change in shareholder taxes presents an identification problem. To illustrate,
suppose we test for an association between dividend yields and individual stock ownership and
find that the correlation becomes more positive following a reduction in individual dividend tax
rates. Such a finding is consistent with both (1) individuals switching to high-dividend-paying
firms following the tax cut (i.e., a tax clientele response) and (2) firms that are held mostly by
individuals increasing their dividends following the tax reduction (a firm payout response). To

distinguish between investors’ rebalancing their portfolios and firms’ altering their distributions,
this study estimates simultaneous equations. Prior studies have focused on either investors or
managers, but not both.
To maximize the power of our tests, we compare a firm’s ownership and dividend-
repurchase mix before and after the largest change in U.S. dividend taxation. The Jobs and
Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003 (JGTRRA) reduced, for individuals only, the
maximum, statutory dividend tax rate from 38.6% to 15%. It also lowered the maximum,
statutory individual capital gains tax rate, which applies to share repurchases, from 20% to 15%.
In many ways, JGTRRA is an ideal legislative setting for testing an association between
shareholder taxes and payout policy. The scope of JGTRRA was narrow. Its genesis was
individual dividend tax reduction. Its primary amendment was individual capital gains tax
relief.1 The final bill did little more than reduce dividend and capital gains tax rates.
Nonetheless, the economic effects were huge.2 Because of its narrow focus and big impact, the
JGTRRA provides a much stronger setting than other shareholder tax rate changes, which were
either much smaller (e.g., Tax Relief Act of 1997) or involved widespread overhaul of the tax
system that affected far more than just shareholder taxes (Tax Reform Act of 1986).
The JGTRRA dividend and capital gains tax cuts should have altered the optimal mix of
dividends and repurchases for at least some individual investors. As a result, we expect that
some individuals rebalanced their portfolio so that a higher proportion of their equity returns
came in the form of dividends. Consistent with such portfolio rebalancing, Desai and
Dharmapala (2010) report that total U.S. equity investments shifted from foreign countries
1 For the legislative history, see Auerbach and Hassett (2006).
2 The size of the tax savings has been very large. In September 2007, the U.S. Congress’ Joint Committee on
Taxation reported that the 2003 dividend and capital gains tax rates will cost the Treasury $632 billion between
2007 and 2011, the largest tax expenditure in the tax code.
2