NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS AND INNOVATION:
EVIDENCE FROM THE HUMAN GENOME
Heidi L. Williams
Working Paper 16213
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16213
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2010
I am very grateful to Wes Cohen, Joe Doyle, Dan Fetter, Matt Gentzkow, Claudia Goldin, Sam Kortum,
Amanda Kowalski, Fiona Murray, Jesse Shapiro, Scott Stern, three anonymous referees, numerous
seminar participants, and especially my PhD advisers David Cutler, Amy Finkelstein, and Larry Katz
for comments. Several individuals from Celera, the Human Genome Project, and related institutions
provided invaluable guidance, including Sam Broder, Peter Hutt, and particularly Mark Adams, David
Altshuler, Bob Cook-Deegan, Eric Lander, Robert Millman, and seminar participants at the Broad
Institute. David Robinson provided valuable assistance with the data collection. Financial support
from NIA Grant Number T32-AG000186 to the NBER, NSF Grant Number 1151497, and the Center
for American Political Studies at Harvard is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Heidi L. Williams. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Intellectual Property Rights and Innovation: Evidence from the Human Genome
Heidi L. Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 16213
July 2010, Revised January 2013
JEL No. I10,I18,O3,O34
ABSTRACT
Do intellectual property (IP) rights on existing technologies hinder subsequent innovation? Using newly-
collected data on the sequencing of the human genome by the public Human Genome Project and
the private firm Celera, this paper estimates the impact of Celera's gene-level IP on subsequent scientific
research and product development. Genes initially sequenced by Celera were held with IP for up to
two years, but moved into the public domain once re-sequenced by the public effort. Across a range
of empirical specifications, I find evidence that Celera's IP led to reductions in subsequent scientific
research and product development on the order of 20 to 30 percent. Taken together, these results suggest
that Celera's short-term IP had persistent negative effects on subsequent innovation relative to a counterfactual
of Celera genes having always been in the public domain.
Heidi L. Williams
MIT Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive
Building E52, Room 274C
Cambridge MA 02142-1347
and NBER
heidiw@mit.edu

Innovationisakeydriverofeconomicgrowth,butcompetitivemarketsmayunder-incentivize
innovation due to the public good nature of ideas (Nelson, 1959; Arrow, 1962). Intellectual
property (IP) rights, such as patents and copyrights, aim to incentivize innovation by allowing
firms to capture a higher share of the social returns to their research investments. Traditional
evaluationsoftheeffectivenessofIPhavefocusedonwhethertheprospectofobtainingIPrights
stimulatesthedevelopmentofnewtechnologies. However,inmanymarketstechnologicalchange
is cumulative, in the sense that product development results from several steps of invention and
research. In markets where innovation is cumulative, the overall effectiveness of IP in promoting
innovation also depends on a second, less studied question: do IP rights on existing technologies
hinder subsequent innovation? The contribution of this paper is to provide empirical evidence
on this second question by investigating how one form of IP on the human genome influenced
subsequent scientific research and product development.
To fix ideas, suppose the firm Celera holds IP on a human gene, and that Pfizer discovers a
genetic diagnostic test based on Celera’s gene. Will Celera’s IP discourage Pfizer from develop-
ing this test? In a perfect contracting environment with no transaction costs, Celera and Pfizer
would negotiate a licensing agreement such that cumulative research is not hindered. However,
transaction costs may cause licensing negotiations to break down, deterring some socially de-
sirable research. While the theoretical literature on this question is well-developed (Scotchmer,
1991; Green and Scotchmer, 1995; Bessen, 2004), empirical evidence is scarce.
The empirical context analyzed in this paper is the sequencing of the human genome by the
public Human Genome Project and the private firm Celera. The public effort began in 1990,
and required that all sequenced genes be placed in the public domain. Celera’s effort began
in 1999, and ended in 2001 when Celera disclosed an incomplete draft genome. The public
effort continued, and by 2003 had sequenced all genes in Celera’s 2001 draft. Between 2001 and
2003, Celera used a contract law-based form of IP to protect genes sequenced by Celera but not
yet sequenced by the public effort. This IP enabled Celera to sell its data for substantial fees,
and required firms to negotiate licensing agreements with Celera for any resulting commercial
discoveries - even though it was publicly known at the time that all of Celera’s genes would be
sequenced by the public effort, and thus be in the public domain, by 2003. Figure 1 summarizes
a timeline of these key events.
How did Celera’s gene-level IP influence subsequent scientific research and product devel-
opment? To investigate this question, I construct a new dataset that tracks the timing of gene
sequencing and Celera’s IP across the human genome, linked to gene-level measures of scien-
tific research and product development. Specifically, I trace cumulative innovation by compiling
data on links between genes and phenotypes, which are observable traits or characteristics. For
example, the link between variation on the HTT gene and Huntington’s disease represents a
genotype-phenotype link. For each gene, I collect data on publications investigating genotype-
phenotype links, on successfully generated knowledge about genotype-phenotype links, and on
the development of gene-based diagnostic tests available to consumers.1
1Patent citations are a frequently-used measure of cumulative innovation (Jaffe, Trajtenberg and Henderson,
1

Asimplecross-tabulationillustrateshowthisdatacanbeusedtoinvestigatehowCelera’sIP
influenced subsequent innovation. Table 1 compares subsequent innovation outcomes for Celera
genes relative to non-Celera genes sequenced in the same year. Taken at face value, these data
suggestthatCelera’sIPledtoeconomicallyandstatisticallysignificantreductionsinsubsequent
scientific research and product development. Celera genes had an average of 1.2 publications
by 2009, relative to 2.1 publications for non-Celera genes sequenced in the same year. About
3 percent of Celera genes were used in a gene-based diagnostic test as of 2009, relative to 5.4
percent of non-Celera genes sequenced in the same year.
These simple differences in means could reflect a negative effect of Celera’s IP on subsequent
research, or could reflect that Celera’s genes had lower inherent potential for follow-on research.
Because the institutional context suggests that selection bias could be a concern, I present
estimates from two additional empirical tests that directly address selection. First, I restrict
attention to within-gene variation in IP and test whether the removal of Celera’s IP increased
subsequentinnovation. Second,IlimitthesampletoCeleragenesandtestforalinkbetweenthe
amount of time a gene was held with Celera’s IP and subsequent innovation. These additional
empirical tests appear to eliminate selection bias in the following sense: within the sample of
∼1,600 Celera genes, proxies for the ex ante expected value of a gene do not predict the timing
of when genes were re-sequenced by the public effort. The estimates from these two additional
empiricaltestsareroughlythesamemagnitudeastheestimatesfromthesimplecross-tabulation:
Celera’s IP appears to have generated economically and statistically significant reductions in
subsequent scientific research and product development, on the order of 20 to 30 percent.
ThisanalysisdoesnotevaluatetheoverallwelfareconsequencesofCelera’sentry, whichmay
have been spurred by the prospect of obtaining IP. If Celera’s entry spurred faster sequencing
of the human genome, the overall timing of genome-related innovation likely shifted earlier in
time, which would have had welfare gains even if Celera’s IP in isolation hindered innovation.
Rather, these results suggest that, holding Celera’s entry constant, an alternative lump-sum
reward mechanism may have had social benefits relative to Celera’s chosen form of IP.2
This paper joins a handful of recent papers documenting evidence that IP may hinder sub-
sequent innovation (Murray and Stern, 2007; Huang and Murray, 2009; Murray et al., 2008). Of
particular note is the work of Murray et al. (2008), who analyze short-term IP the firm DuPont
held on certain types of genetically engineered mice. Using a dataset of matched mouse-article
pairs, the authors document that the removal of IP increased citations to scientific papers on
affected mice by 20 to 40 percent relative to papers on unaffected mice - very similar to the
magnitude of my estimates.3
1993). However, by construction patent citations cannot measure cumulative innovation on non-patented tech-
nologies. The type of data constructed in this paper - measuring scientific research and product development
directly, rather than via patent citations - is critical in enabling a test of how IP affects cumulative innovation.
2For example, under the patent buyout mechanism discussedby Kremer (1998), the public sector(or another
entity) could have paid Celera some fee to “buy out” Celera’s IP and place Celera genes in the public domain.
SeeKremerandWilliams(2010)forfurtherdiscussionofotheralternativemechanismsforrewardinginnovation.
3Murray et al. (2008) also provide evidence, consistent with the model of Aghion, Dewatripont and Stein
(2008), that IP reduces the diversity of scientific experimentation.
2