NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIQUIDITY RISK OF CORPORATE BOND RETURNS:
A CONDITIONAL APPROACH
Viral V. Acharya
Yakov Amihud
Sreedhar T. Bharath
Working Paper 16394
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16394
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2010
Revised August 2014
Published in the Journal of Financial Economics 110(2), 2013, pp. 358-386. We thank an anonymous
referee for useful comments. We thank Jason Sturgess and Yili Zhang for diligent research assistance.
We are grateful to Banque de France grant for this study, and to Ruslan Goyenko for sharing with
us his illiquidity series for the US treasuries. We are grateful for comments from Mark Seasholes and
seminar participants at Moody’s KMV Annual Credit Risk conference (2007) hosted at NYU Stern,
IRC risk management conference in Florence (2008), Arizona State University, Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology, McGill, Tel Aviv University, University of Notre Dame, Barclays Global
Investors (London), Southern Methodist University, Nanyang Technological University of Singapore,
Penn State University, University of Houston, University of Texas at Dallas, University of Virginia
(Darden), and University of Toronto (Rotman). This paper won the 2012 Crowell Memorial Prize
(second place). All errors remain our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Viral V. Acharya, Yakov Amihud, and Sreedhar T. Bharath. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Liquidity Risk of Corporate Bond Returns: A Conditional Approach
Viral V. Acharya, Yakov Amihud, and Sreedhar T. Bharath
NBER Working Paper No. 16394
September 2010, Revised August 2014
JEL No. G12,G13,G32,G33
ABSTRACT
We study the exposure of the US corporate bond returns to liquidity shocks of stocks and Treasury
bonds over the period 1973 - 2007 in a regime - switching model. In one regime, liquidity shocks have
mostly insignificant effects on bond prices, whereas in another regime, a rise in illiquidity produces
significant but conflicting effects: Prices of investment-grade bonds rise while prices of speculative-grade
(junk) bonds fall substantially (relative to the market). Relating the probability of these regimes to
macroeconomic conditions we find that the second regime can be predicted by economic conditions
that are characterized as “stress.” These effects, which are robust to controlling for other systematic
risks (term and default), suggest the existence of time-varying liquidity risk of corporate bond returns
conditional on episodes of flight to liquidity. Our model can predict the out-of-sample bond returns
for the stress years 2008 - 2009. We find a similar pattern for stocks classified by high or low book-to-
market ratio, where again, liquidity shocks play a special role in periods characterized by adverse
economic conditions.
Viral V. Acharya Sreedhar T. Bharath
Stern School of Business Department of Finance
New York University University of Michigan
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-84 Room D7606 ER
New York, NY 10012 701 Tappan Street
and CEPR Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and also NBER sbharath@asu.edu
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu
Yakov Amihud
New York University
Stern School of Business
44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012
yamihud@stern.nyu.edu

1. Introduction
Thispapershowsthatthepricingofliquidityriskinthebondmarketisconditional onthe
state of the economy, with liquidity risk becoming more important in times of financial and
economic distress. Using a regime-switching model, we find a significant (absolute) increase
in the exposure (“beta”) of corporate bond returns to liquidity shocks in stocks and Treasury
bonds, after controlling for term and default risks. We provide an econometric time-series
model that predicts the likelihood of regime in which liquidity matters more for asset pricing,
show that the likelihood is greater in times of macroeconomic and financial distress, and use
the prediction to generate a conditional forecast of bond returns. We further find that stocks
with high book-to-market ratio, which reflects persistent distressed performance and lower
liquidity, also exhibit an increase in their (absolute) liquidity betas in times of economic
distress.
Liquidityshocksaffectrealizedreturnsbecauseexpectedliquidityaffectsexpectedreturns
(AmihudandMendelson,1986,1991). Giventhepersistenceofilliquidity,apositiveilliquidity
shock raises future expected illiquidity and expected return which in turn lowers prices. This
usually generates a negative liquidity beta.1 These relations between illiquidity shocks and
returns have been documented for stocks by Amihud (2002), Pastor and Stambaugh (2003),
Acharya and Pedersen (2005), and Sadka (2006), and for corporate bonds by de Jong and
Driessen (2007), and Lin, Wang, and Wu (2011). This paper contributes to these studies by
showing that the impact of liquidity shocks on asset prices is conditional, being significantly
stronger in adverse economic times.
The relation between liquidity shocks and adverse economic and financial episodes has
been noted by Acharya and Pedersen (2005).2 In times of adverse economic and financial
conditions, the greater demand for liquidity and the rise in its value reduces asset prices
1This holds under reasonable assumptions on the asset cashflows; see a formal model in Acharya and
Pedersen (2005).
2Over the period 1963 to 1999, Acharya and Pedersen (2005) identify these shocks to be 5/1970 (Penn
Central commercial paper crisis), 11/1973 (oil crisis), 10/1987 (stock market crash), 8/1990 (Iraqi invasion
of Kuwait), 4 - 12/1997 (Asian crisis), and 6 - 10/1998 (Russian default, LTCM crisis).
1

by more than usual, and this applies particularly for the less liquid assets. Yet, these
episodes may be coupled by a flight to liquidity, by which securities with higher liquidity
become relatively more valuable. Then, unexpected rise in illiquidity may raise, rather
than depress, the prices of assets that provide greater liquidity in adverse economic times
relative to the prices of less liquid assets. This is indeed what we find for investment-grade
(IG) corporate bonds, which are known to be more liquid than speculative (junk) bonds.
Analogously, we also find that in times of economic distress, the effect of adverse liquidity
shocks is positive (relative to the market) for stocks with low book-to-market ratio, which
have stronger sustained profitability and higher liquidity, whereas the effect is negative for
stocks with high book-to-market ratio.
Formally, we estimate a regression model of bond returns on four pricing factors—term
spread returns, default spread returns (or the bond market excess returns), and liquidity
shocksonstocksandTreasurybonds. Westudytheassociationbetweenchangesincorporate
bond price shocks and changes in the illiquidity of stocks and Treasury bonds. We show
that this response varies over time, switching between two regimes which we characterize as
“normal”and“stress.”EmployingHamilton’s(1989)methodology,wefirstidentifystatistically
the two regimes between which there are variations in the liquidity betas as well as the betas
of the term risk and default risk. We then show that these two regimes can be predicted by
macroeconomic and financial variables. The regime which we call “stress” is associated with
adverse macroeconomic conditions such as recessed economic activity and adverse financial
market conditions such as negative stock market returns, heightened volatility, and shrinking
balance-sheets of financial intermediaries.
Employing our economic prediction model of being in the normal or in the stress regime,
we provide an out-of-sample forecast of corporate bond returns for the years 2008 - 2009.
In regressions of monthly realized returns on predicted returns that are conditional on the
pricing factors, R2 is 76% and 77% for junk and IG bonds, respectively, and the coefficients
indicate unbiased prediction: the slope coefficients are close to one and the intercepts are
2