NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DYNAMIC LABOR DEMAND IN CHINA:
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE OBJECTIVES
Russell Cooper
Guan Gong
Ping Yan
Working Paper 16498
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16498
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2010
We are grateful to conferences participants at the 2010 Shanghai Macroeconomics Workshop at SUFE,
the Tsinghua Workshop in Macroeconomics 2010 and the ESWC 2010. This research was supported
by a National Science Foundation (#0819682) to Russell Cooper and National Science Foundation
of China grants (#70903004, #71273001) to Ping Yan and Russell Cooper and (#71273162) to Guan
Gong and Russell Cooper. The Department of Social Science of Peking University provided additional
research funding. Guan Gong also benefited from the support of the 211 Project for Shanghai University
of Finance and Economics. Huabin Wu provided outstanding research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Russell Cooper, Guan Gong, and Ping Yan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Dynamic Labor Demand in China: Public and Private Objectives
Russell Cooper, Guan Gong, and Ping Yan
NBER Working Paper No. 16498
October 2010, Revised April 2013
JEL No. E24,J23,L33,P23
ABSTRACT
This paper studies dynamic labor demand by private and public manufacturing plants in China. It contributes
along two dimensions. First, it uncovers the objectives of public enterprises and compares them to
private enterprises. Second, it estimates adjustment costs of these plants and thus their (dynamic) labor
demand. One of our principal findings is that public plants maximize the discounted present value
of profits without a soft-budget constraint. There is strong evidence of both quadratic and linear firing
costs at the plant level. Costs of adjusting hours are small and lower for private compared to public
plants. The private plants operate with considerably lower quadratic adjustment costs. The higher quadratic
adjustment costs of the public plants may reflect their internalization of social costs of employment
adjustment. Domestic private plants and collective plants have about the same discount factor, much
lower than state controlled plants.
Russell Cooper Ping Yan
Department of Economics National School of Development
The Pennsylvania State University China Center for Economic Research
611 Kern Peking University
State College, PA 16802 pyan@ccer.edu.cn
and NBER
russellcoop@gmail.com
Guan Gong
School of Economics
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
777 Guoding RD, Shanghai
CHINA
ggong@mail.shufe.edu.cn

1 MOTIVATION
1 Motivation
Any analysis of the effects of government policy, such as labor market interventions, trade
policy, environment reforms, must predict the response of private households and firms. For
some economies, like China and many European countries, the presence of a large public
sector adds another dimension: predicting the effects of policy on public firms.
In the absence of a large public sector, many analyses solve constrained optimization
problems for agents and use the resulting policy functions as inputs into forecasting policy
effects. The natural extension of this methodology is to do the same for public firms: use
the solution of a constrained optimization problem to predict responses to policy interven-
tions. While it is natural to use utility and profit maximization as the objectives of private
households and firms respectively, what are the objectives and constraints of public firms?
Answering that question is one goal of this paper.
The paper contributes to the broad literature linking ownership to performance. In our
analysis, ownership varies between public plants and private plants. The private plants are
assumed to be profit maximizing, facing costs of adjusting labor. The public firms maximize
a more flexible objective and may face constraints different from the private plants. Our
results are best interpreted as comparative: how does the behavior of the public plants differ
from the private ones?
Historically, the nature of public firms in China was distinct from those in capitalist
countries. In the US and other countries with free markets, public firms arose either be-
cause of natural monopoly, like electric utility and telegraph industries, or because of the
need to provide public goods. The former sectors are under rate-of-return regulation and
the objective of public firms under this regulatory constraint has been tested empirically.
For instance, using the operation data of utility firms in the US between 1965 and 1970,
Pescatrice and Trapani (1980) show that public utilities behave as cost minimizers with zero
profit. Meanwhile, the public good sectors are commonly under output price control and
are subsidized by the government. The objective of these public firms is mainly to provide
community benefits.
Prior to the economic reform, the public firms in China dominated the economy, account-
ing for over 95 percentage of total industrial output.1 The public firms acted more like public
1Reported by China government media internet: news.Xinhuanet.com at 2004. 07.08.
2

1 MOTIVATION
good providers. These public firms, especially the medium and large-sized ones, established
a resident community or small society providing all kinds of social services and facilities to
its community members. The public firms had multiple objectives including expansion of
social employment, and provision of various social services and securities, such as housing,
education, hospital care, health insurance, and pensions. In the middle of 1990s, about half
of industrial public firms were unprofitable.
China’s state-sector reforms began in the 1990s, aiming at increasing the efficiency of
public firms and promoting economic growth. The reforms broke the lifetime employment
system, the so-called ‘iron rice bowl’, encouraging labor mobility. Over the past two decades,
the labor market has been transformed to an increasingly market-driven system. The re-
forms changed the incentive system, allowing firm autonomy and linking managerial pay and
promotion to firm’s profit. The public firms have been pushed into the market place to either
competeorgobankrupt. Privatefirms, includingforeignfirmsandjoint-venturedfirms, have
developed rapidly and have contributed more than 60 percentage to China’s total industrial
output since 2002.2 As competition among firms increases and the transformation toward
a market oriented system has occurred, one might expect that the difference in behavior
among public firms and private firms would narrow.
Withourquestionandthisbackgroundinmind,thispaperstudiesdynamiclabordemand
for private and public manufacturing plants in China.3 To do so, we estimate the costs of
labor adjustment and the objectives of private and public plants using a simulated method
of moments (SMM) approach. The idea is to use key moments of labor input, output and
productivity at the plant level to infer the parameters of the dynamic optimization problems.
Our approach is to specify a couple of alternative objectives and determine which one better
matchespertinentdatafacts.4 OnecontributionofthispaperistousetheSMMmethodology
to infer the objectives of the public plants.
Inlookingatthebehaviorofprivateandpublicplants,therearesomestrikingsimilarities.
First, the public plants, like the private plants, appear to be maximizing the discounted
expected value of profits. Importantly, labor demand is not a static decision: adjustment
2Source: China Statistical Yearbook 2012.
3Asdiscussedinsection3,apublicplantisdeterminedbyshareholdingsratherthanregistration. Public
plants are then decomposed into state controlled and collectively controlled plants.
4A similar approach underlies Gowrisankaran and Town (1997) who study the behavior of not-for-profit
hospitals, and estimate an objective function which includes both profits and quality.
3