NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHAT HINDERS INVESTMENT IN THE AFTERMATH OF FINANCIAL CRISES:
INSOLVENT FIRMS OR ILLIQUID BANKS?
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
Herman Kamil
Carolina Villegas-Sanchez
Working Paper 16528
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16528
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2010
We thank Asim Khawaja and three anonymous referees for their constructive comments. We also
thank Laura Alfaro, Hoyt Bleakley, Roberto Chang, Fritz Foley, Mario Crucini, Aimee Chin, Philipp
Schnabl and Bent Sorensen for valuable suggestions and the participants of the seminar at Alicante,
Bank of Spain, Brown University, Dartmouth, ESADE, McGill University, Rice University, University
of Texas at Austin, Stockholm School of Economics, Valencia University, 10th Jacques Polak IMF
Annual Research Conference, 2010 NBER-IFM Spring Meeting, and 2010 LACEA Meetings for their
comments. Carolina Villegas-Sanchez acknowledges financial support from Banco Sabadell. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Herman Kamil, and Carolina Villegas-Sanchez. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What Hinders Investment in the Aftermath of Financial Crises: Insolvent Firms or Illiquid
Banks?
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Herman Kamil, and Carolina Villegas-Sanchez
NBER Working Paper No. 16528
November 2010, Revised July 2015
JEL No. E32,F15,F23,F36,O16
ABSTRACT
We quantify the effects of lending and balance sheet channels on corporate investment during large
crises in emerging markets. The depreciated currency creates investment opportunities in the tradable
sector but firms might be financially constrained due to: 1) a deterioration of their balance sheet via
un-hedged foreign currency debt (balance sheet channel) and 2) a decline in the supply of credit by
banks (lending channel). We find that during twin crises, domestic exporters holding un-hedged foreign
currency debt decrease investment while foreign exporters with better access to credit increase investment,
in spite of their un-hedged foreign currency debt. We do not find such a differential effect under pure
currency crises. Using firm-bank matched data during global financial crisis, we show that both domestic
and foreign-owned firms experienced a decline in bank credit from affected banks however, foreign-
owned firms substituted the lost credit.
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan Carolina Villegas-Sanchez
Department of Economics ESADE Business School
University of Maryland Barcelona
Tydings Hall 4118D Spain
College Park, MD 20742-7211 carolina.villegas@esade.edu
and CEPR
and also NBER
kalemli@econ.umd.edu
Herman Kamil
International Monetary Fund
Western Hemisphere Department
700 19th Street, NW
Washington DC, 20431
hkamil@imf.org

1 Introduction
A central debate in finance and macroeconomics is whether financial frictions operate mostly via
thebanklendingchannelorthefirmbalancesheetchannelinturningfinancialcrisesintorecessions.
Quantifying the effects of both channels on corporate investment simultaneously has been proven
difficult. This is the task we undertake in this paper. A key advantage of our approach is that we
employ a unique data set that allows to account for the ability of firms to borrow based on their
net worth (balance sheet channel) and the ability of banks to lend (the supply of credit/lending
channel), separately. Based on such strategy we measure the relative importance of the lending
and balance sheet channels on corporate investment simultaneously.
We utilize the experience of Latin American countries with a range of financial crises during
1990–2005. These often involved a currency crisis but also a twin crisis episode, where prior to
the currency crash the banking system collapsed, as shown by Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999)
and Reinhart and Rogoff (2010). Both types of financial crises—currency and twin—feature the
depreciation of the currency and therefore, a willingness of exporting firms to invest and exploit
competitiveness effects via a depreciated currency. Hence, a currency crisis constitutes a positive
shocktocreditdemand. Thetwotypesofcrisesdifferinthesupplyofcreditbylocalbanks, namely
the lending channel is more relevant during twin crises where supply of credit contracts relatively
more than in the case of currency crises.
Giventheextensiveforeigncurrencyborrowinginemergingmarketsinthe1990s,bothcurrency
and twin crises are characterized by changes in firm’s debt burden and net worth. We expect firms
withhighdollardebtandnohedge(suchasexportrevenue, derivativesordollarassets)todecrease
investment regardless of the type of crisis due to the negative shock to their collateral resulting
from the balance sheet weakness caused by the depreciated currency (balance sheet channel). Only
exporting firms with enough dollar denominated streams of income can compensate changes in the
value of foreign currency denominated debt and hence, may not be affected from the balance sheet
channel. Suchsolventfirmsshouldincreaseinvestmentunlesstheilliquidlocalbankingsectorposes
2

a problem. There will be a liquidity supply problem (lending channel) during a twin crisis.
We study four episodes of currency crises (Mexico 1995, Argentina 2002, Brazil 1999 and 2002)
usingatripledifference-in-differencemethodology. Twooftheseepisodesweretwincrisessincethey
were combined with a banking crisis (Mexico 1994 and Argentina 2001). In order to have firm level
measures of insolvency and liquidity over time, we have hand-collected a unique panel database
withannualaccountinginformationforthewholeuniverseoflistednon-financialcompaniesinthese
LatinAmericancountries,spanningtheperiod1990to2005. Wedefineaninsolventfirmasonewith
high leverage and holdings of short-term foreign currency denominated debt that are not matched
by a dollar denominated stream of income.1 These firms are naturally more likely to experience a
declineinnetworthintheaftermathoflargeexchangeratedevaluations. Aguiar(2005)showsthat
firms with heavy exposure to short-term foreign currency debt before the Mexican crisis decreased
investment compared to firms with lower dollar debt exposure. Bleakley and Cowan (2008) show
theoppositeresult, wherefirmsholdingdollardebtinvestmoreduringexchangeratedepreciations.
They are the first to argue that firms match the currency composition of their liabilities with that
of their income streams or assets, avoiding insolvency during a currency depreciation. Hence we
make sure our insolvent firms are the ones with un-hedged foreign currency debt.
We measure the liquidity shock, first, at the country level, by focusing on twin crisis episodes
that are characterized by a general dry up of credit in the year prior to the currency crisis for all
firms. Second, weuseforeignownership(FDIandportfolioequityinvestment)asourpreferredfirm
levelmeasureofaccesstoliquidity. Desai, Foley, andHines(2004)showhowmultinationalaffiliates
useinternalcapitalmarketsinfinanciallyunderdevelopedmarkets. Desai, Foley, andForbes(2008)
investigate the response of sales, assets, and capital expenditure of U.S. multinational affiliates and
domesticfirmsintheaftermathofavarietyoffinancialcrisesfrom25emergingmarketcountriesand
find that foreign affiliates outperform their local counterparts across these performance measures.
Their interpretation is that local firms are financially constrained due to their limited access to
1This is based on Allen, Rosenberg, Keller, Setser, and Roubini (2002).
3