NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHAT DOES STOCK OWNERSHIP BREADTH MEASURE?
James J. Choi
Li Jin
Hongjun Yan
Working Paper 16591
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16591
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2010
Choi and Yan received support from a Whitebox Advisors research grant administered through the
Yale International Center for Finance, Jin received support from the Harvard Business School Division
of Research, and Choi received support from the National Institute on Aging (grant P01-AG005842).
We thank Yakov Amihud, Warren Bailey, Long Chen, Cam Harvey, David Hirshleifer, Harrison Hong,
Christine Jiang, Ron Kaniel, Owen Lamont, Akiko Watanabe, and audience members at Berkeley,
CICF Conference, Frontiers in Finance Conference, NYU Five Star Conference, Emory, Fudan, Goldman
Sachs Asset Management, Harvard, INSEAD, Michigan, National University of Singapore, Oxford,
SUNY Binghamton, University of Rochester, and Washington University in St. Louis for their comments.
We are indebted to Ben Hebert and Jung Sakong for their research assistance, and to Fenghua Wang
and Dora Liu for their help in calculating all the breadth measures used in the paper. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by James J. Choi, Li Jin, and Hongjun Yan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

What Does Stock Ownership Breadth Measure?
James J. Choi, Li Jin, and Hongjun Yan
NBER Working Paper No. 16591
December 2010, Revised July 2012
JEL No. G12
ABSTRACT
Using holdings data on a representative sample of all Shanghai Stock Exchange investors, we show
that increases in ownership breadth (the fraction of market participants who own a stock) predict low
returns: highest change quintile stocks underperform lowest quintile stocks by 23% per year. Small
retail investors drive this result. Retail ownership breadth increases appear to be correlated with overpricing.
Among institutional investors, however, the opposite holds: Stocks in the top decile of wealth-weighted
institutional breadth change outperform the bottom decile by 8% per year, consistent with prior work
that interprets breadth as a measure of short-sales constraints.
James J. Choi Hongjun Yan
Yale School of Management Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street 135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200 Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200 New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER hongjun.yan@yale.edu
james.choi@yale.edu
Li Jin
Harvard Business School
Finance Unit
Boston, MA 02163
ljin@hbs.edu

What should we infer about future returns when we see a large number of investors
buying a stock they had previously not owned, or a large number of investors completely
liquidating their holdings of a stock? In this paper, we test how changes in ownership breadth—
the fraction of market participants with a long position in a given stock—predict the cross-
section of stock returns.
Chen, Hong, and Stein (2002) (hereafter CHS) argue that in a market with short sales
constraints, when an investor holds no long position in a stock, he is likely to have negative
information about the stock’s fundamental value. Due to short sales constraints, this negative
information is only partially incorporated into the stock’s price. Thus, when ownership breadth is
low, there is a large amount of negative news missing from the stock’s price, and the stock’s
future returns will be low.1
Empirically testing this theory is challenging because it requires a representative sample
of all investors who face short sales constraints, which is usually not available at high frequency.
Previous empirical tests of ownership breadth have measured ownership breadth among U.S.
mutual funds, which are not representative of all U.S. investors who face short-sales constraints.
The mismatch between available data and theory may explain why the evidence on ownership
breadth has been mixed to date. Because ownership breadth level is close to a permanent
characteristic for a stock, CHS argue that focus should be placed on ownership breadth
changes—essentially controlling for a stock fixed effect. CHS find that cross-sectionally, stocks
that are held by fewer mutual funds this quarter than last quarter subsequently underperform
stocks with mutual fund ownership breadth increases from 1979 to 1998. But Nagel (2005)
expands the CHS sample by five years and finds that there is no relationship on average between
mutual fund ownership breadth changes and future returns over the longer sample.2
1 Most theoretical models find that short-sales constraints lead to overvaluation (e.g., Miller (1977), Harrison and
Kreps (1978), Allen, Morris, and Postlewaite (1993), Scheinkman and Xiong (2003)), but there are exceptions. For
example, Diamond and Verrecchia (1987) argue that short-sales constraints do not bias stock prices on average
when investors correctly anticipate that pessimistic investors are sitting on the sidelines. Bai, Chang, and Wang
(2006) show that, depending on the relative importance of informed versus uninformed trading motives, short-sales
constraints can increase, decrease, or have no impact on stock prices.
2 Cen, Lu, and Yang (2011) find that mutual fund breadth changes tend to negatively predict returns when the Baker
and Wurgler (2006, 2007) sentiment index experiences large absolute movements. Lehavy and Sloan (2008) find
that U.S. mutual fund ownership breadth change is positively autocorrelated, and that controlling for future breadth
changes, current breadth change negatively predicts future returns.
2

We use a new holdings dataset from the Shanghai Stock Exchange (SSE) that is uniquely
suited to testing the CHS theory. The investors in the data are a random, survivorship-bias-free
sample of all investors in the SSE. During our 1996 to 2007 sample period, short sales were
strictly prohibited in China, and there was minimal equity derivatives activity.3 Therefore, our
sample is also representative of all investors in the market who face short-sales constraints.
We find, in sharp contrast to the CHS prediction, that high breadth change stocks
subsequently underperform low breadth change stocks when we define ownership breadth as
CHS do—the percent of all market participants who have a long position in a stock, giving equal
weight to each investor. The annualized difference in the four-factor alpha between the highest
and lowest quintiles of equal-weighted total breadth change (which is not public information) in
the first month after portfolio formation is –23%, with a t-statistic of 9.7. Abnormal returns are
present on both the long and short sides of the hypothetical zero-investment portfolio and persist
for five months after portfolio formation. (Data on each stock’s monthly breadth portfolio
assignments are available on the second author’s website.)
This finding may be consistent with the lay theory recounted by Lewis (1989): “The first
thing you learn on the trading floor is that when large numbers of people are after the same
commodity, be it a stock, a bond, or a job, the commodity quickly becomes overvalued.” In other
words, ownership breadth measures popularity among noise traders who are able to move prices.
Indeed, the breadth measure we adopt from CHS is essentially a measure of breadth among retail
investors in China, since retail investors vastly outnumber institutions in the market. Portfolios
formed on equal-weighted breadth change among only retail investors have returns that are
nearly identical to portfolios formed on equal-weighted total breadth change. Lewis is silent on
when a commodity becomes popular and therefore overvalued. We find that equal-weighted
retail breadth change’s contemporaneous correlation with a stock’s return is negative. Therefore,
retail investors may be causing misvaluation by leaning against price movements and delaying
full price adjustment to fundamental news.
As we put more weight on sophisticated investors in our breadth measure, the results
change. When we redefine total breadth so that investors are weighted by their lagged stock
3 There were no equity derivatives prior to the end of 2005. From 2005 to 2007, eleven Shanghai Stock Exchange
companies (out of over 800 total listed companies) were allowed to issue put warrants. See Xiong and Yu
(forthcoming) for more details on these warrants.
3