NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SIZE ANOMALIES IN U.S. BANK STOCK RETURNS:
A FISCAL EXPLANATION
Priyank Gandhi
Hanno Lustig
Working Paper 16553
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16553
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2010
The authors thank the editors, Cam Harvey and Ken Singleton, as well as the associate editor and several
referees for excellent suggestions. The authors also thank Viral Acharya, Martin Bodenstein, Markus
Brunnermeier, John Campbell, John Cochrane, Ron Feldman, Cesare Fracassi, Etienne Gagnon, Mark
Garmaise, Amit Goyal, Mark Grinblatt, Jennifer Huang, John Krainer, Arvind Krishnamurthy, David
Laibson, Jonathan Parker, Lasse Pedersen, Andrea Raffo, Richard Roll, Jan Schneider, Martin Schneider,
Clemens Sialm, Rob Vishny, Skander Vandenheuvel, and Baolian Wang for many for detailed and
helpful comments, as well as seminar participants at University of Texas at Austin, Chicago Booth,
New York University Stern, Harvard Economics, the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, the Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Society for Economic Dynamics 2010 Annual Meeting in Montreal,
and the 2010 Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics for detailed and helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Priyank Gandhi and Hanno Lustig. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Size Anomalies in U.S. Bank Stock Returns: A Fiscal Explanation
Priyank Gandhi and Hanno Lustig
NBER Working Paper No. 16553
November 2010, Revised November 2014
JEL No. G01,G12
ABSTRACT
The largest commercial bank stocks, ranked by total size of the balance sheet, have significantly lower
risk-adjusted returns than small- and medium-sized bank stocks, even though large banks are significantly
more levered. We uncover a size factor in the component of bank returns that is orthogonal to the standard
risk factors, including small-minus-big, which has the right covariance with bank returns to explain
the average risk-adjusted returns. This factor measures size-dependent exposure to bank-specific tail
risk. These findings are consistent with government guarantees that protect shareholders of large banks,
but not small banks, in disaster states.
Priyank Gandhi
University of California at Los Angeles
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095
gandhip@ucla.edu
Hanno Lustig
UCLA Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C413
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
hlustig@anderson.ucla.edu

Banks are different from nonfinancial firms in many ways. One of the most salient distinctions
is that banks are subject to bank runs during banking panics and crises, not just by depositors,
but also by other creditors (see Gorton and Metrick (2012) and Duffie (2010)). Because financial
crises are high marginal utility states for the average investor, the expected return on bank stocks
should be especially sensitive to variation in the anticipated financial disaster recovery rates of
bank shareholders related to bank size, the regulatory regime, implicit government guarantees, and
other characteristics. For example, if a bank is deemed too big to fail, the expected return on
its stock is lower in equilibrium than that of smaller banks holding the exact same assets in their
portfolio because the government absorbs some of the large bank’s tail risk. We find evidence that
thepricingofbank-specifictailriskinthestockmarketdependsonallofthesebankcharacteristics.
To explore the asset pricing implications of financial disasters, our paper studies historical bank
stock returns in the U.S. We find that there is a size effect in bank stock returns that is different
fromthemarketcapitalizationeffectsthathavebeendocumentedinnonfinancialstockreturns(see
Banz (1981) and many others). All else equal, a 100% increase in a bank’s book value lowers its
annual return by 2.23% per annum. For nonfinancial stocks, there is no similar relation between
book value and returns (Berk (1997)).
These return differences cannot be imputed to differences in standard risk exposure. A long
position in the stock portfolio of the largest commercial banks, measured by deciles of total book
value, and a short position in the stock portfolio of the smallest banks underperforms an equally
risky portfolio of all (nonbank) stocks and bonds by more than 7% per annum. The average alphas
are small but positive for commercial banks in the first five deciles and then decrease for the largest
banks in the top three deciles.
Small banks differ from large banks in many ways, but these differences should not lead to
differences in average risk-adjusted returns on bank portfolios unless there is bank-specific tail risk
thatispricedbutnotspannedbythetradedreturnsonotherstocksinthesample. Wefindevidence
of such a risk factor in bank stock returns: the second principal component of the risk-adjusted
returns on size-sorted portfolios of commercial banks is a size factor that has exactly the right
covariance with the portfolio returns to account for most of this pricing anomaly. By construction,
this size factor is orthogonal to the stock and bond risk factors.
This highly levered size portfolio, determined by the second principal component, which goes
longinsmallbankstocksandshortinlargebankstocks,losesanaverageof61centsduringNational
Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) recessions per dollar invested at the start, after hedging out
exposure to standard stock and bond risk. We attribute the cyclical banking size factor in the data
to size-dependent differences in the perceived shareholder recovery rates on these bank portfolios
during financial disasters.
In a version of the Barro (2006), Rietz (1988), and Longstaff and Piazzesi (2004) asset pricing
model with a time-varying probability of rare events, developed by Gabaix (2012), Wachter (2013),
Gourio (2008), financial disasters that disproportionately impact bank cash flows contribute an
additional bank-specific risk factor. These rare events are priced into the expected returns on
2

portfolios of banks, but are not fully spanned by the returns on other assets in a small sample.
A general equilibrium version of our model can match the average alphas in a sample without
disasters if the financial disaster recovery rate is 35 cents higher for large banks, in line with the
failure rate of banks in the lowest decile during the latest crisis.
Historically, the probability of a financial disaster increases during recessions. Because of the
size-contingent nature of the recovery rate for bank stockholders in the case of a financial disaster,
the variation in the probability of a financial disaster generates a common business cycle factor in
the normal risk-adjusted returns of size-sorted bank stock portfolios; the loadings of bank stock
portfolio returns on this size factor are determined by the recovery rates and hence by size. Small
banks have positive loadings while large banks have negative loadings. As the probability of a
financial disaster increases, the expected return gap between small and large banks grows.
In the U.S., shareholder recovery rates for banks depend on size. During financial disasters,
large banks fare much better, even though they are more levered than their smaller counterparts.
A total of 30% of publicly traded commercial banks in the first size decile were delisted in 2009 but
there were no delistings in the last decile.
Why study the effect of bailouts on bank equity? The anticipation of future bailouts of bond-
holders and other creditors always benefits shareholders (see Kareken and Wallace (1978)) ex ante.
Furthermore, during a crisis, there may be massive uncertainty about the resolution regime, espe-
cially for large financial institutions. As a result, government guarantees will inevitably tend to
benefit shareholders ex post as well. Clearly, the U.S. government and regulators are willing to let
small banks fail, but not large banks. Acharya and Yorulmazer (2008) point out that bailouts may
beexpostefficientifasufficientlylargefractionofbanksisimpacted. Ofcourse, exante, onecould
have expected that the government would wipe out shareholders of large financial institutions in
the case of a bailout. Our evidence suggests that this is not what market participants expect.
Government guarantees essentially grant stockholders of large banks a menu of path-dependent
putoptionsthatcanonlybeexercisedafterlargedeclinesinabroadindexofstocks. Thisessentially
reducesthenegativeco-skewnessoflargebankstockreturns,butnotofsmallbanks. Inoursample,
largebankstockreturnsareindeedlessnegativelyskewedandfeaturelessco-skewness,eventhough
the Harvey and Siddique (2000) skewness factors constructed from nonfinancial stocks cannot fully
account for the variation in average returns on size-sorted bank portfolios.
To back out the implicit financial tail risk premium or discount charged by the shareholders
of commercial banks, we multiply the loadings on the size factor by its risk price. The implicit
insurance provided against financial disaster risk lowers the expected equity return for the largest
U.S.commercialbanksby1.97%, buttheadditionalexposuretobank-specifictailriskincreasesthe
expected return on the smallest bank stocks by 2.85%, compared to a portfolio of nonbank stocks
and bonds with the same standard risk characteristics. The largest banks have an average market
capitalization of $140 billion in 2005 dollars. For the largest commercial banks, this amounts to an
annual savings of $2.76 billion per bank. The market imposes large financial tail risk ”subsidies”
(”taxes”) on large (small) bank stocks compared to a portfolio of stocks and bonds with the same
3