NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EXTENSIVE MARGIN OF EXPORTING PRODUCTS:
A FIRM-LEVEL ANALYSIS
Costas Arkolakis
Sharat Ganapati
Marc-Andreas Muendler
Working Paper 16641
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16641
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2010
We thank the editor Virgiliu Midrigan and two anonymous referees. We are grateful to Hiau Looi
Kee and Marcelo Olarreaga for sharing augmented UNCTAD TRAINS data on non-tariff
measures and detailed explanations. We benefitted from helpful comments and discussions by
David Atkin, Andrew Bernard, Lorenzo Caliendo, Thomas Chaney, Arnaud Costinot, Don Davis,
Gilles Duranton, Jon Eaton, Elhanan Helpman, Gordon Hanson, Sam Kortum, Giovanni Maggi,
Kalina Manova, Marc Melitz, Peter Neary, Jim Rauch, Veronica Rappaport, Steve Redding, Kim
Ruhl, Peter Schott, Daniel Trefler and Jon Vogel as well as several seminar and conference
participants. Oana Hirakawa, Olga Timoshenko and Bingyu Zhang provided excellent research
assistance. Muendler and Arkolakis acknowledge NSF support (SES-0550699 and SES-0921673)
and support from the Yale University High Performance Computing Center with gratitude. An
Online Supplement is available at econ.ucsd.edu/muendler/papers/abs/braxpmkt. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Costas Arkolakis, Sharat Ganapati, and Marc-Andreas Muendler. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Extensive Margin of Exporting Products: A Firm-level Analysis
Costas Arkolakis, Sharat Ganapati, and Marc-Andreas Muendler
NBER Working Paper No. 16641
December 2010, Revised July 2020
JEL No. F12,F14,L11
ABSTRACT
To quantify trade frictions, we examine multi-product exporters. We build a flexible general
equilibrium model and estimate market entry costs using Brazilian firm-product-destination data
under rich demand and market-access cost shocks. Our estimates show that additional products
farther from a firm’s core competency come at higher production costs, but there are substantive
economies of scope in market-access costs. Market-access costs differ across destinations, falling
more rapidly in scope at nearby regions and at destinations with fewer non-tariff barriers. We
evaluate a counterfactual scenario that harmonizes market-access costs across destinations and
find global welfare gains similar to eliminating all current tariffs.
Costas Arkolakis Marc-Andreas Muendler
Department of Economics Department of Economics, 0508
Yale University, 28 Hillhouse Avenue University of California, San Diego
P.O. Box 208268 9500 Gilman Drive
New Haven, CT 06520-8268 La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER and NBER
costas.arkolakis@yale.edu muendler@ucsd.edu
Sharat Ganapati
Georgetown University
Edward B. Bunn, S.J. Intercultural Center
37th and O Streets, NW
Washington, DC 20057
and CESifo
sganapati@gmail.com
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w16641

Trade frictions shape the pattern of trade, the transmission of macroeconomic conditions,
and their aggregate consequences in international trade and open-economy macroeconomics.
Researchtendstocharacterizetradefrictionswithicebergtransportcostsandad-valoremtariffs,
especiallywhenconsideringaggregatetradedata(e.g.Arkolakis,CostinotandRodr´ıguez-Clare
2012). Drawing on firm and firm-destination data, researchers have recently opened up the
black box of market access costs, which deter firms from export market entry (Das, Roberts
andTybout2007,Moxnes2010,Eaton,KortumandKramarz2011,Allen2014,Chaney2014).
This literature typically measures the importance of fixed or sunk costs beyond variable trade
costs, focusing on firm entry into exporting and abstracting from policy. We use firm-product-
destinationdatatouncovertheprecisenatureofthesemarketaccesscosts,focusingonboththe
firms’exportmarketentryandtheirnewproductentry. Toproducemarket-accesscostestimates
ofpolicyrelevance,wetiecostcomponentstonon-tariffpolicyinstruments.
We build a framework of multi-product exporters that generalizes earlier models and offers
a flexible setup to rigorously measure the relevance of market-access costs for exporter-product
presence in foreign markets. We base our framework on novel regularities, using detailed in-
formation on the entry and sales of Brazilian exporters and their individual products by foreign
destination. We structurally estimate the framework and relate market access cost estimates to
observed policy-driven non-tariff measures (NTMs) as well as geography and product-related
barriers, which have proven elusive objects for rigorous quantification to date. NTMs are ar-
guably as important for trade openness as are tariffs, they are prominent in trade negotiations,
andtheyareinstrumentsintradeconflicts.1 Basedonourestimatesweevaluateacounterfactual
scenariothatharmonizesmarket-accesscostsacrossexportdestinationstotheirobservedglobal
minimaandfindwelfaregainssimilartoeliminatingallcurrenttariffs.
OurframeworkextendsthemonopolisticcompetitionmodelofMelitz(2003)byembedding
a multi-product setup into a conventional constant elasticity of substitution (CES) demand sys-
tem. We model within-firm product heterogeneity with two key mechanisms. First, we assume
1Niu et al. (2018, Table 6) estimate for a sample of 97 countries that in 1997 the ad-valorem equivalent of
NTMsusedtoweaklyexceedimporttariffsinabout56percentofHS-6productlinesbutby2015NTMssurpassed
tariffsin73percentofHS-6products. Forcomprehensivepolicyreportsonnon-tariffmeasuresseeOECD(2005),
UNCTAD (2010), WTO (2012). Recent trade agreements between the EU and other countries, including CETA
withCanadaortheEU-MercosurAssociationAgreement,prominentlyaddressnon-tariffbarrierssuchascustoms
procedures, technical regulations, and standards. While the most recent trade accord between the United States,
MexicoandCanada(USMCA)doesnotalterconventionalnon-tariffmeasures, itintroduceslaborstandardsasa
noveltypeofNTM.ThethreepriorU.S.agreementsfrom2012withPanama,ColombiaandSouthKoreaplaced
particularimportanceonthereductionofconventionalnon-tariffbarriers.Chinafrequentlyusesnon-tariffmeasures
suchassafetyandenvironmentalstandards,atpresentforexampletorestrictagriculturalexportsfromCanadaand
coalfromAustralia. WhiletariffsareaprominentinstrumentinrecentU.S.tradedisputes,theUnitedStatesisalso
usingcrucialnon-tariffmeasuresinitsdisputeswithChina, suchastheso-calledEntityListthatimposesexport
licensingrequirementsonspecificforeignbusinessesandpersons.
1

as in Eckel and Neary (2010, henceforth EN) that a firm faces declining efficiency in supply-
ing additional products that are farther from its core competency. Second, we introduce local
product appeal shocks, extending firm-destination heterogeneity as in Eaton, Kortum and Kra-
marz (2011) to the product-destination level. Product appeal shocks allow us to nest a version
of the Bernard, Redding and Schott (2011, henceforth BRS) model that attributes within-firm
product heterogeneity to local demand shocks. In our framework, the firm faces two extensive
margins and one intensive margin: it elects its presence at export destinations at one extensive
margin,itchoosesitsexporterscope(thenumberofproducts)ineachdestinationatanotherex-
tensivemargin,andsetsthepricesforeachindividualproductineachdestinationattheintensive
margin.2
Weconsiderthreetypesofcosts. First,thereareproduct-specificproductioncostsatthefirm
level similar to EN (core competency). Second, there are variable trade costs (shipping costs in
theformoficebergtradecostsandad-valoremtariffs),whichvarywithsalesbutdonotdepend
ontheexporter’sscope. Bothproductioncostsandvariabletradecostsdetertradeatallmargins.
Third, to capture the specificities of non-tariff barriers for market access, we consider a flexible
schedule of fixed exporting costs by firm, product, and destination market, generalizing the
firm-destination level exporting costs in Chaney (2008). This market-access cost schedule can
vary by firm-product and accommodates the possible cases of economies and diseconomies of
scope.3 The market-access cost schedule affects only the two extensive margins: a firm’s entry
into a destination with the first product and its exporter scope there. The first exported item to
a particular destination may face higher entry costs than a subsequent item. Examples of such
barriersincludethefinancialcostandtimerequiredforbothpaperworkandbordercompliance,
sanitaryandphytosanitaryaswellasothertechnicalregulationsthatcanaffectapprovalofafirst
exportproductdifferentlyfromsubsequentproducts,andpriceorquantitycontrolmeasureswith
differentialimportance.
Toquantifythistheory,wedocumentindividualproductsalesandexporterscopeusingfirm-
product-destination data from Brazil, a typical exporter country close to the median in exports
per capita in 2000. We then characterize the nature of market-access costs at the microeco-
nomic level, so we can subsequently conduct adequate aggregate simulations. We elicit three
main facts. First, within firms and destinations, we look at sales by product. Wide-scope ex-
portersselllargeamountsoftheirtop-sellingproducts. Moreover,theysellconsiderablysmaller
2Ourproduct-levelapproachthusdiffersfromfirm-levelresearch,includingArkolakis(2010),inthatwegive
substance to market-access costs and directly estimate these costs from product entry and product sales. The
parametrizationofourestimationmodelfullyneststheArkolakis(2010)marketpenetrationcosts.
3Seminal references on economies of scope are Panzar and Willig (1977) and (1981). Formally, there are
economiesofscopeforsalesxandy oftwoproductsifthecostfunctionsatisfiesC(x+y) < C(x)+C(y),that
isifthecostfunctionissubadditive.
2