NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DIFFERENCES OF OPINION AND INTERNATIONAL EQUITY MARKETS
Bernard Dumas
Karen K. Lewis
Emilio Osambela
Working Paper 16726
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16726
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2011
For valuable suggestions, we thank Geert Bekaert, Urban Jermann, Leonid Kogan, Stavros
Panageas, Anna Pavlova, Raman Uppal, Frank Warnock, Wei Xiong, and three anonymous
referees. We are also grateful for comments from participants at presentations given at the
University of Pennsylvania Wharton School, HEC Lausanne, the CEPR Fourth Annual Workshop
on Global Interdependence at the European University Institute, the 8th Annual Swiss Doctoral
Workshop in Finance at Gerzensee, the NBER meeting of International Finance and
Macroeconomics, Princeton University, Carnegie Mellon University, the Adam Smith Asset Pricing
Conference at the Oxford-Man Institute, the American Finance Association annual meeting,
University of Houston, the 10th Annual Darden International Finance Conference, University of
Southern California, McGill University, Cornell University, the Society for Economic Dynamics
annual meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank at Dallas, University of Calgary, University of Texas at
Dallas, Rutgers University, and the Federal Reserve Board. We thank Frank Warnock and Stephanie
Curcuru for advice with reconstructing the US net equity purchases data, Ivan Shaliastovich for the
forecast variance data, and Xiang Fang for excellent research assistance. Dumas and Osambela
gratefully acknowledge the financial support from NCCR FINRISK of the Swiss National Science
Foundation. Dumas is also grateful for the hospitality of Collegio Carlo Alberto, and for the
support from: the INSEAD research fund, BI Norwegian Business School, and the AXA Chair in
Socioeconomic Risks at the University of Torino. Lewis acknowledges funding from the National Science
Foundation and the Wharton-SMU Research Center with thanks. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Bernard Dumas, Karen K. Lewis, and Emilio Osambela. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Differences of Opinion and International Equity Markets
Bernard Dumas, Karen K. Lewis, and Emilio Osambela
NBER Working Paper No. 16726
January 2011, Revised May 2016
JEL No. F3,G11,G12,G15
ABSTRACT
We develop an international financial market model in which domestic and foreign residents
differ in their beliefs about the information content in public signals. We determine how
informational advantages by domestic investors in the interpretation of home public signals
impact equity markets. We evaluate the ability of our model to generate four international finance
anomalies: (i) the co-movement of returns and capital flows; (ii) home-equity preference; (iii) the
dependence of firm returns on home and foreign factors; and (iv) abnormal returns around foreign
firm cross- listing in the home market. Their relationships with empirical differences-of-opinion
proxies are consistent with the model.
Bernard Dumas Emilio Osambela
INSEAD Tepper School of Business
boulevard de Constance Carnegie Mellon University
77305 Fontainebleau Cedex 5000 Forbes Avenue
FRANCE Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER osambela@cmu.edu
bernard.dumas@insead.edu
Karen K. Lewis
Department of Finance, Wharton School
2300 SHDH
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
lewisk@wharton.upenn.edu

“In almost all models of economic theory, behavioral di¤erences among consumers are attributed to
di¤erences in preferences or in the information they possess. In real life, di¤erences in consumer behavior
are often attributed to varying intelligence and ability to process information. Agents reading the same
morning newspapers with the same stock price lists will interpret the information di¤erently.”
Ariel Rubinstein (1993) cited by Kandel and Pearson (1995).
How do di¤erences in interpreting the same information a¤ect …nancial markets? This question
is at the core of a growing Di¤erence-of-Opinion (hereafter DOO) literature. While di¤ering opinions
may exist between agents in any market, international markets provide a natural place to study their
e¤ects. Evidence of …nancial market segmentation across countries has been documented extensively,
with di¤erent perceptions across those countries often cited as a source. Perhaps people of di¤erent
countries harbor di¤erent opinions that a¤ect their ability to process information relevant to the
analysis of economies other than their own. As such, the international …nancial market may be
viewed as a natural laboratory for analyzing the e¤ects of di¤ering opinions.
In this paper, therefore, we propose a fully dynamic DOO model based upon international dif-
ferences in perceptions about economic information, incorporating the equilibrium consumption of
utility-maximizing investors. We assume that home investors are better at understanding home sig-
nals, and, as such, are rational about home information. However, investor groups in both countries
misinterpret the information about the other country’s prospective growth and are, therefore, equally
rational or irrational. We call this new feature “foreign sentiment.”
The information assumption captures the idea that, while foreigners may see home information as
wellashomeresidentsdo,theydonotknowhowtointerpretit. Theassumptionmaybemotivated(in
an unmodeled way) in at least three di¤erent ways, all stemming from the hypothesis that investors
start history with priors that ignore the relationships (i.e., correlations) between the signals and the
growth rates, and gradually discover them as data comes in. First, it could be that home investors
have had a longer time to study the relationship. From this perspective, it may be taking foreigners
a longer time to learn how to interpret the home signal and, if so, our model is analyzing a long
1

transitional time period. Second, foreigners may simply have chosen not to become informed about
the signal because they have viewed home investment as too risky in the past and consider becoming
informed too costly.1 Third, foreign investors may not be able to learn the same information as
home residents.2 The assumption can also be viewed as a natural extension of the Merton (1987)
“investor-recognition”hypothesis, to which we add the explicit modelling of information processing.3
In Section 1, we review the empirical evidence found in the extant literature that supports the DOO
hypothesis.
To highlight the e¤ects of DOO, we embed our information processing in a two-country model
that is otherwise as stylized and parsimonious as possible. Each country has an output process
with an unobserved conditional mean that can be inferred from observable outputs and signals, each
generated by subjective Brownian motions. Moreover, markets are complete and all information is
public. Investors in each country have an identical set of …ve assets that complete the market: a risk-
free asset, two equities with payo¤s in the output process in each country, and two futures contracts
withpayo¤smarkedtosignalinnovations. Themannerinwhichinformationisprocessedbyinvestors
is modelled in Section 2 and the equilibrium is calculated in Section 3.
We then ask to what extent our model can produce international empirical regularities related
to asset pricing, portfolio choices and capital ‡ows. For that purpose, we gather data, described
in Section 4.1, to re-estimate standard empirical relationships in the literature, allowing comparison
with simulated data from our model. After examining the implications of the model and parameter
values for some traditional moments of asset prices, capital ‡ows, output and consumption (Section
4), we evaluate the e¤ects of DOO on four known empirical regularities. Two of these relationships
have been found at the country level (Section 5). The …rst of these empirical regularities is the
positiverelationshipbetweenforeigncapitalin‡owsandhomestockreturns,sometimescalled“return-
1For example, Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2009) show in a noisy-rational-expectations model that, when
investors are endowed with a small home information advantage, they choose not to learn what foreigners know.
2Acemoglu,Chernozhukov,andYildiz(2015)showthatwhenagentsareuncertainabouttheconditionaldistribution,
even a small amount of uncertainty can lead to signi…cant di¤erences in long-run beliefs.
3On the investor-recognition hypothesis, see also the empirical work of Lehavy and Sloan (2008), and Richardson,
Sloan and You (2012).
2