NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAPITAL-MARKET EFFECTS OF SECURITIES REGULATION:
PRIOR CONDITIONS, IMPLEMENTATION, AND ENFORCEMENT
Hans B. Christensen
Luzi Hail
Christian Leuz
Working Paper 16737
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16737
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2011
This paper previously circulated as "Capital-Market Effects of Securities Regulation: The Role of
Implementation and Enforcement." We appreciate the helpful comments of Cindy Alexander,
Sudipta Basu, Allan Bester, Utpal Bhattacharya, Luca Enriques, Michael Erkens, Matt Gentzkow,
Chris Hansen, Alexander Hellgardt, Emir Kamenica, Zachary Kaplan, Andrew Karolyi (editor),
Daniel Paravisini, Jesse Shapiro, Andrei Shleifer, Jerry Zimmerman, two anonymous referees,
and workshop participants at the 2011 Conference on Empirical Legal Studies, 2011 NBER
Corporate Finance program meeting, 2010 PECA Conference, Bocconi University, University of
Chicago, Chinese University of Hong Kong, University of Colorado Boulder, Copenhagen
Business School, HEC, INSEAD, University of Manchester, University of Michigan, MIT,
University of North Carolina, University of Rochester, Stockholm School of Economics, Temple
University, University of Texas at Dallas, Tilburg University, Vienna University of Business and
Economics, and University of Zurich. We thank several technical partners at PwC’s European
offices as well as several CESR members and supervisory authorities for providing institutional
information, in particular Mike Birch, Oliver Burkart, Jan Fedders, and Bernd Roese. We thank
Philip Jacobs, Laszlo Jakab, Maria Kamenetsky, Jeff Lam, Frank Li, Elton Lor, Russell Ruch,
and Michelle Waymire for their excellent research assistance. Christian Leuz gratefully
acknowledges financial support by the Sondheimer Family Charitable Foundation and the
Business and Public Policy Faculty Research Fund. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2011 by Hans B. Christensen, Luzi Hail, and Christian Leuz. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Capital-Market Effects of Securities Regulation: Prior Conditions, Implementation, and Enforcement
Hans B. Christensen, Luzi Hail, and Christian Leuz
NBER Working Paper No. 16737
January 2011, Revised April 2016
JEL No. F36,G12,G14,G15,G38,K22,M41,M48
ABSTRACT
We examine the capital-market effects of changes in securities regulation in the European Union
(EU) aimed at reducing market abuse and increasing transparency. To estimate causal effects for
the population of EU firms, we exploit that for plausibly exogenous reasons, like national
legislative procedures, EU countries adopted these directives at different times. We find
significant increases in market liquidity, but the effects are stronger in countries with stricter
implementation and traditionally more stringent securities regulation. The findings suggest that
countries with initially weaker regulation do not catch up with stronger countries, and that
countries diverge more upon harmonizing regulation.
Hans B. Christensen Christian Leuz
University of Chicago Booth School of Business
Booth School of Business University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave 5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637 Chicago, IL 60637-1610
hans.christensen@chicagobooth.edu and NBER
cleuz@chicagobooth.edu
Luzi Hail
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
lhail@wharton.upenn.edu

The academic debate on the costs and benefits of securities regulation is controversial and the
empirical evidence so far is mixed (see, e.g., Coffee 1984; Easterbrook and Fischel 1984; Shleifer
2005; Zingales 2009; Leuz and Wysocki 2016). Only a few studies provide causal estimates for
the effects of securities regulation, but they are typically limited to specific market segments (e.g.,
smaller over-the-counter firms) or samples around a narrow size threshold (e.g., Greenstone, Oyer,
and Vissing-Jorgensen 2006; Iliev 2009). Moreover, prior studies typically focus on regulatory
changes in a single country. In these settings, the state of prior regulation, the new rules, their
implementation and their enforcement are essentially a bundle and difficult to separate.
In this paper, we exploit major changes in securities regulation in the EU to provide causal
estimates for the capital-market effects in a large population of EU firms as well as evidence on
how these effects differ by prior regulatory conditions, implementation, and enforcement.
The EU setting offers several unique advantages. First, changes in securities regulation are
enacted in the form of EU-wide directives. Member states need to implement directives within a
predetermined and relatively short time period, resulting in country-specific entry-into-force dates
that are spread over two to three years. The variation in effective dates is plausibly exogenous
within this narrow implementation window, for instance, due to differences in countries’
legislative processes. Second, as EU directives apply to all member states, the regulatory act itself
is held constant across countries, but its transposition (i.e., the process by which EU member states
implement EU directives into national law), the design of supervision, the penalties for violations,
and the actual supervision are left to the EU member states. This variation across countries allows
us to analyze the role of implementation and enforcement separately from the rule change. Third,
the EU setting comprises countries with different regulatory histories, which lets us analyze the
interaction between a country’s prior regulatory conditions and the newly introduced rules.
1!

Specifically, we study the capital-market effects of two EU directives that contain central
elements of securities regulation: the Market Abuse Directive (MAD) concerns insider trading and
market manipulation, and the Transparency Directive (TPD) addresses corporate reporting and
disclosure. Both types of regulations are intended to reduce adverse selection in capital markets.
Given this regulatory intention, we focus our analysis on stock market liquidity. An extensive
body of theory links market liquidity to the magnitude of information asymmetry and adverse
selection in markets (e.g., Copeland and Galai 1983; Glosten and Milgrom 1985; Kyle 1985;
Easley and O’Hara 1987). Furthermore, a primary purpose of securities markets is to provide
liquidity to market participants, and securities regulation is frequently justified with expected
improvements in market liquidity (e.g., Lamfalussy 2000; Enriques and Gatti 2008). Liquidity
also has desirable features from a research design perspective: it can be measured over relatively
short intervals and is “less anticipatory” in nature than other economic constructs (e.g., firm value
or cost of capital). We need both features to exploit the staggered introduction of the directives.
At the same time, improvements in liquidity due to reduced adverse selection should also manifest
in a lower cost of capital, higher market valuations, and improved market efficiency (e.g., Amihud,
Mendelson, and Pedersen 2005). Thus, liquidity effects have broader capital-market implications.
Following Daske et al. (2008) and Lang, Lins, and Maffett (2012), we combine four
individual proxies for information asymmetry and illiquidity (i.e., bid-ask spreads, price impact,
zero returns, and total trading costs) by way of factor analysis to measure our construct of market
liquidity. We estimate quarterly panel regressions with calendar-quarter fixed effects for a large
sample of EU firms over a 10-year window around the two directives. The identification of the
regulatory effects comes solely from within-EU variation in the effective dates of the two
directives. To further tighten identification, we also estimate regressions adding country-specific
linear and quadratic time trends to the model. In addition, we estimate the regulatory effects of the
2!