NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES AGGREGATED RETURNS DISCLOSURE INCREASE PORTFOLIO RISK-TAKING?
John Beshears
James J. Choi
David Laibson
Brigitte C. Madrian
Working Paper 16868
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16868
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2011
This paper was formerly titled "Can psychological aggregation manipulations affect portfolio risk-taking?
Evidence from a framed field experiment." This research was made possible by generous grants from
the FINRA Investor Education Foundation, the National Institute on Aging (grant P01-AG005842),
the Pershing Square Fund for Research in the Foundations of Human Behavior, and the Social Security
Administration (grant 10-P-98363-1-05 to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the
SSA Retirement Research Consortium). We are grateful for the research assistance of Chris Clayton,
Ben Hebert, Nathan Hipsman, Josh Hurwitz, Brendan Price, Gwendolyn Reynolds, Sean Wang, and
Eric Zwick. We have benefited from the comments of Shlomo Benartzi, Peter Bossaerts, Arie Kapteyn,
Andy Lo, Michaela Pagel, Jan Potters, Richard Thaler, and seminar audiences at Arizona State University,
Bentley College, Maastricht, NYU, Tilburg, UCLA, University of Amsterdam, UT Dallas, University
of Mannheim, Wharton, Yale, the Experimental Finance conference, the Annual Conference in Behavioral
Economics, and the NBER. The findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors
and do not represent the views of FINRA, NIA, the Pershing Square Foundation, SSA, any agency
of the Federal Government, or NBER. Comments should be directed to the authors. The FINRA Investor
Education Foundation, formerly known as the NASD Investor Education Foundation, supports innovative
research and educational projects that give investors the tools and information they need to better understand
the markets and the basic principles of saving and investing. For details about grant programs and
other new initiatives of the Foundation, visit www.finrafoundation.org.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by John Beshears, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Aggregated Returns Disclosure Increase Portfolio Risk-Taking?
John Beshears, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian
NBER Working Paper No. 16868
March 2011, Revised February 2015
JEL No. D14,G11
ABSTRACT
Many previous experiments have found that participants invest more in risky assets if they (i) see their
returns less frequently, (ii) see portfolio-level returns (rather than individual asset-by-asset returns),
or (iii) see long-horizon (rather than one-year) historical asset class return distributions. In contrast,
we find that such information aggregation treatments do not increase equity allocations in an experiment
where—unlike previous experiments—participants invest in real mutual funds over the course of one
year. In a follow-up experiment, we start with the classic Gneezy and Potters (1997) experimental
design and modify it step-by-step to move closer to the design of our first experiment. Using this identification
strategy, we show that previously documented aggregation effects are not robust to (i) changes in the
distribution of the risky asset’s returns and (ii) the introduction of a multi-day delay between the initial
portfolio choice and the realization of returns.
John Beshears David Laibson
Harvard Business School Department of Economics
Baker Library 439 Littauer M-12
Soldiers Field Harvard University
Boston, MA 02163 Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER and NBER
jbeshears@hbs.edu dlaibson@gmail.com
James J. Choi Brigitte C. Madrian
Yale School of Management Harvard Kennedy School
165 Whitney Avenue 79 JFK Street
P.O. Box 208200 Cambridge, MA 02138
New Haven, CT 06520-8200 and NBER
and NBER Brigitte_Madrian@Harvard.edu
james.choi@yale.edu

A series of experiments has found that participants are more willing to invest in risky
assets with positive expected returns if they receive information on aggregated returns rather
than on individual component returns. Information aggregation along various dimensions
produces this effect: (i) reporting long-horizon portfolio returns at infrequent intervals rather than
short-horizon returns every period (Gneezy and Potters, 1997; Thaler et al., 1997; Gneezy,
Kapteyn, and Potters, 2003; Bellemare et al., 2005; Haigh and List, 2006; Sutter, 2007; Langer
and Weber, 2008; Fellner and Sutter, 2009; Erikson and Kvaløy, 2010a, 2010b; van der Heijden
et al., 2012), (ii) reporting portfolio-level returns rather than returns for each individual asset
separately (Anagol and Gamble, 2013), or (iii) reporting historical long-horizon return
distributions of asset classes rather than historical one-year return distributions of asset classes
(Benartzi and Thaler, 1999).1
These results are predicted by myopic loss aversion (Benartzi and Thaler, 1995)—the
combination of loss aversion (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979) and mental accounting (Kahneman
and Tversky, 1984; Thaler, 1985, 1990, 1999)—if aggregation frames encourage participants to
integrate multiple gamble outcomes into a single mental account.2 When positive-expected-value
gambles are not perfectly correlated, the sum of their outcomes is usually less likely to be a loss
than is each outcome individually.3 Thus, integrating multiple gambles into a single mental
account makes them more attractive to a loss-averse individual than if each gamble occupied its
own separate mental account.
The strength and consistency of the experimental results constitute compelling evidence
that information aggregation can increase risk-taking. In this paper, we consider a related but
separate question: Would a financial institution increase the portfolio risk-taking of its clients if
it started disclosing returns at a more aggregated level? Numerous authors have extrapolated
from the existing experimental literature to suggest that the answer to this question is “yes.”4
1 Guiso (2009) examines another aggregation manipulation that we do not test in this paper. He finds that asking
subjects about their labor income risk before offering a hypothetical lottery makes them more likely to accept the
lottery.
2 Loss-averse agents derive utility and disutility directly from gains and losses, and the disutility of a loss is greater
than the utility of a gain of equivalent magnitude. Agents engage in mental accounting when they evaluate outcomes
within a subset of their wealth portfolio—the “mental account”—in isolation from outcomes outside the mental
account.
3 Aggregating gambles does not decrease the probability of an overall loss for all return distributions, but the loss
probability does decrease, for example, when the aggregated gambles are drawn from the same normal distribution.
4
For example, Thaler et al. (1997) write: “Decisions made by employees covered by such [defined contribution
pension] plans may vary considerably depending on how their investment opportunities are described and the
1

However, the typical investment environment differs in many ways from the laboratory
environment of previous experiments. For example, the experiments to date have been conducted
over the course of one short laboratory session, while the typical investment horizon is many
years. Most previous experiments have used laboratory assets whose return distributions differ
from the return distributions of typical financial assets. Previous experimenters have had their
participants’ undivided attention, along with complete control over information flows during the
experiment, whereas aggregation manipulations by a single financial institution in a typical
investment environment must contend with background information flows and inattention. These
and other differences may blunt the effect of aggregation manipulations on portfolio choices
outside the laboratory.
We conducted an experiment that comes closer to simulating a typical investment
environment. We recruited 597 participants from the general U.S. adult population to participate
in a year-long study. Each participant allocated $325 among four real mutual funds that cover the
U.S. equity, international equity, U.S. bond, and U.S. money market asset classes.5 Participants
were free to reallocate their portfolio throughout the year, just as if they were making real
investments in these mutual funds. We paid each participant whatever the $325 would have been
worth at the end of the year if the money had been invested according to his or her choices. The
large per-participant payment ensured that participants remained interested in their experimental
portfolio through the end of a one-year experiment.
We randomly varied the extent of information aggregation along four dimensions. The
first treatment dimension varied how frequently participants saw their returns by paying half of
participants to view their weekly returns on our study website once per week and paying the
other half to view their biannual returns on our website once every six months. We paid
participants to view their returns on our website rather than simply emailing them their returns
manner and frequency with which they receive feedback on their returns.” Gneezy and Potters (1997) write:
“Manipulating the evaluation period of prospective clients could be a useful marketing strategy for fund managers.”
Haigh and List (2005) write: “[I]nstitutions may have the ability to influence asset prices through changes in their
information provisioning policies.”
5 Haigh and List (2005) find that professional futures and options traders respond to aggregation manipulations over
individual gambles whose maximum possible gain is $10 and maximum possible loss is $4, so any null results that
we find are probably not due to our portfolio stakes being too low.
2