NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHAT EXPLAINS THE LAGGED INVESTMENT EFFECT?
Janice C. Eberly
Sergio Rebelo
Nicolas Vincent
Working Paper 16889
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16889
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2011
We thank Nick Bloom for helpful discussions on the estimation algorithm used in this paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Janice C. Eberly, Sergio Rebelo, and Nicolas Vincent. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What Explains the Lagged Investment Effect?
Janice C. Eberly, Sergio Rebelo, and Nicolas Vincent
NBER Working Paper No. 16889
March 2011, Revised February 2012
JEL No. E2
ABSTRACT
The best predictor of current investment at the firm level is lagged investment. This lagged-investment
effect is empirically more important than the cash-flow and Q effects combined. We show that the
specification of investment adjustment costs proposed by Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005)
predicts the presence of a lagged-investment effect and that a generalized version of their model is
consistent with the behavior of firm-level data from Compustat.
Janice C. Eberly Nicolas Vincent
Northwestern University HEC Montreal
Department of Finance Montreal, Quebec
Kellogg School of Management Canada
2001 Sheridan Road nicolas.vincent@hec.ca
Evanston, IL 60208
eberly@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Sergio Rebelo
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
Department of Finance
Leverone Hall
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
s-rebelo@northwestern.edu

1. Introduction
Lagged investment is a much better predictor of investment than Tobin’s Q and
cash flow combined. While this fact has been recognized in empirical work on
investment, it has mostly been viewed as an inconvenience. Hayahi’s (1982) re-
sult that investment should depend only on Tobin’s Q placed Q at the center
of the empirical investment literature. The potential role of financial frictions
or other deviations from Hayashi’s framework motivated the subsequent work on
the cash-flow e§ect found in the data.1 While much progress has been made in
understanding the role of Q and cash flow in investment regressions, an important
question remains: what explains the lagged-investment e§ect?
In this paper we first document the importance and robustness of the lagged-
investmente§ectinfirm-levelCompustatdata. Wethenusethesedatatoestimate
the investment adjustment-cost model proposed by Christiano, Eichenbaum, and
Evans (2005) (henceforth CEE). This specification was designed to make the im-
pulse response of investment to monetary policy shocks generated by DSGE mod-
els consistent with the impulse response estimated using vector auto-regressions.
It has since become standard in the DSGE literature.2
We show analytically that the CEE model predicts the presence of a lagged-
investment e§ect in addition to cash-flow and Q e§ects.3 Moreover, regression
coe¢cients obtained from our model-generated data are similar in magnitude to
empirical estimates. We also find that a generalized version of CEE does surpris-
ingly well at explaining the patterns of persistence, volatility, and comovement
1See Hubbard (1998) for a survey of the empirical literature on investment.
2Examplesofpapersthatusethisadjustment-costspecificationincludeFernández-Villaverde
and Rubio-Ramírez (2004), Smets and Wouters (2007), Justiniano and Primiceri (2008), Del
Negro and Schorfheide (2009), and Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010).
3Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1998) raise the possibility that the highly significant lagged-
investment e§ect in their data could be generated by a di§erent adjustment-cost formulation.
1

observed in firm-level data.
Our paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the data and
document the presence of a lagged-investment e§ect. In Section 3 we show an-
alytically that a linearized version of the CEE model predicts the presence of a
lagged-investment e§ect. We then discuss a generalized version of the model that
we use in our estimation. Section 4 presents our estimation results and discusses
the model’s implications for investment regressions. Section 5 concludes.
2. The lagged-investment e§ect
In this section we describe our data set and use it to document the importance of
lagged investment as a predictor of current investment. We also summarize some
key features of the data.
We use a balanced panel of Compustat firms with annual data for the period
1981-2003. We use a balanced panel because the time dimension of the data is im-
portant in identifying the dynamics of the model. The sample includes 776 firms
and roughly 14,000 firm-year observations. We focus our analysis on the large
firms in our dataset, defined as those in the top quartile of firms sorted by size of
the capital stock in 1981. In the beginning of the sample, the top quartile of firms
represents 30 percent of aggregate private non-residential investment and 40 per-
cent of corporate non-residential investment.4 This focus on large firms coupled
with the fact that the balanced panel selects for more stable firms means that we
can reasonably abstract from any financing frictions which might be present for
smaller firms. We use data for the four variables present in our model: invest-
ment in property, plant, and equipment, the physical capital stock, Q, and cash
4Despite our focus on the largest firms, there remains considerable size heterogeneity within
thatgroup: thetime-seriesaverageofthecapitalstockrangesfrom116to239,225milliondollars
across the 194 firms.
2