NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RETURN PREDICTABILITY IN THE TREASURY MARKET:
REAL RATES, INFLATION, AND LIQUIDITY
Carolin E. Pflueger
Luis M. Viceira
Working Paper 16892
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16892
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2011
We thank Tom Powers and Haibo Jiang for excellent research assistance. We are grateful to John
Campbell, Kent Daniel, Graig Fantuzzi, Peter Feldhutter, Michael Fleming, Josh Gottlieb, Robin
Greenwood, Arvind Krishnamurthy, George Pennacchi, Michael Pond, Matthew Richardson, Josephine
Smith, Jeremy Stein, to seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute 2011, the Econometric
Society Winter Meeting 2011, the Federal Reserve Board, the European Central Bank, the New York
Federal Reserve, the Foster School of Business at the U. of Washington, the HBS-Harvard Economics
Finance Lunch and the HBS Finance Research Day for helpful comments and suggestions. We are
also grateful to Martin Duffell and Anna Christie from the U.K. Debt Management Office for their
help providing us with U.K. bond data. This material is based upon work supported by the Harvard
Business School Research Funding. This paper was previously circulated under the title "An Empirical
Decomposition of Risk and Liquidity in Nominal and Inflation-Indexed Government Bonds". The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Carolin E. Pflueger and Luis M. Viceira. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Return Predictability in the Treasury Market: Real Rates, Inflation, and Liquidity
Carolin E. Pflueger and Luis M. Viceira
NBER Working Paper No. 16892
March 2011, Revised October 2013
JEL No. G12
ABSTRACT
Estimating the liquidity differential between inflation-indexed and nominal bond yields, we separately
test for time-varying real rate risk premia, inflation risk premia, and liquidity premia in U.S. and U.K.
bond markets. We find strong, model independent evidence that real rate risk premia and inflation
risk premia contribute to nominal bond excess return predictability to quantitatively similar degrees.
The estimated liquidity premium between U.S. inflation-indexed and nominal yields is systematic,
ranges from 30 bps in 2005 to over 150 bps during 2008-2009, and contributes to return predictability
in inflation-indexed bonds. We find no evidence that bond supply shocks generate return predictability.
Carolin E. Pflueger
Sauder School of Business
University of British Columbia
2053 Main Mall
Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z2
Canada
carolin.pflueger@sauder.ubc.ca
Luis M. Viceira
George E. Bates Professor
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 367
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
lviceira@hbs.edu

There is wide consensus among financial economists that returns on nominal U.S. Treasury
bondsinexcessofTreasurybillsarepredictableatdifferentinvestmenthorizons. Predictorvariables
include forward rates (Fama and Bliss, 1987), the slope of the yield curve (Campbell and Shiller,
1991), and a linear combination of forward rates (Cochrane and Piazzesi, 2005).
There is however an ongoing discussion about what drives this predictability. We contribute
to this discussion by conducting a joint empirical analysis of the sources of excess bond return
predictability in nominal and inflation-indexed bonds in the U.S. and the U.K. Specifically, we
provide evidence that both time-varying inflation risk premia and time-varying real interest rate
risk premia are quantitatively important in explaining time variation in the expected excess return
on nominal bonds.
The question whether expected excess returns of inflation-indexed bonds are time-varying is
important on its own. It remains relatively unexplored, partly due to the short history of U.S.
inflation-indexed bonds (Campbell, Shiller, and Viceira, 2009). We contribute to the emerging
research on inflation-indexed bonds by examining and distinguishing among three potential sources
of excess return predictability in inflation-indexed bonds: time-varying real interest rate risk, time-
varying liquidity risk, and market segmentation. Our work differs from recent work on inflation-
indexed bond return predictability by Campbell, Sunderam, and Viceira (2013) and Pflueger and
Viceira (2011) in that it finds and corrects for an economically significant liquidity risk premium,
which otherwise would likely distort estimates of real rate and inflation risk premia.
Novel and unique to our work is the finding that a liquidity component in breakeven inflation,
or the spread between nominal and inflation-indexed bond yields of similar maturity, predicts the
return differential between nominal and inflation-indexed bonds due to liquidity. The estimated
U.S. return differential due to liquidity exhibits a significantly positive stock market CAPM beta,
suggesting that U.S. TIPS investors bear systematic liquidity risk and should be compensated in
terms of a positive return premium. While the return differential due to liquidity is not directly
1

tradable, this result is relevant to investors who may differ in terms of their exposure to liquidity
crises.
Research in financial economics has proposed several theories to explain predictability in nom-
inal excess bond returns. One hypothesis is that excess return predictability results from time
variation in the aggregate price of risk. Building on the habit preferences model of Campbell and
Cochrane (1999), Wachter (2006) shows that a model with time-varying real interest rates can
generate nominal bond excess return predictability.
Second, excess return predictability could result from time variation in expected aggregate
consumption growth or its volatility. The long-run consumption risk model of Bansal and Yaron
(2004) and Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2010) emphasizes this possibility. Bansal and Shaliastovich
(2013) show that this, combined with time-varying inflation volatility, can explain nominal bond
predictability.
Ifexcessbondreturnpredictabilityisentirelyduetotime-varyinghabitorlong-runconsumption
risk, then excess returns of real bonds should be predictable, since prices of both real and nominal
government bonds change with the economy-wide real interest rate. Prices of nominal, but not
real, government bonds also vary with expected inflation, so excess returns on nominal bonds over
real bonds should not be predictable.
A third hypothesis is that the nominal nature of bonds is an important source of time-varying
risk premia. In this case, the wedge between nominal and real bond returns should be predictable.
Time-varying inflation risk premia are an important source of bond risks in Buraschi and Jiltsov
(2005), Piazzesi and Schneider (2007), Gabaix (2012), Bansal and Shaliastovich (2013), and Camp-
bell, Sunderam, and Viceira (2013).
We use an empirically flexible approach to estimate the liquidity differential between inflation-
indexed and nominal bond yields. We regress breakeven onto bond market liquidity proxies while
2