NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DISSECTING THE EFFECT OF CREDIT SUPPLY ON TRADE:
EVIDENCE FROM MATCHED CREDIT-EXPORT DATA
Daniel Paravisini
Veronica Rappoport
Philipp Schnabl
Daniel Wolfenzon
Working Paper 16975
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16975
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2011
We are grateful to Mitchell Canta, Paul Castillo, Roberto Chang, Raj Iyer, Sebnem Kalemni-Ozcan,
Manuel Luy Molinie, Manju Puri, Marco Vega, and David Weinstein for helpful advice and discus-
sions. We thank Diego Cisneros, Sergio Correia, Jorge Mogrovejo, Jorge Olcese, Javier Poggi, Adriana
Valenzuela, and Lucciano Villacorta for outstanding help with the data. Juanita Gonzalez provided
excellent research assistance. We thank participants at Arizona State University, CEMFI, Columbia
University, Federal Reserve Bank of Peru, European Econometric Society, Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia, Fordham University, Harvard University, INSEAD, Instituto de Empresa, IPA Confer-
ence on Entrepreneurship and SME, LSE, MIT Sloan, NBER ITI, NBER IFM, NBER CF, Ohio State
University, Rothschild Caesarea Center, Royal Economic Society, Royal Holloway University London,
SED 2011, Stanford University, Tel Aviv University, Universidad Catolica de Chile, UC Davis, Uni-
versity of Michigan Ross School of Business, University of Minnesota Carlson School of Management,
and World Bank seminars, workshops, and conferences for helpful comments. Paravisini, Rappoport,
and Wolfenzon thank Jerome A. Chazen Institute of International Business for financial support. All
errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Daniel Paravisini, Veronica Rappoport, Philipp Schnabl, and Daniel Wolfenzon. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Dissecting the Effect of Credit Supply on Trade: Evidence from Matched Credit-Export Data
Daniel Paravisini, Veronica Rappoport, Philipp Schnabl, and Daniel Wolfenzon
NBER Working Paper No. 16975
April 2011, Revised August 2014
JEL No. F10,F30,F40,G15,G21,G32
ABSTRACT
We estimate the elasticity of exports to credit using matched customs and firm-level bank credit data
from Peru. To account for non-credit determinants of exports, we compare changes in exports of the
same product and to the same destination by firms borrowing from banks differentially affected by
capital-flow reversals during the 2008 financial crisis. We find that credit shocks affect the intensive
margin of exports, but have no significant impact on entry or exit of firms to new product and destination
markets. Our results suggest that credit shortages reduce exports through raising the variable cost of
production, rather than the cost of financing sunk entry investments.
Daniel Paravisini Philipp Schnabl
Department of Finance Stern School of Business
London School of Economics New York University
Houghton Street 44 West Fourth Street
London WC2A 2AE New York, NY 10012
d.paravisini@lse.ac.uk and NBER
schnabl@stern.nyu.edu
Veronica Rappoport
London School of Economics Daniel Wolfenzon
v.e.rappoport@lse.ac.uk Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall, Room 808
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
dw2382@columbia.edu

1 Introduction
The role of banks in the amplification of real economic fluctuations has been debated by
policymakers and academics since the Great Depression (Friedman and Schwarz (1963),
Bernanke (1983)). The basic premise is that funding shocks to banks during economic
downturns increase the real cost of financial intermediation and reduce borrowers’ access
to credit and output. Through this channel, international commercial banks have been
showntorepresentanimportantsourceofcontagionduringperiodsofinternationalcapital
reversals.1 Although there is now a large body of evidence suggesting that negative bank
credit shocks may affect economic activity, the magnitude of the sensitivity of output to
bank funding shocks is unknown, and the underlying economic mechanisms behind this
sensitivity are less understood.2
In this paper, we study the effect of bank credit shocks on the export behavior of
Peruvian firms during the 2008 financial crisis. The reversal of capital flows during the
crisis negatively affected the foreign funding of banks operating in Peru. Using this
funding shortage as a source of variation for credit supply, we document that banks that
relied heavily on foreign funding before the financial crisis significantly reduced the supply
of credit when capital flows reversed in 2008. Then, we exploit the disaggregated nature
of the export data to compare the export growth of the same product and to the same
destination across firms that borrowed from banks that were differentially affected by
funding shocks. Comparing exports within narrowly defined markets is key to overcoming
concerns that unobserved export demand and input market shocks might be correlated
with the credit supply shock.
Our main result is that negative shocks to credit reduce the volume of exports for
firms that continue exporting to a given product-destination market (i.e., the intensive
margin) and has no impact on the probability that a firm exits or enters new product
and destination markets. This result provides new insights into the relationship between
exporters’ production function and their use of credit. Consider, for example, the bench-
mark model of trade with sunk entry costs.3 In such a framework, a negative credit shock
affects the entry margin, but once the initial investment is paid, credit fluctuations do not
affect the intensive margin of exports. Yet, we find positive elasticities on the intensive
margin, suggesting that credit shocks affect the variable cost of exporting. This would be
the case, for example, if banks financed exporters’ working capital, as in Feenstra et al.
(2014) and Manova (2013). By increasing the unit cost of production, adverse credit
conditions reduce the equilibrium size and profitability of exports.
The novelty of our empirical estimation relies on the uniqueness of the data. First,
1See Schnabl (2012), Cetorelli and Goldberg (2011), Puri et al. (2011), and IMF (2009).
2For early evidence see, for example, Bernanke and Blinder (1992), Kashyap et al. (1994), Kashyap
and Stein (2000), and Peek and Rosengren (2000). And, more recently, Chodorow-Reich (2014), Iyer
et al. (2014), and Jimenez et al. (2011).
3See, among others, Baldwin and Krugman (1989), Roberts and Tybout (1999), and Melitz (2003).
Motivated by the important fixed costs involved in entering a new market—i.e. setting up distribution
networks, marketing– Chaney (2005) develops a model where firms are liquidity constrained and must
pay an export entry cost. Participation in the export market is, as a result, suboptimal.
2

we observe outstanding credit for all Peruvian firms with each bank, as well as detailed
banks’ balance sheets. Then, rather than simply relying on the firm’s outstanding credit
level—which is an equilibrium outcome also determined by demand—we use a bank’s
dependence on foreign funding interacted with firms’ debt composition across banks to
construct an instrumental variable for firms’ exposure to credit supply shocks. And, sec-
ond, we use customs data, which include information on the identity of the exporting firm,
product, destination, mode of transportation, volume, price, and date of each shipment.
Using this information, we estimate regressions with a full set of product-destination-time
dummies to control for non-credit shocks, such as time-varying export demand, changes
in international prices, and input cost fluctuations. We find that both of these features
of our estimation approach are crucial: a naive estimation, without instrumenting for
credit supply and without accounting for non-credit shocks at the product-destination
level, results in substantial estimation bias that may lead to erroneous conclusions, both
qualitatively and quantitatively.
Our data and empirical approach allow us to obtain point-estimates of the elasticity of
different dimensions of the export activity to credit. On the intensive margin, we find that
a 10% reduction in the supply of credit reduces the volume of exports in the year after the
shock by 1.95%. We further show that firms adjust the intensive margin of exports in two
ways—by changing the frequency of shipments of a given product to a given destination
(with an elasticity of 0.10); and by adjusting the size of each shipment, with an elasticity
of 0.9 and 0.11 when size is measured by volume and value, respectively. On the extensive
margin, we find that credit shocks do not significantly affect the probability that a firm
exits or enters a given export market. We also find that the credit arrangements between
the exporter and the importer react to funding shocks to the exporting firm: after bank
credit supply declines, exporting firms firms partially substitute towards trade credit with
the importer. The magnitude of the effect is economically small: A 10% reduction in bank
lending triggers an increase of 0.2% in the fraction of the shipment paid in advanced by
the importer.4
This paper is related to a growing empirical literature that analyzes the role of credit
in export activities. One strand of this literature focuses on the link between access to
credit and the steady-state patterns of international trade and comparative advantages.5
Our paper focuses not on the static patterns of exports, but on the effect of a credit
shock on firms’ export performance. Our results are more closely related to the work that
analyzes the effects of credit disruptions on trade during the Great Trade Collapse of 2008
(see, for example, Bricongne et al. (2012), Bolton et al. (2011), Chor and Manova (2012),
and Levchenko et al. (2010)). Most of the studies are based on the comparison of exports
4This is consistent with the findings of Antras and Foley (2014), who also document stickiness in the
terms of the trade credit contracts between established trade partners during the 2008 financial crisis.
5Beck(2002)andManova(2013),forexample,lookatcross-countrydifferencesinfinancialconditions
and the resulting patterns of exports across industries. And, related to static models of trade with
heterogeneous firms and credit constraints, as in Chaney (2005), recent empirical literature has used
cross-sectional firm-level data to analyze the effect of credit constraints on firms’ participation in export
markets. See, forexample, Manovaetal.(2014), MinettiandZhu(2011), Muuˆls(2012)andBermanand
Hericourt (2010).
3