NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CROSS-BORDER MEDIA AND NATIONALISM:
EVIDENCE FROM SERBIAN RADIO IN CROATIA
Stefano DellaVigna
Ruben Enikolopov
Vera Mironova
Maria Petrova
Ekaterina Zhuravskaya
Working Paper 16989
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16989
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2011
Our special thanks go to Kristina Gulmac, Tihomir Zivic and to the University of Vukovar for the
invaluable help with the organization of the lab experiment. We are very grateful to Ben Olken for
providing the software necessary for ITM calculation. We also thank Bulat Gafarov, Roman Istomin,
Blazo Kazanegra, Andrey Korolev, Gleb Romanyuk, and Ruslan Sverchkov for excellent research
assistance. We thank Matthew Gentzkow, Irena Grosfeld, Ethan Kaplan, Fernanda Leite Lopez de
Leon, John Londregan, Tom Romer, John Schiemann, David Strömberg, and audiences at Columbia,
Harvard, IIES at the University of Stockholm, IMT Lucca, Princeton, Zurich, Paris School of Economics,
Stanford GSB, London School of Economics, UPF, Bocconi, the 8th Workshop on Media Economics,
the NBER Summer Institute in Political Economics, University of Maryland, and Hebrew University
for useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Stefano DellaVigna, Ruben Enikolopov, Vera Mironova, Maria Petrova, and Ekaterina
Zhuravskaya. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Cross-border media and nationalism: Evidence from Serbian radio in Croatia
Stefano DellaVigna, Ruben Enikolopov, Vera Mironova, Maria Petrova, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya
NBER Working Paper No. 16989
May 2011, Revised August 2013
JEL No. H41,H56,H77
ABSTRACT
How do nationalistic media affect animosity between ethnic groups? We consider one of Europe’s
deadliest conflicts since WWII: the Serbo-Croatian conflict. We show that, after a decade of peace,
cross-border nationalistic Serbian radio triggers ethnic hatred towards Serbs in Croatia. Mostly attracted
by non-political content, many Croats listen to Serbian public radio (intended for Serbs in Serbia)
whenever signal is available. As a result, the vote for extreme nationalist parties is higher, and ethnically
offensive graffiti are more common, in Croatian villages with Serbian radio reception. A laboratory
experiment confirms that Serbian radio exposure causes anti-Serbian sentiment among Croats.
Stefano DellaVigna Maria Petrova
University of California, Berkeley New Economic School
Department of Economics and Princeton University
549 Evans Hall #3880 petrova.ma@gmail.com
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER Ekaterina Zhuravskaya
sdellavi@econ.berkeley.edu Paris School of Economics
48 Bd Jourdan
Ruben Enikolopov 75014 Paris
Institute for Advanced Study France
and New Economic School ezhuravskaya@gmail.com
renikolopov@gmail.com
Vera Mironova
Department of Political Science
University of Maryland
vera-ge0@mail.ru

1. Introduction
Which factors fuel animosity between ethnic groups? What stands in the way of a
durable peace and cooperation between groups that were formerly at war? A substantial
literature has considered the importance of differences in income and resources, political
institutions, aid, and the history of relationships between ethnic groups, among other factors, as
reviewed in Blattman and Miguel (2010) and Jackson and Morelli (2011).
In this paper, we consider the impact of an understudied factor: how the exposure to
media intended to strengthen nationalistic identification of a particular ethnic group affects
nationalistic feelings of a rival group. As radio and television waves travel across political and
ethnic boundaries, ethnic groups often get exposed to nationalistic media of their rivals.
Oftentimes, such exposure occurs across borders, when neighboring ethnic groups share a
language, as is common for countries that formerly belonged to one larger entity, i.e., the
U.S.S.R, Yugoslavia, or Sudan. Such exposure also often occurs within countries when rival
ethnic and religious groups speak the same language. Examples range from Muslims and Hindus
in India to Basques and Spanish in Spain.
The effect of exposure to nationalistic content of a rival’s media is not a priori obvious.
On the one hand, it may trigger ethnic animosity, increasing the polarization of political views
(Glaeser and Sunstein 2008), and thus making future conflict more likely. An alternate
possibility is that such exposure may instead reduce informational asymmetries between groups
and alleviate ethnic tensions (Allport 1954). Finally, the cross-group impact of media may be
negligible, if people mostly consume media that support their own views (Sunstein, 2001;
Durante and Knight, 2012).
This paper examines the impact of cross-border media exposure on nationalistic behavior
in the aftermath of one of Europe’s deadliest conflicts since WWII, namely, the Serbo-Croatian
conflict in the 1991-95 Yugoslavian wars. The region of Croatia near the Serbian-Croatian
border was the site of a full-scale armed conflict between Serbs and Croats in 1991 and was
under Serbian occupation till 1995. The military operations of the Serbian-Croatian conflict
ended in 1995, and Slobodan Milošević—the former president of Serbia—was overthrown in
2000 and handed to the Hague International Criminal Tribunal. Still, in the following decade the
public media in Serbia has continued to promote Serbian nationalism. In particular, public radio
stations (i.e., radios of the Radio-Television of Serbia group, RTS, also known as Serbian
Broadcasting Corporation) operate with the official mission to strengthen Serbian national
identity (IREX 2010). This raises the question of the impact of the Serbian nationalistic radio on
nationalistic sentiment in Croatia, which we address in this paper.
The Serb-Croat case is a nearly ideal setting to study cross-group effects of media. The
signal of Serbian public radio intended for internal consumption inside Serbia reaches several,
but not all, villages in this region of Croatia. As Serbs and Croats speak the same language,
despite using different alphabets, Croats can fully understand the Serbian radio.1 We are able to
1 According to Greenberg (2004), the difference between Serbian and Croatian spoken language is similar in
1

narrow down the analysis of cross-group effects of media exposure to radio because it is the
primary media source in this area.
We focus on the region in Croatia neighboring the border with Serbia. We use detailed
village-level information on media reception, voting, and other nationalistic behavior to answer
two key questions: Do Croats actually listen to Serbian radio when it is available? If so, does
Serbian radio have any effect on nationalistic political views and attitudes towards Serbs?
Using a street survey of residents of Croatian villages located close to the Serbian border,
we find that the answer to the first question is positive. In areas where Serbian radio signal is
available for representative radio sets, 78% of respondents acknowledge that they listen to
Serbian radio occasionally. The high percentage of listeners of Serbian radio among Croats
stands in contrast with an extreme view of political polarization -- that consumers only listen to
media outlets that conform to their political beliefs -- and is consistent with more moderate
evidence of polarization in the US media (Gentzkow and Shapiro 2011). Both survey and
anecdotal evidence suggests that, in addition to a desire for alternative information, Croats tune
in to Serbian radio to listen to its non-political content, such as popular Serbian singers from the
times of Socialist Yugoslavia whose music is restricted in public spaces in Croatia, and in doing
so encounter also political content.2 This is consistent with the social psychology literature
suggesting that people choose media outlets broadcasting messages that disagree with their
priors either because of strong interest in a particular sub-set of a broadcasted content (Iyengar,
et al. 2008). It is also possible that Croatian listeners tune in to the Serbian radio to learn about
rival’s point of view to be able to defend better their own view point (Valentino et al. 2009).
Does Serbian radio trigger ethnic animosity and nationalistic behavior among Croats
who get exposed to it? We estimate the effect of Serbian radio on the propensity to vote for
extremist nationalistic parties as well as expressions of ethnic hatred, namely anti-Serbian
graffiti. Our identification strategy relies on variation in the availability of Serbian radio among
different villages in the border region.
We use two measures of availability of Serbian radio. As the first measure, we use hand-
collected data on actual availability of Serbian radios in 139 villages in the region adjacent to
Serbian border (our baseline sample), measured using an ordinary receiver. As the second
measure, we compute signal strength of Serbian radios using information on Serbian transmitters
and the topography of the region for all 417 villages in Croatia within 75 kilometers of the
Croatian-Serbian border (our extended sample). The two measures, which are positively
correlated, are complementary: the hand-collected measure captures fine variation in radio
reception which the signal strength calculations do not, but is affected by unavoidable errors in
hand measurement; the signal strength is available for a larger sample, but does not measure the
impact of non-topographic obstacles such as forests.
magnitude to the difference between British and American English.
2 A number of former Socialist Yugoslavian singers, popular among Croats, are banned from Croatia for political
reasons.
2