NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ILLIQUID BANKS, FINANCIAL STABILITY, AND INTEREST RATE POLICY
Douglas W. Diamond
Raghuram Rajan
Working Paper 16994
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16994
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2011
We thank the National Science Foundation and the Center for Research on Securities Prices at
Chicago Booth for research support. Rajan also thanks the Initiative on Global Markets at
Chicago Booth for research support. We benefited from comments from Guido Lorenzoni,
Monika Piazzesi (the editor), Tano Santos, José Scheinkman, the referees, and seminar
participants at the Harvard University , Princeton University, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond,
Stanford University, the University of Chicago, the American Economic Association meetings at
San Francisco in 2009, and the February 2009 Federal Reserve Bank New York conference on
Central Bank Liquidity Tools. An earlier version of this paper was titled “Illiquidity and Interest
Rate Policy.” The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Illiquid Banks, Financial Stability, and Interest Rate Policy
Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 16994
April 2011, Revised June 2020
JEL No. E4,E5,G2
ABSTRACT
Banks finance illiquid assets with demandable deposits, which discipline bankers but expose
them to damaging runs. Authorities may not want to stand by and watch banks collapse.
However, unconstrained direct bailouts undermine the disciplinary role of deposits. Moreover,
competition forces banks to promise depositors more, increasing intervention and making the
system worse off. By contrast, constrained central bank intervention to lower rates maintains
private discipline, while offsetting contractual rigidity. It may still lead banks to make excessive
liquidity promises. Anticipating this, central banks should raise rates in normal times to offset
distortions from reducing rates in adverse times.
Douglas W. Diamond
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
douglas.diamond@chicagobooth.edu
Raghuram Rajan
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
raghuram.rajan@ChicagoBooth.edu

Should central banks alter interest rates to deal with episodes of illiquidity and financial fragility?
For instance, Greenspan (2002) has argued that while the Federal Reserve cannot recognize or prevent
asset price booms, it can “mitigate the fallout when it occurs and, hopefully, ease the transition to the next
expansion.” Others have responded that by following an asymmetric interest rate policy – colloquially
known as the Greenspan put -- a central bank can engender the kind of behavior that makes booms and
busts more likely. In this paper, we ask why episodes of systemic financial sector illiquidity arise, why
private arrangements may be insufficient to alleviate them, how central bank intervention to alleviate
financial stress by lending to markets to reduce the short term real interest rate may be better than other
forms of intervention, and how even such intervention can create the potential for greater instability.
This paper takes as given a central bank that has developed the credibility to maintain price
stability, and therefore believes it has the room to stabilize (and enhance) real activity. We show that a
willingness to recapitalize banks directly at times of stress, will undermine the discipline induced by rigid
private capital structures – it is not just that what is ex post optimal is not ex ante optimal (e.g., Kydland
and Prescott (1977)), but worse, intervention can undermine private commitment and make the system
worse off. In this sense, undirected interest rate intervention, where the central bank lends to any solvent
bank that needs funds may be better, because it preserves the commitment induced by private contracts,
even while restoring flexibility to the system by bringing down rates in a way that private contracts
cannot achieve. Interest rate intervention to relieve stress may be better than the alternatives!
However, the central bank’s willingness to intervene when liquidity needs are high by pushing
down interest rates ex post does not just affect expectations of the real interest rate, but also encourages
banks to make commitments that increase the need for intervention – because banks and depositors do not
internalize the costs of interest rate intervention. Expectations of low real interest rates (colloquially the
belief the central bank will stay “low for long”) can increase the future need for low rates. To mitigate
this, the central bank may have to commit to push the interest rate above the natural equilibrium rate in
3

states where liquidity needs are low to offset the incentives created by its lowering them when needs are
high. Central banks may need credibility in a new direction. Let us elaborate.
Our paper studies the effects of policy interventions to alter interest rates in an economy where
short-term debt finances long term illiquid projects. Banks themselves borrow from risk-averse
households, who receive endowments every period. Households deposit their initial endowment in banks
in return for demandable deposit claims (throughout the paper, we focus on demand deposits, though any
form of overnight unsecured debt could be a close substitute). Competition for funds induces banks to
offer deposit contracts that maximize ex ante household utility. There is no uncertainty about the average
quality of a bank’s projects in our model. However, there is uncertainty about future household
endowments. This, coupled with the mismatch between the long gestation period for the projects and the
demandable nature of deposits, is the source of banking sector difficulties.
Once households have deposited their initial endowment, and projects have been started, some
households may have an unexpectedly high need to withdraw deposits. One possibility is that they suffer
an adverse shock to current endowment that causes them to want to run down financial assets to consume.
But another is that they anticipate significantly higher income or endowments in the future and want to
smooth consumption. Thus current adversity, as well as anticipated prosperity, can increase current
household demand for consumption goods substantially, a source of financial sector stress when
household claims on liquidity exceed available liquidity.
As households withdraw deposits to satisfy consumption needs, banks will have to call in loans to
long gestation projects in order to generate the resources to pay them. The real interest rate will rise to
equate the household demand for consumption goods and the supply of these goods from terminated
projects. Thus greater consumption demand will lead to higher real rates and more projects being
terminated. It also leads to lower bank net worth because the bank’s loans pay off only in the long run,
and thus fall in value as real interest rates rise, while the bank’s liabilities, that is demandable deposits, do
4