NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ARE THE SEEDS OF BAD GOVERNANCE SOWN IN GOOD TIMES?
Antoinette Schoar
Ebonya L. Washington
Working Paper 17061
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17061
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2011
We thank Yale’s Institution for Social and Policy Studies for financial support. We thank Martin Baker,
Martijn Cremers, Gary Gorton, Tim Guinnane, Naomi Laromeaux, Nagpurnanand Prabhala, Roberta
Romano, Andrei Shleifer, and participants at the MIT Sloan faculty lunch, MIT organizational economics
seminar, the CAF conference at the Indian School of Business, the finance seminar at UNC, University
of Washington and the Yale Law School’s Law and Economics seminar for helpful comments. All
mistakes are of course our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Antoinette Schoar and Ebonya L. Washington. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Are the Seeds of Bad Governance Sown in Good Times?
Antoinette Schoar and Ebonya L. Washington
NBER Working Paper No. 17061
May 2011, Revised October 2012
JEL No. G34
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the extent to which the corporate governance structure of a firm arises endogenously
in response to its performance. We demonstrate that following periods of abnormally good performance,
managers are more likely to call special meetings and to propose and pass governance measures that
are contrary to shareholder interests (based on IRRC classification). These results are driven primarily
by firms that are characterized as having poor governance according to either the GIM Index or the
proportion of activist shareholders. Following these special meetings, we find that the next quarter
performance of the firm is negative. Our results are consistent with an interpretation of shareholder
inattention to governance following good firm performance or a desire to reward management for
good past performance. Overall, our evidence seems more consistent with the former interpretation.
Antoinette Schoar
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-638
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
aschoar@mit.edu
Ebonya L. Washington
Yale University
Box 8264
37 Hillhouse, Room 36
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
ebonya.washington@yale.edu

1. Introduction
One of the classic debates in corporate finance revolves around the question of
whether firms’ governance structures arise optimally in response to competitive pressures
in the market for corporate control. The argument put forward by supporters of this view
is that competition for resources, especially capital, will force firms to improve their
governance structures in order to obtain better cost of capital. In their seminal paper,
Demsetz and Lehn (1985) argue that firms in which governance matters more for the cost
of capital will develop better governance structures in order to attract investors. Firms
whose valuations are not sensitive to governance structure will thus have poorer
governance. As a result, one should not expect a strong empirical relationship between
firm governance and performance in the cross section. On the other side of the debate are
proponents of the view that the market for corporate control does not function perfectly;
instead, entrenched managers shape the firm’s governance structure for their private
benefit. Examples of this view are Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1988); Lang and Stulz
(1994) and Yermack (1996). A related argument suggests that such opportunistic
behavior by managers is facilitated when shareholders are either too shortsighted or do
not pay enough attention to effectively impose governance pressures; see for example
Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001), and Yermack (1997). This second view of
governance would therefore suggest a positive relationship between better (for
shareholders) governance structures and firm performance.
A large empirical literature has examined the impact of governance on firm
performance. Many early papers struggled exactly with the omitted variable bias pointed
out by Demsetz and Lehn (1985) which implies that any correlation between governance
and performance in the cross section cannot be interpreted in a causal way. A number of
more recent papers have looked at exogenous variation to governance and found a strong
positive impact of improved governance on firm performance; see for example Bertrand
and Mullainathan (2002), Garvey and Hanka (1999), and Bhagat and Bolton (2008).
In the current paper we turn the question on its head: we investigate when and
how changes in governance provisions and CEO compensation come about.
Documenting how governance structures emerge is important for understanding whether
managers are able to entrench themselves over time. Specifically, we ask whether
governance changes are predicted by either abnormally good or bad firm performance. If
the main force shaping the governance provisions of firms is market pressure, we would
expect to see a tightening of governance in favor of shareholder rights after periods of
poor firm performance. However, we would not expect a worsening (or loosening) of
2

governance after good performance, since positive stock returns would provide
confirmation of the quality of the firm’s governance structure. On the other hand, if
managers’ preferences for entrenchment and weak oversight are a first order factor in
shaping the governance structure of firms, we would expect to see deterioration in
governance structures after periods of particularly good firm performance. The idea that
shareholder attention is limited and that shareholders pay closer attention to firms that are
performing poorly than those that are performing well has been previously proposed in
studies by Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001), Baker et al (2007), and Jenter and Kanaan
(2008).
Shareholders vote on changes to the governance provisions of a firm including the
CEO’s compensation in both routine annual and less-frequent special shareholder
meetings. While the timing of annual meetings is set well in advance, the occurrence and
timing of special meetings are at the discretion of management.1 Thus, using a panel of
shareholder meetings for 1500 S&P firms which were obtained from the Institutional
Shareholder Services (ISS), we first examine the endogeneity of the timing of special
meetings with respect to firm performance. We define abnormally good (bad)
performance as the extent to which the firm beats (falls short of) their predicted analysts’
earnings forecasts. Earnings surprises are defined as the absolute difference between the
analysts’ consensus forecast for the quarter and the realized quarterly earnings divided by
the forecast. We find that the mean positive surprise increases the probability of a special
meeting in the quarter by over five percent. In contrast, we find little or no impact of
negative earnings surprises. These results also hold if we use quarterly stock returns in
place of earnings surprises. Interestingly, when we decompose the returns into the
industry overall return and the idiosyncratic stock returns, the timing of special meetings
is correlated with both components but it seems more consistently affected by the firm
specific return. When repeating the analysis for earnings surprises before annual
meetings, we do not find any significant relationship. This is comforting since the timing
of annual meetings is exogenous and set more than a year in advance. We further present
evidence that the surprises are not endogenously caused by earnings manipulation
suggesting that managers are responding to, but not causing, these earnings surprises.
Secondly, we examine the relationship between abnormal earnings surprises and
the types of proposals included on the meeting agenda. We classify ballot propositions as
bad (good) governance items if the IRRC shareholder voting guidance officially
encourages shareholders to vote against (in favor of) these items. Examples of bad
governance proposals are the introduction of a dual class stock or poison pills, while
good proposals would eliminate these measures. We find that positive earnings surprises
increase the frequency with which management places bad governance items on the
ballot of these special meetings. These ballot items result in real changes to the quality of
corporate governance as measured by the GIM Index of Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick
(2003). We again find a strongly asymmetric effect: after periods of poor stock
performance, there is no increase in the number of pro-shareholder provisions that firms
1 Shareholders also have the option of calling for special meetings; however, de facto, this very rarely
happens (and does not happen in our data) since the transaction costs for shareholders are enormously high
in setting up a special meeting.
3