NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
POULTRY IN MOTION:
A STUDY OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE FINANCE PRACTICES
Pol Antràs
C. Fritz Foley
Working Paper 17091
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17091
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2011
The authors are very grateful to numerous employees at the anonymous firm that provided the data
and to Matthew Johnson for excellent research assistance. We also thank Kyle Bagwell, Mihir Desai,
James Hines, Kalina Manova, Francisco Pérez-González, Mitchell Petersen, Catherine Thomas, Tim
Schmidt-Eisenlohr, Andrei Shleifer, Bob Staiger, and seminar participants at the AEA meetings, Boston
University, Columbia, Duke, Harvard, LSE, Manneim, the NBER CF Program Meetings, the NBER
ITI Program Meetings, Nottingham, Oxford, and the University of Missouri for helpful comments.
Foley thanks the Division of Research of the Harvard Business School for financial support. Other
work also uses the phrase "Poultry in Motion," including the album by Hasil Adkins and the film "Chicken
Run." The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Pol Antràs and C. Fritz Foley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Poultry in Motion: A Study of International Trade Finance Practices
Pol Antràs and C. Fritz Foley
NBER Working Paper No. 17091
May 2011
JEL No. F1,G0,K12
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the financing terms that support international trade and sheds light on how and
why these arrangements affect trade. Using detailed transaction level data from a U.S. based exporter
of frozen and refrigerated food products, primarily poultry, it begins by describing broad patterns about
the use of alternative financing terms. These patterns help discipline a model in which the trade finance
mode is shaped by the risk that an importer defaults on an exporter and by the possibility that an exporter
does not deliver goods as specified in the contract. The empirical results indicate that transactions
are more likely to occur on cash in advance or letter of credit terms when the importer is located in
a country with weak contractual enforcement and in a country that is further from the exporter. Letters
of credit, however, are rarely used by the exporter. As an importer develops a relationship with the
exporter, transactions are less likely to occur on terms that require prepayment. During the recent crisis,
the exporter was more likely to demand cash in advance terms when transacting with new customers,
and customers that traded on cash in advance terms prior to the crisis disproportionately reduced their
purchases. These results can be rationalized by the model whenever (i) misbehavior on the part of
the exporter is of little concern to importers, and (ii) local banks in importing countries are typically
more effective than the exporter in pursuing financial claims against importers.
Pol Antràs
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge Street
Littauer Center 207
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
pantras@fas.harvard.edu
C. Fritz Foley
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
ffoley@hbs.edu

1 Introduction
Managers at …rms that engage in international trade must decide which …nancing terms to use in
theirtransactions. Anexportercanrequiretheimportertopayforgoodsbeforetheyareloadedfor
shipment, can allow the importer to pay at some time after the goods have arrived at their destina-
tion, or can use some form of bank intermediation such as a letter of credit. Alternative terms are
associatedwithdistinctrisksandcapitalrequirementsfortraders,andtheygiverisetocross-border
capital ‡ows and …nancial claims. Although similar claims arise for purely domestic transactions,
international transactions are unique because longer transportation times often increase working
capital requirements and variation in institutional context across countries introduces additional
considerations.1 How do cross-country di¤erences in contractual enforcement a¤ect the terms that
are selected and the prices that are charged in transactions that are …nanced in di¤erent ways?
Can the development of a relationship between traders mitigate concerns associated with weak
institutional environments? How did the manner in which trade is …nanced shape the impact of
shocks like the recent crisis on trade ‡ows? This paper sheds light on the relative use of di¤erent
kinds of …nancing terms and addresses these questions.
Oneofthemainchallengesinstudyingthe…nancingarrangementsusedtosupportinternational
trade is that detailed data on how di¤erent types of transactions are …nanced are not readily
available. Thispaperbeginsbypresentingsomebroadpatternsthatemergefromanalyzingdetailed
dataontheactivitiesofasingleU.S.-based…rmthatexportsfrozenandrefrigeratedfoodproducts,
primarily poultry. The data cover roughly $7 billion in sales to more than 140 countries over
the 1996-2009 period and contain comprehensive information on the …nancing terms used in each
transaction.
Three main facts emerge from this initial exploration. First, the most commonly used …nancing
terms do not involve direct …nancial intermediation by banks. They are cash in advance terms and
open account terms; these are used for 44.0% and 39.2% of the value of transactions, respectively.
Cash in advance terms require the importer to pay before goods are shipped and title is trans-
ferred. Open account terms allow a customer to pay a certain amount of time following receipt
of the goods. Over the sample period, 5.8% of the value of transactions occur on letter of credit
terms and 11.0% on documentary collection terms. Under both of these terms, banks intermediate
payments. In typical transactions …nanced with a letter of credit, a bank commits to pay for goods
on behalf of the importer, and this commitment is made before goods are shipped. Under the most
commonly used documentary collection terms, banks facilitate payments, but the exporter retains
thedocumentsgrantingtitletothegoodsuntiltheimporterpaystoobtainthemwhengoodsarrive
at the importer’s location. Foley, Johnson, and Lane (2010) describe these terms in detail.
The second stylized fact that emerges from the data is that the location of the importer has
1A substantial literature seeks to understand trade credit, or the …nancial relationships between …rms that have
supply relationships. Much of this work emphasizes the idea that …rms have access to better collateral or private
information as a consequence of interacting in product markets. Burkart and Ellingsen (2004), Cuñat (2007), Gian-
netti, Burkart, and Ellingsen (2011), Petersen and Rajan (1997), and Ng, Smith, and Smith (1999) represent recent
work in this …eld.
1

a large impact on the …nancing terms that are used. Sales to locations with weak contractual
enforcement are more likely to occur on cash in advance terms than sales to other locations. This
pattern holds for a variety of measures of contractual enforcement, and the di¤erences are large.
For example, 63.8% of exports to countries with a civil law legal origin occur on cash in advance
terms, but only 4.0% of exports to countries with a common law legal origin do. Survey evidence
suggests that these patterns are not unique to the …rm-speci…c data used in this paper.
The third main fact is that as the exporter establishes a relationship with an importer through
repeated interaction, transactions are less likely to occur on cash in advance terms. As the level of
cumulative transactions with a customer increases from values of less than $25,000 to more than $5
million, the share of transactions that occur on cash in advance terms falls from 60.3% to 10.9%.
These empirical patterns are used to motivate a model of how trade is …nanced. The mode
of …nancing chosen by …rms in the model is shaped by cross-country di¤erences in contractual
enforcement. In particular, there are two fundamental sources of contractual frictions: …rst, the
importer may default and not pay fully for goods it orders, and second, the exporter may not
produce and deliver goods as speci…ed. Trading partners choose to trade on cash in advance terms;
post shipment terms, which include documentary collection and open account terms; or letter of
credit terms. In post shipment term transactions, exporters expect lower revenues, relative to
those stated in the sales contract, when transacting with customers that are in environments where
contracts are enforced with a lower probability and in environments that are further away. Cash
in advance terms eliminate this default risk, but under these terms, importers might have concerns
about the quality of goods being shipped and are required to pay funding costs that might be high.
Finally, letters of credit reduce the problem of exporter misbehavior and also eliminate importer
default risk, but these instruments are associated with high bank fees.
The model identi…es a key condition under which exports to locations characterized by weak
contractual enforcement are more likely to occur on cash in advance or letter of credit terms as
opposed to other terms. Namely, this requires that local banks in the importing country are
better able than exporters to pursue …nancial claims against importers. This condition is plausible
given that such banks are likely to be familiar with and close to importers. Regardless of this
condition, the model predicts that the e¤ects of contractual enforcement on …nancing terms is
more pronounced for sales to customers located further away from the exporter. It also predicts
that, holding constant the volume of sales, prices should be set higher in post shipment term
transactions than in cash in advance transactions, especially for transactions with customers in
countries with weak contractual enforcement. The theory also indicates that the use of a letter of
creditisunlikelytobeoptimalwhenevertheexporter’sscopeformisbehaviorislimited, aplausible
scenario in the empirical setting considered.
In order to analyze the impact of the development of relationships between traders, a dynamic
extension of the theoretical framework considers the possibility that some fraction of importers is
trustworthy and honor a contract even when it is not enforced and the remaining fraction is not
always trustworthy. With a certain probability, these traders face a liquidity shock so they care
2