NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW DO MORTGAGE SUBSIDIES AFFECT HOME OWNERSHIP? EVIDENCE
FROM THE MID-CENTURY GI BILLS
Daniel K. Fetter
Working Paper 17166
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17166
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2011
For helpful comments at various points in this project, I am grateful to James Alm, Erica Field, Price
Fishback, Joshua Goodman, Eric Hilt, Richard Hornbeck, Gray Kimbrough, Erzo Luttmer, Robert
Margo, Patrick McEwan, Marianne Page, Rohini Pande, Ken Snowden, Susan Wachter, Eugene White,
Heidi Williams, and numerous seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Harvard,
Northwestern-Kellogg, Mathematica Policy Research, Rutgers, Stanford, UC-Davis, the University
of Maryland, UNC-Greensboro, UPenn-Wharton, Wellesley, the Spring 2011 meeting of the NBER
Development of the American Economy Program, and the September 2011 NBER-Universities Research
Conference. I am especially indebted to Edward Glaeser, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence Katz for
detailed feedback. I also gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Taubman Center for State
and Local Government, the Real Estate Academic Initiative, and the Harvard Graduate School of Arts
and Sciences. All errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Daniel K. Fetter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

How Do Mortgage Subsidies Affect Home Ownership? Evidence from the Mid-century GI
Bills
Daniel K. Fetter
NBER Working Paper No. 17166
June 2011, Revised August 2012
JEL No. N00,N22,N92,R00,R28
ABSTRACT
The largest 20th-century increase in U.S. home ownership occurred between 1940 and 1960, associated
largely with declining age at first ownership. I shed light on the contribution of coincident government
mortgage market interventions by examining home loan benefits granted under the World War II and
Korean War GI Bills. The impact of veterans' housing benefits on home ownership is positive for
young men, and declines with age. Veterans' benefits increased aggregate home ownership rates primarily
by shifting purchase earlier in life, explaining 7.4 percent of the overall 1940-60 increase and 25 percent
of the increase for affected cohorts. A rough extrapolation suggests that broader changes in mortgage
terms may explain 40 percent of the 1940-60 increase.
Daniel K. Fetter
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
dfetter@wellesley.edu

1 Introduction
The primary focus of federal housing policy over the last eighty years has been intervention in
mortgage markets. In part, the goal of these policies has been to extend home ownership to
marginal home buyers, and many observers have argued that the mortgage policies born of the
Great Depression and World War II are responsible for the dramatic transformation in United
States housing markets and home ownership in the mid-20th century.1 But surprisingly, neither
the effect of these policies on historical rates of home ownership, nor the set of factors driving
changesinhousingmarketsduringandafterWorldWarII,iswellunderstood. Therecentcrisisand
debateoverthegovernment’sroleinhousingfinancemakesevidenceonthesequestionsparticularly
timely.2
Oftheinterventionsthatbeganinthe1930’sand1940’s,themortgageinsuranceandguarantees
provided through the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) and Veterans Administration (VA)
were among the largest in scale. The establishment of these programs coincided with the most
striking changes in home ownership in the last century. Between 1940 and 1960, the rate of home
ownership increased sharply from 44 to 62 percent, as younger individuals became home owners at
unprecedented rates. The profile of home ownership by age was nearly linear up to age 60 in every
Census year from 1900 to 1940, but by 1960 had taken the concave shape that persists today.3
This paper sheds light on the role of these mortgage market interventions – and by extension,
on the role of changes in mortgage terms more broadly – by providing estimates of the contribution
of the VA home loan program to increased rates of home ownership. Past work, such as Jackson
(1985), Green and Wachter (2005), and Vigdor (2006), has discussed the potential role of the FHA
1Examples are Jackson (1985) and Schwartz (2010).
2Thespecifictypeofinterventiondiscussedhere–mortgageinsuranceandguarantees–remainscentraltohousing
policy. For example, at the end of Fiscal Year 2011, the amount of outstanding principal guaranteed by the Federal
Housing Administration was $1.097 trillion (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, 2011). Policies
meant to encourage home ownership are often based on the argument that it has social benefits; Haurin, Dietz and
Weinberg(2003)provideareviewoftheacademicliteratureonthisissue. Idonottakeupthisquestionhere,butthe
potentialforsuchspilloversisonemotivationforexaminingwhether,andhow,theseprogramsaffecthomeownership.
3Figure2depictsthechangingagestructureofownershipintheUnitedStatesoverthe20thcentury. Explaining
thechangeintheageprofileofownershiphasnotbeenthedirectfocusofearlierresearch,butAaron(1972)discusses
theparticularlylargeincreasesinhomeownershipforyoungeragegroupsoverthisperiod,Chevan(1989)showsthat
theageatwhichthemedianindividualinacohortbecameahomeownerfell,andCollinsandMargo(2001)notean
increase in the concavity of the age-ownership profile in their study of racial differences in home ownership over the
20th century.
1

and VA in explaining the observed changes in housing markets over the 20th century.4,5 However,
a number of other major changes over the same period could have driven the increase in home
ownership. The favorable tax treatment of owner-occupied housing became more important during
World War II as marginal tax rates rose (Aaron, 1972; Rosen and Rosen, 1980; Rosen, Rosen and
Holtz-Eakin, 1984). Rising real incomes and savings rates during World War II and afterwards
may have increased demand for housing (Chevan, 1989; Chambers, Garriga and Schlagenhauf,
2011); increased rates of family formation after the war may have done so as well.6 Decreased
transportation costs in the postwar era (Baum-Snow, 2007) may have increased home ownership
by lowering the cost of suburban residence.7 Finally, even if changes in housing finance played an
important role, the extent to which federal credit aids were themselves a major factor is an open
question, for which we lack rigorous quantitative estimates.
My empirical design attempts to hold these other factors constant, and, motivated by the
increased concavity of the age-home ownership profile, allows the estimated effects of terms on
home finance to vary with a person’s age.8 I use the home loan benefits provided to veterans
under the World War II and Korean War GI Bills as variation in the mortgage terms available
to an individual. Because of selection into military service during World War II and the Korean
War, direct comparisons of veterans to non-veterans are problematic.9 However, the smoothness
of home ownership rates in age motivates between-cohort comparisons in the spirit of a regression
discontinuity design; this variation is similar to that used in previous work on the GI Bill, such as
4An older literature focused on the effects of federal loan insurance on the supply of credit and the volume of
residential construction: examples include Break (1961), Grebler (1960), and Klaman (1961).
5Alargebodyofworkprovidesevidenceontheimpactofborrowingconstraintsonhomepurchaseinmorerecent
periods. Examples include Linneman and Wachter (1989), Duca and Rosenthal (1994), Haurin, Hendershott and
Wachter(1997),andLinnemanetal.(1997). ChiuriandJappelli(2003)compareage-ownershipprofilesacrosscoun-
triesandarguethatthetermsofmortgagefinance,anddown-paymentsinparticular,areanimportantdeterminant
of the distribution of home ownership across age groups.
6For detailed data series on savings rates, see Carter et al., eds (2006).
7Thismaybethecaseif,forexample,alowerpriceoflandmoredistantfromcitycentersfacilitatesconstruction
of larger, single-family detached dwellings, and for agency reasons these tend to be owner-occupied more often than
multi-family structures (Glaeser and Shapiro, 2003).
8Asdiscussed inSection3, heterogeneityof effectsby ageis apredictionof astandardlife-cycle model oftenure
choice, in which relaxing liquidity constraints may primarily serve to induce earlier home purchase.
9Notethatpositiveselectionintothemilitarydoesnotnecessarilyimplythatnaivecomparisonsofveteranstonon-
veterans would yield upwardly-biased estimates. For example, positively selected individuals may make investments
thatdelayfirsthomepurchase. Acomparisonofage-ownershipprofilesforcollegeandhighschoolgraduatessuggests
that over this period, college graduates were less likely to own early in life, and more likely to own later in life.
2