NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TRADE CREDIT CONTRACTS
Leora F. Klapper
Luc Laeven
Raghuram Rajan
Working Paper 17146
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17146
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2011
We thank PrimeRevenue for generously sharing the trade credit contract data, Alexander
Ljungqvist (the Editor), two anonymous referees, Stijn Claessens, Shane Maine, John Sculley,
and Chris Woodruff for useful comments or suggestions, and Teresa Molina and Douglas Randall
for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Leora F. Klapper, Luc Laeven, and Raghuram Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Trade Credit Contracts
Leora F. Klapper, Luc Laeven, and Raghuram Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 17146
June 2011, Revised June 2020
JEL No. G32
ABSTRACT
We employ a novel dataset on almost 30,000 trade credit contracts to describe the broad
characteristics of the parties that contract together and the key contractual terms of these
contracts. Whereas prior work has typically used information on only one side of the buyer-seller
transaction, this paper utilizes information on both, allowing for the first analysis of buyer-seller
pairs. An equally important distinction is that we have multiple contracts for the same buyer or
supplier firms, rather than a firm-average response, allowing for the correction of time-invariant
firm characteristics that might determine the choice of credit terms. We find that the largest and
most creditworthy buyers receive contracts with the longest maturities from smaller suppliers,
and that discounts for early payment tend to be offered to riskier buyers. (JEL G32)
Leora F. Klapper Raghuram Rajan
The World Bank Booth School of Business
1818 H Street, NW University of Chicago
Washington, DC 20433 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
lklapper@worldbank.org Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Luc Laeven raghuram.rajan@ChicagoBooth.edu
European Central Bank
Research Department
Sonnemannstrasse 20
Frankfurt am Main
GERMANY
Luc.Laeven@ecb.europa.eu

1. Introduction
Trade credit is an important source of external financing for firms of all sizes (Demirguc-
Kunt and Maksimovic, 2001). For instance, suppliers often offer working capital financing to
their buyers, some of whom may be small or credit constrained (McMillan and Woodruff, 1999;
and Marotta, 2005). Trade credit has also been shown to act as a substitute for bank credit during
periods of monetary tightening or financial crisis (see, for example, Calomiris et al., 1995; Choi
and Kim, 2005; and Love et al., 2007).
Trade credit, however, is not used for financing purposes alone. Trade credit, it has been
argued, is a way for a supplier to engage in price discrimination, giving favored or more
powerful clients longer terms (see, for example, Wilner, 2000; Fisman and Raturi, 2004; Van
Horen, 2005; and Giannetti, Burkart, and Ellingsen, 2011). Furthermore, trade credit may simply
be customary in an industry, with customs driven by economic rationales such as allowing
buyers time to assess the quality of the supplied goods (Lee and Stowe, 1993).
Studies have explored the supply and demand of trade credit around the world (for
instance, Petersen and Rajan, 1997; Johnson, McMillan and Woodruff, 2002; Boissay and Gropp,
2007; and Fabbri and Klapper, 2009). Yet, in part due to the lack of detailed contract-level data
on trade credit terms, little is known about how the contract terms of trade credit vary across
buyer and supplier characteristics. For example, what is the typical contract period of trade
credit? Which buyers receive longer net days (days before payment is due)? Which firms are
offered early payment discounts? Equally important, past studies have not been able to
investigate issues such as whether the relative bargaining power of buyers and suppliers matters
because they have not had access to data on both sides of the contract.
3

This paper addresses these questions using a unique database that includes contract
information for about 30,000 supplier transactions for 56 large buyers in the United States and
Europe. The data includes detailed information on contract terms: the contract size (the amount
in trade credit to spend in U.S. dollars), net days (days within which the buyer has to pay the
amount owed), discount days (days within which the buyer has to pay to get the full discount),
and the discount rate (the size of the discount if the amount is paid by the discount date).
What really sets our dataset apart from the earlier survey based work, however, is that our
data has bilateral contract information, allowing us to control both for buyer and supplier firm
characteristics and analyze both sides of the buyer-seller transaction, whereas earlier work only
analyzed one side of the buyer-seller transaction. An equally important advantage with respect to
previously used survey data is that we have multiple contracts for the same buyer and supplier
firms, rather than a firm-average response. This allows us to include firm fixed effects in our
empirical analysis, thereby correcting for time-invariant firm characteristics that might determine
the choice of credit terms.
The limitations of our data set are that the number of buyers is small (a total of 56), which
limits our analysis of buyer characteristics, and that we have relatively little information about
the sellers in our sample. For example, we do not have information on the industry of the seller.
Unfortunately, we have no way of getting more data. Also, because our buyers are mostly large
firms we are less likely to pick up the financing motive as strongly as in the earlier literature
(although we do have a mix of investment and non-investment grade buyers). The silver lining is
that this allows us to focus on other non-financing motives.
We start by summarizing typical trade credit contracts terms, such as number of discount
days, discount rate, and net days, and analyze how they relate to buyer and seller characteristics.
4