NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERNATIONAL RESERVES AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS
Kathryn M.E. Dominguez
Yuko Hashimoto
Takatoshi Ito
Working Paper 17362
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17362
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2011
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research, the IMF, or IMF policy. The research is partially funded by
the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) Grants-in-aid for Scientific Research (A) No.
20243014.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Kathryn M.E. Dominguez, Yuko Hashimoto, and Takatoshi Ito. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

International Reserves and the Global Financial Crisis
Kathryn M.E. Dominguez, Yuko Hashimoto, and Takatoshi Ito
NBER Working Paper No. 17362
August 2011, Revised July 2012
JEL No. F3,F31,F32,F33,F41
ABSTRACT
This study examines whether pre-crisis international reserve accumulations, as well as exchange rate
and reserve policy decisions made during the global financial crisis, can help to explain cross-country
differences in post-crisis economic performance. Our approach focuses not only on the total stock
of official reserves held by countries, but also on the decisions by governments to purchase or sell
reserve assets during the crisis period. We introduce new data made available through the IMF Special
Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS) Reserve Template, which allow us to distinguish interest income
and valuation changes in the stock of official reserves from the actively managed component of reserves.
We use this novel data to gauge how (and whether) reserve accumulation policies influenced the economic
and financial performance of countries during and after the global crisis. Our findings support the
view that higher reserve accumulations prior to the crisis are associated with higher post-crisis GDP
growth.
Kathryn M.E. Dominguez Takatoshi Ito
University of Michigan Graduate School of Economics
Department of Economics and Ford School University of Tokyo
Weill Hall 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku
735 South State Street Tokyo 113-0033
Ann Arbor, MI 48109 JAPAN
and NBER and NBER
kathrynd@umich.edu tito@e.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Yuko Hashimoto
Statistics Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington D.C., 20431
yhashimoto@imf.org
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17362

1. Introduction
The global financial crisis wreaked havoc on world markets and has led to major
economic dislocation around the world. Initially it was the developed countries that bore the
brunt of the crisis, but by mid-2008 the crisis was global; financing for emerging markets dried
up and credit spreads for emerging market debt rose dramatically, raising concerns about their
ability to refinance their debt. After the Lehman Brother’s collapse in September 2008, many
trade-oriented countries saw exports plunge leading to sharp contractions of GDP. Countries
with high levels of debt were also hard hit, with many countries forced to allow their currency to
depreciate and/or draw down their foreign currency reserves. The governments of countries with
exceptionally large banking sectors took over their liquidity-strapped banks, converting private
sector debts to public sector debts. Some countries were hit more strongly by the crisis
(especially in Central and Eastern Europe) while others, at least initially, appeared more
shielded. Many of these emerging market countries had accumulated impressive stocks of
international reserves prior to the global crisis. This paper examines whether these pre-crisis
international reserve accumulations, as well as exchange rate and reserve policy decisions made
during the crisis, can help to explain cross-country differences in post-crisis economic
performance.
We begin with an analysis of initial conditions in order to better understand the choices
countries faced when the global crisis struck. An important component of this analysis focuses
on pre-crisis international reserve accumulation. In the years since the regional crises in the
1990s a number of countries, especially in East Asia, were thought to have built up excessive
international reserve portfolios. If the main rationale for accumulating reserves was to provide
precautionary self-insurance, the global financial crisis would seem to be the ultimate vindication
for that strategy. Yet recent studies by Blanchard, Faruqee and Das (2010) and Aizenman and
Sun (2010) find that even countries with high levels of reserves were reluctant to use (or lose)
them. They find little evidence that reserves were important buffers to the crisis.
Our analysis reexamines the findings and interpretations in the literature about the role of
reserves during crises. First, we argue that the decision by governments not to deplete reserves
during the crisis does not necessarily provide evidence against the positive role for reserves in
self-insurance. Indeed, high reserve stocks prior to the crisis may have protected countries
against speculative attacks, which would require drawing down reserves, and which would have
otherwise occurred. Reserves in this context may be analogous to the lender of last resort
facilities in central banks. Second, our graphical analysis of country-by-country reserve changes
suggests that one has to be careful in defining the timing of crises, which are likely to differ
across countries. The range of currency and reserve defense strategies used by countries is lost in
1

the regressions reported in the current literature which generally use the same crisis timing for all
countries.
The derivation of optimal reserve levels has long been contentious. Recent experience
suggests that models have underestimated the threshold level of reserves after which risk
perceptions about a country rise non-linearly and dramatically. Further, the widely differing
levels of reserve stocks held by emerging countries indicate significant heterogeneity in desired
threshold levels (perhaps based on past experience during crises as Hashimoto and Ito (2007)
emphasize). More importantly, recent evidence suggests that once reserves fall below the
threshold, net new capital inflows abruptly end, leading to debt rollover problems and capital
flight. These capital flow reversals can, in turn, increase the pace of reserve depletion. South
Korea through the current crisis is a case in point. In 2008 there was concern that Korea’s total
external debt maturing over the coming year would exceed its level of international reserves.
Korean officials were also concerned about their losses due to the unwinding of currency hedges
for canceled export orders. In addition to depleting some of its reserves, Korean authorities opted
to draw on their swap line with the Fed in the midst of the crisis in order not to breach their
perceived threshold level of reserves.
Our approach focuses not only on the total stock of official reserves held by countries,
but also on the decisions by governments to purchase or sell reserve assets during the crisis
period. We introduce new data made available through the IMF Special Data Dissemination
Standard (SDDS) Reserve Template, which allow us to distinguish interest income and valuation
changes in the stock of official reserves from the actively managed component of reserves. We
use this novel data to gage how (and whether) reserve accumulation policies influenced the
economic and financial performance of countries during and after the global crisis.
2. Why Do Countries Hold International Reserves?
International reserves held by monetary authorities (typically in the Central Bank,
Treasury, or Ministry of Finance) are part of national wealth, and were originally important for
countries with fixed exchange rates that wanted to avoid costly adjustments to disturbances in the
external sector of the economy. For a country with fixed exchange rates, international reserves
are a necessary buffer to maintain the regime. However, in this view of reserves, if a country
moves away from a fixed exchange rate regime, it is less clear how much of a share of the
national wealth should be devoted to international reserve assets. It is worth noting that when
monetary authorities acquire international reserves they typically sterilize the effect of these
purchases on the domestic monetary base by incurring domestic-currency liabilities (often
2