NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
POLITICAL UNCERTAINTY AND RISK PREMIA
Lubos Pastor
Pietro Veronesi
Working Paper 17464
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17464
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2011
We are grateful for comments from Jules van Binsbergen, Nick Bloom, Mike Chernov, Brad DeLong,
Art Durnev, Francisco Gomes, Peter Kondor, Francesco Trebbi, Mungo Wilson, the conference participants
at the 2012 Fall NBER AP meeting, 2012 Western Finance Association meetings, 2012 European
Finance As- sociation meetings, 2012 Utah Winter Finance Conference, 2012 Duke/UNC Asset Pricing
Conference, 2012 Jackson Hole Conference, 2012 Asset Pricing Retreat at Cass Business School,
2012 CNMV Conference on Securities Markets (Madrid), 2012 University of Chicago conference
on Policy Uncertainty and Its Economic Implications, and the workshop participants at Berkeley, Bocconi,
Boston University, Cambridge, Chicago, Chicago Fed, EIEF Rome, Emory, Fed Board of Governors,
INSEAD, Iowa, LBS, LSE, Lugano, Maryland, Michigan, MIT, New York Fed, NYU, Oxford, Penn
State, Pompeu Fabra, Toronto, Wisconsin, and WU Vienna. We are also grateful to Diogo Palhares
for excellent research assistance and to Bryan Kelly for data assistance. This research was funded
in part by the Fama-Miller Center for Research in Finance at the University of Chicago Booth School
of Business. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Lubos Pastor and Pietro Veronesi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Political Uncertainty and Risk Premia
Lubos Pastor and Pietro Veronesi
NBER Working Paper No. 17464
September 2011, Revised April 2013
JEL No. G01,G12,G18
ABSTRACT
We develop a general equilibrium model of government policy choice in which stock prices respond
to political news. The model implies that political uncertainty commands a risk premium whose magnitude
is larger in weaker economic conditions. Political uncertainty reduces the value of the implicit put
protection that the government provides to the market. It also makes stocks more volatile and more
correlated, especially when the economy is weak. We find empirical evidence consistent with these
predictions.
Lubos Pastor
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
lubos.pastor@chicagobooth.edu
Pietro Veronesi
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
pietro.veronesi@chicagobooth.edu

1. Introduction
Politicalnewshas beendominatingfinancialmarketsrecently. Dayafterday,asset prices
seem to react to news about what governments around the world have done or might do. As
anexample,considertheongoing sovereigndebtcrisisinEurope. WhenEuropean politicians
announcedadealcuttingGreece’sdebtinhalfonOctober27,2011, theS&P500indexsoared
by 3.4%, while French and German stocks gained more than 5%, presumably in response
to the increased likelihood of the preservation of the eurozone. Early in the following week,
stocks gave back all of those gains when Greece’s prime minister announced his intention
to hold a referendum on the deal. When other Greek politicians voiced their opposition
to that initiative, stocks rose sharply again. It seems stunning that the pronouncements of
politicians from a country whose GDP is smaller than that of Michigan can instantly create
or destroy hundreds of billions of dollars of market value around the world.
Regrettably, our ability to interpret the impact of political news on financial markets is
constrained by the lack of theoretical guidance. Models in which asset prices respond to
political news are notably absent from mainstream finance theory. We try to fill this gap,
and we use our model to study the asset pricing implications of political uncertainty.
Political uncertainty has become prominent not only in Europe but also in the United
States. For example, the ratings firm Standard & Poor’s cited political uncertainty among
the chief reasons behind its unprecedented downgrade of the U.S. Treasury debt in August
2011.1 Evenpriorto thepoliticalbrinkmanshipoverthestatutorydebtceilinginthesummer
of 2011, much uncertainty surrounded the U.S. government policy changes during and after
the financial crisis of 2007-2008, such as the various bailout schemes, the Wall Street reform,
and the health care reform. Yet, despite the apparent relevance of political uncertainty for
global financial markets, we know little about its effects on asset prices.
How does uncertainty about future government actions affect market prices? On the one
hand, this uncertainty could have a positive effect if the government responds properly to
unanticipated shocks. For example, we generally do not insist on knowing in advance how
exactly a doctor will perform a complex surgery; should unforeseeable circumstances arise,
it is useful for a qualified surgeon to have the freedom to depart from the initial plan. In
the same spirit, governments often intervene in times of trouble, which might lead investors
to believe that governments provide put protection on asset prices (e.g., the “Greenspan
1The “debate this year has highlighted a degree of uncertainty over the political policymaking process
which we think is incompatible with the AAA rating,” said David Beers, managing director of sovereign
credit ratings at Standard & Poor’s, on a conference call with reporters on August 6, 2011.
1

put”). On the other hand, political uncertainty could have a negative effect because it is not
fully diversifiable. Non-diversifiable risk generally depresses asset prices by raising discount
rates.2 Both of these effects arise endogenously in our theoretical model.
We analyze the effects of political uncertainty on stock prices in the context of a general
equilibriummodel. Inour model,firmprofitabilityfollowsastochasticprocess whose meanis
affected by the prevailing government policy. The policy’s impact on the mean is uncertain.
Both the government and the investors (firm owners) learn about this impact in a Bayesian
fashion by observing realized profitability. At a given point in time, the government makes
a policy decision—it decides whether to change its policy and if so, which of potential new
policies to adopt. The potential new policies are viewed as heterogeneous a priori—agents
expect different policiesto havedifferent impacts, with different degrees of prior uncertainty.
If a policy change occurs, the agents’ beliefs are reset: the posterior beliefs about the old
policy’s impact are replaced by the prior beliefs about the new policy’s impact.
When making its policy decision, the government is motivated by both economic and
non-economic objectives: it maximizes the investors’ welfare, as a social planner would,
but it also takes into account the political costs (or benefits) associated with adopting any
given policy. These costs are uncertain, as a result of which investors cannot fully anticipate
which policy the government is going to choose. Uncertainty about political costs is the
source of political uncertainty in the model. We interpret political uncertainty broadly as
uncertainty about the government’s future actions. Agents learn about political costs by
observing political signals that we interpret as outcomes of various political events.
Solving for the optimal government policy choice, we find that a policy is more likely to
be adopted if its political cost is lower and if its impact on profitability is perceived to be
higher or less uncertain. As a result of this decision rule, a policy change is more likely in
weakereconomicconditions,inwhichthecurrentpolicyistypicallyperceivedas harmful. By
replacing poorly-performing policies in bad times, the government effectively provides put
protection to the market. The value of this protection is reduced, though, by the ensuing
uncertainty about which of the potential new policies will replace the outgoing policy.
We explore the asset pricing implications of our model. We show that stock prices are
driven by three types of shocks, which we call capital shocks, impact shocks, and political
shocks. The first two types of shocks are drivenby shocks to aggregate capital. These shocks
2For example, some commentators argue that the risk premia in the eurozone have been inflated due to
politicaluncertainty. According to Harald Uhlig,“The risk premium in the markets amounts to a premium
on the uncertainty of what Merkel and Sarkozy will do.” (Bloomberg Businessweek, July 28, 2011).
2