NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE IMPACTS OF THE CLIMATE CHANGE LEVY ON MANUFACTURING:
EVIDENCE FROM MICRODATA
Ralf Martin
Laure B. de Preux
Ulrich J. Wagner
Working Paper 17446
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17446
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2011
This research was funded by the Economic and Social Research Council under research grant RES-000-22-2711.
Ralf Martin was supported by the Anglo-German Foundation as a part of the “Sustainable Growth
in Europe” project and by the British Academy. Ulrich Wagner gratefully acknowledges financial
support from the Earth Institute at Columbia University and from the Spanish Ministry for Science
and Innovation, reference number SEJ2007-62908. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2011 by Ralf Martin, Laure B. de Preux, and Ulrich J. Wagner. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Impacts of the Climate Change Levy on Manufacturing: Evidence from Microdata
Ralf Martin, Laure B. de Preux, and Ulrich J. Wagner
NBER Working Paper No. 17446
September 2011
JEL No. D21,Q41,Q48,Q54
ABSTRACT
We estimate the impacts of the Climate Change Levy (CCL) on manufacturing plants using panel
data from the UK production census. Our identification strategy builds on the comparison of
outcomes between plants subject to the CCL and plants that were granted an 80% discount on the
levy after joining a Climate Change Agreement (CCA). Exploiting exogenous variation in eligibility
for CCA participation, we find that the CCL had a strong negative impact on energy intensity and
electricity use. We cannot reject the hypothesis that the tax had no detrimental effects on economic
performance and on plant exit.
Ralf Martin Ulrich J. Wagner
Imperial College Business School Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
London SW7 2AZ, UK Department of Economics
and Centre for Economic Performance Calle de Madrid, 126
London School of Economics 28903 Getafe (Madrid)
R.Martin@lse.ac.uk Spain
uwagner@eco.uc3m.es
Laure B. de Preux
Centre for Health Economics
University of York
Heslington
York YO10 5DD, UK
and Centre for Economic Performance
London School of Economics
L.B.dePreux@lse.ac.uk

Disclaimer: This work contains statistical data from ONS which is Crown copyright and repro-
duced with the permission of the controller of HMSO and the Queen’s Printer for Scotland. The
useoftheONSstatisticaldatainthisworkdoesnotimplytheendorsementoftheONSinrelation
totheinterpretationoranalysisofthestatisticaldata. Thisworkusesresearchdatasetswhichmay
notexactlyreproduceNationalStatisticsaggregates.
1 Introduction
The rise of climate policy on government agendas around the world has stirred a renewed interest
in the optimal design of large-scale regulation of environmental externalities. Climate change –
the“ultimatecommonsproblem”(Stavins,2011)–iscausedbyanthropogenicemissionsofgreen-
house gases (GHG) such as carbon dioxide (CO ) and is expected to have severe ecological and
2
economic consequences (IPCC, 2007). Mitigating climate change will require substantial abate-
ment of GHG emissions from all core economic sectors (Pacala and Socolow, 2004). The choice
of appropriate policy instruments for each of these sectors is essential for minimizing the overall
economic costs of mitigation with given technologies (static efficiency), and for stimulating tech-
nological innovations that will further reduce mitigation costs in the future (dynamic efficiency).
The relative performance of two such instruments to curb CO emissions from the manufacturing
2
sectoristhefocusofthispaper.
Manufacturing is a major contributor to GHG emissions around the world.1 Since most man-
ufactured goods are tradable, there is a risk that regulated firms will lose international competi-
tiveness, shed part of their labor force or even exit. These concerns have been fueling vehement
opposition towards regulation in this sector and left their mark on the design of the policies im-
plemented so far. Command-and-control policies have long been the predominant form of envi-
ronmental regulation in the manufacturing sector, and their impacts have been studied extensively
1Togetherwithprimaryindustry,themanufacturingsectoraccountsforalmost40%ofGHGemissionsworldwide
(IEA,2010).
2

in the context of air pollution.2 On theoretical grounds, economists have favored market-based
instruments such as taxes and tradable permit schemes because they are more efficient in both the
staticanddynamicsenses(e.g.Montgomery,1972;Tietenberg,1990;MillimanandPrince,1989).
However, empirical evidence on the impacts of market-based environmental regulation on man-
ufacturing is scarce, especially when it comes to carbon emissions.3 For example, the European
Union Emissions Trading Scheme (EU ETS), the largest cap-and-trade system for carbon emis-
sions worldwide, is overdue for a microeconometric evaluation. While carbon taxes have been
implemented in various EU countries, their rigorous evaluation has proven difficult, be it for lack
ofsuitablemicrodataorofacompellingidentificationstrategy.4
This paper fills the void by analyzing the Climate Change Levy (CCL) package – the single
most important climate change policy that the UK government has unilaterally imposed on the
business sector so far. The package consists of an energy tax, the CCL, which added 15% to the
energybillofatypicalUKbusinesswhenitwasintroducedin2001(NAO,2007). Thegovernment
seeks to lighten the tax burden on energy intensive firms by offering an 80% discount on the tax
rate to businesses that join a Climate Change Agreement (CCA) which obliges them to adopt
a specific target for energy consumption or carbon emissions. These firms may also participate
in emissions trading on the UK carbon market. Together, the CCL and CCAs were expected to
contribute the lion’s share of total carbon savings from the business sector under the UK Climate
ChangeProgrammebetween2000and2010(HMGovernment,2006).
Given its scope and institutional context, the CCL package provides a unique opportunity to
study the impacts of carbon pricing in an industrialized economy. We use longitudinal data on
manufacturingplantstoestimatetheimpactoftheCCLonenergyuseandeconomicperformance.
Our strategy to identify the tax effect builds on the comparison of outcomes between fully-taxed
2See,forexample,thesizableempiricalliteratureontheeffectsofcommand-and-controlregulationofairpollution
on emissions (Henderson, 1996; Greenstone, 2004), industrial activity (Becker and Henderson, 2000; Greenstone,
2002), plant births and deaths (Henderson, 1996; Levinson, 1996; List et al., 2003), plant-level productivity (e.g.
Berman and Bui, 2001; Gray and Shadbegian, 2003), foreign direct investment (Hanna, 2010) and market structure
(Ryan,2010).
3Onereasonforthisisthatmostexistingcap-and-tradeprogramsdonotcovermanufacturingemissionsinsignifi-
cantways. TheRECLAIMprogramforNO emissionsinCaliforniaisanexception(Fowlieetal.,2011).
X
4SeeBjornerandJensen(2002)foranearlymicroeconometricevaluationofindustrialenergytaxesinDenmark.
3