NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IN THE EYE OF A STORM:
MANHATTAN'S MONEY CENTER BANKS DURING
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL CRISIS OF 1931
Gary Richardson
Patrick Van Horn
Working Paper 17437
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17437
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2011, Revised July 2017
Previously circulated as "When the Music Stopped: Transatlantic Contagion During the Financial
Crisis of 1931." We thank colleagues, students, audiences at several conferences, and two
anonymous referees for comments and advice that helped us to improve the paper. We thank the
University of California for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w17437.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2011 by Gary Richardson and Patrick Van Horn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

In the Eye of a Storm: Manhattan's Money Center Banks During the International Financial
Crisis of 1931
Gary Richardson and Patrick Van Horn
NBER Working Paper No. 17437
September 2011, Revised July 2017
JEL No. E02,E42,E44,G21,N1,N12,N14,N2,N22,N24
ABSTRACT
In the summer of 1931, a financial crisis began in Austria, spread to Germany, forced Britain to
abandon the gold standard, crossed the Atlantic, and afflicted financial institutions in the United
States. This article describes how banks in New York City, the central money market of the
United States, reacted to this trans-Atlantic trauma. New York’s money-center banks anticipated
the onset of a financial crisis, prepared for it by accumulating substantial reserves, and during the
European crisis, continued business as usual. New York’s leading bankers deliberately and
collectively decided on the business-as-usual policy in order to minimize the impact of the panic
in the United States. New York banks’ behavior changed only after the Federal Reserve raised
discount rates to stem gold outflows in the fall of 1931.
Gary Richardson
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3155 Social Sciences Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
garyr@uci.edu
Patrick Van Horn
Department of Economics and Business
Southwestern University
Georgetown, TX 78626
vanhornp@southwestern.edu

1. Introduction
Scholars debate how the financial crisis of 1931 crossed the Atlantic. Explanations fall into
two broad classes. A traditional class, commonly called “golden fetters,” emphasizes how the
financial crisis triggered gold flows from the United States, forcing the Federal Reserve to defend
its gold reserves by raising interest rates, reducing economic activity and weakening domestic
banks (Friedman and Schwartz, 1963; Eichengreen and Sachs, 1985; Eichengreen, 1992; Temin,
1989 and 1993). An alternative class emphasizes the crisis’s direct impact on the behavior of
banks, either due to declines in values of their foreign investments or withdrawals by their
depositors, particularly the largest institutions in the United States operating in the money-center
of Manhattan (Accominotti, 2016; James, 2009; Morsy, 2002; Ritschl and Sarferaz, 2014;
Richardson and Van Horn, 2009 and 2011). Both explanations appear plausible. Evidence
indicates that both golden fetters and bank balance sheets transmitted the crisis from Austria, where
it began, to Germany, and then to Britain (Accominotti, 2012; James, 1984, 1986, 2009; Park,
2013; Schnabel, 2004a, 2004b; Temin, 1993, 2008).
Regarding trans-Atlantic transmission, however, the debate persists, largely because
scholars have yet to assemble and analyze the types of detailed commercial-bank balance sheet
data that would enable them to resolve this issue. Our essay fills this lacuna in the literature. We
are the first scholars to assemble and analyze data illuminating the behavior of banks in the central-
money market of the United States before, during, and after the financial crisis swept through
Europe and spread to America. The money-center banks were the largest financial institutions in
the United States. They held more than one-third of the financial assets in the nation. A subset of
these banks had substantial foreign exposure, both on the asset and liability sides of their balance
1

sheets, because they solicited foreign accounts; had expertise investing overseas; and operated
branches in Europe, Latin America, and Asia.
Our data enable us to compare the impact of the European crisis on banks with and without
foreign exposure. The banks without foreign exposure serve as a control group. Changes in their
balance sheets should have been driven by domestic factors. The banks with foreign exposure are
the treatment group. Changes in their balance sheets may have been influenced both by domestic
and international factors. Comparing changes in the balance sheets and behavior of the control and
treatment groups, before and after financial panics in different nations in Europe, and before and
after the Federal Reserve raised interest rates, illuminates the impact of these events.
Our analysis begins with microdata. We examine a panel consisting of all extant balance
sheets for every bank in New York city and state. The panel spans the year 1931. The data’s
frequency is approximately quarterly. The panel contains information about banks’ foreign
liabilities, assets, and branches. This information enables us to estimate the impact of the European
crisis on banks with more or less foreign exposure. We conduct this exercise for all banks in New
York State and also while limiting our sample to banks in Manhattan. In the first exercise, the
control group includes all banks in New York with limited foreign exposure, including numerous
banks in New York’s industrial and agricultural heartland. These banks resembled the thousands
of country banks operating in smaller cities and towns throughout the United States. In the second
exercise, the control group consists of banks in Manhattan with limited overseas linkages. These
banks resembled banks operating in reserve cities throughout the nation. We examine the four
chief components of commercial banks’ balance sheets: on the liability side, (i) owners’ equity
and (ii) deposits; on the asset side, (iii) illiquid earning assets such as loans, and (iv) liquid safer
assets such as cash and reserves. We ask if these components declined more in absolute or relative
2