NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MUTUAL FUND PERFORMANCE AND THE INCENTIVE TO GENERATE ALPHA
Diane Del Guercio
Jonathan Reuter
Working Paper 17491
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17491
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2011
This paper was previously titled "Mutual Fund Performance and the Incentive to Invest in Active Management."
We would like to thank an anonymous referee, an anonymous associate editor, John Campbell, Larry
Dann, Robin Greenwood, Ro Gutierrez, Campbell Harvey (editor), Edie Hotchkiss, Abhiroop Mukherjee,
Jeff Pontiff, Antoinette Schoar, Phil Strahan, Laurens Swinkels, Paula Tkac, Hai Tran, Peter Tufano,
Eric Zitzewitz, and seminar partici-pants at Harvard University, the 2010 NBER Summer Institute
Household Finance Workshop, the 2011 Boston College Center for Asset Management Conference
on Financial Markets, and the 2012 HKUST Symposium on Household Finance for helpful comments.
Del Guercio would like to acknowledge support from the Finance and Securities Analysis Center
at the University of Oregon. We thank Lauren Beaudette and Hai Tran for providing excellent research
assistance and Deb Wetherbee at Financial Research Corporation for generously providing data on
mutual fund distribution channels. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Diane Del Guercio and Jonathan Reuter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Mutual Fund Performance and the Incentive to Generate Alpha
Diane Del Guercio and Jonathan Reuter
NBER Working Paper No. 17491
October 2011, Revised July 2012
JEL No. G14,G23
ABSTRACT
Financial economists have long been puzzled by investor demand for actively managed funds that
generate, on average, negative after-fee, risk-adjusted returns. To shed new light on this puzzle, we
exploit the fact that funds in different market segments compete for different types of retail investors.
Within the segment of funds marketed directly to retail investors, we find that flows chase risk-adjusted
returns, and that funds respond by investing more in active management. Importantly, within this
direct-sold segment, we find little evidence that actively managed funds underperform index funds.
In contrast, within the segment of funds sold through brokers, which we demonstrate face a weaker
incentive to generate alpha, we find that actively managed funds significantly underperform index
funds. We conclude that the well-known underperformance of the average actively managed fund
in the full sample is driven by the large fraction of funds with weak incentives to identify and motivate
skilled managers.
Diane Del Guercio
Lundquist College of Business
1208 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1208
dianedg@lcbmail.uoregon.edu
Jonathan Reuter
Carroll School of Management
Boston College
224B Fulton Hall
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
reuterj@bc.edu

The typical actively managed U.S. equity fund earns a negative after-fee alpha (Gruber
(1996), French (2008), Fama and French (2010), and others). This well-documented underper-
formance gives rise to two important and related questions. Why do actively managed funds un-
derperform? And, given this underperformance, why are the vast majority of mutual fund assets
still invested in actively managed funds? The widely-accepted answer to the first question is that
efficient U.S. equity markets make it difficult for U.S. mutual fund managers to add value net of
fees. The answer to the second question has been debated since Gruber (1996) first highlighted
this puzzle in his AFA presidential address and suggested that it might be driven by ‘disadvan-
taged’ investors who are either ignorant of the underperformance or behaving irrationally.
Rationalizing retail investor demand for active management is an area of active research.
Most recent papers take the approach that traditional tests for positive after-fee alphas are the
wrong benchmark for actively managed funds.1 Glode (2011) and Savov (2012) argue that it is
rational for investors to accept negative average alphas if active funds outperform in periods
when marginal utility is high. However, de Souza and Lynch (2012) find little evidence that mu-
tual fund returns are countercyclical. Berk and van Binsbergen (2012) argue that actively man-
aged funds should be benchmarked against the set of investable index mutual funds available to
retail investors instead of against an after-fee alpha of zero. Their argument is strengthened by
findings in Elton, Gruber, Das, and Hlavka (1993) and Cremers, Petajisto, and Zitzewitz (2012)
that factor models can generate significant non-zero alphas when applied to purely passive indi-
ces. Nevertheless, Berk and van Binsbergen (2012) find that the average actively managed fund
underperforms, leading them to the familiar conclusion that at least some retail investors are be-
1 There are also two explanations based on investor learning. Baks, Metrick, and Watcher (2001) show in a Bayesi-
an framework that even investors that have skeptical priors over the existence of manager skill will optimally invest
in actively managed funds if the maximum posterior after-fee alpha is positive. Pastor and Stambaugh (2012) show
that investment in active funds is rational when investors simultaneously learn about manager skill and about the
extent to which decreasing returns to scale affects the performance of actively managed funds.
1

having irrationally. Notably, each of these papers implicitly assumes that retail investor prefer-
ences are homogeneous.
In this paper, we propose and test a different explanation for the underperformance of
actively managed funds, one based on heterogeneity in investor preferences. Motivated by the
recent findings in Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano (2009) and Christoffersen, Evans, and
Musto (2012), we hypothesize that retail mutual funds sold through intermediaries, or brokers,
face a weaker incentive to generate alpha than mutual funds sold directly to retail investors, and
that this disincentive helps to explain the underperformance of the average actively managed
fund. Our explanation rests on the premise that mutual fund families will expend resources to
generate alpha only to the extent that they expect the investments to increase investor flows. The
lower the expected benefit associated with investing in active management—because, for exam-
ple, investor flows are less responsive to alpha—the weaker the incentive to do so.
Evidence on the pricing and product characteristics of mutual funds sold through brokers
versus those sold directly to investors supports our hypothesis that they serve investor clienteles
with distinct preferences. Retail funds sold directly to investors offer unbundled access to port-
folio management. Their investors neither receive, nor pay extra fees for, advice. In contrast,
retail funds sold through brokers bundle portfolio management with financial advice. Del
Guercio, Reuter, and Tkac (2010) show that fund families tend to sell their funds either directly
to investors or through brokers, but rarely do both, suggesting a segmented market where the na-
ture of competition differs across the two segments. Because experienced and knowledgeable
investors are likely to self-select into direct-sold funds, flows in this segment are more likely to
respond to risk-adjusted returns, giving direct-sold families a strong incentive to generate alpha.
In contrast, the findings in Christoffersen, Evans, and Musto (2012) and Chalmers and Reuter
2