NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PERSISTENT LIQUIDITY EFFECTS AND LONG RUN MONEY DEMAND
Fernando E. Alvarez
Francesco Lippi
Working Paper 17566
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17566
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2011
We are grateful to Warren Weber and especially Bob Lucas for the discussions that lead to the model
in this paper. We also thank Luca Dedola, Chris Edmond, Luca Sala, Paolo Surico, Ivan Werning and
seminar participants at EIEF, the Bank of England, the European Central Bank, the Bank of Italy,
the Austrian National Bank, Bocconi University, and the 2007 ASSA Meeting. Alvarez has received
funding for this project from an ongoing consulting relationship with the Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, and appointments as visiting scholar at the Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance foundation
and as a Duisenberg fellow at the European Central Bank. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Fernando E. Alvarez and Francesco Lippi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Persistent Liquidity Effects and Long Run Money Demand
Fernando E. Alvarez and Francesco Lippi
NBER Working Paper No. 17566
November 2011
JEL No. E31,E4,E41,E43,E5
ABSTRACT
We present a monetary model in the presence of segmented asset markets that implies a persistent
fall in interest rates after a once and for all increase in liquidity. The gradual propagation mechanism
produced by our model is novel in the literature. We provide an analytical characterization of this mechanism,
showing that the magnitude of the liquidity effect on impact, and its persistence, depend on the ratio
of two parameters: the long-run interest rate elasticity of money demand and the intertemporal substitution
elasticity. At the same time, the model has completely classical long-run predictions, featuring quantity
theoretic and Fisherian properties. The model simultaneously explains the short-run “instability” of
money demand estimates as-well-as the stability of long-run interest-elastic money demand.
Fernando E. Alvarez
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
f-alvarez1@uchicago.edu
Francesco Lippi
University of Sassari
Department of Economics
and
EIEF
via Sallustiana, 62
00184 Rome - Italy
flippi@uniss.it

1 Summary and Introduction
This paper unifies two main views, or theories, on money demand. One is the transactions-
based money demand that emerges in the models of e.g. Baumol-Tobin or Sidrausky. This
theory predicts a stable downward sloping relationship between real balances and interest
rates. This relationship is apparent in the low-frequency data, e.g. those describing decade
to decade movements. The second theory is the so called “liquidity effect”, namely that a
central bank’s purchase of bonds, which increases the amount of money, creates a transitory
but persistent decrease in interest rates. These patterns are apparent in high-frequency data,
such as those used in the VAR literature for the identification of monetary shocks. This
paper presents a simple segmented asset market model that unifies both ideas, displaying
a stable long-run money demand, and explaining the short-term instability in terms of the
liquidity effect.
We develop the model building on theideas proposed by Rotemberg (1984), Lucas (1990),
Fuerst (1992), Christiano and Eichenbaum (1992), and others. To keep the analysis tractable
the previous literature ignored the lingering distributional effects that follow an injection of
liquidity.1 Our model is simple enough to include these effects and yet to allow us to com-
pletely characterize its solution, including a full analysis of the dynamic transmission of mon-
etary shocks, in terms of 3 primitive parameters: a measure of the segmentation of the bond
markets, and two parameters related to the households’ intertemporal and intra-temporal
elasticity of substitution between real balances and consumption. As long as only a fraction
of agents has access to open market operations, i.e. the bond market is segmented, the model
displays a persistent liquidity effect after a once and for all increase in the money supply for
any value of the parameters. The basic mechanism for the persistent liquidity effect is the
redistribution of wealth that is created by the operation. At the same time, and also novel
in the segmented market models applied to monetary shocks, we show that if the changes in
money growth are nearly permanent, the model delivers a standard money demand, with a
positive relationship between velocity and interest rates. These three parameters dictate the
long run elasticity of money demand, the strength and persistence of the liquidity effect, and
the amplitude of the interest rates response to monetary shocks.
1See for instance Lucas (1990): “In [2] and [13], (referring to Grossman and Weiss, and Rotemberg) an
open market operation that induces a liquidity effect will also alter the distribution of wealth, since agents
who participate in the trade will have different post-trade portfolios than those who were absent. These
distributionaleffects lingeronindefinitely (as they nodoubt doinreality),afactthatvastly complicatesthe
analysis,effectivelylimitingbothpaperstothestudyofaone-time,unanticipatedbondissueinanotherwise
deterministic setting. This paper studies this same liquidity effect using a simple device that abstracts
from these distributional effects.” Fuerst (1992) uses the same assumption and comments about it: “This
methodology is not without cost. By entirely eliminating these wealth effects, the model loses the persistent
and lingering effects of a monetary injection captured, for example, in Grossman and Weiss (1983).”
1

The model results are useful to interpret several empirical facts about money demand.
First, several authors have used high frequency data to document a persistent liquidity effect
as well as a small interest elasticity after a monetary shock, see for example section 4.2.2 in
Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1999) (see Appendix D.1 for a review of the empirical
literature). In Section 5 we use our model to reproduce these stylized facts.
Second, combining the results for the dynamics of monetary expansions, inflation and
interest rates provides a novel interpretation of the money demand data across low and
high frequencies. Assuming that the money growth rate is driven by both permanent and
transitory shocks our theory implies that the low-frequency changes in monetary growth
rates (e.g. decade to decade) will generate a time series revealing an interest-elastic money
demand such as the one estimated by Lucas (2000) and Ireland (2009) (see Appendix D.1).
Instead the high-frequency changes of money growth will generate data-points that do not
lie on this money demand curve because of the liquidity effect. This assumption allows us to
reconcile low-frequency US data on interest rate and velocity, displaying an interest-elastic
money demand, with the high-frequency data, featuring persistent deviations from it and
very small (even positive) interest elasticities. Indeed the reconciliation between the high
and low frequency fluctuations of money demand is one of the challenges discussed by Lucas
(2000).2 In Section 6 we evaluate the predictions of the model quantitatively by simulating a
process for the growth rate of M1 compounding both a low and a high frequency component,
and comparing the model predictions with the US data over the period 1900-2006.
Third, the predictions concerning the effects of transitory and persistent monetary shocks
are useful to interpret the evidence in Sargent and Surico (2011) and Cogley, Sargent, and
Surico (2011). They estimate that the correlationbetween interest rates andmoney growth is
smaller than the one between money growth and inflation, and also show that these correla-
tions vary fromdecade to decade.3 They also provide an interpretation of these facts interms
of changes in the systematic response of monetary policy. Our model provides a complemen-
tary explanation of why, due the the liquidity effect, the correlation between money growth
and interest rates is systematically smaller than the correlation between money growth and
inflation.
At amoreabstract level thepaper relatestothe literature, bothempirical andtheoretical,
where shocks to different “segments” of the asset market have mean reverting but persistent
2 Quoting from page 250: “The interest elasticity needed to fit the long-term trends (and very sharply
estimated by these trends) is much too high to permit a good fit on a year-to-year basis. Of course, it is
precisely this difficulty that has motivated much of the money demand research of the last 30 years, and
has led to distributed lag formulations of money demand that attempt to reconcile the evidence at different
frequencies. In my opinion, this reconciliation has not yet been achieved [...]”.
3For the full sample averages see the first row of Table 1 and the solid lines in Figure 5 in Sargent and
Surico (2011).
2