NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A TRANSPARENCY STANDARD FOR DERIVATIVES
Viral V. Acharya
Working Paper 17558
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17558
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2011
This note is partly based on the chapter “Regulating OTC Derivatives” co-authored with Or Shachar
and Marti G Subrahmanyam, in the book “Regulating Wall Street: The Dodd-Frank Act and the New
Architecture of Global Finance”, NYU Stern and John Wiley & Sons, November 2010. The author
is grateful to Melissa Johnston and John Yan for research assistance and comments from Or Shachar
and participants at the NBER conference “Measuring Systemic Risk Initiative” (October 2010). The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Viral V. Acharya. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

A Transparency Standard for Derivatives
Viral V. Acharya
NBER Working Paper No. 17558
November 2011
JEL No. G01,G13,G18,G28
ABSTRACT
Derivatives exposures across large financial institutions often contribute to – if not necessarily create
– systemic risk. Current reporting standards for derivatives exposures are nevertheless inadequate
for assessing these systemic risk contributions. In this paper, I explain how a transparency standard,
in contrast to the current standard, would facilitate such risk analysis. I also demonstrate that such
a standard is implementable by providing examples of existing disclosures from large dealer firms
in their quarterly filings. These disclosures often contain useful firm-level data on derivatives, but
due to a lack of standardization, they cannot be aggregated to assess the risk to the system. I highlight
the important contribution that reporting the “margin coverage ratio” (MCR), namely the ratio of a
derivatives dealer’s cash (or liquidity, more broadly) to its contingent collateral or margin calls in
case of a significant downgrade of its credit quality, could make toward assessing systemic risk contributions.
Viral V. Acharya
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-84
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu

A Transparency Standard for Derivatives
- Viral V Acharya, New York University Stern School of Business2
August 2011
Derivatives exposures across large financial institutions often contribute to – if
not necessarily create – systemic risk. During a crisis, lack of adequate understanding of
such exposures often compromises regulatory ability to unwind an institution, inducing
large-scale backstops and counterparty bailouts. It is often claimed – in spite of the
massive assistance that was provided in this crisis to deal with derivatives exposures –
that derivative contracts are well collateralized so that counterparty risk on derivatives
exposures is not a significant issue. Documenting evidence that supports or refutes this
claim beyond reasonable doubt is currently infeasible due to the poor quality – and lack
of standardization – of derivatives disclosures by financial firms. Nevertheless, all
available evidence points against the claim that counterparty risk in derivative exposures
is always well collateralized.
In many important cases that contributed to the crisis, most notably but not
exclusively the case of A.I.G. Financial Products, collateralization was weak.3 Some
reports also suggest that the problem is probably of non-trivial magnitudes and that going
forward derivatives exposures are likely to remain a potentially important contributor to
systemic risk. For instance, using information from the 10-Q quarterly statements, the
IMF reports estimate that the five key institutions that are active in the OTC derivatives
market – Goldman Sachs, Citigroup, JP Morgan, Bank of America, and Morgan Stanley
– were jointly carrying almost $500 billion in OTC derivative payables exposure as of
3Q09.4 The report also estimates that five largest European banks – Deutsche Bank,
Barclays, UBS, Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS) and Credit Suisse – had about $600-$700
billion in under-collateralized risk (measured by residual derivative payables) as of
December 2008. This residual exposure arises for two reasons, as per the IMF report.
First, sovereigns, as well as AAA-rated insurers, corporations, large banks and
multilateral institutions “do not post adequate collateral since they are viewed by large
complex financial institutions as privileged and (apparently) safe clients.” Second,
dealers have agreed in their bilateral contracts not to mandate adequate collateral for
2 This note is partly based on the chapter “Regulating OTC Derivatives” co-authored with Or Shachar and
Marti G Subrahmanyam, in the book “Regulating Wall Street: The Dodd-Frank Act and the New
Architecture of Global Finance”, NYU Stern and John Wiley & Sons, November 2010. The author is
grateful to Melissa Johnston and John Yan for research assistance and comments from Or Shachar and
participants at the NBER conference “Measuring Systemic Risk Initiative” (October 2010).
3 For example, The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report, released in January 2011, reports: “In the housing
boom, CDS were sold by firms that failed to put up any reserves or initial collateral or to hedge their
exposure. In the run-up to the crisis, AIG, the largest U.S. insurance company, would accumulate a one-
half trillion dollar position in credit risk through the OTC market without being required to post one
dollar’s worth of initial collateral or making any other provision for loss. AIG was not alone….”
4 Manmohan Singh, 2010, “Collateral, Netting and Systemic Risk in the OTC Derivatives Market”, IMF
Working Paper 10/99.

dealer-to-dealer positions whereby credit-worthy dealers often post no collateral to each
other for these contracts.
These reports raise several pertinent questions:
 What is the true potential exposure on derivatives dealings of large institutions?
 How much of this exposure is collateralized?
 Is collateral posted adequate under some conservative requirements of maximum
counterparty risk in case of system-wide stress when besides the emergence of
counterparty risk, positions become illiquid, hard to replace and may have to be
unwound at short notice?
 Are derivatives being deployed in under-collateralized manner to undertake
significant maturity transformation and taking on attendant liquidity risks?5
This note addresses these questions by examining the theoretical justification for a
transparency standard for derivatives positions. To demonstrate that such a standard is
implementable, the note shows examples of existing disclosures from large dealer firms
in their quarterly filings. These disclosures often contain useful firm-level data on
derivatives, but due to a lack of standardization, these are not aggregation-friendly for
assessing the risk to the system. The note highlights the important role for tracking of a
“margin coverage ratio” (MCR), namely the ratio of a derivatives dealer’s cash (or
liquidity, more broadly) to its contingent collateral or margin calls in case of a significant
downgrade of its credit quality. Finally, the note discusses the implications of such a
possible standard for the Office of Financial Research (OFR) to be set up under the
Treasury as per the Dodd-Frank Act in the United States.
Case for regulatory and market disclosure of standardized derivatives reports
It is useful to understand theoretically the market failure in the provision of
information in derivatives markets. Acharya and Engle (2009) and Acharya and Bisin
(2010) formalize this idea under the notion of a “counterparty risk externality”.6
To illustrate the idea, suppose that counterparty A agrees to pay B. Then, A turns
around and sells a similar contract to C. The addition to A’s position from the contract
with C dilutes the payoff on its contract with B in case that A turns out ex-post to not
5 In terms of “risk topography”, derivatives can be considered the mechanism to build contingent exposures
– across states of nature and over time – which when not adequately collateralized or capitalized lead to
liquidity risk. Thus, derivatives facilitate complex forms of “liquidity mismatch”, discussed in greater
detail elsewhere by Markus Brunnermeier, Gary Gorton and Arvind Krishnamurthy.
6 Acharya, Viral V and Robert Engle, 2009, “Derivatives trades should all be transparent,” Wall Street
Journal, 15 May 2009, and Acharya, Viral V and Alberto Bisin, 2010, “Counterparty risk externality:
Centralized versus over-the-counter markets,” working paper, NYU-Stern.