NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SOVEREIGN CDS AND BOND PRICING DYNAMICS IN THE EURO-AREA
Giorgia Palladini
Richard Portes
Working Paper 17586
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17586
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2011
This paper is produced as part of the CEPR project 'Politics Economics and Global Governance: The
European Dimensions' (PEGGED) funded by the Theme Socio-economic sciences and humanities
of the European Commission's 7th Framework Programme for Research. Grant Agreement no. 217559.
The London Business School RAMD fund supported an early stage of this work. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Giorgia Palladini and Richard Portes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Sovereign CDS and Bond Pricing Dynamics in the Euro-area
Giorgia Palladini and Richard Portes
NBER Working Paper No. 17586
November 2011
JEL No. F34,G12,G15
ABSTRACT
This analysis tests the price discovery relationship between sovereign CDS premia and bond yield
spreads on the same reference entity. The theoretical no-arbitrage relationship between the two credit
spreads is confronted with daily data from six Euro-area countries over the period 2004-2011. As a
first step, the supposed non stationarity of the two series is verified. Then, we examine whether the
non-stationary CDS and bond spreads series are bound by a cointegration relationship. Overall the
cointegration analysis confirms that the two prices should be equal to each other in equilibrium, as
theory predicts. Nonetheless the theoretical value [1, -1] for the cointegrating vector is rejected, meaning
that in the short run the cash and synthetic market's valuation of credit risk differ to various degrees.
The VECM analysis suggests that the CDS market moves ahead of the bond market in terms of price
discovery. These findings are further supported by the Granger Causality Test: for most sovereigns
in the sample, past values of CDS spreads help to forecast bond yield spreads. Short-run deviations
from the equilibrium persist longer than it would take for participants in one market to observe the
price in the other. That is consistent with the hypothesis of imperfections in the arbitrage relationship
between the two markets.
Giorgia Palladini
London Business School
Regents Park
London NW1 4SA UK
gpalladini@london.edu
Richard Portes
London Business School
Regent's Park
London NW1 4SA
UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER
rportes@london.edu

1 Introduction
As Duffie (1999) and related literature point out, a theoretical no-arbitrage condition between the
cash and synthetic price of credit risk should drive investment decisions and tie up the two credit
spreads in the long run. Insofar as credit risk is what they price, cash and synthetic market prices
should reflect an equal valuation, in equilibrium. If in the short run they are affected by factors
other than credit risk, such elements may partially obscure the comovement between bond yield
spreads and CDS premia.
The first contribution of this study lies in checking the accuracy of credit risk pricing in the CDS
marketbycomparingthetheoreticallyimpliedCDSpremiawiththeoneestablishedbythemarket.
The existence of a stable cointegration relationship between the two credit spreads presupposes a
statisticallysignificantlong-runconnectionbetweenbondsandCDScontractsonthesamereference
entity. Ontheonehand, thisrulesoutthepossibilitythatcreditriskispricedinunrelatedwaysin
thederivativeandcashmarket. Ontheother,wecannotdiscardthehypothesisthatlargecommon
pricing components rather than credit risk affect both prices to some extent.
As a second contribution, we address the relative efficiency of credit risk pricing in the bond and
CDS market. In order to explore the price discovery relationship between CDS and bond yield
spreads, we estimate a Vector Error Correction Model (VECM). We proceed in three steps: first,
weapplytheaugmentedDickey-FullertestforeachbondyieldspreadandCDSpremiaseries. Ifthe
creditspreadsarecointegratedoforderoneatthe5%level, foreachcountryinthesamplewethen
perform a Johansen cointegration test to determine if bond yield spreads and CDS premia move
together in the long run. If the cointegration hypothesis is not rejected at the 5% level, we then
estimate a Vector Error Correction Model to investigate whether the CDS market can anticipate
the bond market in pricing, or merely adapts to the cash market valuation of credit risk.
Several recent papers study the credit derivative markets. The majority focus on CDS contracts
written on corporate bonds,1 and their data do not cover the past several years, in which the CDS
market grew rapidly and then went through the financial crisis. Of the few papers devoted to the
1J.Hull,M.Predescu,andA.White,2004;R.Blanco,S.Brennan,andI.W.Marsh,2005. Blancoetal. dotake
anapproachsimilartoourown,unlikethestudiescitedinfn. 2.
2

study of sovereign CDS spreads, most focus on emerging markets. We know of only two papers on
sovereign credit risk in the European Union based on CDS market data.2 The size of the markets,
the intrinsic interest of the recent period, and the policy relevance of CDS market performance
would seem to justify further work with a different approach.
The most relevant studies following the accuracy and efficiency dimensions of credit risk are Zhu
(2006) and Ammer and Cai (2011). Zhu examines how CDS spreads interact with bond rates,
using daily data of corporate names over the period 1999-2002. His analysis confirms that the
long-run parity condition holds in the data for corporate reference entities, even though short-run
price discrepancies can exist between the two markets. VECM analysis shows that the derivative
market moves ahead of the bond market in terms of price discovery. Ammer and Cai (2011) find
that the parity relationship between the two credit spreads holds for a sample of nine emerging
marketeconomiesovertheperiod2001-2005. Theyprovidenoconclusiveevidenceregardingwhich
market leads price discovery, but they argue that the relatively more liquid market tends to lead.3
Our study similarly brings the theoretical parity relation between CDS and bond spreads to the
data, but it differs from their papers in several ways. First, we cover a substantially longer and
morerecentperiodthandoesZhu(2004-2010vs. 1999-2002). Weincludeintheanalysistheperiod
of maturity of CDS market,4 and we extend the analysis over the current financial crisis. Although
the theoretical framework we refer to is similar to that of Zhu (2006), we examine the Eurozone
2O.Arceetal.,2011. Theircountrysampleandapproachdifferfromours. Theyapplyastatisticalarbitragetest
(Hogan,Teo,andWarachka,2004)ontheCDS-bondbasistryingtoassesswhethertheexistenceofanon-zerobasis
haseithertobeseenasaconsequenceofmarketfrictionsorhastobeunderstoodasanopportunityforarbitrage.
Intheirpricediscoveryanalysis,theyuserollingwindowsestimation,whileweapplyastaticpricediscoverymetric.
Ourresultsarenotdirectlycomparable.
A.FontanaandM.Scheicher,2010. TheyfocusontenEUcountriesovertheperiod2006-2010. Theydoregression
analysistoinvestigatethedeterminantsofthesovereignCDS-bondbasis. Thisisaratherdifferentperspective. In
addition,theyapplyVECMframeworkto10yearbondandCDSseriestoinvestigatetheirpricediscoveryrelation.
They split their sample into pre and post crisis, hence producing results not directly comparable to ours, as we
decidednottobreakupthesampleperiod(seediscussionbelow).
3AmmerandCaishowthattheGonzaloandGrangermeasureofCDSpriceleadershipispositivelycorrelatedwith
theratioofthebondbid-askspread,toCDSbid-askspreadandnegativelywiththenumberofbondsoutstanding,
respectively a proxy for relative and collective bond market liquidity. Arce, Mayordomo and Pena find that price
discoveryisstate-dependent,andtheyarguethatmarketliquidityisasignificantfactorindeterminingwhichmarket
leadspricediscovery.
4According to the International Swap and Derivative Association (ISDA) Market Survey (2008), after 2003 the
CDSmarketreacheditsmaturity,characterizedbyarapidgrowth,andbytheshiftinitsprimaryusefromhedging
tospeculation. TheglobalnotionalamountofCDScontractsoutstandingstartedtofallonlyafteraseriesoflarge
scaleincidentsin2008,beginningwiththefailureofBearStearns.
3