NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECT OF LIQUIDITY ON GOVERNANCE
Alex Edmans
Vivian W. Fang
Emanuel Zur
Working Paper 17567
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17567
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2011
We thank Charles Trzcinka for data and Niki Boyson, Chris Clifford, Slava Fos, Robin Greenwood,
Cliff Holderness, Oguzhan Karakas, Robert Kieschnick, Alexander Ljungqvist, Ernst Maug, Greg
Nini, Ed Rock, and seminar participants at Boston College, Oregon, UT Dallas, and Wharton for helpful
comments. Vivian also gratefully acknowledges the financial support from Rutgers Business School
Research Resources Committee (RRC). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Alex Edmans, Vivian W. Fang, and Emanuel Zur. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Liquidity on Governance
Alex Edmans, Vivian W. Fang, and Emanuel Zur
NBER Working Paper No. 17567
November 2011
JEL No. G12,G23,G34,G38
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the effect of stock liquidity on blockholders’ choice of governance mechanisms.
We focus on hedge funds as they are unconstrained by legal restrictions and business ties, and thus
have all governance channels at their disposal. Since the threat of governance, not just actual governance,
can discipline managers, we use Section 13 filings to measure governance intent rather than only studying
instances of actual governance. We find that liquidity increases the likelihood that a hedge fund acquires
a block in a firm. Conditional upon acquiring a stake, liquidity reduces the likelihood that a blockholder
governs through voice (intervention) – as evidenced by the greater propensity to file Schedule 13Gs
(passive investment) rather than 13Ds (active investment). Liquidity is more likely to lead to a 13G
filing if the manager’s wealth is sensitive to the stock price, consistent with governance through exit
(trading). A 13G filing leads to positive announcement returns, especially in liquid firms. These two
results suggest that liquidity does not dissuade blockholders from governing altogether, but instead
encourages them to govern through exit rather than voice. We use decimalization as an exogenous
shock to liquidity to identify causal effects.
Alex Edmans Emanuel Zur
The Wharton School Zicklin School of Business, Baruch College
University of Pennsylvania City University of New York
2318 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall New York, NY 10010
3620 Locust Walk emanuel.zur@baruch.cuny.edu
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
aedmans@wharton.upenn.edu
Vivian W. Fang
Rutgers Business School
Rutgers University
Newark, NJ 07102
fang@business.rutgers.edu

This paper studies the effect of stock liquidity on an investor’s decision to acquire a block in a
firm, and her choice of how to govern the firm thereafter. The theoretical literature yields
conflicting predictions regarding the effect of liquidity on governance. The traditional view is
that investors govern through intervening in a firm’s operations (also known as “voice”), for
example by firing a shirking manager or blocking a pet project. Under this view, liquidity
weakens governance because it provides the blockholder with the option of selling her stake in a
troubled firm rather than bearing the cost of intervening to fix it (Coffee (1991); Bhide (1993)),
or trading on inside information rather than monitoring (Maug (2002)). However, this view has
been recently challenged along two fronts. First, even when considering voice as the only
governance mechanism, Maug (1998) shows that liquidity encourages blockholders to intervene
as they can buy additional shares at a price that does not incorporate the gains from intervention.
Kyle and Vila (1991), Maug (1998), and Kahn and Winton (1998) demonstrate that liquidity
facilitates block formation in the first place. Faure-Grimaud and Gromb (2004) show that
liquidity encourages intervention as it increases stock price informativeness. Thus, if the activist
is forced to sell prematurely due to a liquidity shock, the price she receives will partially reflect
the gains from intervention. Second, Admati and Pfleiderer (2009), Edmans (2009), and Edmans
and Manso (2011) demonstrate that the act of selling one’s shares (also known as engaging in
“exit”, following the “Wall Street Rule”, or taking the “Wall Street Walk”) can be a governance
mechanism in itself.1 By gathering and trading on private information, blockholders cause the
stock price to more closely reflect the firm’s fundamental value. If the manager is compensated
according to the stock price, the threat of exit induces him to maximize fundamental value – for
example, by exerting effort and investing efficiently. Liquidity increases the threat of exit in two
1 While it is the threat of exit that induces superior managerial actions ex ante, we follow the literature by referring
to this governance mechanism as “exit” for brevity.
1

ways: it induces blockholders to gather information (Edmans (2009); Edmans and Manso
(2011)), and it encourages investors to acquire a larger block to begin with (Edmans (2009)).
Thus, even if liquidity discourages intervention, it may not reduce governance overall but instead
cause the blockholder to govern through exit rather than voice.
Despite the rich theoretical literature analyzing the effect of stock liquidity on governance
choices, there are very few papers that address this debate empirically. This likely results from a
number of empirical challenges. First, many blockholders do not have the governance
mechanism of voice at their disposal to begin with. Mutual funds have diversification
requirements that prevent them from acquiring the large positions necessary to exercise control,2
and pension funds are subject to “prudent man” rules that hinder them from acquiring stakes in
troubled firms that may be particularly in need of intervention (Del Guercio (1996)). Even if not
legally restricted, certain blockholders may choose not to engage in activism due to conflicts of
interest: suppliers and customers may risk losing supply-chain relationships, and mutual funds
may have business ties through managing a firm’s pension plan.3 Del Guercio and Hawkins
(1999) find that pension fund activism has little effect on stock or accounting performance; more
generally, the survey by Yermack (2010) concludes that “the success of institutional investor
activism to date appears limited.” Thus, liquidity may not affect the choice between exit and
voice, since many blockholders do not engage in voice to begin with. Moreover, even if they do
use voice, certain blockholders may have little motivation to make the optimal governance
2 Most mutual funds prefer to designate themselves as “diversified”. Under the Investment Company Act of 1940,
such a fund, with respect to 75% of its portfolio, can have no more than 5% of it invested in any one security and
can own no more than 10% of the voting rights in one company.
3 Davis and Kim (2007) show that mutual funds with more business ties in aggregate are more likely to vote with
management in general, although at the individual firm level they are no more likely to vote with management of
client firms than of non-clients.
2