NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IDENTIFYING DEMAND WITH MULTIDIMENSIONAL UNOBSERVABLES:
A RANDOM FUNCTIONS APPROACH
Jeremy T. Fox
Amit Gandhi
Working Paper 17557
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17557
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2011
Thanks to Daniel Ackerberg, Richard Blundell, Andrew Chesher, Philip Haile and Jack Porter for
helpful comments. Thanks to Philip Reny for earlier collaboration. Our email addresses are jtfox@umich.edu
and agandhi@ssc.wisc.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Jeremy T. Fox and Amit Gandhi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Identifying Demand with Multidimensional Unobservables: A Random Functions Approach
Jeremy T. Fox and Amit Gandhi
NBER Working Paper No. 17557
November 2011
JEL No. C0,L0
ABSTRACT
We explore the identification of nonseparable models without relying on the property that the model
can be inverted in the econometric unobservables. In particular, we allow for infinite dimensional
unobservables. In the context of a demand system, this allows each product to have multiple
unobservables. We identify the distribution of demand both unconditional and conditional on market
observables, which allows us to identify several quantities of economic interest such as the (conditional
and unconditional) distributions of elasticities and the distribution of price effects following a merger.
Our approach is based on a significant generalization of the linear in random coefficients model that
only restricts the random functions to be analytic in the endogenous variables, which is satisfied by
several standard demand models used in practice. We assume an (unknown) countable support for
the distribution of the infinite dimensional unobservables.
Jeremy T. Fox
Economics Department
University of Michigan
238 Lorch Hall
611 Tappan St.
Ann Arbor, MI 48104
and NBER
jeremyfox@gmail.com
Amit Gandhi
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
agandhi@ssc.wisc.edu

1 Introduction
In this paper we study the identification of nonseparable demand systems
Q=D(P,ξ), (1)
where Q is a vector of market level quantities demanded for a set of goods, P is a vector of prices
for these goods, ξ ∈ Ξ is a demand error, and D(·,·) is the demand system. We do not impose that
ξ is independent of P, as price may be determined in market equilibrium. Rather, we assume that
the demand error ξ is independent of a vector of instruments Z. The non-separable demand system
contrasts with models that assume the error is additively separable, i.e.,
D(P,ξ)=D(P)+ξ.
Althoughadditiveseparabilityhasconvenienteconometricfeatures,thereislittleunderlyingeconomic
basis for demand shocks being separable. For example, when market demand is the aggregation of
individual discrete choices, the quantity sold of product j in a market is a function of the demand
errorsforproductj andallcompetingproductsinthemarket, whichisinconsistentwiththeadditive
structure above (Berry, 1994). Our interest thus centers on identification of the non-separable model
(1).
Therearetwomajorexistingliteraturesontheidentificationofnonseparablemodelswithendoge-
nous regressors. First, the literature on the nonparametric identification of simultaneous equation
modelstakesasitsstartingpointtheassumptionthatthedemandsystem(1)isinvertibleintheerror
ξ (Brown,1983;Roehrig,1988;BenkardandBerry,2006;Matzkin,2008;BerryandHaile,2010;Berry
et al., 2011). In contrast, we do not require invertibility. Invertibility in ξ requires, at a minimum,
the order restriction that there are only as many unobservables as there are products demanded; the
dimensionality of ξ equals the dimensionality of Q. Instead, we allow the error to be infinite dimen-
sional and hence do not impose the structure that demand is invertible in the unobservable ξ. This
allows for considerable richness in the unobserved market level heterogeneity of demand models, as
2

we illustrate later using the standard discrete choice setting for demand for differentiated products
(see e.g., Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes (1995) or BLP).
Anotherliteraturethatcanbeappliedtodemandidentificationistheliteratureonnonparametric
control functions (Altonji and Matzkin, 2005; Chesher, 2003; Imbens and Newey, 2009; Blundell and
Matzkin, 2010). This literature can allow for multiple unobservables in the demand equation, and in
particular more unobservables than the number of goods, but cannot allow for such multidimensional
unobservability in the equilibrium pricing equations. This means adapting these approaches to de-
mand models requires that strong assumptions be placed on the reduced form pricing equation that
areatoddswithstandardsupplysidemodels: boththedemandand supplysideunobservablesshould
impact equilibrium prices under standard mechanisms according to which prices are set. Thus allow-
ing for multidimensional unobservables in demand requires that we also allow for multidimensional
unobservables to affect prices in order to be consistent with standard economic theory.
As far as we are aware, the identification problem of introducing multiple unobservables per prod-
uct in a standard supply and demand setting has yet to be studied. As discussed above, multiple
unobservables preclude inverting demand, and thus the demand unobservables themselves (for any
realization of a market) cannot be identified. Instead, we will seek identification of the distribution
of demand functions, both conditional and unconditional on the realization of the market observ-
ables. We will assume that any realization of the demand function function D(·,ξ) for ξ ∈ Ξ is a
real analytic function in prices, which nonparametrically generalizes a property of various well known
demand systems used in practice (e.g., the AIDS model, the mixed logit BLP model). The key to
our approach is then showing that under a general mechanism that governs how prices are set (which
allows for multidimensional unobservables that include the demand unobservable ξ, and is consistent
withstandardmodelsofpriceequilibrium), thereducedformofthemodeltakesontheformofasys-
tem of random analytic functions that are indexed by an infinite dimensional unobservable consisting
of both the demand unobservables ξ and the supply unobservables ω. We first show this system of
randomanalyticfunctionsrepresentingthereducedformofthemodelcanbeuniquelyidentifiedfrom
the data. We then show that, given a minimal relevance condition on the instruments, the structural
demand feature of interest, namely the distribution of demand functions, can be recovered from the
3