NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE REAL EFFECTS OF HEDGE FUND ACTIVISM:
PRODUCTIVITY, ASSET ALLOCATION, AND LABOR OUTCOMES
Alon Brav
Wei Jiang
Hyunseob Kim
Working Paper 17517
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17517
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2011
Previously circulated as "The Real Effects of Hedge Fund Activism: Productivity, Risk, and Product
Market Competition." The authors have benefited from comments from and discussions with Lucian
Bebchuk, Christa Bouwman, Joan Farre-Mensa, Simon Gervais, Sandy Klasa, April Klein, Dalida
Kadyrzhanova, Vikram Nanda, Michael Raith, Adriano Rampini, and seminar and conference participants
at Arizona State University, Boston College, Brigham Young University, Cornell University, Duke
University, Drexel, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Emory, Erasmus, Fordham, Fudan,
HEC Paris, Imperial College, INSEAD, Interdisciplinary Center at Herzlyia, London Business School,
Michigan, New York University, University of Oregon, Rotterdam School of Management, Rutgers,
SAIF, Seoul National University, Southern Methodist University, Tel Aviv University, Temple, University
of Amsterdam, University of Washington, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, University
of Oxford, Wharton, Yale, the Annual Corporate Governance Conference at Drexel University, Western
Finance Association Annual Meetings, the International Conference on Corporate Governance at Tsinghua
University, the HBS Information, Markets and Organization Conference, the Annual Financial Intermediation
Society Conference, Jackson Hole Finance Conference, the SFS Finance Cavalcade, and the Annual
Conference on Corporate Finance at Washington University in St. Louis. We thank Bert Grider at
the Triangle Census Research Data Center for help with data and clearance requests. We also thank
Jin Xu and Yinghua Li for help with data collection at an early stage of the paper and Bryan Oh for
excellent research assistance. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed
to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Alon Brav, Wei Jiang, and Hyunseob Kim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Real Effects of Hedge Fund Activism: Productivity, Asset Allocation, and Labor Outcomes
Alon Brav, Wei Jiang, and Hyunseob Kim
NBER Working Paper No. 17517
October 2011, Revised January 2015
JEL No. G23,G3,G34
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the long-term effect of hedge fund activism on the productivity of target firms using
plant-level information from the U.S. Census Bureau. A typical target firm improves its production
efficiency in the three years after an activist intervention, and the improvements are most pronounced
in those interventions specifically targeting the firm’s business strategy. We also find that plants sold
post-intervention exhibit a significant improvement in productivity under new ownership, consistent
with the view that efficient capital redeployment is an important channel via which activists create
value. We further find that employees of target firms experience a reduction in work hours and stagnation
in wages despite an increase in labor productivity. Additional tests refute alternative explanations that
attribute the improvement to mean reversion, management’s voluntary reforms, industry consolidation
shocks, or hedge funds’ stock picking abilities. The overall evidence is consistent with hedge fund
intervention having a real and long-term effect on the fundamental values of target firms.
Alon Brav Hyunseob Kim
Fuqua School of Business Cornell University
Duke University Johnson Graduate School of Management
One Towerview Drive 366 Sage Hall
Durham, NC 27708 114 East Avenue
and NBER Ithaca, NY 14853
brav@duke.edu hk722@cornell.edu
Wei Jiang
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
411 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
wj2006@columbia.edu

The Real Effects of Hedge Fund Activism:
Productivity, Asset Allocation, and Labor Outcomes
Abstract
This paper studies the long-term effect of hedge fund activism on the productivity of target firms using
plant-level information from the U.S. Census Bureau. A typical target firm improves its production
efficiency in the three years after an activist intervention, and the improvements are most pronounced in
those interventions specifically targeting the firm’s business strategy. We also find that plants sold post-
intervention exhibit a significant improvement in productivity under new ownership, consistent with the
view that efficient capital redeployment is an important channel via which activists create value. We
further find that employees of target firms experience a reduction in work hours and stagnation in wages
despite an increase in labor productivity. Additional tests refute alternative explanations that attribute the
improvement to mean reversion, management’s voluntary reforms, industry consolidation shocks, or
hedge funds’ stock picking abilities. The overall evidence is consistent with hedge fund intervention
having a real and long-term effect on the fundamental values of target firms.
JEL Classification: G12, G23, G34
Keywords: Hedge fund activism, Corporate Governance, Productivity, Capital reallocation, Labor
outcomes
_____________________________________________________________________________________
1. Introduction
A growing literature on hedge fund activism shows that the stock prices of target firms experience
significantly positive returns when the market first learns of the presence of the activist. The range of
abnormal returns during the short-term announcement window is highly consistent across different
studies and markets.1 A subset of this literature also documents a significant improvement in operating
performance in the period following hedge fund interventions. Using our sample of close to 2,000
activism events in the U.S. from 1994 to 2007, we validate and summarize this pattern using return on
assets (ROA) as the performance measure. Figure 1 plots the target firms’ average ROA in excess of that
of a control group—where the control group consists of firms in the same three-digit SIC industry and
year, and is adjusted for firm size and age—from three years before to three years after the public
announcement of activism. There is a clear “V” shaped pattern centered on the year of intervention, and
the level in the third year post intervention is significantly higher than that during the year of intervention
or the year prior to intervention.
1 Average event returns range from five to ten percent. See Brav, Jiang, Partnoy, and Thomas (2008), Klein and Zur
(2009), Clifford (2008), Greenwood and Schor (2009) for U.S. companies; and Becht, Franks, Mayer, and Rossi
(2009), Becht, Franks, Grant and Wagner (2014) for non-U.S. markets.
1

While the evidence regarding both stock returns and firm operating performance speaks favorably
on the impact of hedge funds activism, several important related questions have yet to be addressed. First,
research to date has not explicitly identified how hedge fund activists create value. As a result, little is
known about the precise mechanism via which activists are able to improve efficiency and increase
shareholder value. In fact, opponents of hedge fund activism often consider hedge fund activists to be
“short-term focused” and “financial engineering oriented,” and deny that such activists have any
meaningful real and long-term impact.2 Moreover, performance measures at the firm level, such as ROA,
do not reveal the underlying channels of improvement. That is, these measures cannot isolate gains from
production efficiency of existing assets from those due to capital reallocation, such as the divestiture of
underperforming assets, because firm-level analysis cannot trace out the performance of the underlying
assets subsequent to the change in ownership.
Second, since previous research is based on databases that cover only public companies at the
firm level (such as Compustat), it has been a challenge to address the potential survivorship bias in the
post-intervention period. Within two years of activists’ intervention, close to 26% of companies targeted
by activists disappear from the Compustat database because they were either acquired or delisted, a rate
almost twice the normal attrition rate of the Compustat universe. As a result, researchers have not been
able to directly assess post-intervention performance based on an uncensored sample. Third, while
existing research has focused on the effects of hedge fund activism on shareholder wealth and the overall
operating performance of the target firms, little is known about its impact on the firms’ other stakeholders,
particularly the employees.
The limitations of previous research are due both to the novelty of the topic, and hence the lack of
a large sample of post-intervention data, and the reliance on firm-level information of public companies.
This paper addresses these important impediments by exploring the U.S. Census Bureau’s longitudinal
databases of manufacturing establishments (i.e., plants), including the Census of Manufacturers (CMF)
and the Annual Survey of Manufacturers (ASM). We match these plant observations to hedge fund
activism events from 1994 to 2007 and then examine the dynamics of productive efficiency at firms
targeted by activists, measured by total factor productivity (TFP). We assess the relative importance of
the gains in efficiency among assets in place and those due to reallocation of the target firms’ plants. In
addition, we are able to investigate the impact of hedge fund activism on labor by examining changes to
labor productivity, work hours, and wages obtained from the Census Bureau datasets.
2 See, for example, “Hedge Fund Activists Set for Comeback,” Financial Times, December 8, 2009, and “Current
Thoughts about Activism,” by Martin Lipton, The Harvard Law School Forum, available at:
http://blogs.law.harvard.edu/corpgov/2013/08/09/current-thoughts-about-activism/#more-50945.
2