NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LAWS AND NORMS
Roland Benabou
Jean Tirole
Working Paper 17579
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17579
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2011
We are grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Tim Besley, Betsy Paluck, Torsten Persson, Aleh Tsyvinski,
Glen Weyl, Yao Zeng and participants at many seminars,lectures and conferences for valuable comments,
and to Andrei Rachkov and Edoardo Grillo for superb research assistance. Bénabou gratefully acknowledges
support from the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research. Both authors gratefully acknowledge
support from the European Research Council (Grant No. FP7/2007-2013 - 249429) and from IDEI's
"Chaire Association Finance Durable et Investissement Responsable" (AFG). The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Roland Benabou and Jean Tirole. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Laws and Norms
Roland Benabou and Jean Tirole
NBER Working Paper No. 17579
November 2011
JEL No. D64,D82,H41,K1,K42,Z13
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes how private decisions and public policies are shaped by personal and societal
preferences ("values"), material or other explicit incentives ("laws") and social sanctions or rewards
("norms"). It first examines how honor, stigma and social norms arise from individuals' behaviors
and inferences, and how they interact with material incentives. It then characterizes optimal incentive-setting
in the presence of norms, deriving in particular appropriately modified versions of Pigou and Ramsey
taxation.
Incorporating agents' imperfect knowledge of the distribution of preferences opens up to analysis several
new questions. The first is social psychologists' practice of "norms-based interventions", namely campaigns
and messages that seek to alter people’s perceptions of what constitutes "normal" behavior or values
among their peers. The model makes clear how such interventions operate but also how their effectiveness
is limited by a credibility problem, particularly when the descriptive and prescriptive norms conflict.
The next main question is the expressive role of law. The choices of legislators and other principals
naturally reflect their knowledge of societal preferences, and these same "community standards" are
also what shapes social judgments and moral sentiments. Setting law thus means both imposing material
incentives and sending a message about society's values, and hence about the norms that different
behaviors are likely to encounter. The analysis, combining an informed principal with individually
signaling agents, makes precise the notion of expressive law, determining in particular when a weakening
or a strengthening of incentives is called for. Pushing further this logic, the paper also sheds light on
why societies are often resistant to the message of economists, as well as on why they renounce certain
policies, such as "cruel and unusual" punishments, irrespective of effectiveness considerations, in
order to express their being "civilized".
Roland Benabou
Department of Economics
and Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
rbenabou@princeton.edu
Jean Tirole
Institut d'Economie Industrielle
Bureau MF529 - Bat. F
21 allees de Brienne
31000 Toulouse
FRANCE
tirole@cict.fr

Introduction
To foster desired behaviors, economists emphasize (with a number of caveats) material incen-
tives provided through contracts, markets or policy. While these often work very e¤ectively, there
also many puzzling cases where incentives fail to have the desired e¤ects (e.g., crowding out) or,
conversely minor ones have a disproportionately large impact (crowding in, shift in norms).1 Soci-
eties also sometimes “insist”on what seem like ine¢ ciently costly forms of incentives (e.g., prison
rather than …nes or reparations) or renounce others that might be quite cheap or e¤ective (paying
for organ donations, corporal punishments, public shaming).
Rather than incentives, psychologists emphasize persuasion and social in‡uence, in particular
through manipulations of collective identity, peer comparison and other interventions aimed at
changing the “social meaning”of actions and shifting the norms that prevail in a population.2 This
body of work o¤ers many valuable insights and a wide knowledge base of experimental regularities,
but no clear analytical framework.
Legal scholars, …nally, certainly agree on the importance of incentives, but many argue that
the law is not merely a price system for bad and good behaviors –it also plays an important
role in expressing and shaping the values of society. The spectrum of opinions ranges from pure
“consequentialists”to pure “expressivists”, but here also the underlying architecture –exactly how
laws do or should convey societal values–remains elusive. Thus, the expressive content of law is
sometimes invoked to call for harsher measures and sometimes for more lenient ones, or appealed
to both for and against a given form of punishment.
These apparently disjoint approaches are in fact highly complementary and can be fruitfully
brought together to shed new light on the determinants of compliance and the e¤ects of incentives.
To this e¤ect, we develop in this paper a unifying framework to analyze how private decisions as
well as public policies are shaped by personal and societal preferences (“values”), material or other
explicit incentives (“laws”) and social sanctions or rewards (“norms”).
We …rst show how honor, stigma and social norms –a social multiplier, more generally–arise
from individuals’behaviors and inferences, and when they are strengthened or undermined by the
presence of material incentives. We then characterize optimal incentive-setting in the presence of
norms, deriving appropriately modi…ed versions of Pigou and Ramsey taxation that correct not
just for standard externalities but also for the zero-sum aspect of image-seeking. In particular,
this “reputation tax”makes the optimal incentive depend, nonmonotonically, on aggregate shifts
in costs or preferences that a¤ect the overall rate of compliance. For well-behaved (unimodal)
distributions of individual values, the subsidy is lowest for behaviors with very high or very low
participation rates (as these respectively induce maximal stigma and maximal honor), and highest
1Examples of such puzzles include e.g., Gneezy and Rustichini [2000a,b], Fehr and Gächter [2001], Knez and
Simester [2001], Fehr and Falk [2002], Fehr and Rockenbach [2003], Falk and Kosfeld [2006], Karlan and List [2007],
Arielyetal. [2009],Panagopoulos[2009],Funk[2010]andFryer[2010]. See,e.g.,Bowles[2008]andBowlesandReyes
[2009]forrecentsurveysoftheempiricalpuzzles,andGibbons[1997]andPrendergast[1999]forthemore“classical”
literature on incentives in organizations.
2See, e.g., Cialdini [1984], Cialdini et al. [2006], Prentice and Miller (1993), or Schultz et al. [2007].
1

for behaviors in the “grey zone”where compliance and noncompliance are both common behaviors
(and social pressure is thus at its weakest).
Next, we incorporate into the model the idea that the distribution of preferences in society may
be only imperfectly known by agents. Allowing for such aggregate uncertainty, in addition to the
individual heterogeneity standard in signaling models, opens up to analysis a number of ideas and
practices found mostly outside economics, but closely linked to the study of incentives.
The…rstissocialpsychologists’practiceof“norms-basedinterventions”, namelycampaignsand
messages that seek to alter people’s perceptions of what constitutes “normal”behavior (or values)
amongtheirpeers. Wemakeclearhowsuchinterventionsoperate,butalsohowtheire¤ectivenessis
limited by a credibility problem, particularly when the “descriptive”and “injunctive’norms (what
most people do, versus what most approve of) are in con‡ict.
The next and central question we analyze is the expressive role of law. Whether intended to
foster the common good or more narrow objectives, laws and other policies re‡ect the knowledge
that decision-makers have about societal preferences. These same “community standards”are also
what shapes social norms (conferring esteem or stigma) and moral sentiments (pride and shame).
Thus, imposing a heavy sentence for some o¤ense or a zero price on certain transactions means
both setting material incentives and sending a message about society’s values, and hence about the
norms according to which di¤erent behaviors are likely to be judged. The analysis, combining an
informed principal with individually signaling agents, makes precise the notion of expressive law,
determining in particular when a weakening or a strengthening of incentives is called for.
Somewhat surprisingly, the answer turns out to be entirely independent of whether individual
behaviors are complements (the usual understanding of a norm) or substitutes (search for dis-
tinction). Instead, it hinges on what speci…c variable the law signals –agents’general willingness
to contribute to the public good, or the value to society of such contributions. The underlying
intuition, and the main thread running through our analysis, is that the principal can use mul-
tiple “currencies”to shape agents’behavior. In the empirically relevant case where rewards and
punishments are costly to implement, he will seek to economize on them by harnessing agents’
other sources of motivation –intrinsic and reputational. Thus, when better informed about prevail-
ing standards of behavior, he tries to signal that social sanctions or payo¤s are large by lowering
extrinsic incentives, at some cost in compliance. In contrast, when the asymmetric information
concerns the magnitude of the externalities that agents impose on each other (and provided that
they care more, the larger their social impact), the principal seeks to enhance their intrinsic mo-
tivation by convincing them that the externalities are large, and this now involves setting higher
incentives than under symmetric information.
Pushing further this logic, we extend the model to also shed light on why societies are often
resistant to economists’messages about the virtues of incentives, as well as on why they forego cer-
tain policies, such as “cruel and unusual”punishments, irrespective of e¤ectiveness considerations,
in order to express their being “civilized”.
2