NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CROSS-SECTORAL VARIATION IN THE VOLATILITY OF PLANT-LEVEL IDIOSYNCRATIC
SHOCKS
Rui Castro
Gian Luca Clementi
Yoonsoo Lee
Working Paper 17659
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17659
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011
We thank Alan Sorensen and two anonymous referees for suggestions that greatly improved the paper.
We are also grateful to Mark Bils, Yongsung Chang, Sílvia Gonçalves, Massimiliano Guerini, Francisco
Ruge–Murcia, and Carlos Serrano for very helpful comments. A special thanks goes to Gianluca Violante
and Jason Cummins for providing us with their data on investment–specific technological change,
and to Yongsung Chang and Jay Hong for supplying us with their ELI–SIC correspondence table.
The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. The research in this paper was conducted while Yoonsoo Lee was a Special Sworn
Status researcher of the U.S. Census Bureau at the Michigan Census Research Data Center. Research
results and conclusions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the Census Bureau. This paper has been screened to ensure that no confidential data is revealed.
Support for this research at the Michigan RDC from NSF (awards no. SES–0004322 and ITR–0427889)
is gratefully acknowledged. Castro and Lee acknowledge financial support from SSHRC and Sogang
Research Frontier Grant, respectively. An earlier draft of this paper circulated under the title “Cross-Sectoral
Variation in Firm-Level Idiosyncratic Risk.”
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Rui Castro, Gian Luca Clementi, and Yoonsoo Lee. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Cross-Sectoral Variation in The Volatility of Plant-Level Idiosyncratic Shocks
Rui Castro, Gian Luca Clementi, and Yoonsoo Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 17659
December 2011, Revised July 2013
JEL No. D24,L16,L60,O30,O31
ABSTRACT
We estimate the volatility of plant–level idiosyncratic shocks in the U.S. manufacturing sector. Our
measure of volatility is the variation in Revenue Total Factor Productivity which is not explained by
either industry– or economy–wide factors, or by establishments’ characteristics. Consistent with previous
studies, we find that idiosyncratic shocks are much larger than aggregate random disturbances, accounting
for about 80% of the overall uncertainty faced by plants. The extent of cross–sectoral variation in the
volatility of shocks is remarkable. Plants in the most volatile sector are subject to about six times as
much idiosyncratic uncertainty as plants in the least volatile. We provide evidence suggesting that
idiosyncratic risk is higher in industries where the extent of creative destruction is likely to be greater.
Rui Castro Yoonsoo Lee
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of Montreal Sogang University
Montreal H3C3J7 CANADA Seoul, 121-742, Korea
rui.castro@umontreal.ca ylee@sogang.ac.kr
Gian Luca Clementi
Department of Economics
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
clem@nyu.edu

1 Introduction
In this study we assess the cross–sectoral variation in the volatility of plant–level
idiosyncratic shocks in U.S. manufacturing. Our data consists of a large panel ex-
tracted from theAnnualSurvey of Manufacturers (ASM), gathered by the USCensus
Bureau.
Our measure of volatility is the variation in Revenue Total Factor Productivity
(TFPR) which cannot be forecasted by means of factors, either known or unknown
to the econometrician, that are systematically related to plant dynamics. Variation
in TFPR reflects changes in technical efficiency, as well as shifts in input supply
and product demand schedules affecting input and product prices, respectively. We
strive to isolate the portion of such variation which is due to plant–specific, random
disturbances – a measure of idiosyncratic uncertainty, or risk.
Consistent with previous studies, we find that across the manufacturing sector id-
iosyncratic uncertainty accounts for the majority – about 80% – of overall plant–level
uncertainty. The variation in idiosyncratic risk across 3–digit industries is substan-
tial. To gain a flavor of the amount of heterogeneity we uncover, consider that the
volatility of TFPR growth duetoidiosyncratic shocks ranges from6.7% for producers
of leather soles to a whopping 35.2% for manufacturers of non–ferrous metals.
Why does volatility differ so much across sectors? We provide some preliminary
evidence in favor of a particular explanation: volatility is higher in sectors where cre-
ative destruction is more important. The notion of creative destruction is central to
the Schumpeterian paradigm. According to the latter, firms are engaged in a perpet-
ual race to innovate. Creation, i.e. the success by a laggard in implementing a new
process or producing a new good, displaces the previous market leader, eliminating
(destroying) its rent.
1
Formal models of Schumpeterian competition predict a positive cross–sectoral
association between creative destruction, product turnover, and innovation–related
activities. We document that idiosyncratic risk is higher in industries where product
turnover is greater and investment–specific technological progress is faster.
Our study of the statistical properties of TFPR is of central relevance to most
modern models of business dynamics, where TFPR is the most important, if not
the only driver of establishment growth and survival. See for example the seminal
work of Ericson and Pakes (1995) and Hopenhayn (1992), as well as the more recent
1Werefer to theeconomic growth literature that buildson Aghion and Howitt (1992).
1

information–based theories of Quadrini (2003) and Clementi and Hopenhayn (2006).
Establishment growth is driven by improvement in technical efficiency, increases in
mark–ups, and declines in input prices. Changes of the opposite sign lead plants to
shrink and, eventually, exit.
Learning about the volatility of the innovation to productivity is important in
light of the rather general result that, everything else equal, higher volatility implies
greater reallocation of inputs across plants and greater plant turnover. Over the last
25 years or so, a large number of cross–sectional studies have documented a wide
heterogeneity in the level of total factor productivity across plants. See Bartelsman
and Doms (2000) and Syverson (2011) for a very effective account of this literature.
A related body of work, closer to ours in spirit, studies the extent of cross–plant
variation in the growth of productivity. Davis and Haltiwanger (1992) and Davis,
Haltiwanger, and Schuh (1996) document the extent of within–sector job reallocation
across manufacturing plants, while Davis, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2006)
describe the time variation in the volatility of business growth rates. Work by Bar-
telsmanandDhrymes(1998), Baily, Hulten, andCampbell(1992), Baily, Bartelsman,
and Haltiwanger (2001) and Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan (2001) shows that such
heterogeneity is accompanied by a substantial variation in productivity growth.
Our contribution to the literature is twofold. To start with, we strive to asses the
portion of volatility in plant–level TFPR growth that is due to merely idiosyncratic
shocks.
The logarithm of TFPR is modeled as a linear function of its lagged value, size,
age, a sector–time dummy variable that accounts for aggregate and industry–wide
disturbances, and an establishment–level dummy that stands in for plant unobserved
characteristics systematically associated with productivity dynamics. We regard the
residuals of this regressions as realizations of random shocks, and their standard
deviation as our measure of idiosyncratic risk.
Furthermore, we illustrate the cross–sectoral variation in plant–level idiosyncratic
shocks. We provide estimates of risk by 3–digit SIC sectors and make a first attempt
atidentifyingthedeterminantsoftheheterogeneity weuncover. Asaby–product,our
exercise also produces estimates for the sector–specific auto–correlation coefficients of
TFPR.
Given that firms’ stakeholders have often limited insurance opportunities, assess-
ingestablishment–level idiosyncraticriskisrelevantfortheanalysisofscenarioswhere
risk aversion matters. This is the case of entrepreneurship studies such as Michelacci
2