NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF WOMEN'S RIGHTS
Matthias Doepke
Michèle Tertilt
Alessandra Voena
Working Paper 17672
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17672
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011
Forthcoming in Annual Review of Economics, doi: 10.1146/annurev-economics-061109-080201.
We thank Zoe Cullen and Vuong Nguyen for excellent research assistance. Financial Support from
NSF grants SES-0748889 and SES-0820409, SIEPR, and the University of Munich is gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Matthias Doepke, Michèle Tertilt, and Alessandra Voena. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Economics and Politics of Women's Rights
Matthias Doepke, Michèle Tertilt, and Alessandra Voena
NBER Working Paper No. 17672
December 2011
JEL No. J10,N30,O10
ABSTRACT
Women's rights and economic development are highly correlated. Today, the discrepancy between
the legal rights of women and men is much larger in developing compared to developed countries.
Historically, even in countries that are now rich women had few rights before economic development
took off. Is development the cause of expanding women's rights, or conversely, do women's rights
facilitate development? We argue that there is truth to both hypotheses. The literature on the economic
consequences of women's rights documents that more rights for women lead to more spending on
health and children, which should benefit development. The political-economy literature on the evolution
of women's rights finds that technological change increased the costs of patriarchy for men, and thus
contributed to expanding women's rights. Combining these perspectives, we discuss the theory of Doepke
and Tertilt (2009), where an increase in the return to human capital induces men to vote for women's
rights, which in turn promotes growth in human capital and income per capita.
Matthias Doepke Alessandra Voena
Northwestern University Harvard Kennedy School
Department of Economics 79 John F Kennedy Street, Mailbox 34
2001 Sheridan Road Cambridge, MA 02138
Evanston, IL 60208 ale.voena@gmail.com
and NBER
doepke@northwestern.edu
Michèle Tertilt
Department of Economics
University of Mannheim
L7, 3-5
68131 Mannheim
Germany
and NBER
tertilt@uni-mannheim.de

1 Introduction
Intoday’sdevelopedcountries,byandlarge,womenenjoythesamelegalrights
as men. This has not always been the case. Two hundred years ago, in most
countries women were considered property of men (typically either a father or a
husband) and had no intrinsic rights of their own. They usually could not own
property or sign contracts, they had no control over their own body, they could
not vote, they had no legal way to end a marriage, and they had no access to
theirchildrenafteraseparation. Whatexplainstheexpansionofwomen’srights
since? And what was the economic impact of these changes? In this paper, we
provideasurveyoftheeconomicsandpoliticsofwomensrights.
Wefocusonlegalrightstoemphasizethedistinctionbetweenequalityinoppor-
tunity as opposed to equality in outcomes.1 Men and women are different, and
hence gender differences in outcomes such as labor force participation, life ex-
pectancy, or political involvement should not be surprising. For example, even
a small comparative advantage of women in child-rearing may lead to an op-
timal division of labor in which many women specialize in home production
(Becker1991). Inequalitiesinoutcomesdonotnecessarilyimplythatwomenare
disadvantaged. However, if formal rights are gender-specific, then women are
denied the same opportunities as men. A large literature on gender differences
inoutcomesexists,whereastheformalrightsofwomenhavereceivedincreasing
attentiononlyrecently.2
We start by documenting the salient facts on women’s rights in relation to eco-
nomic development. In contemporary cross-country data, measures of women’s
rights and development are highly correlated.3 The fact that women in today’s
least developed countries have the least legal rights might suggest that rights
1While the focus is on formal rights, we sometimes also describe de facto rights, such as
whetherviolenceagainstwomenisacceptedinasocietyornot.
2Thereexistsasubstantialbodyofworkonotherexamplesofexpandinglegalrights,suchas
the abolition of slavery and franchise extensions in the nineteenth century. However, explana-
tions for these phenomena (such as the threat of violence and revolution) usually do not fit the
caseofwomen’srights,callingforaseparateanalysis.
3Duflo (2005) and Sinha, Raju, and Morrison (2007) provide surveys on the relationship be-
tween gender inequality and development. See also the 2012 World Development Report on
GenderEqualityandDevelopment.
2

will expand naturally once economic development takes hold, just as they did
in developed countries. However, there are important differences between to-
day’s poor countries and the historical situation in rich countries. Focusing on
the cases of the United States and England, we show that the historical expan-
sion of women’s rights unfolded through distinct stages: basic economic rights
camefirst,politicalrightswerenext,andequaltreatmentinthelabormarketand
greater control over their own body ultimately followed. In contrast, in most
African countries women gained formal political rights (as part of the end of
colonialism) before obtaining economic rights. Moreover, there are many spe-
cifictraditions(suchasfootbinding,childmarriage,andwitchkillings)affecting
therightsofwomenthatarespecifictocertaincultures. Contemporaryphenom-
ena,suchasHIV/AIDS,sex-selectiveabortions,andinternationalsextrafficking
also represent challenges to gender equality that were not present in earlier time
periods(KristofandWuDunn2009).4
After reviewing the facts, we describe the economic consequences of women’s
rights. The bulk of the literature focuses on the effects of property (often land)
rightsforwomen. Inlinewitheconomicintuition,anumberofempiricalstudies
find that more rights lead to a redistribution of resources towards women and
higher investment in both physical and human capital. Some studies find a de-
crease in fertility when women obtain more economic rights. Further, equality
in the division of marital assets tends to decrease female labor force participa-
tion. There is also research on the economic consequences of including women
in politics through suffrage and gender quotas. The main finding here is that
when women are involved in politics, both as voters and as policymakers, the
compositionofgovernmentspendingshiftstowardshigherexpendituresrelated
to health and children. Some studies also find an overall increase in government
expenditures, but here the evidence is less robust. Finally, improvements in wo-
men’scontrolovertheirownbodyseemtoincreasetheircareerprospectsandlife
satisfaction,andmaypositivelyaffectfemalebargainingpowerinthehousehold.
The political-economy literature on the origins of women’s rights is relatively
4For example, a myth in some African tribes is that sex with a virgin cures HIV (Leclerc-
Madlala2002).
3