NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FAMILY PROXIMITY, CHILDCARE, AND WOMEN'S LABOR FORCE ATTACHMENT
Janice Compton
Robert A. Pollak
Working Paper 17678
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17678
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011
We thank Sarah MacPhee, Karl Scholz, Betsey Stevenson, Christopher Taber, Jeffrey Wooldridge,
and participants at the CNISS workshop at Washington University in St. Louis, the Michigan Retirement
Research Center workshop, the NBER Cohort Studies Conference, the University of Wisconsin, the
Center for Retirement Research at Boston College, and the NBER Labor Studies Conference for helpful
comments. Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the American Economic Association meetings
in Atlanta and the International Association for Time Use Research in Paris. The usual disclaimer
applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Janice Compton and Robert A. Pollak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Family Proximity, Childcare, and Women's Labor Force Attachment
Janice Compton and Robert A. Pollak
NBER Working Paper No. 17678
December 2011
JEL No. J13,J20
ABSTRACT
We show that close geographical proximity to mothers or mothers-in-law has a substantial positive
effect on the labor supply of married women with young children. We argue that the mechanism through
which proximity increases labor supply is the availability of childcare. We interpret availability broadly
enough to include not only regular scheduled childcare during work hours but also an insurance aspect
of proximity (e.g., a mother or mother-in-law who can provide irregular or unanticipated childcare).
Using two large datasets, the National Survey of Families and Households and the public use files
of the U.S. Census, we find that the predicted probability of employment and labor force participation
is 4-10 percentage points higher for married women with young children living in close proximity
to their mothers or their mothers-in-law compared with those living further away.
Janice Compton
Department of Economics
University of Manitoba
Winnipeg, MB, R3R 5V5
CANADA
comptonj@cc.umanitoba.ca
Robert A. Pollak
Washington University in St. Louis
Arts and Sciences
and the Olin Business School
Campus Box 1133
1 Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
and NBER
pollak@wustl.edu

3
1. Introduction
In this paper we show that close geographical proximity to mothers or mothers-
in-law has a substantial positive effect on the labor supply of married women with young
children.1 Using two large datasets, the National Survey of Families and Households
(NSFH) and the public use files of the U.S. Census, we find that the predicted probability
of employment and labor force participation is 4-10 percentage points higher for married
women with young children living close to their mothers or their mothers-in-law
compared with those living further away. We argue that the availability of childcare is the
mechanism linking proximity and labor supply. We interpret availability broadly enough
to include not only regular scheduled childcare during work hours but also an insurance
aspect of proximity (e.g., a mother or mother-in-law who can provide irregular or
unanticipated childcare).
Two endogeneity issues complicate estimation. The first complication arises
because childcare decisions and labor supply decisions are often made simultaneously.
We deal with this endogeneity issue by using proximity as an instrument for childcare
transfers from mother or mother-in-law. This IV approach assumes that proximity is
exogenous, an assumption often made in the literature.
The second complication arises because of the potential endogeneity of
proximity. If proximity is not exogenous but is related to variables that affect labor
supply and childcare decisions (e.g., both proximity and labor supply may be influenced
by human capital investment, fertility and the marriage market), then the IV results are
misleading. To deal with the potential endogeneity of proximity, we use census data to
analyze the relationship between labor force attachment and proximity using a sample of
“military wives,” civilian women with husbands serving in the U.S. military. Economists
have generally viewed the endogeneity of proximity as less serious than those posed by
the childcare-labor supply relationship, as evidenced by several recent papers that use
proximity to mothers as an instrument for family-provided childcare (e.g., Dimova and
Wolff (2008), Dimova and Wolff (2011), Zamarro (2009)). Estimates based on census
1 We use “mothers” to refer to the older generation, “women” to refer to the middle generation (i.e., the
adult daughters of the mothers) and “children” to refer to the youngest generation (i.e., grandchildren of the
mothers). By "young children" we mean children 12 and under.

4
data support our conclusion that proximity has a substantial positive effect on the labor
force attachment of married women with young children and that the mechanism is the
availability of childcare.
Using proximity as an instrument for childcare transfers from mothers or
mothers-in-law, we find that married women who receive childcare transfers from their
mothers or mothers-in-law are 5.1 to 6.2 percentage points more likely to work in the
paid labor force than those who do not receive childcare transfers. These estimates are
based on predicted transfer of childcare in the previous month and may underestimate the
full effect of geographic proximity. Proximity to a mother or mother-in-law who can
respond to irregular or unanticipated childcare needs constitutes a kind of insurance the
importance of which may be greater than the number of actual or predicted childcare
hours would suggest. Market-based childcare may be a good substitute for care provided
by a grandmother when the need for childcare is regular and anticipated. But market-
based childcare is less able to meet irregular or unanticipated childcare needs. Hence, the
proximity of a grandmother who can pick up a sick child from school, take a child to after
school sports practice, or care for a child whose parents are traveling on business may
affect women's labor market choices, even if such childcare needs seldom arise.
To allay concerns that proximity affects labor force attachment through
channels other than childcare, we show that proximity has no discernable effect on the
labor force behavior of married women without childcare needs: those without young
children. Although unmarried women with children are more likely than married women
with children to benefit from work-related childcare by their mothers, we do not find a
relationship between proximity and labor force attachment for unmarried women. This
lack of effect is consistent with a more inelastic labor supply of unmarried women with
children, making them less responsive to the availability of childcare.2
Using micro-data from the census, we find additional evidence that proximity to
mothers or mothers-in-law increases the labor force attachment of married women with
2 Kimmel (1998) finds that the labor supply of unmarried mothers is less responsive to childcare prices than
the labor supply of married mothers. Bishop et al (2009) estimate labor supply elasticities for single
women and show that participation wage elasticities for single mothers have declined dramatically between
1980 and 2004, and are much lower than those for married mothers. They estimate a participation wage
elasticity for single mothers of 0.68 in 1979, dropping to 0.25 by 2004. In contrast, Blau and Kahn (2007)
estimate wage elasticities for married mothers at 0.98-1.04 in 1979-1981 and 0.48-0.54 in 1999-2001.