NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CEO PREFERENCES AND ACQUISITIONS
Dirk Jenter
Katharina Lewellen
Working Paper 17663
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17663
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011
We are grateful for comments and suggestions from Kenneth Ahern, John Graham, Simi Kedia, Kevin
J. Murphy, Francisco Perez-Gonzalez, Adriano Rampini, Myron Scholes, Geoffrey Tate, Ivo Welch,
Rebecca Zarutskie, Jeffrey Zwiebel, seminar participants at the University of Michigan, Nanyang Technological
University, National University of Singapore, Singapore Management University, Stanford University,
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, and conference participants at the 2011 Econometric
Society Meeting, the 2011 Western Finance Association Meeting, the 2011 Duke-UNC Corporate
Finance Conference, and the 2011 SFS Cavalcade. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Dirk Jenter and Katharina Lewellen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

CEO Preferences and Acquisitions
Dirk Jenter and Katharina Lewellen
NBER Working Paper No. 17663
December 2011
JEL No. D22,D23,G3,G30,G34
ABSTRACT
This paper explores the impact of target CEOs’ retirement preferences on the incidence, the pricing,
and the outcomes of takeover bids. Mergers frequently force target CEOs to retire early, and CEOs’
private merger costs are the forgone benefits of staying employed until the planned retirement date.
Using retirement age as an instrument for CEOs’ private merger costs, we find strong evidence that
target CEO preferences affect merger patterns. The likelihood of receiving a takeover bid increases
sharply when target CEOs reach age 65. The probability of a bid is close to 4% per year for target
CEOs below age 65 but increases to 6% for the retirement-age group, a 50% increase in the odds of
receiving a bid. This increase in takeover activity appears discretely at the age-65 threshold, with no
gradual increase as CEOs approach retirement age. Moreover, observed takeover premiums and target
announcement returns are significantly lower when target CEOs are older than 65, reinforcing the
conclusion that retirement-age CEOs are more willing to accept takeover offers. These results suggest
that the preferences of target CEOs have first-order effects on both bidder and target behavior.
Dirk Jenter
Stanford University
Graduate School of Business
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
djenter@stanford.edu
Katharina Lewellen
Tuck School at Dartmouth
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
katharina.lewellen@tuck.dartmouth.edu

1 Introduction
From 1990 to 2008, close to 7,800 public U.S. firms were acquired. For the 5,537 target
firms for which we have data, the total market capitalization exceeded $5.0 trillion. In the
median transaction, target shareholders received a premium of 35% over the pre-
announcement share price, and the total value increase from all deals combined was about
$1.4 trillion. These magnitudes suggest that the takeover market has great potential to create
or destroy shareholder value. This paper provides evidence that the career concerns and
retirement preferences of target firms’ CEOs have first-order effects on takeover decisions,
leading to outcomes that are unlikely to be in the target shareholders’ best interest.
The target firm’s CEO is, arguably, one of the most important actors in the takeover
market. As the top executive of the target, the CEO plays a key role in her firm’s decisions
leading up to a bid (e.g., the decision to seek out a buyer, or to initiate merger talks), and
once a bid is made, the CEO leads her firm’s response and its negotiations with buyers.
Given this unique role, it is interesting to note that target CEOs’ career concerns and
retirement preferences are likely to be at odds with target shareholders’ objectives: target
CEOs typically lose their jobs during or shortly after a takeover, and in only a handful of
cases does the departing CEO find a new position in a public firm (see for example, Martin
and McConnell (1991) and Agrawal and Walkling (1994)). In many cases, mergers force
target CEOs into early retirement, ending their CEO careers entirely. This suggests that
mergers can represent serious setbacks to target CEOs’ careers. Though most CEO
compensation contracts recognize these costs – they include golden parachutes or special
bonuses conditional on mergers – it is unclear to what extent they succeed at eliminating the
inherent incentive problem.
In this paper, we test whether target CEOs’ retirement preferences affect the incidence,
the pricing, and the outcomes of takeover bids. If mergers force target CEOs to retire early,
then the CEOs’ private merger costs are the forgone benefits of staying employed until the
planned retirement date. Though retirement plans differ across individuals, research in labor
economics shows that a disproportional fraction of workers retires at the age of 65 (we
observe the same phenomenon for CEOs). This age-65 effect cannot be fully explained by
monetary incentives, including social security benefits or Medicare, which suggests
behavioral explanations related to customs or social norms. If CEOs similarly favor 65 as
1

retirement age, this preference should be reflected in their private merger costs, and –
provided that these costs affect merger decisions – in the observed merger patterns.
Specifically, one should observe an increase in merger activity as CEOs approach 65, or a
discrete jump in this activity at the age-65 threshold (we derive these predictions in Section
2).
We find strong evidence that target CEOs’ retirement preferences affect merger patterns.
In data on U.S. public firms from 1992 to 2008, the likelihood of a takeover bid increases
sharply when the target CEO reaches age 65. Controlling for CEO and firm characteristics,
the implied probability that a firm receives a takeover bid is close to 4% per year for CEOs
below the retirement age (e.g., in age groups 56-60 and 61-65), but it increases to 6% for the
retirement-age group (above age 65). This corresponds to a 50% increase in the odds of
receiving a bid, and the effect is statistically significant at the 1% level. The increase in
takeover activity appears abruptly at the age-65 threshold, with no gradual increase as CEOs
approach retirement age. The effect is similar whether all bids or only successful bids are
included, and it remains economically large and significant even when CEO age and age
squared are included separately as controls. These results show that bidders are more likely to
target firms with retirement-age CEOs, possibly due to these CEOs’ weaker expected
resistance against takeover bids.
We next examine the effect of CEOs’ retirement preferences on target shareholders’
gains from acquisitions. A target CEO’s attitude towards a merger bid is likely to be
influenced by both the CEO’s private costs and by the expected impact of the merger on
target shareholder value. CEOs pay attention to shareholder value because they themselves
hold equity in their firms, and because of pressure from boards to maximize shareholder
wealth. This implies that a CEO with lower private costs will require a smaller gain for
shareholders to approve a merger deal. Thus, if retirement-age CEOs face lower private costs,
then they should allow more mergers to go through (as we document), and the incremental
deals should generate lower shareholder gains on average.
Consistent with this prediction, observed takeover premiums and target announcement
returns are significantly lower when target CEOs are above 65. Controlling for firm, CEO,
and deal characteristics, the takeover premium measured from one month before the first bid
announcement to the final offer price is eight to ten percentage points lower when the target
has a retirement-age CEO. This effect is both statistically significant and economically large.
2