NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COMPETING ON SPEED
Emiliano Pagnotta
Thomas Philippon
Working Paper 17652
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17652
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011
Both authors are at New York University, Stern School of Business. Philippon is also at NBER and
CEPR. We are particularly grateful to Joel Hasbrouck for his insights. We thank Thierry Foucault,
Yakov Amihud, Albert Menkveld, Pierre-Oliver Weill, Dimitri Vayanos, Ricardo Lagos, Lasse Pedersen
and seminar participant at HEC Paris, NYU Stern, Rochester U., and the SED 2011 conference. We
acknowledge the support of the Smith Richardson Foundation. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Emiliano Pagnotta and Thomas Philippon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Competing on Speed
Emiliano Pagnotta and Thomas Philippon
NBER Working Paper No. 17652
December 2011, Revised December 2011
JEL No. G12,L13,L15
ABSTRACT
Two forces have reshaped global securities markets in the last decade: Exchanges operate at much
faster speeds and the trading landscape has become more fragmented. In order to analyze the positive
and normative implications of these evolutions, we study a framework that captures (i) exchanges'
incentives to invest in faster trading technologies and (ii) investors' trading and participation decisions.
Our model predicts that regulation that protect prices will lead to fragmentation and faster trading
speed. Asset prices decrease when there is intermediation competition and are further depressed by
price protection. Endogenizing speed can also change the slope of asset demand curves. On normative
side, we find that for a given number of exchanges, faster trading is in general socially desirable. Similarly,
for a given trading speed, competition among exchange increases participation and welfare. However,
when speed is endogenous, competition between exchanges is not necessarily desirable. In particular,
speed can be inefficiently high. Our model sheds light on important features of the experience of European
and U.S. markets since the implementation of Reg. NMS, and provides some guidance for optimal
regulations.
Emiliano Pagnotta
New York University
Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-81
New York, NY 10012
emiliano.pagnotta@stern.nyu.edu
Thomas Philippon
New York University
Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
tphilipp@stern.nyu.edu

“Inthishigh-techstockmarket,DirectEdgeandtheotherexchangesaresprinting
for advantage. All the exchanges have pushed down their latencies [...] Almost
each week, it seems, one exchange or another claims a new record [...] The
exchanges have gone warp speed because traders have demanded it. Even main-
stream banks and old-fashioned mutual funds have embraced the change”. The
New YorkTimes,January1st2011,The New Speed of Money, Reshaping Markets
The securities exchange industry has been been deeply transformed over the past decade.
In particular, the speed at which investors trade has increased a lot, and stock trading,
particularly in the U.S., have become significantly more fragmented. The consequences of
these transformations are the subject of heated debates in academic and policy circles. In
thispaper we providea frameworkforthejoint analysis oftrading speed, tradingregulations,
and market fragmentation.
Let us consider trading speed first. Major market centers around the world have made
costlyinvestments infastcomputerized tradingplatformstoreducecommunicationlatencies.
This process has gone beyond stock exchanges to include derivatives and currencies, and it
has accelerated during the second half of the 2000s. Figure 1 illustrate this trend. It displays
the reduction in execution times of small orders on NYSE and NASDAQ. What is driving
this race for speed? In the human-driven trading era, higher execution speeds helped reduce
moral hazard with floor brokers, but this is less relevant in the current environment. In
this paper, we emphasize investor heterogeneity and vertical differentiation. We argue that
market centers seeking to attract order flows have an incentive to relax price competition by
differentiating along the speed dimension.
The second major feature of the new trading landscape is fragmentation, illustrated by
Figure 2 for Europe and the U.S. The top panel (Europe) shows that traditional markets
2

Figure 1: Speed of Executing small orders (seconds)
Source: Angel, Harris and Spatt (2010)
such as the London Stock Exchange have lost market share to faster entrants such as Chi-X.
The bottom panel (US) shows an even more dramatic evolution: the fraction of NYSE-listed
stocks traded at the NYSE has decreased from 80% in 2004 to just over 20% in 2009. Most
of the lost trading volume has been captured by new entrants (e.g. Direct Edge and BATS).
Market regulators were not passive witnesses of this process. In the U.S., policy makers
have encouraged fragmentation to reduce the market power of exchanges and other interme-
diaries (prominently with Reg. NMS, which we discuss below).1 The effects are tangible:
big cap stocks that previously traded in one or two exchanges can now be traded in near fifty
venues (including internalization. pools and dark venues). But, does fragmentation achieve
the desired goal? Should it be fostered in the first place? We argue that the answer to
this question depends on the nature of innovations in intermediation services (e.g., execution
delays). This dimension, however, is largely absent from the fragmentation literature.
1Forexample,theSECstatedin2010: “mandatingtheconsolidationoforderflowinasinglevenuewould
create a monopoly and thereby lose the important benefits of competition among markets. The benefits of
such competition include incentives for trading centers to create new products, provide high quality trading
services that meet the needs of investors, and keep trading fees low.”
3