NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE INCIDENCE OF GEOGRAPHY ON CANADA'S SERVICES TRADE
James E. Anderson
Catherine A. Milot
Yoto V. Yotov
Working Paper 17630
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17630
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011
We are grateful for research support from the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade,
Canada. Funding came from the Research Fund on North American Borders, Security and Prosperity
managed by Industry Canada. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by James E. Anderson, Catherine A. Milot, and Yoto V. Yotov. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Incidence of Geography on Canada's Services Trade
James E. Anderson, Catherine A. Milot, and Yoto V. Yotov
NBER Working Paper No. 17630
December 2011
JEL No. F1
ABSTRACT
We estimate geographic barriers to export trade in nine service categories for Canada's provinces from
1997 to 2007 using the structural gravity model. Constructed Home, Domestic and Foreign Bias indexes
(the last two new) capture the direct plus indirect effect of services trade costs on intra-provincial,
inter-provincial and international trade relative to their frictionless benchmarks. Barriers to services
international trade are huge relative to inter-provincial trade and large relative to goods international
trade. A novel test confirms the fit of structural gravity with services trade data.
James E. Anderson Yoto V. Yotov
Department of Economics Drexel University
Boston College LeBow College of Business
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467 Department of Economics and International Business
and NBER Matheson Hall, Suite 503-C
james.anderson.1@bc.edu Philadelphia, PA 19104
yotov@drexel.edu
Catherine A. Milot
Department of Foreign Affairs
and International Trade, Canada
111 Sussex Drive
Ottawa, Canada K1N 1J1
catherine.milot@international.gc.ca

Introduction
Fog lying over services trade volumes and barriers has impeded progress in
understanding services trade, how policies affect it and how trade negoti-
ations can liberalize it. This paper pushes back some of the fog by quan-
tifying the effects of geographic barriers to the services trade of Canada’s
provinces from 1997 to 2007. New and exceptionally high quality bilateral
services trade data from Statistics Canada are used to estimate structural
gravity equations for nine service sectors. Novel Constructed Bias indexes
combine the bilateral and multilateral effects of geographic barriers on ser-
vices trade. A test based on the Constructed Bias indexes confirms the
validity of the restrictions of structural gravity for services trade.
ConstructedForeignBias(CFB)istheratioofpredictedtohypothetical
frictionless foreign trade. CFB in services trade is huge, on average some
800 times smaller than Constructed Domestic Bias (CDB), the ratio of
predicted to hypothetical frictionless inter-provincial trade. Constructed
Home Bias (CHB), the ratio of predicted to frictionless internal trade,
measures the localization of trade. CHB is very large and varies much more
by province than does CDB, provincial localization is considerably damped
on inter-provincial services trade. In contrast, powerful forces other than
localization suppress international trade in services as measured by CFB.
The ratio of the CFB and CDB indexes is a power function of the
relative sellers’ incidence of foreign and domestic trade costs. Relative
incidence complements the direct bilateral border trade cost inferred from
estimated gravity equations. The implied sellers’ incidence of foreign trade
costs is 2 to 4 times that for domestic trade costs, assuming an elasticity of
substitution between 6 and 10 (as standard in the literature) to infer trade
costs from the trade displacing effects of geographic barriers. This measure
of the full effects of geography on relative services sellers’ incidence is a
multipleoftheoverallbilateraldirectbordereffectontradecostsestimated
from gravity below. A border cost factor equivalent of between 1.52 and
2.11 is inferred for elasticity of substitution between 6 and 10.
The foreign trade-reducing forces of gravity are much stronger for ser-
vices than for goods — Canada’s provinces have lower CFB in services
than in goods by a factor exceeding 7. (The CFB calculations for goods

use Anderson and Yotov’s (2010) data for 19 manufacturing and primary
goods industries of Canada’s provinces from 1992 to 2003). Services on the
wholedonotexhibitgreaterConstructedHomeBias(CHB)thandogoods,
where CHB measures the excess localization of trade in goods and in ser-
vices, the ratio of predicted to frictionless within-province trade. In other
words, localization forces operate about equally on goods and services, so
they do not explain the much lower CFB in services than in goods. (On net
a higher CDB in services offsets the lower CFB in meeting the requirement
that a weighted average of CDB, CFB and CHB must always sum to 1.)
Over time, though less than for the goods sectors, CHB in services
is mostly falling for Canada’s provinces; CFB rises dominate CDB falls.
Aggregating across provinces and sectors, CHB falls, CDB falls and CFB
rises: Canada’s service sector is becoming more outward oriented.
Our method is to proxy trade barriers with geographic variables, in-
cluding the effect on provincial trade of crossing international borders. The
variationacrossprovincesintheirtradewiththeUSallowsaninternational
border effect on services trade to be identified, overcoming a limitation of
previous gravity model work on services using national data (Francois and
Hoekman, 2010, review the literature). An important subtlety is that the
size of the barrier is partly endogenous since private agents can invest in
reducing the impact of governmentally imposed regulatory and security
barriers. Thus our reduced form approach to barrier measurement risks
focusing on an unstable relationship between geographic proxies and bi-
lateral trade patterns. Despite the risk, our results indicate that gravity
works well in the case of services disaggregated into 9 sectors, yielding
stable coefficients over the period 1997-2007.
We explore whether the security-related measures implemented since
September 11, 2001 have led to border thickening/thinning by estimating
border coefficients before and after 9/11. Direct evidence from a survey of
Canadian service providers (Vance, 2007) reports additional border-related
obstacles. (More complete survey evidence on regulatory barriers along
withdirectmeasuresofallotherborderbarrierscouldinprinciplebeusedin
gravitymodelingtoconvertimpliedsecuritybarriersintotariffequivalents.)
We find significant, large service border effects in each direction of service
tradeflows. Thereisevidenceforchanges(mostlythickening)intheborder
2