NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A THEORY OF INCOME SMOOTHING WHEN INSIDERS KNOW MORE THAN
OUTSIDERS
Viral V. Acharya
Bart M. Lambrecht
Working Paper 17696
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17696
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011
We are grateful to Phil Brown, Peter Easton, Stew Myers, John O'Hanlon, Ken Peasnell, Joshua Ronen,
Stephen Ryan, Lakshmanan Shivakumar and Steve Young for insightful discussions. Comments can
be sent to Viral Acharya (vacharya@stern.nyu.edu) or Bart Lambrecht (b.lambrecht@lancaster.ac.uk).
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Viral V. Acharya and Bart M. Lambrecht. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

A Theory of Income Smoothing When Insiders Know More Than Outsiders
Viral V. Acharya and Bart M. Lambrecht
NBER Working Paper No. 17696
December 2011
JEL No. D82,D92,G32,G35,M41,M42,O43
ABSTRACT
We consider a setting in which insiders have information about income that outside shareholders do
not, but property rights ensure that outside shareholders can enforce a fair payout. To avoid intervention,
insiders report income consistent with outsiders' expectations based on publicly available information
rather than true income, resulting in an observed income and payout process that adjust partially and
over time towards a target. Insiders under-invest in production and effort so as not to unduly raise
outsiders' expectations about future income, a problem that is more severe the smaller is the inside
ownership and results in an "outside equity Laffer curve". A disclosure environment with adequate
quality of independent auditing mitigates the problem, implying that accounting quality can enhance
investments, size of public stock markets and economic growth.
Viral V. Acharya
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-84
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu
Bart M. Lambrecht
Lancaster University Management School
Room C-42
Bailrigg
Lancaster LA1 4YX, UK
b.lambrecht@lancaster.ac.uk

Introduction
A fundamental property right conferred upon stockholders of a firm is that they are
entitled to their fair share of the firm’s (distributable) net income. Since stock owner-
ship is verifiable, this right is relatively easy to enforce provided that everyone agrees
on what the income is. In a world of complete information, determining net income
should be a relatively simple matter because it is clear to everyone to see how much
money is left on the table after all senior claimants (creditors, managers, employees,
taxman, ...) have been paid. Matters become more tricky in a world of asymmetric
information where inside shareholders may know more than outside shareholders.
How is income reported and payout determined if asymmetric information is a fact
of life? What are the effects of information asymmetry on insiders’ production decision
or incentives to put in effort? How does asymmetric information affect the time-series
properties of reported income and payout? How does inside ownership affect income
and operating efficiency? These are some of the questions we try to address in this
paper.
Weconsideranall-equityfinancedfirmthatpaysouteachperiodallrealizedincome.
In our model outsiders can extract their share of income from the firm by a threat
of collective action against insiders.1 While under symmetric information outsiders
know exactly what they are due, under asymmetric information outsiders refrain from
intervention for as long as the reported income (and corresponding payout) meets
their expectations. Outsiders (supported by analysts) form their expectations about
income on the basis of the information available to them. Outsiders’ income estimate
is unbiased and “best” based on the information they have available, and it is therefore
rationalforthemtorequireapayoutthatisconsistentwiththeirexpectations.2 Hence,
1If collective action is costly (as in Myers (2000), Jin and Myers (2006), Lambrecht and Myers
(2007, 2008), Acharya, Myers and Rajan (2011), among others) then this gives insiders scope to
extractrents,whicherodesoutsiders’stakeinthefirm’sincomeandthevalueoftheoutsideequity. A
strictly positive cost of intervention is not central to our paper. We rule out, however, the possibility
that property rights are void and outsiders cannot extract any income from the firm as this would
completely undermine the firm’s capability to raise outside equity in the first place.
2Policies where insiders pay out according to realized income would be “fragile” for insiders. For
instance,ifrealizedpayoutsarerepeatedlybelowoutsiders’estimates,thenoutsidersmaybelievethey
are being taken for a ride by insiders and intervene.
1

when the strength of property rights and pressure by outside investors keeps insiders to
the straight and narrow, the equilibrium payout will be smooth compared to realized
income as it is based on outsiders’ expectation. Insiders absorb short-term variation
in income and, if necessary, have to “find the money” to keep outside investors at bay.
So far smoothing is fairly harmless in that it merely irons out variation in reported
income. We call it “financial smoothing” because it merely alters the time pattern of
reported income (through borrowing and savings) without changing the firm’s under-
lying cash-flows as determined by insiders’ production and effort decisions. Insiders
may, however, also engage in “real smoothing” by manipulating production and effort
decisions in an attempt to “manage” outsiders’ expectations. In particular, suppose
outsiders cannot observe value-relevant variables (such as marginal costs) directly but
have to rely on an incomplete set of observable proxies (such as output or sales) in
order to infer income indirectly. Then insiders may have an incentive to distort the
observable proxy variables in order to lower outsiders’ expectations about current and
future income. The logic of this results is as follows.
Suppose that outsiders can observe realized sales (revenues) but not costs. In
particular, the firm’s marginal cost is a stochastic latent variable. While outsiders do
not know the realization of the marginal cost, the parameters that drive the marginal
cost process are common knowledge. As before outsiders expect their fair share of
income. Insiders know that outsiders associate a higher sales level with lower marginal
costs. Therefore, upon observing higher sales, outsiders expect income to be higher
and want higher payout. In an attempt to manage outsiders’ expectations, insiders
underproduce and cut output up to the point where the cost in terms of reducing
expected income equals the benefit of lowering outsiders’ payout expectations.
In contrast, in an environment of symmetric information where payout to outsiders
is a function of actual income (i.e., cash-flows), insiders determine the firm’s output
(and sales) level at the first-best by setting marginal costs equal to marginal revenues.3
Now, though insiders underproduce in order to manage outsiders’ expectations, in
equilibrium they are not successful in their attempt because insiders anticipate what is
going on and can still infer from sales the value of the latent cost variable if that is the
3In effect, insiders have an incentive to maximize total firm value and to put in the optimal effort
level if they get (i) a constant fraction of the firm’s actual (i.e., realized) income and, (ii) a perfectly
competitive remuneration (taken upfront out of gross revenues) for their cost of effort.
2