NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EVAPORATING LIQUIDITY
Stefan Nagel
Working Paper 17653
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17653
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011
I thank Miguel Ferreira, Terrence Hendershott, David Hirshleifer, Charles Jones, Ron Kaniel, Ian Martin,
Konstantin Milbradt, Laura Starks, Dimitry Vayanos, an anonymous referee, and seminar participants
at the University of Amsterdam, University of Arizona, University of British Columbia, Columbia
University, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, University of Maastricht, Princeton, Rice, Stanford,
the American Finance Association Meetings, the NBER Summer Institute, and the Gutmann Center
Symposium at WU Vienna for useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Stefan Nagel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Evaporating Liquidity
Stefan Nagel
NBER Working Paper No. 17653
December 2011
JEL No. G12
ABSTRACT
The returns of short-term reversal strategies in equity markets can be interpreted as a proxy for the
returns from liquidity provision. Analysis of reversal strategies shows that the expected return from
liquidity provision is strongly time-varying and highly predictable with the VIX index. Expected returns
and conditional Sharpe Ratios increase enormously along with the VIX during times of (cid:0)nancial market
turmoil, such as the (cid:0)nancial crisis 2007-09. Even reversal strategies formed from industry portfolios
(which do not yield high returns unconditionally) produce high rates of return and high Sharpe Ratios
during times of high VIX. The results point to withdrawal of liquidity supply, and an associated increase
in the expected returns from liquidity provision, as a main driver behind the evaporation of liquidity
during times of (cid:0)nancial market turmoil, consistent with theories of liquidity provision by (cid:0)nancially
constrained intermediaries.
Stefan Nagel
Stanford University
Graduate School of Business
518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
nagel_stefan@gsb.stanford.edu

1 Introduction
Liquidity evaporated in many sectors of financial markets during the financial crisis 2007-09.
Insome markets, such as those for “toxic” asset-backed securities, tradingactivity reportedly
came to a complete halt.1 There are at least two possible explanations for this disappearance
of market liquidity. One is that the crisis amplified asymmetric information problems. For
example, Gorton and Metrick (2010) argue that large adverse shocks strongly increased the
information sensitivity of securitized debt. According to this view, the reduction in liquidity
is a symptom for aggravated adverse selection problems. An alternative and complementary
theory is that the market turmoil strained the inventory-absorption capacity of the market-
making sector, either because of a surge in liquidity demand from the public, or because
market makers reduced liquidity supply in response to elevated levels of risk, tighter funding
constraints, and reduced competition. According to this second view, the conditions during
the crisis raised the expected return from liquidity provision.
This paper studies this second channel using data from equity markets. The main objec-
tive is to estimate the extent by which the expected return from liquidity provision rises in
times of financial market turmoil. The notion of “liquidity providers” adopted in this paper
is broad and not restricted to designated market makers. Liquidity provision in equity mar-
kets is increasingly performed by algorithmic traders and other quantitative investors that
perform, effectively, a market-making role, but without being officially designated as market
makers (Hendershott, Jones, and Menkveld (2011)). Even individual investors could perform
a liquidity provision role to some extent (Kaniel, Saar, and Titman (2008)).
Toconstructaproxy forthereturnsfromliquidity provision, Iexamine reversalstrategies
that buy stocks that went down over the prior days, and sell stocks that went up during the
prior days, as in Lehman (1990) and Lo and MacKinlay (1990). This pattern of buying and
selling in reversal strategies resembles the trading of a market maker who sells when the
public buys (which tends to coincide with rising prices), and who buys when the public sells
1See Brunnermeier (2009) for a review.
1

(which tends to coincide with falling prices). Setting up a model in which the public trades
forliquidity andinformationalreasons, andinwhichmarketmakers have limited risk-bearing
capacity, I show that reversal strategy returns closely track the returns earned by liquidity
providers. Effectively, reversal strategies use lagged returns as a noisy proxy for unobserved
market maker inventory imbalances. They profit from the transitory price impact of order
flow and the negative serial correlation in price changes that arises from market makers’
aversion to absorbing inventory. Price impact due to private information, in contrast, is
permanent and does not induce negative serial correlation (Glosten and Milgrom (1985)),
which allows me to isolate the variation in the expected returns from liquidity provision from
adverse selection effects.2
The focus of this paper is to examine whether there is predictable time-variation in the
returns from liquidity provision. Recent work on risk-taking of financial intermediaries sug-
geststhattheVIXindexofimpliedvolatilities ofS&P500indexoptionsisanaturalcandidate
predictor. ThetheoriesinGrombandVayanos (2002) andBrunnermeierandPedersen(2009)
predict that higher volatility tightens funding constraints of market makers and thereby re-
duces their liquidity-provision capacity. Adrian and Shin(2010) argue that risk-management
constraints reduce the risk appetite of financial intermediaries in times of high VIX. Ang,
Gorovyy, and van Inwegen (2011) and Ben-David, Franzoni, and Moussawi (2011) find that
hedge funds lose assets under management and reduce leverage in times of market turmoil
and high VIX. Motivating evidence also comes from a recent literature that finds the VIX to
be related to various asset-pricing phenomena that may be related to risk-taking of financial
intermediaries, such as corporate bond liquidity (Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011)), foreign ex-
change carry trades (Brunnermeier, Nagel, and Pedersen (2008)) or sovereign credit-default
swaps (Longstaff, Pan, Pedersen, and Singleton (2010)).
Figure 1 illustrates some of the key findings of the paper. The solid line plots a three-
2InGlostenandMilgrom’smodel,greateradverseselectionleadstoawiderbid-askspread,buttransaction
prices always follow a martingale (i.e., there is no bid-ask bounce), and market makers, as well as reversal
strategies, earn zero expected return.
2