NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND INSTITUTIONAL CHANGE
Andrei A. Levchenko
Working Paper 17675
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17675
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011
I am grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Michael Alexeev, Julian di Giovanni, Simon Johnson, Nuno Limao,
Jaume Ventura, Josep Vilarrubia, the editor (John Morgan), two anonymous referees, and workshop
participants at Dartmouth College, University of Maryland, CEPR (Stockholm), the IAE-CSIC Conference
on Institutions, Contracts, and Growth (Barcelona), the Cornell-Michigan Conference on Enforcement,
Evasion and Informality (Ann Arbor), and the 2011 AEA meetings (Denver) for helpful suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Andrei A. Levchenko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

International Trade and Institutional Change
Andrei A. Levchenko
NBER Working Paper No. 17675
December 2011
JEL No. F15,P45,P48
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the impact of international trade on the quality of institutions, such as contract
enforcement, property rights, or investor protection. It presents a model in which imperfect institutions
create rents for some parties within the economy, and are a source of comparative advantage in trade.
Institutional quality is determined as an equilibrium of a political economy game. When countries
share the same technology, there is a "race to the top'' in institutional quality: irrespective of country
characteristics, both trade partners are forced to improve institutions after opening. On the other hand,
domestic institutions will not improve in either country when one of the countries has a strong enough
technological comparative advantage in the institutionally intensive good. We provide empirical evidence
for a related cross-sectional prediction of the model. Countries whose exogenous geographical characteristics
predispose them to exporting in institutionally intensive sectors exhibit significantly higher institutional
quality.
Andrei A. Levchenko
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
alev@umich.edu

1 Introduction
Recent literature on the economics of institutions has established a set of important results. First,
institutionsmatteragreatdealforeconomicperformance(LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleiferand
Vishny, e.g. 1997, 1998, Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, e.g. 2001, 2005a, Rodrik, e.g. 2007).
Second, in spite of the obvious overall benefits to institutional improvement, institutions are in
fact very persistent (Acemoglu and Robinson 2008). Relatedly, episodes of institutional change are
rare, and they are typically associated with large and abrupt changes in the economic environment.
Finally, institutions are a source of comparative advantage in trade, and the welfare consequences
of institutional comparative advantage are often ambiguous (Levchenko 2007, Nunn 2007, Costinot
2009).
This paper analyzes the impact of international trade on economic institutions. This is an
important question, because it is widely hoped that greater openness will improve institutional
quality through a variety of channels, including reducing rents, creating constituencies for reform,
and inducing specialization in sectors that demand good institutions (International Monetary Fund
2005, Johnson, Ostry and Subramanian 2007). Indeed, Rodrik (2000) argues that the greatest
growth benefits of trade liberalization may well come not from the conventional channels, but
from the institutional reform that trade liberalization can engender. However, no well-accepted
theoretical framework or a set of basic results on this question currently exist. This paper is an
attempt to fill this gap.
We develop a model in which institutions play two key roles. First, they generate rents for some
parties within the economy. Second, they are a source of comparative advantage in trade. Then,
we endogenize institutional quality using a simple political economy model in which some groups
lobby for rents created by imperfect institutions. When countries share the same technology, trade
leads to a “race to the top” in institutional quality. Trading partners improve institutions up to
the best attainable level after opening, as they compete to capture the sectors that generate rents.
By contrast, when one of the trading partners has a sufficiently strong technological comparative
advantage in the rent-generating good, institutions do not improve after trade opening in either
country. When other sources of comparative advantage are strong enough, changing institutions
will not affect trade patterns, and thus trade does not create an incentive to improve them.
To analyze the effect of trade on institutional quality, we must first build a model of institu-
tions. To do so, this paper uses the insights from the incomplete contracts literature exemplified
by Williamson (1985) and Grossman and Hart (1986). The quality of contract enforcement is
important because it allows agents to overcome the well-known holdup problem. This modeling
approach leads to a concrete interpretation of what constitutes institutional quality, suggested by
1

CaballeroandHammour(1998): incountrieswithworseinstitutionscontractsaremoreincomplete.
This framework can be adapted seamlessly and tractably to both trade openness and the political
economy of institutions.
An important aspect of the incomplete contracts setup is that some parties to production earn
rents. Those parties benefit from making institutions worse, up to a certain point, and thus have
an incentive to lobby for imperfect institutions. This feature lends itself naturally to endogenizing
institutions in the political economy framework of Grossman and Helpman (1994). We show that
equilibrium institutions can be sub-optimal, as the parties benefiting from rents lobby against
the first-best level of institutions. Thus, one of the contributions of this paper is to introduce a
parsimonious and tractable model of endogenous institutions, that combines the insights from the
literatures on both incomplete contracts and political economy.1
Under trade, both countries set institutions non-cooperatively as in the two-country model
of Grossman and Helpman (1995). The key force driving institutional change is what happens
to the rents when countries open to trade. There are several cases to consider. When countries
sharethesametechnology, institutionaldifferencesarethesalientsourceofcomparativeadvantage.
Aftertradeopening, onlythecountrywithbetterinstitutionsproducestheinstitutionallyintensive
good, which is characterized by rents. By contrast, the rents disappear in the country with inferior
institutions.2 The resulting political economy equilibrium is a “race to the top” in institutional
quality: both countries improve institutions up to the best attainable level. This is because rents
– the very reason to lobby for bad institutions – cannot be captured unless a country improves
institutions to at least the level slightly better than the trading partner’s. When both countries
set their institutional quality simultaneously and non-cooperatively, equilibrium is characterized
by the best attainable institutions, a Bertrand-like outcome.3 Note that the “race to the top”
result is completely due to the changing preferences of the lobby groups regarding the optimal
institutions: their political power does not change as a result of trade opening. Nonetheless,
1An novel aspect of this paper is that while the large majority of papers employing the Grossman-Helpman
framework apply it to fiscal instruments – be it tariffs, taxes, or subsidies – we use it to model the determination of
institutions instead.
2See Levchenko (2007) for a detailed analysis of this result.
3Note that we do not attempt to endogenize trade opening. Endogenous trade policy has been the subject of a
large literature, and remains beyond the scope of this paper (see, e.g., Rodrik 1995, Grossman and Helpman 2002).
Nonetheless, we believe that our exercise is still well worth pursuing. First, in many instances changes in trade
openness have indeed been exogenous, driven by technological shocks or changes in colonial regimes. Second, many
other factorsbesidesensuing institutionalchangecontributeto the formationof trade policy. Thus, it couldbe that
even when trade openness is endogenous, it is driven by factors unrelated to those we are modeling. The policy
initiatives promoting unconditional trade liberalization in developing countries are an important example. Finally,
in order to analyze trade opening and endogenous institutions simultaneously, it is important to first understand
how the former affects the latter. This paper studies that question, and thus can be used as a building block for a
more completeanalysis. Indeed, ourapproachcan beviewedas complementary to the tradepolicy literature, which
endogenizes openness but assumes that institutions are exogenous and do not change with trade opening.
2