NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TIME-VARYING FUND MANAGER SKILL
Marcin Kacperczyk
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Laura Veldkamp
Working Paper 17615
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17615
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2011
We thank the Q-group for their generous financial support. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Marcin Kacperczyk, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Laura Veldkamp. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Time-Varying Fund Manager Skill
Marcin Kacperczyk, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Laura Veldkamp
NBER Working Paper No. 17615
November 2011
JEL No. G00,G11,G2
ABSTRACT
Mutual fund managers can outperform the market by picking stocks or timing the market successfully.
Previous work has estimated picking and timing skill, assuming that each manager is endowed with
a fixed amount of each and found some evidence of picking skills and little evidence of timing skills
among successful managers. This paper estimates skill separately in booms and recessions and finds
that the extent to which managers focus on stock picking or market timing fluctuates with the state
of the economy. Stock picking is more prevalent in booms, while market timing dominates in recessions.
We use this finding to develop a new methodology for detecting managerial skill. The results suggest
that some but not all managers have skill. We describe the characteristics of the skilled managers and
show that skilled managers significantly outperform the market.
Marcin Kacperczyk Laura Veldkamp
Stern School of Business Stern School of Business
New York University New York University
44 West 4th Street 44 W Fourth Street,Suite 7-77
KMC 9-190 New York, NY 10012
New York, NY 10012 and NBER
and NBER lveldkam@stern.nyu.edu
mkacperc@stern.nyu.edu
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 W 4th Street, Suite 9-120
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
svnieuwe@stern.nyu.edu

An enormous literature asks whether investment managers add value for their clients and
if so, how. One way to answer this question is to decompose fund performance into stock-
picking ability and market-timing ability. Previous work has estimated picking and timing
skills implicitly assuming that each manager is endowed with a fixed amount of each skill.
But stock picking and market timing are not talents one is born with. They are the result
of time spent working, analyzing data. Like workers in other jobs, fund managers may
choose to focus on different tasks at different points in time. This simple idea leads us
to re-estimate fund manager skill in a way that allows its nature to change, depending on
economic conditions. Our results show that successful managers pick stocks well in booms
and time the market well in recessions. This suggests that skills such as stock picking and
market timing are not distinct and permanent, but instead reflect a cognitive ability that
can be applied in different ways depending on the market environment. As a financial web
site ZeroHedge writes: “It is hard for a portfolio manager to focus on the nuances of stock
selection when the prospects of a U.S. recession keep rising. ...Simply put, the macro is
overwhelming the micro.”1
Understanding exactly how managers add value for their clients is important because
a large and growing fraction of individual investors delegate their portfolio management
to professional investment managers.2 Yet, a significant body of evidence finds that the
average actively managed fund does not outperform passive investment strategies, net of
fees, and after controlling for differences in systematic risk exposure. Instead, there is a
small subset of funds that persistently outperform. Most previous work has argued that this
1Published on September 25, 2011.
2In1980,48%ofU.S.equitywasdirectlyheldbyindividuals–asopposedtobeingheldthroughinterme-
diaries; by 2007,that fractionwas down to 21.5%(French(2008), Table 1). At the end of 2008,$9.6trillion
was invested with such intermediaries in the U.S. Of all investment in domestic equity mutual funds, about
85% was actively managed (2009 Investment Company Factbook).
1

outperformance comes from stock picking and not market timing. Our results suggest that
the reason previous studies failed to detect market- timing ability is because it is typically
displayed only in recessions, which are a small fraction of the sample periods. Once we
condition on the state of the economy, we find that most skilled managers exhibit both
types of skill: Those who are good stock-pickers in booms are also good market-timers in
recessions.
The fact that only a subset of managers add value makes it important to be able to
identify these skilled managers. Therefore, a second contribution of the paper is to develop
a new measure for detecting managerial skill, that gives more weight to fund manager’s
market-timing ability inrecessions andher stock-picking ability inbooms. This new measure
predicts performance. We show that a subset of managers with the highest value of our skill
measure significantly outperform the passive benchmarks by 70-90 basis points per year, in
a persistent way.
To measure skill, we construct estimates of stock picking (the covariance of portfolio
weights withthefirm-specific component of stockreturns) andmarket timing (thecovariance
of portfolio weights with the aggregate component of stock returns) for each firm in each
12-month rolling window. Then, we regress these timing and picking variables on a recession
indicator variable to determine if skills change significantly over the business cycle. We find
that the average fund manager exhibits greater stock-picking ability in booms and a better
market-timing ability in recessions. Moreover, results from quantile regressions show that it
is the most skilled managers that vary the use of their skills most over the business cycle.
This is consistent with the idea that only some managers have skill and it is those managers
who decide how to apply that skill depending on the economic environment. Importantly,
this is not a composition effect. It is the same manager who picks stocks well in booms that
2