NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE FUTURE OF THE GOVERNMENT SPONSORED ENTERPRISES:
THE ROLE FOR GOVERNMENT IN THE U.S. MORTGAGE MARKET
Dwight Jaffee
John M. Quigley
Working Paper 17685
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17685
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011
We are grateful to the Fisher Center for Real Estate and Urban Economics at the University of California,
Berkeley, for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Dwight Jaffee and John M. Quigley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Future of the Government Sponsored Enterprises: The Role for Government in the U.S.
Mortgage Market
Dwight Jaffee and John M. Quigley
NBER Working Paper No. 17685
December 2011
JEL No. G01,G2,G28,H81,R21,R3
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes options for reforming the U.S. housing finance system in view of the failure of
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac as government sponsored enterprises (GSEs). The options considered
include GSE reform, a range of possible new governmental mortgage guarantee plans, and greater
reliance on private mortgage markets. The analysis also considers the likely consequences of adopting
alternative roles for government in the U.S. housing and mortgage markets. We start by reviewing
the history of the GSEs and their contributions to the operation of U.S. housing and mortgage markets,
including the actions that led to their failure in conjunction with the recent mortgage market crisis.
The reform options we consider include those proposed in a 2011 U.S. Treasury White Paper, plans
for new government mortgage guarantees from various researchers and organizations, and the evidence
from Western European countries for the efficacy of private mortgages markets.
Dwight Jaffee
Haas School of Business
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
jaffee@haas.berkeley.edu
John M. Quigley
Department of Economics
Evans Hall #3880
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
quigley@econ.berkeley.edu

I. Introduction
The two large Government Sponsored Housing Enterprises (GSEs),1 the Federal
National Mortgage Association (“Fannie Mae”) and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Corporation (“Freddie Mac”), evolved over three quarters of a century from a single
small government agency, to a large and powerful duopoly, and ultimately to insolvent
institutions protected from bankruptcy only by the full faith and credit of the U.S.
government. Between 2007 and Q2 2011, the two GSEs had realized losses of $247
billion, and they required draws of $169 billion under the Treasured Preferred Stock
Purchase Agreements to remain in operation. (See Federal Housing Finance Agency
2011). This paper traces the transformation of the GSEs from privately held institutions
with powerful direction and political influence to vassals reporting to an administrative
agency in the Department of Housing and Urban Development (the Federal Housing
Finance Agency, FHFA).
Within the next few years, the agencies will have to be restructured. Proposals for
reform include recapitalizing them in some form as Government Sponsored Enterprises
(GSEs), reconstituting them as agencies of the federal government with more narrowly-
specified missions, or privatizing the organizations. There are also proposals to replace
the GSEs with a variety of new government mortgage guarantee/insurance programs. The
GSE reform and mortgage guarantee proposals are both nested within the larger question
of what are the likely consequences of alternative roles for government in the U.S.
housing and mortgage markets. This paper is intended to help in the deliberations about
1 A third, much smaller, Government Sponsored Housing Enterprise is the Federal Home Loan Bank
System (FHLBS). The issues for reforming the FHLBS are similar to many of the issue raised in this paper
for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, although we have not analyzed separately the FHLBS or other non-
housing government enterprises.
2

“what to do” about these costly failures. We briefly review the history of the housing
enterprises and their performance, including the recent housing crisis. We document the
contributions of Freddie and Fannie to the operation of U.S. housing markets, and we
analyze the role of the agencies in the recent housing crisis. We search for evidence on
the importance of Freddie and Fannie in achieving other important housing goals. We
compare U.S. policies with those adopted in other developed countries.
This is not the first time we have provided some analysis of the reform options in
housing finance, either individually (Jaffee, 2010b, 2011; Quigley 2006) or jointly (Jaffee
and Quigley, 2010). However, it is our first attempt to consider all the history and all of
the options.
In section II below we discuss the background and origin of the GSEs and of the
federal role in supplying housing credit. Section III provides a brief summary of
homeownership and government policy. Section IV describes the broader objectives and
goals of the GSE institutions and analyzes the most recent failures of the credit market
and the secondary housing market. Section V links the current housing crisis to the
insolvency of credit institutions. Section VI describes likely the consequences of a series
of plans concerning the restructuring of these institutions and alternative mechanisms for
government support of the U.S. mortgage market. It also provides a brief summary of the
GSEs under their government conservatorship since September 2008.
II. Background
With the public sale of its stock and its conversion into a government sponsored
enterprise in 1968, the Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA) emerged from
obscurity as an agent in the market for home mortgage credit. The FNMA had been
3