NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REGULATING SYSTEMIC RISK THROUGH TRANSPARENCY:
TRADEOFFS IN MAKING DATA PUBLIC
Augustin Landier
David Thesmar
Working Paper 17664
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17664
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Augustin Landier and David Thesmar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Regulating Systemic Risk through Transparency: Tradeoffs in Making Data Public
Augustin Landier and David Thesmar
NBER Working Paper No. 17664
December 2011
JEL No. D82,D83,H41
ABSTRACT
Public or partial disclosure of financial data is a key element in the design of a new regulatory environment.
We study the costs and benefits of higher public access to financial data and analyze qualitatively
how frequency, disclosure lag and granularity of such open data can be chosen to maximize welfare,
depending on the relative magnitude of economic frictions. We lay out a simple framework to choose
optimal transparency of financial data.
Augustin Landier
the Toulouse School of Economics
21 Allée de Brienne
31000 Toulouse, FRANCE
augustin.landier@tse-fr.eu
David Thesmar
HEC Paris
1 rue de la libération
78351 Jouy-en-Josas cedex
France
thesmar@hec.fr

Regulating Systemic Risk through Transparency:
Tradeoffs in Making Data Public
Augustin Landier (TSE) and David Thesmar (HEC)1
Public or partial disclosure of financial data is a key element in the design of a
new regulatory environment. We study the costs and benefits of higher public
access to financial data and analyze qualitatively how frequency, disclosure lag
and granularity of such open data can be chosen to maximize welfare, depending
on the relative magnitude of economic frictions. We lay out a simple framework
to choose optimal transparency of financial data.
According to many observers, the financial crisis is a product of the lack of transparency of
the financial system. In a recent speech, Fed chairman Ben Bernanke acknowledged that
opaqueness was a “structural weakness in the shadow banking system” and an important
element in the narrative of the crisis.2 Examples of such opaqueness are OTC markets such as
the CDS market, for which there is little detailed data about holdings, prices and collateral
posted. This made it difficult for the regulator to understand the web of counterparty
exposures and have its independent assessment of the overall resilience of the system.
Besides what was available to the regulator, public disclosure of financial information was
probably insufficient. For instance, the lack of micro-data on the content of securitized
products made it difficult for investor to price risk correctly. Market participants trading
securitized products such as collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) and collateralized
mortgage obligations (CMOs) were relying on imprecise, and sometimes flawed, ratings
(Benmelech and Dlugoszb (2008)). Beyond pricing, public availability of data is argued to
enhance the role that researchers outside the government (from universities, think-tanks or
other private institutions) can play in assisting, and to some extent monitor, regulators.3
This article is about the optimal degree of public disclosure of financial data. Theoretically,
however, increasing transparency may reduce welfare as well as increase it. For instance,
Dang, Gorton and Holmström (2010) argue that common ignorance of market participants
about the precise nature of some assets might be a desired feature rather than a bug of the
financial system. Such assets might deliberately be constructed as opaque to remain
information insensitive. Releasing more information in the public domain might thus be
welfare decreasing. Other voices, notably from the private sector, warn that extreme
1 We thank Markus Brunnermeier, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Luigi Zingales, and other participants to the NBER
Systemic Risk meeting in Chicago, May 2011.
2 Speech given at the 2010 Squam Lake conference.
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20100616a.htm
3 Mary Graham, 2002, "Democracy by Disclosure", Brookings Institution Press, Washington DC

transparency might be detrimental to incentives of financial agents to produce information
and to innovate.
In this paper, we develop a framework to understand the costs and benefits of public
disclosure of financial data. We believe such a framework can help regulators to determine
the format under which data should be publicly accessible, as a function of the type of
information under consideration. In our framework, the welfare impact of public access to
data depends on three dimensions: (1) the frequency of data collection, (2) the time-lag of
their public release and (3) their level of granularity / anonymity. Granularity and anonymity
are linked as less granular (more aggregated) data make it easier to protect anonymity.
In doing so, our framework addresses the following questions:
 At what frequency should data be collected and made available?
 How long should the regulator wait before releasing the data?
 At what level of detail (granularity) should information be released? If the public
information is detailed, should it be made anonymous?
Frequency, lag and granularity are important choice variables for regulators who wish to
publicly disclose data; yet, there is no systematic doctrine about their optimal level. To give
examples, some data are currently publicly available at very fine levels of granularity (13Fs
filings provide at the institution level an exhaustive position-by-position view of individual
long equity holdings at a quarterly frequency). By contrast some other data are available only
at an aggregated level (e.g. new lending by banks, or bank cross-country exposures). But
these choices owe more to history and political compromises than to a systematic cost and
benefit analysis.
In the first section of the paper, we review the various economic costs associated to public
data release and review the corresponding academic literature. In the second section, we
present several dimensions of data that can be optimized to mitigate each of these costs. Last,
we review the positive impact that might be expected from public access to financial data and
develop a framework to manage on a case-by-case basis the cost-benefit trade-off, notably
through the choice of disclosure lags and granularity.
1. The potential costs of transparency: a review of economic forces at stakes
There is a basic intuitive economic reason why more information is a priori better than less:
Individual decisions are closer to being privately optimal when agents have more accurate
information. Since, in a frictionless economy, private and social efficiency do not differ, it
follows that full public disclosure of information is always desirable from a welfare
perspective if we abstract from frictions. However, this prediction does not hold any more in
the presence of economic frictions. In this section, we review the various kinds of frictions
that can create a welfare cost to the public release of financial information.
a. The (shrinking) material and clerical costs