NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EMPLOYMENT PROTECTION LEGISLATION AND PLANT-LEVEL PRODUCTIVITY
IN INDIA
Sean Dougherty
Verónica C. Frisancho Robles
Kala Krishna
Working Paper 17693
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17693
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011
We would like to thank TCA Anant (Indian Ministry of Statistics) and Alok Sheel (Indian Ministry
of Finance) for their support of this project, which was partially carried out while Sean Dougherty
was visiting the National Institute of Public Finance and Policy (New Delhi, India) and Veronica Frisancho
Robles was an external consultant to the OECD. Useful feedback was received from colleagues at
the OECD, The Pennsylvania State University and the Paris School of Economics. The views expressed
in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the NBER, the OECD
nor its member countries or partners.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w17693.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Sean Dougherty, Verónica C. Frisancho Robles, and Kala Krishna. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Employment Protection Legislation and Plant-Level Productivity in India
Sean Dougherty, Verónica C. Frisancho Robles, and Kala Krishna
NBER Working Paper No. 17693
December 2011
JEL No. D24,F16,J5,J8,K31
ABSTRACT
Using plant-level data from the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) for the fiscal years from 1998-99
through 2007-08, this study provides plant-level cross-state/time-series evidence of the impact of employment
protection legislation (EPL) on total factor productivity (TFP) and labor productivity in India. Identification
of the effect of EPL follows from a difference-in-differences estimator inspired by Rajan and Zingales
(1998) that takes advantage of the state-level variation in labor regulation and heterogeneous industry
characteristics. The fundamental identification assumption is that EPL is more likely to restrict firms
operating in industries with higher labor intensity and/or higher sales volatility. Our results show that
firms in labor intensive or more volatile industries benefited the most from labor reforms in their states.
Our point estimates indicate that, on average, firms in labor intensive industries and in flexible labor
markets have TFP residuals 14% higher than those registered for their counterparts in states with more
stringent labor laws. However, no important differences are identified among plants in industries with
low labor intensity when comparing states with high and low levels of EPL reform. Similarly, the
TFP of plants in volatile industries and in states that experienced more pro-employer reforms is 11%
higher than that of firms in volatile industries and in more restrictive states; however, the TFP residuals
of plants in industries with low labor intensity are 11% lower in high EPL reform states than in states
with lower levels of EPL reform. In sum, the evidence presented here suggests that the high labor costs
and rigidities imposed through Indian federal labor laws are lessened by labor market reforms at the
state level.
Sean Dougherty Kala Krishna
OECD Economics Department Department of Economics
2, rue Andre Pascal 523 Kern Graduate Building
75775 Paris Cedex 16 The Pennsylvania State University
France University Park, PA 16802
sean.dougherty@oecd.org and NBER
kmk4@psu.edu
Verónica C. Frisancho Robles
Department of Economics
306 Kern Building
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
vfrisancho@psu.edu

1 Introduction
It is well known that India’s formal Employment Protection Legislation (EPL) is among the most
stringent in the world. Many believe that this is one of the main reasons behindthe stagnant share
of manufacturing output in India’s GDP during the last 40 years (OECD, 2007). Although the
country has recorded impressive output growth rates since the 1970s, the share of manufactures in
total output has remained between 14% and 18%. Though infrastructure and product market reg-
ulation have been major challenges, strict labor laws have been blamed in particular for the poor
performance of large-scale labor intensive manufactures despite India’s labor abundance (Pana-
gariya, 2008; Conway and Herd, 2009; Dougherty et al., 2009). According to the Indian Ministry of
CommerceandIndustry(2011), thetopfivegoodsexportedduring2010-11 representedalmost50%
of the country’s total exports and they were all relatively capital intensive goods such as petroleum
products, gems and jewelry, transport equipment, machinery and instruments, and pharmaceutical
products. In contrast, ready-made garments, traditionally an unskilled-labor intensive export, has
seen its share in total Indian exports decline from 12.5% to 6% between 2000 and 2010. In 2009,
India was the fifth largest exporter of apparel with 3.6% of the world’s exports (WTO, 2010).
Industrialrelations inIndiafall underthejointjurisdictionof central andstate governments, an
arrangementthathasgeneratedadegreeofvariationinlaborregulationsacrossstates. Althoughall
states had essentially the same starting point under the License Raj, each state has independently
amended labor regulations, rules and practices during the post-Independence period. In the last
decade, this “natural experiment” setting has been exploited by several empirical studies that have
1
tried to assess the effects of labor regulation on output, employment, and productivity. However,
and despite increasing interest in the topic, the evidence for India is still inconclusive and mostly
limited to industry-level analysis.
One of the most influential studies of India is Besley and Burgess (2004), which constructs
an index summarizing state-level amendments to the Industrial Disputes Act (IDA) between 1949
and 1992. The index, henceforth referred to as BB, is used along with several control variables to
explain state-level outcomes corresponding to the organized manufacturing sector using industry-
level panel data for 1958-92. The authors identify a negative impact of pro-worker regulation on
output, investment, employment, and labor productivity among registered manufacturing firms.
1One must keep in mind that the state-level amendments may not have been as exogenous as a true natural
experiment would require.
1

2
Several papers that also rely on the BB index reach similar conclusions.
Nonetheless, the validity of theBB index and theeconometric methodology usedto identify the
effect of excessive pro-worker regulation have been extensively criticized. The main concerns with
the use of this index are related to problems in the coding of labor laws and its exclusive focus on
formal reforms to the IDA. This study tries to overcome the shortcomings of the previous empirical
evidence in the tradition of Besley and Burgess (2004) to evaluate the effect of labor regulation
on the Indian organized manufacturing sector. We make use of a more comprehensive measure of
labor market regulations proposed in OECD (2007) and elaborated in Dougherty (2009). We argue
that this index is superior to the BB index as it includes information on formal and informal labor
market reforms, not only to the IDA but in seven additional areas: the Factories Act, the State
Shops and Commercial Establishments Acts, the Contract labor Act, the role of inspectors, the
maintenance of registers, the filing of returns and union representation.
Using this comprehensive EPL measure and plant-level data from the Annual Survey of Indus-
tries (ASI) for all the fiscal years between 1998-99 and 2007-08, we evaluate whether labor market
3
regulation differences across Indian states led to a differential response in industrial performance.
However, differencesacrossstatesintermsoflaborregulationmaybeendogenous. Ahighernumber
of pro-employer reforms in a given state may be driven by the characteristics of the firms located
in that state.
Following Rajan and Zingales (1998), we focus on the details of the theoretical mechanisms at
play. As we will show below, unit labor costs increase with more stringent EPL, and more so for
firms operating in industries with higher labor intensity. This implies that firms in industries with
higher labor shareswill sufferthemost fromthe additional costs of hiringandfiringworkers. Thus,
we implement a difference-in-difference estimator that exploits both the variation in EPL by state,
as well as the variation in industry-specific characteristics related to labor intensity and volatility.
In addition, to the extent that such costs act as adjustment costs, they will have more of an effect
in more volatile industries so that the productivity of firms in more volatile sectors should be more
affected by strict labor laws. By focusing on a specific mechanism through which EPL reform
operates (labor intensity or volatility), this approach provides stronger evidence of causality.
4
Previous studies have also exploited the variation in state and industry characteristics but
2See Aghion et al. (2008) and Ahsan and Pag´es (2006) as examples.
3In this paper, EPL is used as a shorthand to refer to a customized measure of state-level labor regulation
reforms in India as presented in OECD (2007) and elaborated in Dougherty (2009). The official OECD measure is
country-specificand has a longstanding standardized definition,as most recently elaborated in Venn(2009).
4See Guptaet al. (2009) and Bassanini et al. (2009).
2