NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERNATIONAL CONTAGION THROUGH LEVERAGED FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
Eric van Wincoop
Working Paper 17686
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17686
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011
The paper has benefitted from comments by Nicolas Coeurdacier, Ricardo Correa, Matteo Iacoviello
and participants of workshops at the Board of Governors, ECB and the conference "The Financial
Crisis: Lessons for International Macroeconomics'' at the Paris School of Economics. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Eric van Wincoop. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

International Contagion Through Leveraged Financial Institutions
Eric van Wincoop
NBER Working Paper No. 17686
December 2011
JEL No. E32,F3,F4,G12,G2
ABSTRACT
The 2008-2009 financial crises, while originating in the United States, witnessed a drop in asset prices
and output that was at least as large in the rest of the world as in the United States. A widely held view
is that this was the result of global transmission through leveraged financial institutions. We investigate
this in the context of a simple two-country model. The paper highlights what the various transmission
mechanisms associated with balance sheet losses are, how they operate, what their magnitudes are
and what the role is of different types of borrowing constraints faced by leveraged institutions. For
realistic parameters we find that the model cannot account for the global nature of the crisis, both in
terms of the size of the impact and the extent of transmission.
Eric van Wincoop
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
P.O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
and NBER
vanwincoop@virginia.edu

1 Introduction
In response to the 2008 …nancial crisis a debate has reignited about channels of
international transmission. The drop in asset prices was of similar magnitude all
around the world. The decline in real GDP growth was also of similar magnitude
in the rest of the world as in the United States.1 This happened even though
clearly this was a U.S. crisis that started with substantial losses on mortgage
backed securities, which signi…cantly deteriorated balance sheets of U.S. leveraged
…nancial institutions. This naturally leads to the question of what can account for
the nearly one-to-one transmission.
A widely held view is that the shock was transmitted across the globe through
leveraged …nancial institutions. In this paper we will investigate this view, but
reach a conclusion that is highly skeptical. While surely leveraged …nancial insti-
tutions experienced substantial losses associated with asset backed securities and
other assets, in both the United States and Europe, we will argue that the impact
of those losses alone is nowhere near su¢ cient to explain either the magnitude of
the crisis or its global transmission. A more plausible explanation, explored else-
where but discussed near the end of the paper, is a global risk panic that drove
down asset prices and the real economy across the globe.
We will develop a simple two-country model with leveraged …nancial institu-
tions in order to address two questions. First, we aim to understand through
what channels of transmission involving leveraged …nancial institutions a …nancial
shock in the Home country impacts the Foreign country. We will identify …ve dif-
ferent transmission channels. Second, we aim to get a sense of the magnitude of
transmission, and the impact on asset prices and lending rates, by calibrating the
model.
We consider the impact of exogenous losses on the balance sheet of leveraged
…nancial institutions, for example related to mortgage backed securities or mort-
gage loans. Two aspects signi…cantly limit the global impact of this shock. First,
there is substantial portfolio home bias, including for bank portfolios. Second,
1See for example Perri and Quadrini (2011) for both GDP and stock prices. It shows that
if anything stock prices and GDP fell slightly more in the G6 (the G7 minus the U.S.) than in
the United States. Emerging market growth, while starting from a higher level, dropped about
as much as industrialized country growth (see for example the 2011 World Economic Outlook,
Figure 1.6.).
1

using Flow of Funds data we …nd that leveraged …nancial institutions hold only
20% of …nancial assets.
The paper is related to a recent literature that has introduced leveraged …-
nancial institutions into open economy macro models. We discuss this literature
in Section 5. Several papers in this literature …nd that the impact of …nancial
shocks on asset prices and the real economy can be large and that transmission
may be perfect. This is the result of assumptions that either leveraged institutions
are perfectly diversi…ed across the globe and/or they hold all …nancial assets. We
draw the same conclusions when making these assumptions in our model, but we
…nd both assumptions to be in stark contrast to reality.
The model we use to analyze these issues is much simpler than the dynamic
stochastic general equilibrium models considered in the literature. While this
simplicity limits the breadth of our results (focusing for example on asset prices
and not on real variables), it allows us to obtain simple analytical results. This
makes it quite transparent what the various transmission channels are, how they
operate, and what their magnitudes are.
Leveraged institutions matter both because of their leverage and because of
borrowing constraints that they face. In order to better understand the role of
these constraints, we …rst consider the case where leveraged institutions are not
subject to borrowing constraints. Then we consider the impact of adding either
a constant leverage constraint or a margin constraint. The latter is particularly
relevant for collateralized borrowing. In contrast to a constant leverage constraint,
with a margin constraint borrowing is limited not by the current value of the
institution’s assets, but rather by the expected future value of these assets and
risk associated with the return on these assets.
Theremainderofthepaperisorganizedasfollows. InSection2wedescribethe
modelforeachofthethreedi¤erentassumptionsaboutthenatureoftheborrowing
constraints. Section 3 then considers at a theoretical level what determines the
impact on asset prices of marginal defaults in the Home country that lead to losses
on the balance sheets of leveraged institutions. Section 4 calibrates the model in
order to quantify the extent of transmission. Various extensions of the model are
considered as well and the results are related to the 2008 crisis. Section 5 relates
our …ndings to the existing literature and Section 6 concludes.
2