NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LINKING EXTERNAL SECTOR IMBALANCES AND CHANGING FINANCIAL
INSTABILITY BEFORE THE 2008 FINANCIAL CRISIS
John Whalley
Manmohan Agarwal
Jing Wang
Sean Walsh
Chen Yan
Working Paper 17645
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17645
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011
We are grateful to the Ontario Research Fund (ORF) and the Center for International Governance
Innovation (CIGI) for support. We thank Daniel Schwanen and Li Chunding for discussions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by John Whalley, Manmohan Agarwal, Jing Wang, Sean Walsh, and Chen Yan. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Linking External Sector Imbalances and Changing Financial Instability before the 2008
Financial Crisis
John Whalley, Manmohan Agarwal, Jing Wang, Sean Walsh, and Chen Yan
NBER Working Paper No. 17645
5December 2011
JEL No. F1,F30
ABSTRACT
The G20 Framework for Strong, Sustainable and Balanced Growth builds on the claim that growing
imbalances before the 2008 Financial Crisis were a major cause of the crisis, and the further claim
that reducing imbalances post crisis must be a central part of any effort to prevent a further
occurrence. Analytical literature in economics seemingly does not provide satisfactory measures of
financial instability, either in individual national economies or in the combined global economy; nor
ways of linking imbalance change to either worsening or improving financial (or real) instability and
the onset of financial crises.
Here we focus on the external sector component of financial instability and link changes in country
imbalances to individual economy growth rates in ways when summed across countries produce
indices of expected worsening or improving financial instability at different points in time. We
compute a variety of such indices for the years immediately before the 2008 Financial Crisis. We
use the sum of the absolute value of external sector imbalances across countries (the trade
imbalance, or the current account imbalance) as a proportion of the combined GDP of countries and
link them in various ways to country growth ra tes. An increasing measure under an index is an
indication of future widening excess demands and supplies over all countries as a group relative to
gross world product. This, in turn, is an indication of increasing severity of adjustment problems
ahead, and hence expected worsening financial instability. We compute such indices for all G20
countries, and various subsets of countries(G2, G8, G8+5) and examine their behavior over the
period 2004-2007.
Our results suggest that depending upon the index used and the base date chosen for comparative
purposes in determining changes, different implications emerge for the linkage between external
sector imbalances, perceived future instability and hence the onset of a financial crisis. The
implication we drawn is that the l inks between imbalances and both the onset and best policy
response to the 2008 Financial Crisis asserted by the G20 amy be more tenuous than claimed. Indeed
no such links were suggested earlier for the 1930s, the Asian Financial Crisis or any other crisis. In
turn economies have functioned with larger imbalances relative to GDP t han in 2008 for
considerable periods of time and with no financial implosion (UK in the pre World War I period;
Germany and Australia in the 1990s).

John Whalley
Department of Economics
University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario
Canada N6A 5C2
and NBER
jwhalley@uwo.ca
Manmohan Agarwal
Center for International Governance
Innovation (CIGI)
57 Erb St. West
Waterloo, Ontario
Canada N2L 6C2
magarwal@cigionline.org
Jing Wang
Institute of Quantitative & Technical
Economics
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences
(CASS).
Beijing
China 100732
wj@cass.org.cn
Sean Walsh
Centre for International Governance
Innovation
57 Erb Street West
Waterloo, Ontario
Canada N2L 6C2
swalsh@cigionline.org
Chen Yan
School of Economics
Xiamen University
Fujian Province
China 361005
chenyan@xmu.edu.cn

1. Introduction
The 2008 Financial Crisis saw large stock price, exchange rate, commodity price, and
housing price oscillations and these prompted a global policy response through the G20 with
the creation of a new Financial Stability Board (FSB), and the negotiation of a Framework for
Strong, Sustainable, and Balanced Growth (FSSBG) to provide for a sustainable recovery. But
central to these two initiatives are the twin presumptions that in some sense growing global
imbalances were a key factor in precipitating the crisis, and that reduction in imbalances is
the key to any future globally coordinated policy initiative to reestablish sustainable global
growth. This stands in contrast to analytical literature in economics which provides no
satisfactory measures either of the degree of either real or financial instability, either
individual national economies or in the combined global economy1, nor whether financial
instability is worsening or improving over time. Here we focus on the external sector
components of global imbalances, link these to expected worsening instability, and through
this linkage assess their potential contribution to the onset of the 2008 crisis.
Theoretical literature (such as Arrow and Hurwicz, 1958) of following Walras and his
tâtonnement price adjustment scheme has characterized both stable and unstable
adjustment processes, but remains silent on both the characterization and measurement of
the degree of instability; either financial or real. The post‐crisis literature which attempts to
fill this gap like Dattels et al (2010) which provides detailed discussion on the Global
Financial Stability Map developed by the IMF in Global Financial Stability Report (2007), and
adopts an ad hoc approach of compiling composite indices of economic performance over
time covering broad aggregates such as GDP change, inflation rates, employment change
and other aggregates, with the claim that this provides proxies for measures of financial
instability.
We focus here only on the external sector component of imbalances and
produce measures of expected worsening or improving external sector instability both for
1 But see the discussion by Irving Fisher of corridor of stability in Fisher (1933). This concept is also discussed in Tobin (1975)
and Dimand (2005).
‐ 3 ‐
‐