NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GETTING UP TO SPEED ON THE FINANCIAL CRISIS:
A ONE-WEEKEND-READER'S GUIDE
Gary B. Gorton
Andrew Metrick
Working Paper 17778
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17778
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2012
Thanks to Janet Currie (the editor) and Patrick McCabe for helpful comments, and to Jeanne Helene
Gobat, Campbell Harvey, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Nellie Liang, Patrick McCabe, Zoltan Pozsar, Carmen
Reinhart, Kenneth Rogoff, and Alan Taylor for assistance with the figures. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Gary B. Gorton and Andrew Metrick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Getting up to Speed on the Financial Crisis: A One-Weekend-Reader's Guide
Gary B. Gorton and Andrew Metrick
NBER Working Paper No. 17778
January 2012
JEL No. A0,D0,E0,G0
ABSTRACT
All economists should be conversant with “what happened?” during the financial crisis of 2007-2009.
We select and summarize 16 documents, including academic papers and reports from regulatory and
international agencies. This reading list covers the key facts and mechanisms in the build-up of risk,
the panics in short-term-debt markets, the policy reactions, and the real effects of the financial crisis.
Gary B. Gorton
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu
Andrew Metrick
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
metrick@yale.edu

1
1. Introduction
The first financial crisis of the 21st century has not yet ended, but the wave of research on the crisis has
already exceeded any single reader’s capacity, with the pace of new work only making this task harder.
Many professional economists now find themselves answering questions from their students, friends,
and relatives on topics that did not seem at all central until a few years ago, and we are collectively
scrambling to catch up.
This article is intended to serve as a starting point for economists that want to get up to speed on the
literature of the crisis, without having to go into a cave and read for a whole year. To this end, the
reading list is restricted to 16 documents, a list that an ambitious reader could cover in one weekend or
at a more leisurely pace over a few weeks. Thus, this article is not a complete survey in any shape or
form, and many interesting papers have been omitted. The coverage is from 2007 to 2009, and while
the scope is global during this time period, it does not include any papers or discussion about the still
ongoing Euro‐currency and sovereign‐debt crisis. The list is also confined to readings with significant
empirical content, hoping that this collection can at least answer the “what happened?” question about
the crisis, even if the “why?” is not yet settled. In addition to a good number of papers from top
journals, the final collection includes several reports from international agencies, a speech and a
congressional testimony from Chairman Bernanke, and several as‐yet‐unpublished papers. We have
tried hard to avoid repetition, and on several occasions chose one paper among several worthy
contenders on the same topic. Thus, this is an unusual paper for the Journal of Economic Literature in
that citations and the reference list include only the 16 documents covered in the review.
The proposed reading list and article into eight sections. Following this introduction, Section 2 provides
an overview and timeline of the crisis, with suggested readings that cover that same broad range. The
three documents in that section can be thought of as an even briefer reading list, for people who only
have an afternoon to spend on the project: 2010 testimony from Ben Bernanke in front of the Financial
Inquiry Crisis Commission, and report chapters from the International Monetary Fund (2010) and Bank
for International Settlements (2009) containing overviews of different aspects of the crisis.
Section 3 gives a historical perspective on financial crises, which we believe crucial for understanding the
recent one. The two papers covered here, Reinhart and Rogoff (2011) and Schularick and Taylor (2012),
are the products of Herculean data collection efforts on long historical time series about government
and private debt. Both of these papers demonstrate the strong association between accelerations in

2
economy‐wide leverage and subsequent banking crises. That finding deserves emphasis as the main
empirical fact about historical predicates to financial crises.
Section 4 covers the build‐up to the crisis. In retrospect, the experience of the 2000s looks ominously
like the prelude to other large crises. Pozsar (2011) documents the important role played by
“institutional cash pools”, which grew rapidly in the decade before the crisis. These pools, with a scale
unique to history, created a large demand for safe and liquid short‐term debt, a demand met in part by
securitization and other financial innovations. Bernanke (2005) foreshadowed some dynamics of the
crisis when describing and naming the “global savings glut”. The resulting growth in sovereign‐wealth
funds, a new institution of the 21st century, also added to the demand for short‐term debt. By 2007,
system‐wide leverage had reached critical levels, but the historical aggregate‐credit data necessary for
“early‐warning” models would not be built until after the damage was done. Coincident with the
increase in leverage was a large run‐up in housing prices. While historical cross‐country data on housing
prices is not as comprehensive as the data on credit aggregates, Reinhart and Rogoff (2008) find sharp
increases in housing prices prior to the five largest financial crises of recent history, with the previous
decade in the United States comparable (or worse) than those previous crises. Case and Shiller (2003),
in a remarkably prescient paper, provide evidence that the United States was already experiencing a
housing bubble well before the crisis began.
Section 5 discusses three papers about the two “panic” phases of the crisis – August 2007 and
September‐October 2008 – between which the crisis expanded from a relatively narrow slice of financial
markets focused on subprime mortgages into a broad‐based run on many types of short‐term debt. The
three papers in this section focus on three different short‐term money markets: Covitz, Liang, and
Suarez (2011) on asset‐backed commercial paper, McCabe (2010) on money‐market mutual funds, and
Gorton and Metrick (2012) on repurchase agreements and securitization. The combination of these
three papers provides a narrative of contagion where each step drains the banking system of hundreds
of billions of dollars and induces higher risk premia for banks to replace those funds.
Section 6 analyzes the various government responses, where opinion remains divided between views of
government as savior or culprit. There are now many papers focusing on specific policy actions, but few
comprehensive surveys. We chose Chapter III of the IMF’s Financial Stability Report of October 2009,
which includes a taxonomy and analyses of policy actions across 13 countries from 2007 to 2009. The
report finds a few bright spots for policy, with actions to support the liquidity of short‐term debt
markets most effective during the pre‐Lehman period of the crisis (before September 2008), and capital