NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERMEDIARIES IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE:
DIRECT VERSUS INDIRECT MODES OF EXPORT
Andrew B. Bernard
Marco Grazzi
Chiara Tomasi
Working Paper 17711
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17711
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011
The present work has been possible thanks to a research agreement between the Italian Statistical Office
(ISTAT) and the Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna. Grazzi and Tomasi gratefully acknowledge financial
support from the European Commission 6th FP (Contract CIT3-CT-2005-513396), Project: DIME
- Dynamics of Institutions and Markets in Europe. Tomasi gratefully acknowledges financial support
by the Marie Curie Program Grant COFUND Provincia Autonoma di Trento. Bernard acknowledges
support from the European University Institute and the Tuck School of Business. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Andrew B. Bernard, Marco Grazzi, and Chiara Tomasi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Intermediaries in International Trade: Direct versus indirect modes of export
Andrew B. Bernard, Marco Grazzi, and Chiara Tomasi
NBER Working Paper No. 17711
December 2011
JEL No. D22,F12,F14,L22,L23
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the factors that give rise to intermediaries in exporting and explores the implications
for trade volumes. Export intermediaries such as wholesalers serve different markets and export different
products than manufacturing exporters. In particular, high market-specific fixed costs of exporting,
the (lack of) quality of the general contracting environment and product-specific factors play important
roles in explaining the existence of export intermediaries. These underlying differences between direct
and intermediary exporters have important consequences for trade flows. The ability of export intermediaries
to overcome country and product fixed costs means that they can more easily respond along the extensive
margin to external shocks. Intermediaries and direct exporters respond differently to exchange rate
fluctuations both in terms of the total value of shipments and the number of products exported as well
as in terms of prices and quantities. Aggregate exports to destinations with high shares of indirect
exports are much less responsive to changes in the real exchange rate than are exports to countries
served primarily by direct exporters.
Andrew B. Bernard Chiara Tomasi
Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth University of Trento
100 Tuck Hall Via Inama, 5
Hanover, NH 03755 38122 Trento, Italy
and NBER and LEM Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna
(cid:68)ndrew.(cid:69).(cid:69)ernard@dartmouth.edu chiara.tomasi@unitn.it
Marco Grazzi
LEM Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna
Piazza Martiri della Liberta', 33
56127 Pisa, Italy
m.grazzi@sssup.it

Intermediaries in International Trade
1 Introduction
The growing availability of firm-level international trade data has contributed to the blooming
of both theoretical and empirical literatures highlighting the importance of firm heterogeneity
in aggregate trade flows. Since the initial empirical papers of Bernard and Jensen (1995, 1999),
Roberts and Tybout (1997) and the theoretical models of Melitz (2003) and Bernard et al. (2003),
amajor focusin international tradehas beenon the relationship between thecharacteristics of pro-
ducingfirms,mostnotablyproductivity,andtheirparticipationininternationaltrade. Anemerging
streamofresearchhasexamineddifferencesamongtradingfirms(Bernard, Jensen, Redding and Schott;
2010b; Ahn et al.; 2011; Antra`s and Costinot; 2011). These papers emphasize that exporters in-
cludebothmanufacturingfirmsthatorganize theproductionanddistributionoftheirgoodsabroad
as well as intermediaries that specialize in distribution in foreign markets.
In this paper, we examine the underlying factors that give rise to exports by intermediaries
and the consequences in terms of trade volumes and the margins of adjustment to external shocks.
Existing theoretical and empirical work on intermediaries in exporting emphasizes the importance
of country-specific fixed export costs and the variation of intermediary export shares across desti-
nations. We extend that focus to include both broader country-level fixed costs as well as charac-
teristics of the products themselves.
More importantly, this paper also considers additional implications of the lower fixed costs for
wholesale exporters. If export intermediaries do indeed face lower fixed costs of exporting then
they should also more easily enter and exit export markets in the face of changing profitability.
Firm-level export volumes should respond differently for wholesale exporters and manufacturing
exporters. Aggregating to the country-level, this firm-level variation implies differential changes in
exports between destinations served primarily by direct and indirect exporters.
UsingItalianfirm-leveltradedata,weinvestigatetheimportanceofintermediaries(wholesalers)
in exports across destinations and products and examine how they differ from manufacturing firms
that export directly. More than one quarter of all exporters are intermediaries and they account
for over 10 percent of Italian exports. However, there is substantial variation in the importance of
intermediaries across countries and products. New Zealand and China have intermediary export
shares near 9 percent (25th percentile) while Paraguay and Malawi are at the 75th percentile with
shares above 23 percent.
Intermediary exporters differ in a number of dimensions from manufacturing firms that export
directly. They are smaller in terms of exports, sales and especially employment as would be
expected since they are only involved in the cross-border distribution of the products and not the
production. However,wholesaleexportersdisplayhighersalesperemployeeandcomparableexports
per employee. On average, intermediary exporters reach fewer countries and ship more products
1

Intermediaries in International Trade
than do direct exporters. One important difference between wholesalers and manufacturers lies in
their tendency to add and drop products. Intermediaries add and drop products at much higher
rates than direct exporters. These firms face lower sunk costs of exporting and thus are able to
adjust their extensive margin more easily.
The existence of intermediaries suggests that they overcome barriers to international trade at a
lower costthanmanufacturersforsomerangeofgoodsandforsomecountries. We examinetherole
of both country and product characteristics in the choice of the mode of export and the magnitude
of country-productexports. The finding of previous studies that country-specific fixed export costs
arecorrelatedwiththeuseofexportintermediariesisconfirmedintheItaliandata. Inaddition,the
quality of the general contracting environment is related to the choice of mode of export. Exports
through an intermediary are more likely when the quality of the general contracting environment
of the country is weak. Product characteristics also play a role in determining the choice of export
mode. Lower contract intensity, greater product homogeneity, and higher product-level sunk costs
of exporting are associated with a greater reliance on intermediaries in exporting.
The differences in fixed costs across destinations and products give rise to variation in response
to common external shocks to profitability such as exchange rates. Total exports by wholesalers
are less responsive to exchange rate changes precisely because wholesalers are better able to adjust
along the extensive margin. Given the big difference in the share of intermediated exports across
countries and products, these firm-level results suggest that there are potentially large, predictable
differences in how aggregate exports will respond to changes in the value of the domestic currency.
We indeed find that the responsiveness of aggregate exports is much greater in destinations served
primarily by direct exporters.
Existing theoretical and empirical work on exporting intermediaries is reviewed in Section 2.
Section 3 describes the firm and country level data. Section 4 documents differences between direct
exporters and wholesalers. The role of country and product fixed costs on the choice of export
mode and export values are examined in Section 5. Section 6 explores the responseof exports both
at the firm level and in the aggregate to exchange rates shocks. Section 7 concludes.
2 Theoretical frameworks
Recent models of international trade emphasize the role that heterogeneity in productivity plays in
explaining the structure of international commerce. According to these models and a large quan-
tity of associated empirical work, more productive firms are more likely to engage in exporting and
foreign direct investment. While these frameworks have been extended to examine multiple desti-
nations and multiple products, they generally assume that trade occurs directly between producers
in one country and final consumers in another and do not account for the activity of intermediary
firms in trade.
2