NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INCONSISTENT REGULATORS:
EVIDENCE FROM BANKING
Sumit Agarwal
David Lucca
Amit Seru
Francesco Trebbi
Working Paper 17736
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17736
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2012
The authors would like to thank John Cochrane and Randy Kroszner for detailed comments. We also
thank Gadi Barlevy, Paul Beaudry, Matilde Bombardini, Richard Crump, Doug Diamond, Gene Fama,
Mark Flannery, Gary Gorton, Bev Hirtle, Cathy Lemieux, Thomas Lemieux, Anna Paulson, Raghuram
Rajan, Uday Rajan, Rich Rosen, Jesse Shapiro, Robert Vishny, and Luigi Zingales, as well as seminar
participants at Chicago Booth Finance, Chicago Booth Microeconomics, the Chicago Fed, NY Fed,
SFU, and UBC for useful discussions. Caitlin Kearns, Tanya Mann, and Justin McPhee provided outstanding
research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the
Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Sumit Agarwal, David Lucca, Amit Seru, and Francesco Trebbi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Inconsistent Regulators: Evidence From Banking
Sumit Agarwal, David Lucca, Amit Seru, and Francesco Trebbi
NBER Working Paper No. 17736
January 2012, Revised January 2012
JEL No. G21,G28
ABSTRACT
US state chartered commercial banks are supervised alternately by state and federal regulators. Each
regulator supervises a given bank for a fixed time period according to a predetermined rotation schedule.
We use unique data to examine differences between federal and state regulators for these banks. Federal
regulators are significantly less lenient, downgrading supervisory ratings about twice as frequently
as state supervisors. Under federal regulators, banks report higher nonperforming loans, more delinquent
loans, higher regulatory capital ratios, and lower ROA. There is a higher frequency of bank failures
and problem-bank rates in states with more lenient supervision relative to the federal benchmark. Some
states are more lenient than others. Regulatory capture by industry constituents and supervisory staff
characteristics can explain some of these differences. These findings suggest that inconsistent oversight
can hamper the effectiveness of regulation by delaying corrective actions and by inducing costly variability
in operations of regulated entities.
Sumit Agarwal Amit Seru
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Booth School of Business
230 South LaSalle Street University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60604 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
ushakri@yahoo.com Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
David Lucca amit.seru@chicagobooth.edu
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street Francesco Trebbi
New York, NY 10045 University of British Columbia
david.lucca@ny.frb.org 1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC, V6T1Z1
Canada
and NBER
ftrebbi@mail.ubc.ca

1. Introduction
At least since Pigou (1938), economists have been interested in effective regulatory design. A
critical element of this design involves assessing how regulatory institutions themselves affect
the implementation of regulations. This is a complex question, as it often entails understanding
the interactions among several regulatory agencies with overlapping jurisdictions, as well as the
degree to which they are consistent in implementing the rules. Several anecdotes suggest that
inconsistent oversight by regulators could hinder regulatory effectiveness, none clearer than the
demise of Washington Mutual Bank (WaMu), a $300 billion thrift and the sixth largest US bank
at the time of its failure.1 According to a formal congressional investigation, WaMu’s failure –
the largest bank failure in US history – was, to a large extent, due to delayed corrective action
that resulted from inconsistent oversight by its regulators, the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS)
and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC).2 Despite the relevance of this issue, little
systematic evidence exists on whether there is differential implementation of regulation by
regulators – in banking or other industries – its drivers, or its consequences. We attempt to fill
this gap by analyzing supervisory decisions of US banking regulators.
The current regulatory structure in US banking provides a convenient laboratory for studying the
issue of regulatory inconsistency because it involves dual supervision of institutions – i.e.,
supervision by both state and federal regulators. Using a natural experiment to circumvent the
issue of banks self-selecting into different regulatory environments, we provide evidence of
inconsistent implementation of identical rules by federal and state regulators. This inconsistency
arises due to differences in the institutional design and incentives of these regulators.
Furthermore, we show that this inconsistency may be costly, as it induces variability in bank
operations, and that it may hamper the effectiveness of regulation by delaying corrective action.
Inconsistent implementation of regulation by state and federal regulators relates broadly to the
debate on effectiveness of dual regulatory structure that has taken place in several industries,
including banking (see Scott 1977; Dixon and Weiser 2006). The fallout from the recent
financial crisis has triggered massive regulatory reform in banking (see Brunnermeier et al.
(2009)). However, most of these reforms have targeted activities that should be regulated, while
the discussion on reforming the current dual structure of supervision in banking has been less
active. This paucity of discussion is not due to the lack of arguments for and against the current
1 More anecdotes on ineffective regulation due to inconsistent supervision by US state and federal banking
regulators are available in Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs (1994). There are also abundant
examples of regulatory impediments due to inconsistencies between state and federal regulators in other industries
(see for example Lane (2004) for securities regulation, Dixon and Weiser (2006) for telecommunication regulation
and Esworthy (2008) for regulations on pollution control).
2 Absent a deal between the FDIC and JP Morgan Chase to take over WaMu’s assets, this failure would have
exhausted the entire Deposit Insurance Fund. More detail on the tussle between the OTS and FDIC in the run up to
WaMu’s failure in September 2008 is available in the Office of Inspector General (2010) and the congressional
investigation report (Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs (2011)).
1

regulatory structure.3 On the one hand, proponents argue that informational advantage of state
supervisors coupled with broader perspective of federal supervisors enhances the nature of
decision making. In addition, having competing supervisors allows for lower political
interference, giving banks the choice of picking the less “tyrannical” regulator and a more
efficient allocation in the sense of Tiebout (1956). On the other hand, critics suggest that such a
complex supervisory structure may create coordination and informational problems between
entities. It may also produce regulatory inconsistencies and result in a “race to the bottom” in
terms of regulatory laxity. Lack of empirical evidence validating or refuting these claims has
implied that the debate on the effectiveness of the current regulatory structure has been muted
and largely informed by anecdotes.
The lack of empirical evidence stems from two main difficulties. First, it is hard to find
comparable metrics of behavior across the myriad of dimensions affected by different regulators
overseeing different firms, in particular complex entities such as banks. To overcome this issue,
we rely on the easy-to-compare results of safety and soundness on-site examinations by
regulators, which are crucial micro-prudential supervisory tools. These examinations culminate
in the assignment of a CAMELS rating, which summarizes the conditions of the bank on a
numerical scale. Second, and perhaps more challenging, it is difficult to tell if a bank picked the
supervisor more suited to actions it intended to undertake or the regulator itself changed the
actions taken by a bank. More precisely, a bank’s regulatory setting is not random, rather it is
determined endogenously through a charter choice, and thus, driven by observable and
unobservable bank characteristics.
Our identification strategy exploits a legally determined rotation policy that assigns federal and
state supervisors to the same banks at exogenously predetermined time intervals. This allows us
to circumvent the issue of banks sorting into different regulatory settings. The policy on
alternating examinations was introduced in the Riegle Act of 1994 and subsequent regulatory
provisions with the goal of reducing administrative requirements for insured depository
institutions (that is, eliminating the burden of facing both federal and state examination in the
same year). The law assigns state chartered commercial banks to fixed 12-month or 18-month
rotations between state and federal supervisors. In particular, the rotation involves state
regulators and the FDIC for non-member banks (NMBs) and state regulators and the Federal
Reserve (Fed) for state member banks of the Federal Reserve System (SMBs). SMB and NMB
entities combined cover a substantial portion of the US banking industry, about 30 percent in
terms of total assets and 80 percent in terms of the number of commercial banks.4
3 See House Committee on Banking and Currency.(1965), Scott (1977), Butler and Macey (1987).
4 Unfortunately, this excludes interesting subsamples, such as national banks, primarily overseen by the Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and thrifts, overseen by the Office of Thrift Supervision until 2011:Q1, and
currently by the OCC. We discuss the applicability of our results to this set of banks in Section 6.
2