NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ALTERNATIVE CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY MECHANISMS:
IMPACTS ON ROUTINE PREVENTATIVE HEALTH CLINIC VISITS IN BURKINA FASO
Richard Akresh
Damien de Walque
Harounan Kazianga
Working Paper 17785
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17785
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
(cid:3)
January 2012
(cid:3)
(cid:3)
These data were collected for a project evaluating social protection strategies in Burkina Faso, which
greatly benefited from the support of Marie-Claire Damiba, Seydou Kabré and Victorine Yameogo
from the Secrétariat Permanent du Comité National de Lutte contre le SIDA et les Infections Sexuellement
Transmissibles (SP-CNLS-IST) in Burkina Faso and Hans Binswanger, Nono Ayivi-Guedehoussou,
Ousmane Haidara, Timothy Johnston, Mead Over and Tshiya Subayi-Cuppen at the World Bank. Data
collection was supervised by Robert Ouedraogo, Jean-Pierre Sawadogo, Bambio Yiriyibin and Pam
Zahonogo from the University of Ouagadougou, Department of Economics. The project is funded
by the NBER Africa Project and the following World Bank trust fund grants: Strategic Impact Evaluation
Fund (SIEF), Bank-Netherlands Partnership Program (BNPP), Gender Action Plan (GAP), Knowledge
for Change Program (KCP), WB-DFID Evaluation of the Community Response to HIV and AIDS,
and Luxembourg Poverty Reduction Partnership (LPRP). The authors would also like to thank Pascaline
Dupas and Adam Wagstaff as well as participants at the NBER Africa workshop in Zanzibar for helpful
comments on an earlier draft. Finally, the authors thank Emilie Bagby, German Caruso, Igor Cunha,
Christine Jachetta, Moussa Kone, Marleen Marra, and Nga Thi Viet Nguyen for their research assistance.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors.
They do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries
they represent. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Richard Akresh, Damien de Walque, and Harounan Kazianga. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Alternative Cash Transfer Delivery Mechanisms: Impacts on Routine Preventative Health
Clinic Visits in Burkina Faso
Richard Akresh, Damien de Walque, and Harounan Kazianga
NBER Working Paper No. 17785
January 2012
JEL No. I15,I38,J13,O15
ABSTRACT
We conducted a unique randomized experiment to estimate the impact of alternative cash transfer
delivery mechanisms on household demand for routine preventative health services in rural Burkina
Faso. The two-year pilot program randomly distributed cash transfers that were either conditional
or unconditional and were given to either mothers or fathers. Families under the conditional cash transfer
schemes were required to obtain quarterly child growth monitoring at local health clinics for all children
under 60 months old. There were no such requirements under the unconditional programs. Compared
with control group households, we find that conditional cash transfers significantly increase the number
of preventative health care visits during the previous year, while unconditional cash transfers do not
have such an impact. For the conditional cash transfers, transfers given to mothers or fathers showed
similar magnitude beneficial impacts on increasing routine visits.
Richard Akresh Harounan Kazianga
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Department of Economics
Department of Economics Oklahoma State University
1407 West Gregory Drive Business 324
David Kinley Hall, Room 214 Stillwater, OK 74078
Urbana, IL 61801 and William Spears School of Business
akresh@illinois.edu harounan.kazianga@okstate.edu
Damien de Walque
The World Bank
Development Research Group
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
ddewalque@worldbank.org

1. Introduction
Poor health is widespread among children in low-income countries. Often, such ill health is
coupled with poor access to health care, either because of supply-side or demand-side
constraints. These poor health outcomes negatively affect physical growth and cognitive
development, with potential long-term consequences. For example, children who are in poor
health are less likely to enroll in school, or enter school later, and when they enroll they tend to
perform worse than children in good health (Moock and Leslie 1986; Brooker, Hall, and Bundy
1999; Glewwe, Jacoby, and King 2001). This in turn affects productivity later in life (Dasgupta
1993; Strauss and Thomas 1995; Schultz 2001). It is estimated that illness incidence and other
health risks prevent approximately 200 million children in low income countries from reaching
their full potential in cognitive development (Grantham-McGregor et al. 2007). Obviously,
identifying mechanisms that could improve health outcomes among children will have large
payoffs, not only at the individual level, but also in term of overall economic progress as well.
Conditional cash transfer (CCT) programs are now one of the most popular government
welfare interventions in developing countries.1 These programs transfer resources to poor
households conditional on the family taking measures to increase the health and human capital of
their children (predominantly enrolling their children in school and taking them for regular
health care visits). Unconditional cash transfer (UCT) programs do not impose these
conditionality constraints. CCT programs represent a “top-down” approach in which outside
organizations decide what is best for poor children and provide incentives to their parents to
achieve these objectives. In contrast, UCT programs assume that, once a budget constraint is
1 Numerous countries in Latin America, as well as in Asia have implemented such programs (Fiszbein and Schady
2009). In Africa, several CCT pilot programs (in South Africa and Kenya) have been implemented but focus
exclusively on orphans and HIV households and have not yet been rigorously evaluated, while other pilot programs
(in Malawi and Morocco) are currently being evaluated (see Baird, McIntosh, and Ozler 2011 for information about
the Malawi evaluation) but focus mainly on educational outcomes or adolescent children.
2

relaxed, parents are in a better position to make appropriate decisions regarding their child’s
human capital. CCT programs are also more costly per recipient to administer than UCT
programs because of the costs associated with monitoring conditions. Unconditional cash
transfers act through increased income, so that health outcomes should improve as long as the
income elasticity of demand for health is positive and marginal productivity of health care is
positive (Parker and Wong, 1998). Mounting evidence shows both types of transfers improve
child health outcomes (for CCTs in Colombia (Attanasio, Gomez, Heredia, and Vera-Hernandez
2005), Ecuador (Paxson and Schady 2008), Nicaragua (Maluccio and Flores 2005; Macours,
Schady, and Vakis 2008); and for UCTs in South Africa (Case and Deaton 1998; Case,
Hosegood, and Lund 2005; Duflo 2003)), but the evidence on which mechanisms–conditionality
or income effects- are playing a role in driving the impacts is more limited.2
In this paper, we present evidence of the impacts of a unique cash transfer pilot program
in rural Burkina Faso, the Nahouri Cash Transfers Pilot Project (NCTPP), on the take-up of
routine preventative health clinic visits. The NCTPP incorporated a random experimental design
to evaluate the relative effectiveness of the following four cash transfer programs targeting poor
households in rural Burkina Faso: conditional cash transfers given to fathers, conditional cash
transfers given to mothers, unconditional cash transfers given to fathers, and unconditional cash
transfers given to mothers. Our evaluation focuses on health utilization for children 0 to 59
months old, in particular their visits to health clinics for routine preventative care. Even by
African standards, child health outcomes in Burkina Faso are considered to be poor. In 2003,
2 However, not all impact studies show consistently positive results for these programs, and differences tend to
depend on the specific details about the cash transfer program, the age range of the child studied, the evaluation
method, and whether the evaluations were measuring short or medium term impacts. Even for outcomes that were
directly conditioned upon, such as preventative health clinic visits, evaluations for Chile (Galasso 2006), Ecuador
(Paxson and Schady 2008), and Nicaragua (Maluccio and Flores 2005) show no significant change in the number of
visits to the health clinic for preventative reasons, while there were positive impacts on routine health check-ups in
Colombia (Attanasio et al. 2005), Honduras (Morris, Flores, Olinto, and Medina 2004), and Jamaica (Levy and Ohls
2007).
3