NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE REAL EFFECTS OF FINANCIAL MARKETS
Philip Bond
Alex Edmans
Itay Goldstein
Working Paper 17719
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17719
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2011
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Philip Bond, Alex Edmans, and Itay Goldstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Real Effects of Financial Markets
Philip Bond, Alex Edmans, and Itay Goldstein
NBER Working Paper No. 17719
December 2011
JEL No. G12,G14,G31,G34
ABSTRACT
A large amount of activity in the financial sector occurs in secondary financial markets, where securities
are traded among investors without capital flowing to firms. The stock market is the archetypal example,
which in most developed economies captures a lot of attention and resources. Is the stock market
just a side show or does it affect real economic activity? In this article, we discuss the potential real
effects of financial markets that stem from the informational role of market prices. We review the
theoretical literature and show that accounting for the feedback effect from market prices to the real
economy significantly changes our understanding of the price formation process, the informativeness
of the price, and speculators’ trading behavior. We make two main points. First, we argue that a new
definition of price efficiency is needed to account for the extent to which prices reflect information
useful for the efficiency of real decisions (rather than the extent to which they forecast future cash
flows). Second, incorporating the feedback effect into models of financial markets can explain various
market phenomena that otherwise seem puzzling. Finally, we review empirical evidence on the real
effects of secondary financial markets.
Philip Bond Itay Goldstein
Carlson School of Management The Wharton School
University of Minnesota University of Pennsylvania
321 19th Ave S 3620 Locust Walk
Minneapolis, MN 55410 Philadelphia, PA 19104
apbond@umn.edu itayg@wharton.upenn.edu
Alex Edmans
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
aedmans@wharton.upenn.edu

I. Introduction
One of the most important topics in financial economics is whether financial markets have an effect on
the real economy. This question has become particularly relevant in the light of the recent financial crisis.
An important line of research, exemplified by Bernanke and Gertler (1989) and Kiyotaki and Moore
(1997), studies how adverse selection or moral hazard problems affect primary financial markets by
limiting the ability of entrepreneurs and firms to raise external capital. This in turn constrains real
investment, and so frictions in primary financial markets end up reducing real economic activity.
However, there is an important feature of real-world financial markets that is missing in this line of
research, namely that a large fraction of activity occurs in secondary financial markets, in which
securities are traded among investors, without any capital flowing to firms. The archetypal example of a
secondary market is the stock market, in which capital flows to a firm only when it issues shares, but most
of the time, trading is conducted between investors and does not involve the firm at all. In this sense,
derivative markets are almost always secondary, and there is large amount of activity in secondary bond
markets as well. In most developed economies, substantial resources are devoted to secondary markets
such as the stock market. However, in the line of research mentioned above, the operation of secondary
financial markets has either no or very little effect on the real economy.1
How can one explain the attention devoted to secondary financial markets? Why do managers constantly
track the performance of their firms’ stocks? Why does the press so frequently report the developments in
the stock market? Can this be rationalized in a world where secondary market prices are passive (i.e.,
epiphenomenal), in that they merely reflect expectations about future cash flows and do not affect them,
as in many economic models, including most of those used in the asset-pricing literature? Related, is it
plausible that secondary-market prices are purely passive, and have no effect on real decisions, given that
a vast empirical literature documents how much information prices contain about future cash flows?
1 The ex-post liquidity of secondary markets affects the prices firms obtain ex-ante in primary markets.
2

In our view, treating secondary market prices as a side show is a mistake. Instead, we will argue that one
should take seriously the idea that secondary market prices have an effect on real economic activity.
Since secondary financial markets do not lead to any direct transfer of resources to the firm, prices in
these markets have real consequences only if they affect the actions of decision makers in the real side of
the economy (henceforth, ‘real decision makers’). We can think of three reasons for which this may
occur. We argue that all of them originate from the informational role of prices.
First, real decision makers learn new information from secondary market prices, and use this information
to guide their real decisions. The idea is very natural, going back to Hayek (1945), who argued that prices
are a useful source of information. A financial market is a place where many speculators with different
pieces of information meet to trade, attempting to profit from their information. Prices aggregate these
diverse pieces of information and ultimately reflect an accurate assessment of firm value. Real decision
makers (such as managers, capital providers, directors, customers, regulators, employees, etc.) will learn
from this information and use it to guide their decisions, in turn affecting firm cash flows and values
(Baumol (1965)). Ultimately, the financial market has a real effect due to the transmission of
information.
Some readers may wonder if it is plausible that real decision makers learn from prices. They are closer to
the firm than market traders, and so one might expect them to have better information. However, this
logic is incomplete. The assumption needed for financial markets to have a real effect via the
transmission of information is not that real decision makers are less informed than traders, but only that
they do not have perfect information about every decision-relevant factor, and so outsiders may possess
some incremental information that is useful to them. Thus, real decision makers may be the most
informed agents in the economy about the firm, but there are still aspects about which they can learn from
outsiders. This is for two reasons. First, while an individual speculator may be less informed than the
manager, the market aggregates the information of many speculators who collectively may be more
informed (Grossman (1976), Hellwig (1980)). Second, optimal real decisions depend not only on internal
3