NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COLLATERAL CRISES
Gary B. Gorton
Guillermo Ordonez
Working Paper 17771
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17771
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2012
We thank Fernando Alvarez, Tore Ellingsen, Ken French, Mikhail Golosov, David K. Levine, Guido
Lorenzoni, Kazuhiko Ohashi, Vincenzo Quadrini, Alp Simsek, Andrei Shleifer, Javier Suarez, Warren
Weber and seminar participants at Berkeley, Boston College, Columbia GSB, Darmouth, EIEF, Federal
Reserve Board, Maryland, Minneapolis Fed, Ohio State, Richmond Fed, Rutgers, Stanford, Wesleyan,
Wharton School, Yale, the ASU Conference on ”Financial Intermediation and Payments”, the Bank
of Japan Conference on ”Real and Financial Linkage and Monetary Policy”, the 2011 SED Meetings
at Ghent, the 11th FDIC Annual Bank Research Conference, the Tepper-LAEF Conference on Advances
in Macro-Finance, the Riksbank Conference on Beliefs and Business Cycles at Stockholm and the
2nd BU/Boston Fed Conference on Macro-Finance Linkages for their comments. We also thank Thomas
Bonczek, Paulo Costa and Lei Xie for research assistance. The usual waiver of liability applies. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Gary B. Gorton and Guillermo Ordonez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Collateral Crises
Gary B. Gorton and Guillermo Ordonez
NBER Working Paper No. 17771
January 2012
JEL No. E2,E20,E32,E44,G01,G2,G20
ABSTRACT
Short-term collateralized debt, such as demand deposits and money market instruments - private money,
is efficient if agents are willing to lend without producing costly information about the collateral backing
the debt. When the economy relies on such informationally-insensitive debt, firms with low quality
collateral can borrow, generating a credit boom and an increase in output and consumption. Financial
fragility builds up over time as information about counterparties decays. A crisis occurs when a small
shock then causes a large change in the information environment. Agents suddenly have incentives
to produce information, asymmetric information becomes a threat and there is a decline in output and
consumption. A social planner would produce more information than private agents, but would not
always want to eliminate fragility.
Gary B. Gorton
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu
Guillermo Ordonez
Yale University
Department of Economics
28 Hillhouse Av. Room 208
New Haven, CT, 06520
guillermo.ordonez@yale.edu

1 Introduction
Financial crises are hard to explain without resorting to large shocks. But, the recent
crisis, for example, was not the result of a large shock. The Financial Crisis Inquiry
Commission (FCIC) Report (2011) noted that with respect to subprime mortgages:
”Overall, for 2005 to 2007 vintage tranches of mortgage-backed securities originally
ratedtriple-A,despitethemassdowngrades,onlyabout10%ofAlt-Aand4%ofsub-
prime securities had been ’materially impaired’-meaning that losses were imminent
or had already been suffered-by the end of 2009” (p. 228-29). Park (2011) calculates
the realized principal losses on the $1.9 trillion of AAA/Aaa-rated subprime bonds
issued between 2004 and 2007 to be 17 basis points as of February 2011.1 The sub-
primeshockwasnotlarge. But,thecrisiswaslarge: theFCICreportgoesontoquote
Ben Bernanke’s testimony that of ”13 of the most important financial institutions in
theUnitedStates,12wereatriskoffailurewithinaperiodofaweekortwo”(p. 354).
A small shock led to a systemic crisis. The challenge is to explain how a small shock
can sometimeshave a verylarge, sudden, effect, whileat other timesthe effect ofthe
samesizedshockissmallornonexistent.
One link between small shocks and large crises is leverage. Financial crises are typ-
ically preceded by credit booms, and credit growth is the best predictor of the like-
lihood of a financial crisis.2 This suggests that a theory of crises should also explain
the origins of credit booms. But, since leverage per se is not enough for small shocks
to have large effects, it also remains to address what gives leverage its potential to
magnifyshocks.
We develop a theory of financial crises, based on the dynamics of the production
and evolution of information in short-term debt markets, that is private money such
as demand deposits and money market instruments. We explain how credit booms
arise, leading to financial fragility where a small shock can have large consequences.
We build on the micro foundations provided by Gorton and Pennacchi (1990) and
Dang, Gorton, and Holmstro¨m (2011) who argue that short-term debt, in the form
1Park(2011)examinedthetrusteereportsfromFebruary2011for88.6%ofthenotionalamountof
AAAsubprimebondsissuedbetween2004and2007.
2See, for example, Claessens, Kose, and Terrones (2011), Schularick and Taylor (2009), Reinhart
and Rogoff (2009), Borio and Drehmann (2009), Mendoza and Terrones (2008) and Collyns and Sen-
hadji (2002). Jorda, Schularick, and Taylor (2011) (p. 1) study 14 developed countries over 140 years
(1870-2008): ”Ouroverallresultisthatcreditgrowthemergesasthebestsinglepredictoroffinancial
instability.”
1

of bank liabilities or money market instruments, is designed to provide transactions
services by allowing trade between agents without fear of adverse selection. This is
accomplishedbydesigningdebttobe”information-insensitive,”thatis,suchthatitis
not profitable for any agent to produce private information about the assets backing
the debt, the collateral. Adverse selection is avoided in trade. But, in a financial
crisisthereisasuddenlossofconfidenceinshort-termdebtinresponsetoashock;it
becomesinformation-sensitive,andagentsmayproduceinformation,anddetermine
whetherthebackingcollateralisgoodornot.
We build on these micro foundations to investigate the role of such information-
insensitivedebtinthemacroeconomy. Wedonotexplicitlymodelthetradingmotive
for short-term information-insensitive debt. Nor do we explicitly include financial
intermediaries. We assume that households have a demand for such debt and we
assume that the short-term debt is issued directly by firms to households to obtain
fundsandfinanceefficientprojects. Informationproductionaboutthebackingcollat-
eral is costly to produce, and agents do not find it optimal to produce information at
everydate.
Thekeydynamicinthemodelconcernshowtheperceivedqualityofcollateralevolves
if(costly)informationisnotproduced. Collateralissubjecttoidiosyncraticshocksso
that over time, without information production, the perceived value of all collateral
tends to be the same because of mean reversion towards a ”perceived average qual-
ity,” such that some collateral is known to be bad, but it is not known which specific
collateral is bad. Agents endogenously select what to use as collateral. Desirable
characteristics of collateral include a high perceived quality and a high cost of infor-
mationproduction. Inotherwords,optimalcollateralwouldresembleacomplicated,
structured,claimonhousingorland,e.g.,amortgage-backedsecurity.
When information is not produced and the perceived quality of collateral is high
enough, firms with good collateral can borrow, but in addition some firms with bad
collateral can borrow. In fact, consumption is highest if there is never information
production,becausethenallfirmscanborrow,regardlessoftheirtruecollateralqual-
ity. The credit boom increases consumption because more and more firms receive
financingandproduceoutput. Inoursettingopacitycandominatetransparencyand
theeconomycanenjoyablissfulignorance. Iftherehasbeeninformation-insensitive
lending for a long time, that is, information has not been produced for a long time,
thereisasignificantdecayofinformationintheeconomy-allisgrey,thereisnoblack
2