NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE IMPACT OF FOREIGN LIABILITIES ON SMALL FIRMS:
FIRM-LEVEL EVIDENCE FROM THE KOREAN CRISIS
Yun Jung Kim
Linda Tesar
Jing Zhang
Working Paper 17756
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17756
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2012
The authors would like to thank Chris House, Andrei Levchenko, Kathryn Dominguez, Amy Dittmar,
and participants of seminars at the University of Michigan and the Australian National University.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Yun Jung Kim, Linda Tesar, and Jing Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Impact of Foreign Liabilities on Small Firms: Firm-Level Evidence from the Korean Crisis
Yun Jung Kim, Linda Tesar, and Jing Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 17756
January 2012
JEL No. E44, F32, F34
ABSTRACT
Using Korean firm-level data on publicly-listed and privately-held firms together with firm exit data,
we find strong evidence of the balance-sheet effect for small firms at both the intensive and extensive
margins. During the crisis, small firms with more short-term foreign debt are more likely to go bankrupt,
and experience larger sales declines conditional on survival. The extensive margin accounts for a large
fraction of small firms’ adjustment during the crisis. Consistent with many studies in the literature,
large firms with larger exposure to foreign debt paradoxically have better performance during the crisis
at both the intensive and extensive margin.
Yun Jung Kim Jing Zhang
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of Michigan University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220 Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
yunjungk@umich.edu jzhang@umich.edu
Linda Tesar
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
ltesar@umich.edu

Introduction
The sequence of events experienced by an emerging market undergoing a financial
crisis is now all-too-familiar. Rapid economic growth and financial market liberaliza-
tion encourage capital inflow, contributing to an overvalued exchange rate and in-
creased reliance on foreign credit, usually denominated in US dollars. As economic
growth and exports slow, the economy tips into a crisis. The exchange rate collapses,
capital flow reverses and firms find themselves unable to meet their debt require-
ments. Firms, and in some cases governments, become insolvent. Those deemed
“too big to fail” may receive bailouts; others slash employment, declare bankruptcy
or are sold to foreign owners.
While the general anatomy of crises has been well documented,1 the exact
channels through which a financial crisis translates into a real economic contraction
at the microeconomic level are less well understood. Traditional macroeconomic
models predict that a depreciation of the exchange rate will be expansionary by mak-
ing exports more competitive. However, if the depreciation occurs when firms are
holding significant foreign-currency denominated liabilities, a negative balance-sheet
effect may outweigh the export-expansion effect (Krugman 1999, Céspedes, Chang
and Velasco 2004, and Feldstein 1999). In general, the literature has found ample
evidence of the export-expansion effect but limited evidence of the balance-sheet
effect.2 Due to data limitations, most existing firm-level studies examine only pub-
licly-listed firms that survived the financial crisis, and leave the extensive margin of
the balance-sheet effect unexplored.
In this paper, we use a detailed database on over 4,000 Korean firms—both
privately-held and publicly-listed—to study the impact of the 1997–1998 Korean fi-
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
1 See for example Corsetti et. al. (1998).
2 Benavente et. al. (2003), Bleakley and Cowan (2008), Bonomo et.al. (2003), Forbes (2002), and Lu-
engnaruenitchai (2003) find either a positive balance-sheet effect or no balance-sheet effect. In con-
trast, Aguiar (2005), Carranza et. al. (2003), Echeverrya et. al. (2003), Gilchrist and Sim (2007) and
Pratapa et.al. (2003) find some evidence of a negative balance-sheet effect.
! 2!

nancial crisis on firm performance. The database contains information on firms’ ex-
port status, holdings of foreign debt, and total indebtedness along with a host of
other firm-level characteristics. The database also provides information about firm
exit during the crisis. We exploit the heterogeneity across firms to see which fac-
tors—firm size, industry, export status, exposure to foreign debt, and term structure
of debt—are critical for explaining firm performance and firm exit leading up to and
during the Korean crisis.
Our analysis yields three key findings. First, we find evidence of a signifi-
cantly negative balance-sheet effect for small firms conditional on survival. Specifi-
cally, for a firm at the 10th percentile of the size distribution (with size measured by
real assets), a one percent increase in its short-term foreign debt ratio prior to the
crisis is associated with a 0.31 percent lower rate of sales growth during the crisis.
Most existing firm-level studies focus on publicly-listed firms and often find either
no balance-sheet effect or a positive balance-sheet effect. The reason we are able to
find evidence of a significantly negative balance-sheet effect is because of the broad
coverage of our dataset, which includes both well-established, publicly-listed firms as
well as small, privately-held firms. This balance-sheet effect becomes insignificant
when one focuses only on publicly-listed firms as in previous studies. Publicly-listed
firms tend to be larger, are more likely to be exporting firms and are more likely to
survive the crisis than an average Korean firm.
Second, we find strong evidence of the balance-sheet effect on small firms at
the extensive margin: foreign debt holdings are a significant predicator for small
firms’ exit during the crisis. Consider a percentage point increase in the pre-crisis
foreign debt ratio for firms at varying sizes.3 The marginal impact on the probability
of exit increases from about zero for a firm of median size to 0.28 percentage points
for a firm at the 10th percentile. Again, the impact of the crisis on firm exit is missed
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
"!Specifically, the ratio of foreign debt holdings to liabilities is set at the mean level conditional on
having foreign debt, and all other characteristics are set at the sample mean.!
! 3!