NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW FIRMS USE DOMESTIC AND INTERNATIONAL CORPORATE BOND MARKETS
Juan Carlos Gozzi
Ross Levine
Maria Soledad Martinez Peria
Sergio L. Schmukler
Working Paper 17763
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17763
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2012
We are grateful to Francisco Ceballos for excellent research assistance. We thank the World Bank
Knowledge for Change Program and Development Economics Vice-presidency for financial support.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
any other person associated with the Federal Reserve System, the World Bank, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Juan Carlos Gozzi, Ross Levine, Maria Soledad Martinez Peria, and Sergio L. Schmukler.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Firms Use Domestic and International Corporate Bond Markets
Juan Carlos Gozzi, Ross Levine, Maria Soledad Martinez Peria, and Sergio L. Schmukler
NBER Working Paper No. 17763
January 2012
JEL No. F36,G12,G15,G32
ABSTRACT
This paper provides the first comprehensive documentation of the main features of corporate bond issues
in domestic and international markets and analyzes how firms use these markets after they internationalize.
We find that debt issues in domestic and international bond markets have different characteristics,
not explained by differences across firms or their country of origin. International issues tend to be larger,
of shorter maturity, denominated in foreign currency, and include a higher fraction of fixed rate contracts.
Moreover, a large proportion of firms remain active in domestic bond markets after accessing international
markets, and many of these firms use both markets for different types of issues. This evidence suggests that
domestic and international bond markets provide different financial services and are not substitutes, but
but rather complements.
Juan Carlos Gozzi Maria Soledad Martinez Peria
International Finance Division The World Bank
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System mmartinezperia@worldbank.org
Washington, DC
Juan.C.GozziValdez@frb.gov Sergio L. Schmukler
The World Bank
Ross Levine MSN MC3-301
Department of Economics 1818 H Street, N.W.
Brown University Washington, DC 20433
64 Waterman Street Sschmukler@worldbank.org
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
ross_levine@brown.edu

1. Introduction
Financial globalization has transformed corporate finance since the early 1990s. Firms from
both developed and developing countries increasingly raise capital through debt and equity
issues outside their domestic markets and list their securities in major financial centers. For
example, the total amount raised by firms through security issues in foreign markets grew
more than four-fold between 1991 and 2008, reaching about one trillion U.S. dollars at the end
of the period and accounting for almost 40 percent of the total amount raised in world capital
markets.
The internationalization of capital markets has led to a large literature on why firms
issue securities in foreign markets. Most of this research focuses on equity markets, particularly
on the decision by firms to list their shares in foreign stock exchanges. According to one strand
of this literature, firms internationalize to circumvent regulations, poor accounting systems,
taxes, and illiquid domestic markets that might discourage foreign investors from purchasing
their shares in local markets. Other research examines whether listing in a foreign stock
exchange allows firms to bond to a better corporate governance framework or to exploit
temporarily high prices for their securities during ‗‗hot‘‘ markets.1
Research on the internationalization of equity markets, however, offers only a partial
perspective on financial globalization because it largely overlooks bond markets. This is a
significant drawback since bond markets constitute a larger and more internationalized source
of capital for firms than equity markets. Over the period from 1991 to 2008, bond issues
1 For theoretical arguments that focus on barriers to foreign investor participation in local market as drivers of the
decision to list shares abroad see, for example, Black (1974), Solnik (1974), Stapleton and Subrahmanyam (1977),
Errunza and Losq (1985), Alexander et al. (1987), and Domowitz et al. (1998). Stulz (1999) and Coffee (2002)
argue that listing in foreign exchanges may allow firms to improve investor protection, while Errunza and Miller
(2000) and Henderson et al. (2006) highlight the role of market timing in the decision to issue shares abroad. For
empirical analyses of the motivations for cross-listings in foreign stock exchanges see, among many others,
Pagano et al. (2002), Benos and Weisbach (2004), Doidge et al. (2004), and Gozzi et al. (2008).
1

accounted for almost 80 percent of all capital raised by firms in capital markets around the
world and for more than 90 percent of all capital raised in markets outside their home country.2
In this paper, we provide the first comprehensive documentation of the main
characteristics of corporate bond issues in domestic and international capital markets and
analyze how firms use these markets after they internationalize. While Henderson et al. (2006)
and Gozzi et al. (2010) examine capital raisings around the world, we (1) document differences
in bond characteristics, such as issue size, maturity, interest rate type, and currency, between
issues in domestic and international markets and (2) assess how firms use domestic and
international bond markets after they first internationalize.3 Thus, we evaluate two broad
questions: Do firms use domestic and international bond markets to issue different types of
bond contracts? And, do domestic and international bond markets act as complements or
substitutes? That is, do firms use both markets after internationalization, or do they opt out of
domestic markets once they are able to issue bonds in international markets? Rather than
testing or proposing specific theories, this paper documents new patterns on the use of
domestic and international bond markets, relates these patterns to current theories, and offers
new challenges to those seeking to understand international corporate finance.
To conduct our study, we construct and analyze a unique dataset that includes
information on major characteristics of 116,338 corporate bond issues in domestic and
international markets conducted by 13,920 firms from 99 countries. Our study covers the
2 The value of debt issues is not directly comparable to that of equity issues because equity issues have no
maturity, while debt issues must be repaid. Part of the proceeds from debt issues is typically used to repay
maturing debt and therefore only a fraction of debt issues can be considered new financing. Henderson et al. (2006)
try to adjust the data on debt issues to take this fact into account and conclude that, even with these adjustments,
debt issues constitute a much larger source of new capital than equity issues at the aggregate level.
3 Earlier empirical work on international bond markets compares yields in the Eurodollar and U.S. markets for
U.S. firms (Finnerty et al., 1980; Kidwell et al., 1985; Mahajan and Fraser, 1986) and analyzes stock price reactions
to foreign bond issues in the Eurobond and U.S. markets (Kim and Stulz, 1988; Miller and Puthenpurackal, 2002).
Miller and Puthenpurackal (2005) and Petrasek (2010) study the effects of global bonds (i.e., bonds that are issued
and traded simultaneously in multiple markets) on bond yields and liquidity.
2