NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REPOSSESSION AND THE DEMOCRATIZATION OF CREDIT
Juliano J. Assunção
Efraim Benmelech
Fernando S. S. Silva
Working Paper 17858
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17858
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2012
We thank Daron Acemoglu, Daniel Carvalho, Lauren Cohen, Ken French, Simon Gervais, Karl Diether,
Todd Gromley, Oliver Hart, Campbell Harvey, Bengt Holmstrom, Laura Jones Dooley, Rafael La
Porta, Marco Pagano, Manju Puri, Adriano Rampini, David Robinson, Andrei Shleifer, Matthew Slaughter,
Jeremy Stein, Vish Vishwanathan, Amir Yaron, Rebecca Zarutskie, and seminar participants at Banca
d’Italia, Brigham Young University, Boston University, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Dartmouth
(Tuck), Duke (Fuqua School of Business), Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance, European
Central Bank, the Grossman and Hart at 25 conference at the Solvay Brussels School of Economics
and Management, Harvard-MIT Applied Theory seminar, HEC Paris, INSEAD, Pontifcia Universidade
Católica do Rio de Janeiro,University of Southern California (Marshall), and Wharton for very helpful
comments. Benmelech is grateful for financial support from the National Science Foundation under
CAREER award SES-0847392. Assunção is grateful for financial support from the Consortium on
Financial Systems and Poverty at University of Chicago and CNPq. Silva is grateful for financial support
from CAPES and CNPq. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Juliano J. Assunção, Efraim Benmelech, and Fernando S. S. Silva. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Repossession and the Democratization of Credit
Juliano J. Assunção, Efraim Benmelech, and Fernando S. S. Silva
NBER Working Paper No. 17858
February 2012
JEL No. G21,G28,K22
ABSTRACT
We exploit a 2004 credit reform in Brazil that simplified the sale of repossessed cars used as collateral
for auto loans. We show that the change has led to larger loans with lower spreads and longer maturities.
The reform expanded credit to riskier, low-income borrowers for newer, more expensive cars. Although
the credit reform improved riskier borrowers’ access to credit, it also led to increased incidences of
delinquency and default. Our results shed light on the consequences of a credit reform, highlighting
the crucial role that collateral and repossession play in the liberalization and democratization of credit.
Juliano J. Assunção Fernando S. S. Silva
Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro (PUC-Rio) Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro (PUC-Rio)
Rua Marquês de São Vicente, 225 Rua Marquês de São Vicente, 225
22451-900 Rio de Janeiro, RJ 22451-900 Rio de Janeiro, RJ
Brazil Brazil
juliano@econ.puc-rio.br fernandosssilva@yahoo.com.br
Efraim Benmelech
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer 233
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
effi_benmelech@harvard.edu

I. Introduction
Perhaps the most important legal feature of debt contracts is the lender’s right to repossess assets
when borrowers default on promised payments. The legal right to repossess collateral is critical to
the provision of credit because it allows creditors to recover, at least partially, the value of their
loans. We show how a 2004 credit reform that simplified the selling of repossessed cars led to the
liberalization of the auto loan credit market in Brazil. Our evidence suggests that the legal change
has led to larger loans with lower spreads, longer maturities, and higher leverage.
ThedevelopmentoftheBrazilianautoloanmarkethasfacedseveralimpediments. Chiefamong
them was the inefficient process of repossession and resale of autos when borrowers defaulted on
their loans. Banks were allowed to repossess the autos of borrowers who failed to repay their loans.
However, these banks could not resell these repossessed cars without court approval. As a result,
the time from repossession of a car to its resale by the bank averaged more than two years. In
August 2004, the Brazilian government announced a broad credit reform that, among other legal
changes, eased the resale of repossessed autos.
Although previous research has analyzed some implications of legal reforms to credit markets,
the evidence on the effect of such reforms on lending is mixed. While the improvement in judi-
cial efficiency and creditor rights is correlated with increased supply of external finance (Jappelli,
Pagano, and Bianco (2005), La Porta et al. (1997), Laeven and Majnoni (2005)), the effect of the
reform on financial contracts is ambiguous. On one hand, increased recovery of collateral induces
banks to offer larger loans with lower credit spreads and longer maturities. On the other hand,
however, increased recovery rates enables riskier borrowers who were previously rejected and ra-
tioned out of the market to obtain credit. While enhancing the ability of banks to recover their
loans leads to better contracts for existing borrowers, banks will offer smaller loans, with higher
credit spreads and shorter maturities, to the newly admitted cohort of riskier borrowers.
We use micro-level data from one of the largest banks in Brazil to provide direct evidence on
the consequences of the reform. Our data enable us to separate the direct effect of the legal change
on contracts from the composition effect that results in increased lending to riskier borrowers. We
show that the reform brought about an expansion of credit, enabling riskier, low-income borrowers
to obtain loans and purchase newer, more expensive cars. We refer to this effect as the “democra-
tization of credit,” in which the strengthening of the ability of lenders to foreclose, repossess, and
1

sell assets increases the supply of credit to those who need it most.
Using detailed information on a large sample of auto loans made by one of Brazil’s largest
banks during the years 2003 to 2005 we study the relation between the bank’s ability to seize
and resell collateral and a battery of outcomes pertaining to: (i) financial contracts, (ii) borrower
characteristics, (iii) car characteristics, and (iv) loan performance. Consistent with the predictions
from the financial contracting literature (Hart and Moore (1994), Shleifer and Vishny (1992)),
our analysis shows that the credit reform in Brazil led to larger loans with lower spreads, longer
maturities, and higher leverage.
We also find that the ability to resell collateral affected not only financial contracts but also the
composition of borrowers in the auto loan market. As the process of reselling repossessed cars was
expedited dramatically with the implementation of the reform, expected loss given default from
a car loan declined sharply. As a result, borrowers with a higher probability of default would be
expected, ex ante, to be more likely to obtain an auto loan. Our regression analysis shows that the
reform enabled riskier, low-income borrowers to obtain loans and purchase newer, more expensive
cars. Further, borrowers who are self-employed were more likely to obtain a car loan. These results
demonstrate a process of the “democratization” of credit – in which an improved legal process to
resell collateral led to an expansion of credit to borrowers who were less likely to obtain a loan
before the reform.
Further, we study the consequences of the reform for loan performance. A growing body
of empirical evidence suggests that credit expansion leads to subsequent waves of default and
repossession (Keys et al. (2010), Mian and Sufi (2009, 2010)). Given that we find that the reform
led to lending to riskier borrowers, it is likely that loans granted after the reform will have a higher
rate of default. We use three measures to capture the performance of loans: (i) late payment, (ii)
default on one loan installment, and (iii) default on the entire loan. We find that after controlling
for contract terms, personal and car characteristics, macro controls, and time trend, the likelihood
of a late payment and default increased after the law was implemented. The effect of the reform
on the probability that the borrower will be late or default is substantial, implying an increase of
about 20% relative to the mean.
Our regressions control for a battery of contract, borrower, and car characteristics, in addition
to macro variables. Although our identification strategy hinges on the notion that our results are
driven only by the time-series change in the law, other important polices that affect credit markets
2