NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CRISIS-RELATED SHIFTS IN THE MARKET VALUATION OF BANKING ACTIVITIES
Charles W. Calomiris
Doron Nissim
Working Paper 17868
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17868
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2012
The authors gratefully acknowledge the helpful comments and suggestions made by seminar participants
at Baruch College, Columbia University, FASRI, Insead, Northwestern, and Yale University. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Charles W. Calomiris and Doron Nissim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Crisis-Related Shifts in the Market Valuation of Banking Activities
Charles W. Calomiris and Doron Nissim
NBER Working Paper No. 17868
February 2012
JEL No. E32,E43,G01,G21
ABSTRACT
We examine changes in the market valuation of banking activities over the last decade, focusing on
the effects of the financial crisis. Our valuation model recognizes that banks create value through the
types of assets and liabilities that they create and the various types of risk they undertake (including
their leverage, their lending risk, and their interest rate risk). The model also allows for heterogeneous
bank income streams, dividend signaling effects, and changes in capitalization rates for income streams
over time depending on changing market conditions. This approach explains substantial cross-sectional
variation in observed market-to-book values, allowing us to identify the market pricing of various
banking activities and changes in market pricing over time. We find that the declines in bank stock
values since 2007 reflect declining values of various categories of banking activity and changes in
market conditions. Dividend payments matter for market values increasingly over time. “Carry-trade”
effects from taking on interest rate risk are also apparent. The effects of leverage on bank valuation
changed sign during the crisis; while the market rewarded high leverage with higher market values
prior to the crisis, leverage become associated with lower values during and after the crisis. Contrary
to the view that the declines in market-to-book values for U.S. banks from 2006-2011 mainly reflect
unrecognized losses, we find that other factors explain most of the decline in market-to-book ratios.
Although model parameters do change over time, more than three-quarters of the change in market-to-book
values that occurred from 2006 to the end of 2008 were predictable based on changes in fundamental
determinants of value using the model coefficients estimated in 2006.
Charles W. Calomiris
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu
Doron Nissim
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
dn75@columbia.edu

1. INTRODUCTION
This study examines the market valuation of banking activities and how it has changed over the last
decade, focusing on the effects of the financial crisis in changing the way the market perceives the
relationship between various dimensions of bank performance and bank value.
Many researchers have drawn attention to the dramatic declines in banks’ market-to-book values.
Those researchers have argued that the declining market-to-book ratios largely reflect the purposeful
understatement of losses in bank holding companies – especially losses related to mortgage activity –
“in an effort to preserve book capital” (Huizinga and Laeven 2011). Huizinga and Laeven (2011) argue
that: (1) the presence of greater proportions of mortgage-related assets on a bank’s balance sheet was
associated with greater declines in the ratio of market-to-book value, (2) banks augmented their book
values in 2008 by classifying mortgage-backed securities (MBS) as held-to-maturity rather than as available-
for-sale, a behavior that increased in the difference between the amortized cost and fair value of a bank’s
MBS portfolio, and (3) banks with greater mortgage exposure reported relatively low rates of loan loss
provisioning and loan charge-offs. In the working paper version of their paper, Huizinga and Laeven
(2009) also report that at moments when accounting rules for valuing assets under “fair value”
accounting standards were relaxed, banks with larger mortgage exposure experienced higher excess
returns (reflecting the value to banks of possessing more book capital for regulatory purposes).1
This evidence reinforces a line of argument in a large literature about regulatory forbearance
during financial crises, defined as regulatory understatement of bank losses designed to limit the costs to
banks from those losses. The inflation of bank capital via forbearance may be motivated either by
political favoritism toward banks or by the desire to encourage banks not to cut the supply of credit to
1 Transfers of securities from available-for-sale category to the held-to-maturity category should not affect book value under
GAAP, since transferred securities are supposed to be valued at current fair value, not at amortized cost. The authors,
however, believe that violations of this rule were tolerated, and that transferred securities were valued at amortized cost.
Furthermore, it is important to note that provision for loan losses under GAAP rules is not supposed to measure expected
losses but rather incurred losses, and therefore, the fact that provisions understate expected losses is inherent in the
accounting rule, not a violation of the rule.
1

borrowers. Kane (1989), Brewer (1995), and Kroszner and Strahan (1996), for example, argued that
forbearance kept under-capitalized savings and loans afloat in the 1980s, and encouraged risk taking by
those under-capitalized institutions. Brown and Dinc (2005, 2011) show that forbearance is a more
general international phenomenon, especially in the wake of severe financial crises, and especially prior
to elections. With respect to the recent U.S. crisis, in addition to Huizinga and Laeven (2009, 2011),
many other researchers have argued that the under-recognition of loss was significant for U.S. banks,
reinforcing the view that the decline in market-to-book values largely reflects flawed accounting rules,
and banks’ and regulators’ attempts to preserve book capital (Goh et al. 2009, Knaup and Wagner 2009,
Kolev 2009, Plantin et al. 2008). Laux and Leuz (2010) find little evidence that such effects are the
result of pro-cyclical biases in fair value accounting, per se, indicating that regulatory forbearance with
regard to particular aspects of bank behavior (as documented by Huizinga and Laeven) are more
important than the presence of fair value accounting, per se, for encouraging the understatement of loss
by banks. Although these authors provide powerful evidence in favor of the view that the
understatement of expected loss by book values contributed to the observed declines in banks’ market-
to-book values during and after the crisis, there are many other potential sources of change that could
have contributed to the dramatic decline in the market-to-book value ratio of banks.
First, the market values of loan and deposit relationships may have been affected by changes in
market conditions that do not affect book values. The costs of servicing loan relationships during the
crisis included banks’ having to honor draw-downs on lines of credit at a time when banks themselves
were scrambling for liquidity. More generally, the values of loan and deposit relationships may have
declined as a consequence of reductions in the expected per-period profits flowing from those
relationships, or because of increases in the risk factors and discount rates used to value those flows.
With respect to the value of deposit relationships, the crisis was associated with a dramatic change in
2