NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIQUIDITY CONSTRAINTS AND CONSUMER BANKRUPTCY:
EVIDENCE FROM TAX REBATES
Tal Gross
Matthew J. Notowidigdo
Jialan Wang
Working Paper 17807
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17807
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2012
We are grateful to Ben Keys, Erik Hurst, Neale Mahoney, Nick Souleles, and seminar participants
at the University of California at Los Angeles, University of Illinois, University of Miami, the Olin
School of Business, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, and Columbia University for useful
feedback. We thank Ido Moskovich and Anthony Vashevko for helpful research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Tal Gross, Matthew J. Notowidigdo, and Jialan Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Liquidity Constraints and Consumer Bankruptcy: Evidence from Tax Rebates
Tal Gross, Matthew J. Notowidigdo, and Jialan Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 17807
February 2012
JEL No. H31,K35
ABSTRACT
This paper estimates the extent to which legal fees prevent liquidity-constrained households from declaring
bankruptcy. To do so, it studies how the 2001 and 2008 tax rebates affected consumer bankruptcy
filings. We exploit the randomized timing of the rebate checks and estimate that the rebates caused
a significant, short-run increase in consumer bankruptcies in both years, with larger effects in 2008
when the rebates were more generous and more widely distributed. Using hand-collected data from
individual bankruptcy petitions, we document that the rebates caused an increase in the average liabilities
and the liabilities-to-income ratios of filers.
Tal Gross Jialan Wang
Department of Health Policy and Management Olin Business School
Mailman School of Public Health Washington University in St. Louis
Columbia University 208 Simon Hall
600 West 168th Street, Sixth Floor 1 Olympian Way
New York, NY 10032 St. Louis, MO, 63130
tg2370@columbia.edu jialan.wang@wustl.edu
Matthew J. Notowidigdo
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
noto@chicagobooth.edu

1 Introduction
Over the past three decades, consumer bankruptcy rates have tripled. As of the late 1990s,
nearly ten percent of American households had declared bankruptcy (Stavins, 2000). By
2001, over1.3percentofAmericanhouseholdswerefilingforbankruptcyeveryyear(Zywicki,
2005). In an attempt to slow the increase in bankruptcies, the 2005 Bankruptcy Abuse
Prevention and Consumer Protection Act (bapcpa) raised the barriers consumers must
overcomeinordertofileforbankruptcy. Thebapcparequiresthatbankruptcyfilersundergo
mandatory credit counseling at their own expense. Furthermore, the act raises the legal and
administrative fees that households have to pay in order to declare bankruptcy. These
“entrance fees” for bankruptcy increased from an average of $921 before the reform to an
average of $1,477 after the reform (GAO, 2008).
While there exists a divisive debate over these entrance fees (Zywicki, 2005; Mann and
Porter, 2010), little empirical research has estimated their effect. Unfortunately, economic
theory provides little guidance, as the welfare consequences of entrance fees are theoretically
ambiguous. Ontheonehand, feesmayactasanordealmechanism, screeningouthouseholds
who stand to gain little from filing for bankruptcy (Nichols and Zeckhauser, 1982). On the
other hand, the fees may prevent liquidity-constrained households from filing for bankruptcy,
and those households may benefit the most from filing.
In this paper, we find that a significant fraction of bankruptcy filers are liquidity-
constrained. We exploit plausibly exogenous variation in liquidity induced by the 2001
and 2008 income tax rebates. The rebates were distributed over 9–10 week periods in both
years, and households received between $300 and $1,200. The date households received their
rebates was effectively randomly assigned, which allows us to estimate the causal effect of a
one-time, anticipated increase in liquidity on consumer bankruptcy filings.
Wefindthatthetaxrebatesledtoasignificant, short-runincreaseinconsumerbankrupt-
1

cies. Total bankruptcies increased by roughly 2 percent after the 2001 rebates, and by 7
percent after the 2008 rebates. The increase in bankruptcies was driven entirely by Chapter
7 filings, which is consistent with the existence of liquidity constraints.1 We find no evidence
that the increase consisted of bankruptcies that otherwise would not have occurred. Instead,
the rebates likely allowed households to file months earlier than they otherwise would have
been able to file.
To interpret our results, we develop a simple model of consumer bankruptcy.2 The
model is motivated by the relevant case law regarding how bankruptcy courts treated the
tax rebates. It suggests that tax rebates should only affect the filing decisions of liquidity-
constrained households. The model allows us to translate our empirical results into an
estimate of the share of households who wish to file for bankruptcy but cannot afford to
do so. Combining our model and empirical results, we conclude that 2.0 percent of filers in
2001 and 3.8 percent of filers in 2008 could not afford to file for bankruptcy in the absence
of the tax rebates. The larger share in 2008 is likely driven by the larger average value of
the rebate checks as well as the more severe recession, which likely increased the number of
liquidity-constrained households.
Ourresultsareconsistentwithexistingevidenceonhouseholdliquidityconstraints(Lusardi
et al., 2011), and our paper contributes to the literature on the economic effects of these con-
straints. Liquidity constraints have been shown to cause excessive consumption responses
to transitory changes in income (Shapiro and Slemrod, 2003; Souleles, 1999; Hsieh, 2003;
Stephens, 2003), limit investment in human capital (Dynarski, 2003), and amplify the behav-
ioral response to unemployment insurance benefits (Chetty, 2008).3 Additionally, liquidity
1Households can file for bankruptcy either under Chapter 7 or Chapter 13. Chapter 7 filers are more
likely to be liquidity-constrained since they have lower incomes and fewer assets. Moreover, the majority
of Chapter 7 legal fees must be paid in advance of filing, while Chapter 13 legal fees can be paid gradually
after filing.
2See Wang and White (2000) for a related model.
3Liquidityconstraintsalsoaffectsub-primemortgagedefaultsinthemonthsfollowinglump-sumproperty
taxpayments(AndersonandDokko,2011). Bycontrast,HurstandLusardi(2004)donotfindclearevidence
2