NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ARE BANKS PASSIVE LIQUIDITY BACKSTOPS? DEPOSIT RATES AND FLOWS
DURING THE 2007-2009 CRISIS
Viral V. Acharya
Nada Mora
Working Paper 17838
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17838
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2012
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City or the Federal Reserve System. Jacob Schak, Paul Rotilie, Thad
Sieracki, Jon Christensson, and Kristen Regehr provided valuable research assistance. We are grateful
to Ruth Judson for her help with the Bank Rate Monitor data. We thank Sumit Agarwal, Heitor Almeida,
David Backus, Morten Bech, Lamont Black, Francisco Covas, Bob DeYoung, Bill Keeton, Michal
Kowalik, Ouarda Merrouche, Chuck Morris, Wayne Passmore, Jack Reidhill, Anthony Saunders, Ken
Spong, Phil Strahan, and participants at the Financial Management Association’s 2011 Meeting and
the Federal Reserve’s “Day Ahead” 2012 Conference on Financial Markets and Institutions for helpful
comments. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Viral V. Acharya and Nada Mora. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Are Banks Passive Liquidity Backstops? Deposit Rates and Flows during the 2007-2009 Crisis
Viral V. Acharya and Nada Mora
NBER Working Paper No. 17838
February 2012
JEL No. E4,G01,G11,G21,G28
ABSTRACT
Can banks maintain their advantage as liquidity providers when they are heavily exposed to a financial
crisis? The standard argument - that banks can - hinges on deposit inflows that are seeking a safe haven
and provide banks with a natural hedge to fund drawn credit lines and other commitments. We shed
new light on this issue by studying the behavior of bank deposit rates and inflows during the 2007-09
crisis. Our results indicate that the role of the banking system as a stabilizing liquidity insurer is not
one of the passive recipient, but of an active seeker, of deposits. We find that banks facing a funding
squeeze sought to attract deposits by offering higher rates. Banks offering higher rates were also those
most exposed to liquidity demand shocks (as measured by their unused commitments, wholesale funding
dependence, and limited liquid assets), as well as with fundamentally weak balance-sheets (as measured
by their non-performing loans or by subsequent failure). Such rate increases have a competitive effect
in that they lead other banks to offer higher rates as well. Overall, the results present a nuanced view
of deposit rates and flows to banks in a crisis, one that reflects banks not just as safety havens but also
as stressed entities scrambling for deposits.
Viral V. Acharya
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-84
New York, NY 10012
and CEPR
and also NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu
Nada Mora
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
nada.mora@kc.frb.org

“Citigroup representatives fanned out across San Francisco’s financial district on Oct. 17, handing out
fliers promoting six-month certificates of deposit with 4 percent interest rates” – Bloomberg, “Citi
Squeezed in Debt Market as JPMorgan, Wells Lure Deposits” October 20, 2008.
“The fact that Washington Mutual is now owned by Chase is very positive, because they were a huge
outlier on rates," Kenneth D. Lewis, then Chairman and CEO of Bank of America, as cited in American
Banker, “Deposit-Gathering Pitches Evolving Amid Upheaval”, October 9, 2008.
1. INTRODUCTION
In financial crises of the recent past, investors often withdrew from securities markets and
placed their funds into safer assets, such as U.S. Treasuries and bank deposits. During such episodes, a
wide range of businesses shut out of securities markets sought to fund their operations by drawing
down credit lines established with banks during normal times. Awash with funds from depositors
seeking a safe haven, banks had no difficulty meeting these increased credit demands (e.g., Gatev and
Strahan, 2006). Thus, banks seem to have helped avoid financial disruptions and business liquidations
that would have occurred in the absence of a liquidity backstop.
In 2007-09, however, banks were themselves at the center of the financial crisis. While
significant risks were present in some other financial institutions, this crisis was special in that
commercial banks were much more exposed to losses than in recent past crises. Aggregate risk also
sharply increased, disrupting banks’ ability to diversify shocks across businesses and depositors. These
two features of the crisis (and their interaction) cast doubt on the notion that banks can be taken for
granted as a natural source of liquidity during financial crises. Were banks still viewed as a safe haven,
and if not, how compromised was their ability to meet the demand for liquidity? And, what actions did
banks take to ensure that inflows into deposit funds persisted as their funding sources were drying up?
To answer these questions, we investigate the behavior of bank deposit rates and flows during
the recent financial crisis. As banks become weak or liquidity-constrained, they may seek to attract
deposits by offering higher rates.1 More broadly, competition for deposits can be intense during a
crisis.2 Supporting these channels, Chart 1a shows the average deposit rates offered by failed banks and
nearly failed banks (decline in stock price of 90% or more), as measured by the difference from the rates
1 For example, Washington Mutual pitched above-market rates prior to its acquisition by JP Morgan Chase in 2008
as did Countrywide in 2007. See the American Banker, October 9, 2008, “Deposit-Gathering Pitches Evolving Amid
Upheaval” and December 5, 2007, “Why Rate Cuts Aren’t Helping on the Deposit Side”.
2 Indeed, there were several news reports of extensive deposit promotions despite significant cuts in the Federal
funds rate during 2008 (e.g., Citibank introduced a 6-month CD offering 4% in October 2008 compared with an
average rate of 2.9% that it paid on its deposits in the third quarter). See Bloomberg, October 20, 2008, “Citi
Squeezed in Debt Market as JPMorgan, Wells Lure Deposits”.
2

of non-fail banks (that is, banks that did not fail), over a one year period prior to failure, for failures
occurring during the 1997-2009 period. For ease of comparison, the x-axis is the time to failure.3 As is
evident, the weak institutions offered substantially higher CD rates in the run-up to failure. For
example, the differential between their 12-month CD rate and that of non-fail banks crept up from 10
basis points one year prior to failure to close to 60 basis points in the last two weeks before failure (and
even their checking rates edged up). Chart 1b narrows the set to four prominent examples of banks and
thrifts that failed (IndyMac, Washington Mutual) or nearly failed (Wachovia, Citi) in the crisis. Zooming
in on these four large financial institutions, their average 12-month CD (60-month CD) differential
reached 100 basis points (130 basis points).
Were institutions that later failed able to attract correspondingly greater deposit inflows? The
descriptive evidence from the quarterly regulatory reports indicates that these institutions in fact lost
deposits as they approached failure. Chart 2 shows that while they were able to initially maintain
inflows of insured deposits, even insured deposits registered a negative growth rate in the last two
quarters prior to failure (e.g., average insured deposit growth was roughly -1% in the quarter of the
institution’s final regulatory filing, and similarly, uninsured deposit growth reached -2%). A similar
pattern characterized core deposits of weak institutions as these also fell five quarters prior to failure
(core deposits exclude large time and foreign deposits and are commonly considered stable sources of
funding).
This deposit funding pressure was not limited to banks that failed but was widespread and
particularly acute in the first phase of the crisis from the ABCP “freeze” starting August 9, 2007 (as
documented in Acharya, Schnabl and Suarez, 2009), until just before the Lehman failure on September
15, 2008. Although core deposits increased in the banking system by close to $800 billion from end
2007 to early 2009 (Table 1 and He, Khang and Krishnamurthy,2010), core deposits increased by just $90
billion up until 2008:Q2. In other words, the sharp increase in core deposits only occurred in 2008:Q3,
growing by $272 billion in just one quarter – and occurred across both large and small banks and
extended to large time deposits as well (Table 1).4
3 By failures, we hereafter mean both actual and nearly failed banks (specifically, failure for the latter cases is
recorded starting the first date when the 18-month return over the period 1997-2009 was worse than -90% using
daily stock return data and following Acharya, Pedersen, Philippon, and Richardson, 2010). For example, the near-
failure date for Wachovia was September 29, 2008 (coinciding with the date its acquisition was announced), and
for Citi was November 20, 2008 (the U.S. government provided a package of guarantees, liquidity financing and
capital on November 23).
4 While banks remained heavily exposed to losses even after 2008:Q3, the jump in aggregate uncertainty following
the Lehman failure and a sudden shift in the perceived riskiness of money market funds and enacted measures of
3