NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE FIRM-LEVEL CREDIT MULTIPLIER
Murillo Campello
Dirk Hackbarth
Working Paper 17805
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17805
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2012
We thank Yiorgos Allayannis, Heitor Almeida, Janice Eberly, Espen Eckbo, Alex Edmans, Antônio
Galvão, Erasmo Giambona, Anzhela Knyazeva, Marc Martos-Vila, David Mauer, Kristian Miltersen,
David Schoenherr, Phil Strahan, Erik Theissen, and Mike Weisbach for their comments and suggestions.
Comments from seminar participants at Boston College, Dartmouth College, Drexel University, Erasmus
University, the 2008 European Finance Association Meetings (Athens), Florida State University, ISCTE/Nova
de Lisboa University, the 2008 JH Finance Group's Conference, Stockholm School of Economics,
the 2008 Symposium on Finance, Banking, and Insurance (Karlsruhe), University of Amsterdam, University
of Bonn, University of Illinois at Chicago, University of Iowa, University of Miami, University of
Missouri, University of North Carolina, University of South Florida, University of Texas at Dallas,
University of Virginia, University of Zürich, Washington University in St. Louis, and the 2008 Western
Finance Association Meetings (Waikoloa) are also appreciated. Bruno Laranjeira and Dongming Sun
provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Murillo Campello and Dirk Hackbarth. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Firm-Level Credit Multiplier
Murillo Campello and Dirk Hackbarth
NBER Working Paper No. 17805
February 2012
JEL No. G31,G32
ABSTRACT
We study the effect of asset tangibility on corporate financing and investment decisions. Financially
constrained firms benefit the most from investing in tangible assets because those assets help relax
constraints, allowing for further investment. Using a dynamic model, we characterize this effect –
which we call firm-level credit multiplier – and show how asset tangibility increases the sensitivity
of investment to Tobin’s Q for financially constrained firms. Examining a large sample of manufacturers
over the 1971-2005 period as well as simulated data, we find support for our theory’s tangibility–investment
channel. We further verify that our findings are driven by firms’ debt issuance activities. Consistent
with our empirical identification strategy, the firm-level credit multiplier is absent from samples of
financially unconstrained firms and samples of financially constrained firms with low spare debt capacity.
Murillo Campello
Johnson Graduate School of Management
Cornell University
114 East Avenue
369 Sage Hall
Ithaca, NY 148531-6201
and NBER
campello@cornell.edu
Dirk Hackbarth
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
515 East Gregory Drive, 4035 BIF
Champaign, IL, 61820
dhackbar@uiuc.edu

1 Introduction
The interplay between real and financial decisions is a central issue in corporate finance research.
Accordingly, a large body of literature examines when firms should invest and how they should
finance their projects. The literature, however, often fails to appreciate the impact of contracting
frictions on firms’ ability to raise funds for investment. As a result, the investment process is
generally taken as exogenous to firms’ financial status and financing decisions.
Financing frictions manifest themselves in many different ways. They typically make it harder
for firms to raise fairly-priced funds to finance their projects. As a result, the availability of financ-
ing—ratherthantheavailabilityofinvestmentopportunities—drivesfirms’investmentspending.
Some of the most commonly observed financing frictions stem from the limited enforceability of
contracts, especially in poor states of the world. Evidence suggests that firms strategically default
on their contractual obligations when liquidation values are too low to keep investors committed to
termination (Gilson et al. (1990) and Altman (1991)). Theoretical models recognize this problem
and characterize financing arrangements that commit investors to costly termination outcomes (see
Harris and Raviv (1990) and Bolton and Scharfstein (1990)). Although they vary in their design,
the element that makes these contracts enforceable has a common real-world counterpart: the sal-
ability or “tangibility” of the company’s assets.1 The tangibility of corporate assets is not only tied
to the firm’s investment process (asset tangibility is a function of the firm’s line of business and
capital accumulation process), but also to the firm’s ability to raise external funds.
This paper explores an inherent attribute of the firm — the tangibility of its operating assets —
to characterize an endogenous relation between firms’ real and financial decisions in the presence
of financing imperfections. The tangibility of a firm’s assets affects its ability to pledge collateral,
which serves as creditors’ “enforceable” outside option in contract renegotiations. As such, asset
tangibility reduces debtors’ incentive to default strategically, enlarging the firm’s debt capacity.
While variants of the asset tangibility–investment channel have been described in prior work in
macroeconomics(seeKiyotakiandMoore(1997)andBernankeetal.(2000)), theideahasnotbeen
articulated in a firm-level setting. The extant literature lacks a theory with implications for cross-
sectional investment as well as empirical tests for the real effects of contract enforceability frictions.
We argue that firms that face financing frictions can benefit the most from the larger debt
capacity that is created by tangible assets. In particular, access to more (or cheaper) credit allows
firms to invest more without resorting to costly external equity or public unsecured debt. We
show that the additional investment — in tangible assets — further relaxes constraints, albeit at
a diminishing rate. In this way, investment is amplified by a financing feedback of asset tangibility
that arises endogenously in the presence of contracting frictions. Our analysis formalizes the mech-
anism through which asset tangibility amplifies the impact of shocks to the firm’s opportunity set
1Hereinafter, theterm“assettangibility”isgenerallyadoptedandmeanttosummarizetheliquidation value and
ease of redeployment of a firm’s capital from the perspective of outside creditors in the event of default.
1

onto the firm’s investment and financing across time. We call this mechanism the firm-level credit
multiplier. The mechanism we characterize arises from the interplay between asset tangibility,
renegotiable bank debt, costly equity financing, and investment and differs from the economy-wide
credit multiplier discussed in the macroeconomics literature. As we discuss below, the firm-level
credit multiplier yields a number of new testable predictions, such as the increased sensitivity of
investment to Tobin’s Q for financially constrained firms.
The dynamic model we use is uniquely suitable for the purpose of our analysis. Among other
features, it allows us to compute security values, characterize dynamic aspects of the credit multi-
plier, and gauge the impact of financing–investment interactions upon a number of variables that
are of wide interest for empirical research (e.g., Q and debt issuance). In addition to closed-form
solutions for constrained and unconstrained firm values and financing–investment strategies, the
model enables us to simulate artificial panel data sets and conduct cross-sectional tests similar to
those later performed in our empirical tests (based on COMPUSTAT data).
Our model’s central results guide us in performing novel empirical tests on the extensively stud-
ied relation between corporate investment and Q. The model shows, for example, that the impact
of the credit multiplier on investment is only significant for firms that face financing frictions and
that it increases with the degree of tangibility of those firms’ assets. Empirically, both Q and
asset tangibility are expected to affect investment behavior, but the model’s credit multiplier effect
implies that the interaction of these two variables will have a strong positive impact on investment
in a cross-section of financially constrained firms. Put differently, our theory predicts that positive
innovations to investment prospects prompt stronger responses in observed capital spending when
the firm solves a constrained optimization problem and its assets are more tangible.
Wetestourtheoryusingalargesampleofmanufacturersoverthe1971–2005period. Asisstan-
dard in the corporate investment literature, we identify the predictions of our model based on com-
parisons between firms that are likely to be more financially constrained (“constrained firms”) and
firms thatare likely tobe lessconstrained (“unconstrainedfirms”). We employ multipleschemes to
partition the data into constrained and unconstrained subsamples. These are based on firm char-
acteristics, such as payout policy, firm size, and debt ratings (bond and commercial paper ratings).
Foreachconstraintpartitionscheme,wefindthatassettangibilitypromotesinvestmentthrough
a credit multiplier effect for constrained firms, but not for unconstrained firms. As discussed above,
because of the role of asset tangibility in simultaneously boosting financing and investment, our
theory implies that the credit multiplier will be finely identified in the cross-section by interacting
asset tangibility with Q. Consistent with this prediction, our tests show that estimates for this
interaction term reliably explain investment across financially constrained firms. Moreover, we find
that this interaction effect is even more pronounced in a more refined set of tests in which we split
constrainedfirmsintosubsampleswithlowandhighincremental(or“spare”)debtcapacity. Inpar-
ticular, in line with our theory, we find that constrained firms with largely untapped debt capacity
2