NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BEN BERNANKE AND THE ZERO BOUND
Laurence M. Ball
Working Paper 17836
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17836
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2012
I am grateful for suggestions from Patricia Bovers, Christopher Carroll, Jon Faust, Joseph Gagnon,
Donald Kohn, Daniel Leigh, Prakash Loungani, Gregory Mankiw, David Romer, and Jonathan Wright.
The opinions in this paper are solely my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Laurence M. Ball. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Ben Bernanke and the Zero Bound
Laurence M. Ball
NBER Working Paper No. 17836
February 2012
JEL No. E52,E58,E65
ABSTRACT
From 2000 to 2003, when Ben Bernanke was a professor and then a Fed Governor, he wrote extensively
about monetary policy at the zero bound on interest rates. He advocated aggressive stimulus policies,
such as a money-financed tax cut and an inflation target of 3-4%. Yet, since U.S. interest rates hit
zero in 2008, the Fed under Chairman Bernanke has taken more cautious actions. This paper asks when
and why Bernanke changed his mind about zero-bound policy. The answer, at one level, is that he
was influenced by analysis from the Fed staff that was presented at the FOMC meeting of June 2003.
This answer raises another question: why did the staff's views influence Bernanke so strongly? I seek
answers to this question in the social psychology literature on group decision-making.
Laurence M. Ball
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
lball@jhu.edu

[Japan’s] economy has operated below potential for nearly a decade. Nor is it by any means clear
that recovery is imminent. Policy options exist that could greatly reduce these losses. Why isn’t
more happening? To this outsider, at least, Japanese monetary policy seems paralyzed, with a
paralysis that is largely self-induced.
Ben Bernanke (2000)
Monetary policy can be a powerful tool, but it is not a panacea for the problems currently faced by
the U.S. economy.
Ben Bernanke (2011)
What forces shape the policy decisions of a central bank? To gain insight into this question, this
paper examines the policies of the Federal Reserve from December 2008 to the present.
Unemployment has been high during this period and Fed officials have expressed a desire to reduce
it by stimulating aggregate demand. Yet their traditional tool for demand stimulus--cuts in the
federal funds rate--has not been available, because this rate is close to its lower bound of zero. In
this setting, the Fed has confronted choices among various “unconventional” monetary policies.
The analysis starts with a puzzle about Ben Bernanke. From 2000 to 2003, when Bernanke was
an economics professor and then a Fed Governor (but not yet Chair), he wrote and spoke extensively
about monetary policy at the zero bound. He suggested policies for Japan, where interest rates were
near zero at the time, and he discussed what the Fed should do if U.S. interest rates fell near zero
and further stimulus were needed. In these early writings, Bernanke advocated a number of
aggressive policies, including targets for long-term interest rates, depreciation of the currency, an
inflation target of 3-4%, and a money-financed fiscal expansion. Yet, since the U.S. hit the zero
bound in December 2008, the Bernanke Fed has eschewed the policies that Bernanke once supported
and taken more cautious actions--primarily, announcements about future federal funds rates and
1

purchases of long-term Treasury securities (without targets for long-term interest rates).
A number of economists have noted the difference between recent Fed policies and Bernanke’s
earlier views--usually critically. In discussing one of Bernanke’s early writings on the zero bound,
Christina Romer says “My reaction to it was, ‘I wish Ben would read this again’” (quoted in Klein
[2011]). Paul Krugman (2011b) asks “why Ben Bernanke 2011 isn’t taking the advice of Ben
Bernanke 2000.” In criticizing Fed policy, Joseph Gagnon echoes Bernanke’s criticism of the Bank
of Japan: “It’s really ironic. It’s a self-induced paralysis” (quoted in Miller, 2011).
The leading explanation for Bernanke’s caution as Fed chair is political pressure from inflation
hawks. Krugman’s (2011a) harsh assessment is
Mr. Bernanke is allowing himself to be bullied by the inflationistas... The Fed’s policy is to do
nothing about unemployment because Ron Paul is now the chairman of the House subcommittee on
monetary policy.
Mankiw (2011) views Bernanke more favorably, but he, too, cites the political constraints that
Bernanke faces: “If Chairman Bernanke ever suggested increasing inflation to, say, 4 percent he
would quickly return to being Professor Bernanke.”
This paper examines Bernanke’s changing views on monetary policy at the zero bound and
seeks explanations for the changes. Section II documents Bernanke’s early views, both the specific
policies that he advocated and his broader view that the zero bound is not a significant impediment
to demand stimulus. Section III discusses one change that occurred earlier than others, in 2002:
Bernanke’s rejection of exchange-rate depreciation as a stimulus tool.
Sections IV-VI review the broader evolution of Bernanke’s views. I find that they changed
abruptly in June 2003, while Bernanke was a Fed Governor. On June 24, the FOMC heard a briefing
on policy at the zero bound prepared by the Board’s Division of Monetary Affairs and presented by
its director, Vincent Reinhart. The policy options that Reinhart emphasized are close to those that
2