NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CREDIT SUPPLY AND HOUSE PRICES:
EVIDENCE FROM MORTGAGE MARKET SEGMENTATION
Manuel Adelino
Antoinette Schoar
Felipe Severino
Working Paper 17832
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17832
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2012
We thank Viral Acharya, Chris Foote, Gustavo Manso, Atif Mian, Sendhil Mullainathan, Chris Mayer,
David Scharfstein, Todd Sinai, Mathew Slaughter, Jeremy Stein, Bill Wheaton, and seminar participants
at the 2012 AEA Conference, CFS-EIEF Conference on Household Finance, Columbia Business School,
Dartmouth College, Duke University, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia,
Federal Reserve Board, McGill University, MIT Finance Lunch, NBER Asset Pricing and Household
Finance meetings, Princeton University, University of California at Berkeley, Weimer School May
2012 Meetings, Western Finance Association 2012 Meetings, and Yale School of Management for
thoughtful comments. We also thank Andrew Cramond from Dataquick for help with the data. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Manuel Adelino, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Credit Supply and House Prices: Evidence from Mortgage Market Segmentation
Manuel Adelino, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino
NBER Working Paper No. 17832
February 2012, Revised March 2013
JEL No. D12,G10,R20
ABSTRACT
We show that easier access to credit significantly increases house prices by using exogenous changes
in the conforming loan limit as an instrument for lower cost of financing. Houses that become eligible
for financing with a conforming loan show an increase in house value of 1.16 dollars per square foot
(for an average price per square foot of 220 dollars) and higher overall house prices controlling for
a rich set of house characteristics. However, these estimated coefficients are consistent with a local
elasticity of house prices to interest rates that is lower than some previous studies proposed (below
10). In addition, loan to value ratios around the conforming loan limit deviate significantly from the
common 80 percent norm, which confirms that it is an important factor in the financing choices of
home buyers. In line with our interpretation, the results are stronger in the first half of our sample (1998-2001)
when the conforming loan limit was more important, given that other forms of financing were less
common and substantially more expensive. Results are also stronger in zip codes where personal income
growth is low or declining, and in regions with lower elasticity of housing supply.
Manuel Adelino Felipe Severino
Duke University MIT Sloan School of Management
Fuqua School of Business 100 Main Street, E62-678
100 Fuqua Drive Cambridge, MA 02142
Durham, NC 27708-0120 fseverin@mit.edu
manuel.adelino@gmail.com
Antoinette Schoar
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-638
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
aschoar@mit.edu
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17832

1 Introduction
One of the central debates in finance is about the role of credit on the level of asset prices
and the creation of bubbles (Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997; Allen and Gale, 1998; Bernanke
and Gertler, 2001; Kindleberger, Aliber, Solow, 2005; Mian and Sufi, 2009; Brunnermeier,
Eisenbach and Sannikov, 2012). A salient recent example is the US housing market: many
observers of the crisis have proposed that easy access to credit, and the reduced cost of
credit, were the central factors fueling the increase in housing prices as well as the subse-
quent reversal in house price growth when credit dried up (Favilukis, Ludvigson, and Van
Nieuwerburgh, 2010; Hubbard and Mayer, 2008; Khandani, Lo, and Merton, 2009; Pavlov
and Wachter, 2010; Mayer, 2011). Proponents on the other side of the debate argue that
cheap credit alone cannot explain the house price boom and bust, and that other forces are
likely to have been at play (Glaeser, Gottlieb, and Gyourko, 2010).
The key difficulty in measuring the effect of credit on the price of housing is establishing
the direction of causality between credit conditions and house price growth: On the one
hand, easier and cheaper access to credit might reduce borrower financing constraints and
increase total demand for housing, which in turn would lead to higher prices. On the other
hand, however, credit conditions might be responding to expectations of stronger housing
demand and, as a consequence, higher house prices. In this latter scenario, cheaper credit
is not the driver of house price increases, but a byproduct of increased demand for housing,
since housing as collateral becomes more valuable. As we see in the existing literature, it
has been very difficult to separate these two effects.1
Inthispaper, weuseannualchangesintheconformingloanlimit(CLL)asaninstrument
for exogenous variation in the cost of credit, and in the availability of credit itself. The
CLL determines the maximum size of a mortgage that can be purchased or securitized by
Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac. This implicit (and since 2008, explicit) government support
for loans below the conforming loan limit provides easier access to credit for a wide range of
borrowers and reduces the cost of credit relative to jumbo loans. The difference in interest
rates between conforming loans and jumbo loans (those that are above the conforming limit)
is estimated to be up to 24 basis points in the 90’s and 2000’s (McKenzie, 2002; Ambrose,
LaCour-Little, and Sanders, 2004; Sherlund, 2008; Kaufman, 2012). Loutskina and Strahan
(2009, 2011)showthatlendersscreenborrowersforjumboloansmoreintenselythantheydo
those that apply for conforming loans, which implies that mortgages below the conforming
loan limit are both cheaper and easier to obtain than above this limit.
1ArecentpaperbyFavaraandImbs(2011)usesbranchingderegulationinthe1990stoidentifythecausal
link between credit supply and house prices and finds that states where there is deregulation subsequently
experience larger house price increases.
2

The key idea of our identification strategy is that changes in the conforming loan limit
(CLL) from one year to the next are exogenous not only to individual transactions, but also
to the conditions of local housing markets or the local economy, since this change is based
on the countrywide average appreciation in house prices. Our empirical approach involves
comparing transactions with a price that can be financed more easily using a conforming
loan, and houses that are more expensive and for which buyers need to obtain larger loans
to maintain the same loan-to-value ratio. We track houses in this price range in the year
that the limit is in effect as well as the subsequent year, once the limit is raised and all
houses in the sample become eligible for conforming loans. This setup enables us to cleanly
identify the effect of the cost and access to credit based on the exogenous variation of the
CLL and control for any overall trends in house prices.
The threshold that we use to define houses that are “easy” to finance with a conforming
loan in a given year is the conforming loan limit divided by 0.8.2 By construction, buyers
of houses with a price below this threshold can get a conforming loan that makes up 80
percent of the price of the house, whereas, if the price of the house is above 125 percent of
the CLL, it can no longer be financed at 80 percent with a conforming loan.3 Above this
price threshold, borrowers either finance their home with an 80 percent first mortgage using
a jumbo loan (i.e. a loan above the CLL) at a higher interest rate, or, if they want to take
advantage of the lower interest rate below the CLL, they have to use savings or alternative
forms of financing to make a larger down payment.
The intuition behind this estimation strategy is that transactions that fall just above
the threshold are harder to finance, and thus, their prices have been bid up less relative to
the underlying fundamentals of the house. An increase in the conforming loan limit should
affect this part of the house price distribution more strongly since it allows borrowers who
previously were not able to get attractive financing to enter this segment of the market.
Importantly, our sample includes all transactions in this price range independent of the
financing choice of each borrower. This excludes any bias from our estimates that might
come from the endogenous choice of financing of a specific transaction, e.g. richer people
whocanaffordtoputmoremoneydownmightalsopurchasehousesthataremoreexpensive
based on (unobservable) quality dimensions.
We first confirm that the conforming loan limit has a significant impact on borrowers’
2Kaufman (2012) uses this threshold for appraisal values to study the effect of the conforming status of
a loan on its cost and contract structure.
380 percent loan to value ratios (LTV) are widely used in the industry as an important threshold for
first lien mortgages. Loans with an LTV ratio below 80 are associated with more attractive terms and
conforming loans above 80 percent require private mortgage insurance in order to qualify for purchase by
Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac (Green and Wachter, 2005).
3