NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHO LIVES IN THE C-SUITE? ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE AND THE
DIVISION OF LABOR IN TOP MANAGEMENT
Maria Guadalupe
Hongyi Li
Julie Wulf
Working Paper 17846
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17846
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2012
We would like to thank Erik Brynjolfsson, David Collis, Wouter Dessein, Bob Gibbons, Shane Greenstein,
Don Hambrick, Connie Helfat, Bruce Harreld, Anne Marie Knott, Kristina McElheran, Paul Oyer,
Heikki Rantakari, Jim Rebitzer, Julio Rotemberg, Raffaella Sadun, Tano Santos, John Van Reenen,
David Yoffie, Tim Van Zandt, and especially Jim Dana for very helpful discussions. Thanks also to
seminar participants at IESE, LBS, the NBER Organizational Economics meeting, UCLA, Washington
University, HBS strategy conference, HBS brown bag and to Erik Brynjolfsson and Lorin Hitt, for
the Harte Hanks data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Maria Guadalupe, Hongyi Li, and Julie Wulf. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Who Lives in the C-Suite? Organizational Structure and the Division of Labor in Top Management
Maria Guadalupe, Hongyi Li, and Julie Wulf
NBER Working Paper No. 17846
February 2012
JEL No. D22,J31,L2,M12,M5
ABSTRACT
This paper shows that top management structures in large US firms radically changed since the mid-1980s.
While the number of managers reporting directly to the CEO doubled, the growth was driven primarily
by functional managers rather than general managers. Using panel data on senior management positions,
we explore the relationship between changes in executive team composition, firm diversification, and
IT investments—which arguably alter returns to exploiting synergies through corporate-wide coordination
by functional managers in headquarters. We find that the number of functional managers closer to
the product (“product” functions i.e., marketing, R&D) increase as firms focus their businesses, while
the number of functional managers farther from the product (“administrative” functions i.e., finance,
law, HR) increase with IT investments. Finally, we show that general manager pay decreases as functional
managers join the executive team suggesting a shift in activities from general to functional managers—a
phenomenon we term “functional centralization.”
Maria Guadalupe Julie Wulf
Graduate School of Business Harvard Business School
Columbia University Morgan Hall 241, Soldiers Field Road
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 624 Boston, MA 02163
New York, NY 10027 jwulf@hbs.edu
and NBER
mg2341@columbia.edu
Hongyi Li
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-513
Cambridge, MA 02142
hongyili@mit.edu

I. Introduction
“We learned from experience that work of higher quality could be obtained by utilizing,
corporation-wide, the highly developed talents of the [functional] specialists.”
Alfred P. Sloan, Jr. “My Years with General Motors” (1963)
Modern corporations are run by a team of executives that go beyond the Chief Executive Officer
(CEO). It is by now a well established fact that the size of the CEO’s executive team–-as defined by the
managers that report directly to the CEO and commonly referred to as the C-Suite--has increased
dramatically in recent decades (Rajan and Wulf, 2006). Yet we know little about the composition of the
top team -- even though it is the governing body that sets firm strategy, coordinates activities and
allocates resources across business units, decisions that are critical to firm performance. Moreover, the
executive team is the focus of extensive research on top management teams (TMT) by management
scholars (Hambrick and Mason, 1984). To explore changes in the organizational structure at the top, we
use a unique panel dataset rich in details of managerial job descriptions, reporting relationships and
compensation structures for senior management positions in large US firms over two decades (1986-
2006). We are the first to document the dramatic increase in the number of functional managers in the
executive team. The size of the team in these firms doubled over the time period from 5 to 10 positions,
with approximately three-fourths of the increase attributable to functional managers (e.g., Chief Financial
Officer, Chief Marketing Officer, Chief Human Resource Officer) rather than general managers. 1 After
documenting this novel fact, we use our firm panel-dataset of 300 large US firms to study the drivers of
changes in firm organizational structure, as reflected in the top management team. This analysis will
uncover how firms adapt their organizational structure to implement changes in strategies.
Firm choices about hierarchical structure and task allocation across managers are critical to
current formal theories of firm organization (e.g., Garicano, 2000; Harris and Raviv, 2002; Hart and
Moore, 2005; Dessein and Santos, 2006; Dessein, Garicano and Gertner, 2011). The relevant tradeoff that
we focus on is whether a firm assigns activities to functional managers to coordinate corporate-wide
functions and exploit synergies (e.g., Chief Marketing Officer and marketing activities) versus assigning
activities to general managers responsible for business units who may have better local information or
incentives. One well-known example illustrating this tradeoff is Lou Gerstner’s turnaround of IBM in the
mid-1990s. Before Gerstner was hired as CEO, IBM was a highly decentralized organization operating in
related information technology businesses, but with little coordination across businesses. The executive
team was comprised primarily of autonomous general managers of business units (e.g., mainframes) and
1 In this paper, we define the executive team or members of the C-Suite (e.g., Groysberg, Kelly, and MacDonald,
2011) as the positions that report directly to the CEO in the organizational hierarchy or the CEO’s span of control.
2

very few functional managers. Gerstner joined in 1993 and deliberately “centralized” activities to
turnaround the firm’s massive losses that he later attributed to the “balkanized IBM of the early 1990’s.”2
Not long into his tenure, Gerstner dramatically changed the firm’s strategy to one based on an integrated
product and service offering to customers (“One IBM”). Since the new strategy required extensive
coordination across business units, Gerstner reorganized the top team and added functional managers to
facilitate corporate-wide coordination (see Exhibit 1). For example, he created a Chief Marketing Officer
position (CMO) and filled the position with an external hire. Historically, all marketing activities were
performed within the individual business units, which led to 100 marketing campaigns, overseen by
various advertising agencies.3 To better coordinate marketing activities across all businesses and unify
IBM’s global brand, the new CMO consolidated all of IBM’s buying, planning and direct marketing in
the hands of one advertising agency.
The addition of a CMO to IBM’s executive team was a structural choice to centralize marketing
activities at the corporate level to implement the “One IBM” strategy. In a large sample of research-
intensive firms, and motivated by the evolution of Du Pont’s organization of R&D since the 1920’s,
Argyres and Silverman (2004) classify firms as having centralized R&D structures when “there is a single
executive in charge of the firm’s research activities who reports directly to a corporate-level executive
such as the CEO or President (pg. 931)”. In general, firms place functional managers in the executive
team in order to centralize decisions related to their function, to coordinate activities across business
units, and to involve the function in strategic decision making with the CEO (Menz, 2007) -- all broadly
related to the objective of coordinating activities, realizing synergies and improving efficiency. In what
follows, we will loosely refer to the presence of a functional manager reporting to the CEO as “functional
centralization,” acknowledging that some activities may still be performed within the business unit.
To explain the shift in the composition of the top team towards increased functional centralization
since the mid-1980s, we consider two important trends in the environment in which firms operate that are
potentially relevant to a firm’s ability to exploit synergies. First, large US firms have become less
diversified in response to increased global competition and demanding capital markets. Second, firms
have dramatically increased investments in information technology as costs have declined. Existing
theories explain why these trends can have an effect on the composition of the top team. As firms narrow
their business portfolios, they increase opportunities for synergies (e.g., Hill, Hitt and Hoskisson, 1992;
Helfat and Eisenhardt, 2004; Hart and Moore, 2005) and as they increase IT investments, they reduce
communication costs and hence the costs of exploiting synergies (e.g., Dessein and Santos, 2006; Cremer,
Garicano and Prat, 2007). Both trends could lead to additional corporate-level functional managers as the
2 Gerstner, Louis, Jr., “Who Says Elephants Can’t Dance,” Harper Collins, New York, p. 77, 2002.
3 International Business Machine (IBM), 1994 Annual Report, p.6.
3