NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE "OUT OF SAMPLE" PERFORMANCE OF LONG-RUN RISK MODELS
Wayne E. Ferson
Suresh K. Nallareddy
Biqin Xie
Working Paper 17848
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17848
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2012
We are grateful to an anonymous referee, Ravi Bansal, Jason Beeler, David P. Brown, Dana Kiku,
Ayse Imrohoroglu, Selahattin Imrohoroglu, Chris Jones, Sergei Sarkissian, Zhiguang Wang, Jianfeng
Yu, Guofu Zhou, and to participants in workshops at the University of British Columbia, Claremont
McKenna College, Florida International University, the University of California San Diego, the University
of North Carolina Charlotte, University of Notre Dame, Ohio State University, the University of Oregon,
the Oxford-Man Institute, Queens University, the University of Southern California, the University
of Utah, and the University of Washington for discussions and comments. We are also grateful to participants
at the 2010 Duke Asset Pricing Conference, the 2010 First World Finance Conference and the 2010
Conference on Financial Economics and Accounting. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Wayne E. Ferson, Suresh K. Nallareddy, and Biqin Xie. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The "Out of Sample" Performance of Long-run Risk Models
Wayne E. Ferson, Suresh K. Nallareddy, and Biqin Xie
NBER Working Paper No. 17848
February 2012
JEL No. E21,E27,G12
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the ability of long-run risk models to explain out-of-sample asset returns during
1931-2009. The long-run risk models perform relatively well on the momentum effect. A cointegrated
version of the model outperforms the classical, stationary version. Both the long-run and the short
run consumption shocks in the models are empirically important for the models’ performance. The
models’ average pricing errors are especially small in the decades from the 1950s to the 1990s. When
we restrict the risk premiums to identify structural parameters, this results in larger average pricing
errors but often smaller error variances. The mean squared errors are not substantially better than those
of the classical CAPM, except for Momentum.
Wayne E. Ferson Biqin Xie
Department of Finance Leventhal School of Accounting
and Business Economics University of Southern California
University of Southern California 3670 Trousdale Avenue, Los Angeles CA 90089
3670 Trousdale Parkway Suite 308 biqinxie@usc.edu
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0804
and NBER
ferson@marshall.usc.edu
Suresh K. Nallareddy
School of Accounting
University of Southern California
3670 Trousdale Parkway Suite 308
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0804TER
suresh.nallareddy.2011@marshall.usc.edu

1
1. Introduction
The long-run risk model following Bansal and Yaron (2004) has been a phenomenal
success. A rapidly expanding literature finds the model useful for the equity premium puzzle,
size and book-to-market effects, momentum, long-term return reversals in stock prices, risk
premiums in bond markets, real exchange rate movements and more (see the review by Bansal,
2007). However, the evidence to date is based largely on calibration exercises and some in-
sample data fitting. If long-run risk models are to ultimately be useful for practical applications,
their performance in an out-of-sample setting is important. This paper provides an empirical
analysis of the models from this perspective.
We study the "out-of-sample" performance of long-run risk models for explaining the
equity premium puzzle, size and book-to-market effects, momentum, reversals, and bond returns
of different maturity and credit quality. Comparing the fit out of sample allows us to evaluate
features of model performance that are important for practical applications. (As explained below,
we put "out-of-sample" in quotes to emphasize some qualifying remarks.) We examine both
stationary and cointegrated versions of the models using annual data for 1931-2009.
Our first main result is that the overall performance of a cointegrated version of the long-
run risk model is better than the original, stationary version. Thus, we argue that the out-of-
sample performance justifies a more prominent role for cointegrated models in future research.
We find that the long-run risk models perform relatively well in explaining the
Momentum Effect. At the same time, they perform poorly in explaining the relative returns to
low-grade corporate and long-term government bonds. These results point to the importance of
missing factors in the simple, long-run risk models.
To evaluate the risk factors that drive the fit of the long-run risk models we examine

2
models that suppress the consumption-related shocks. We find that these models perform poorly,
indicating that the consumption shocks are important risk factors. The long-run risk models also
perform better than the simple consumption-based (CCAPM) model. Thus, both the short-run
consumption risk factor and the long-run risk factor are important ingredients in the models’
performance.
We examine the impact of restricting the risk premiums on the long-run risk models’
factors to identify structural parameters of the model. Imposing consistency with economically
reasonable values of risk aversion and intertemporal substitution reduces the degrees of freedom,
and has the effect of increasing the average out-of-sample pricing errors substantially, while
sometimes reducing the pricing error variances. Compared to the classical Capital Asset Pricing
Model (CAPM, Sharpe, 1964) the restricted model’s overall performance is inferior.
We examine the robustness of our findings to the method used to estimate the expected
risk premiums, to longer holding periods, time aggregation of consumption, to the measures of
returns, dividend yields and interest rates, to the sample period, to outliers in the data, and to
biases from lagged stochastic regressors. Holding the parameters fixed, the long-run risk models
perform better in the 1951-1990 period than in the decades before or in more recent data, but the
cointegrated models dominate in every subperiod.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the models and
Section 3 our empirical methods. Section 4 describes the data. Section 5 presents our main
empirical results and Section 6 examines their robustness. Section 7 concludes.