NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DYNAMIC ADVERSE SELECTION:
A THEORY OF ILLIQUIDITY, FIRE SALES, AND FLIGHT TO QUALITY
Veronica Guerrieri
Robert Shimer
Working Paper 17876
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17876
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2012
This paper is an outgrowth of research with Randall Wright; we are grateful to him for many discussions
and insights on this project. A previous version of this paper was entitled, "Competitive Equilibrium
in Asset Markets with Adverse Selection.'' We also thank numerous seminar audiences for comments
on previous versions of this paper. For research support, Guerrieri is grateful to the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation, Shimer is grateful to the National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w17876.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Veronica Guerrieri and Robert Shimer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Dynamic Adverse Selection: A Theory of Illiquidity, Fire Sales, and Flight to Quality
Veronica Guerrieri and Robert Shimer
NBER Working Paper No. 17876
March 2012
JEL No. D82,E44,G14
ABSTRACT
We develop a dynamic equilibrium model of asset markets affected by adverse selection. There exists
a unique equilibrium where better assets trade at higher prices but in less liquid markets. Sellers of
high-quality assets can separate because they are more willing to accept a lower trading probability.
As a result, the emergence of adverse selection generates a drop in liquidity. It may also lead to a decline
in the price-dividend ratio—a fire sale—and a flight to quality. Subsidies to purchasing assets may
be Pareto improving and can reverse the fire sale and flight to quality.
Veronica Guerrieri
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
vguerrie@chicagobooth.edu
Robert Shimer
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
shimer@uchicago.edu

1 Introduction
This paper develops a dynamic equilibrium model of asset markets with adverse selection.
Individuals choose prices at which to trade heterogeneous durable assets for homogeneous
perishable consumption goods. Their choice depends on their expectations about the diffi-
culty of trading and the type of asset that is available at each price. In equilibrium, asset
sellers are rationed by a shortage of buyers at all prices above some threshold, and it is
increasingly time-consuming to sell an asset at higher prices. This keeps the owners of low
quality assets from trying to sell them at high prices. The owners of high quality assets are
willing to set a high price despite the low sale probability because holding a better asset
gives a higher continuation value in the event that they fail to sell it. The owners of low
quality assets opt for a low price and a high sale probability.
We work in a deliberately stylized dynamic general equilibrium framework in which the
distribution of asset holdings evolves endogenously over time as individuals trade. Assets
are perfectly durable and pay a constant dividend, some amount of a perfectly perishable
consumption good. Better quality assets pay a higher dividend but only the asset’s current
owner observes the dividend. This is the source of private information and the root of
the adverse selection problem, as in Akerlof (1970). Individuals are risk-neutral and have
a discount factor that changes over time, independently across individuals, creating gains
from trade. The only permissible trades are between the consumption good and the asset.
Finally, discount factors are observable, which ensures that patient individuals never sell
assets since there are no gains from trade. We believe this framework is useful for capturing
our main idea that illiquidity may serve to separate high and low quality assets in markets
with private information.
We define a competitive equilibrium in this environment and prove that it is unique. Key
to our equilibrium concept is that buyers’ beliefs about the quality of asset purchased at a
particular price must respect sellers’ incentive to sell at that price. More precisely, if buyers
anticipate getting a particular type of asset with positive probability for a given price, it
must be weakly optimal for some seller to offer that type asset at that price.
Inequilibrium, higher qualityassets tradeatahigher pricebut theexpected revenue from
selling an asset, the product of its price and per-period trading probability, is decreasing in
the quality of the asset. In the case where the support of the distribution of asset qualities
is convex, we derive simple closed-form expressions for the relationship between prices, div-
idends, and sale probabilities. We also find that the existence of illiquidity does not hinge
on assumptions about the frequency of trading opportunities. More precisely, we prove that
even in the limit with continuous trading opportunities, there are not enough buyers in the
1

market for high quality assets and so it takes a real amount of calendar time to sell at a high
price. From the perspective of a seller, selling opportunities arrive at a Poisson arrival rate.
While this may seem similar to the predictions of search theoretic models of illiquidity in
asset markets (e.g. Duffie, Gˆarleanu and Pedersen, 2005; Weill, 2008; Lagos and Rocheteau,
2009), there are important differences. For example, the difficulty of finding a buyer depends
primarily on the extent of private information rather than on the availability of trading op-
portunities. This is because real trading delays are essential for separating the good assets
from the bad ones. Of course, in reality adverse selection and search frictions may coexist in
a market, and it is indeed straightforward to introduce search into our framework (Guerrieri,
Shimer and Wright, 2010; Chang, 2011).
Although our model is abstract, we believe it may be useful for understanding and quan-
tifying the importance of adverse selection for market liquidity. To be concrete, consider the
market for AAA-rated asset-backed securities during the 2007–2008 financial crisis. Prior
to the crisis, market participants viewed these securities as a safe investment, nearly indis-
tinguishable from a Treasury bond. In the early stages of the crisis, investors started to
recognize that some of these securities were likely to pay less than face value. Moreover, it
was difficult to determine the exact assets that backed each individual security. Anticipating
that she might later have to sell it, the owner of an asset has an incentive to learn its quality.
On the other hand, it may not have been profitable for potential buyers to investigate the
quality of all possible assets because they did not know which assets would later be for sale.
Although we do not model the process of learning about an asset’s quality, we view this
world with private information and adverse selection as the starting point for our model.
If this view is correct, our model predicts that a seller should always be able to sell an
asset at a sufficiently low price. However, within an asset class, such as AAA-rated asset-
backed securities, the owners of good quality assets will choose to hold out for a higher price,
recognizing that there will be a shortage of buyers at that price and so it will take time to
sell the asset. Moreover, the price that buyers are willing to pay for a high quality asset will
be depressed because the market is less liquid. That is, even if a buyer somehow understood
that a particular asset would pay the promised dividends with certainty, he would pay less
for it because he would anticipate having trouble reselling it to future buyers who don’t have
his information. Illiquidity therefore further depresses asset prices. In particular, sellers’
knowledge of the quality of their assets depresses their liquidity and may depress the value
of all securities even if the average quality is unchanged. This is why we view an event where
sellers start to learn the quality of the assets in their portfolio as a fire sale.1 During a fire
1For a detailed description of the first phase of the crisis and an analysis of the source of the adverse
selectionproblem,seeGorton(2008). ThisviewofthecrisisisconsistentwithDang,GortonandHolmstr¨om
2