NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEFAULTS AND ATTENTION:
THE DROP OUT EFFECT
Andrew Caplin
Daniel J. Martin
Working Paper 17988
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17988
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2012
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Andrew Caplin and Daniel J. Martin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Defaults and Attention: The Drop Out Effect
Andrew Caplin and Daniel J. Martin
NBER Working Paper No. 17988
April 2012
JEL No. D01,D03,D04,D82
ABSTRACT
When choice options are complex, policy makers may seek to reduce decision making errors by making
a high quality option the default. We show that this positive effect is at risk because such a policy
creates incentives for decision makers to "drop out" by paying no attention to the decision and accepting
the default sight unseen. Using decision time as a proxy for attention, we confirm the importance of
this effect in an experimental setting. A key challenge for policy makers is to measure, and if possible
mitigate, such drop out behavior in the field.
Andrew Caplin
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
andrew.caplin@nyu.edu
Daniel J. Martin
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
daniel.martin@nyu.edu

Defaults and Attention: The Drop Out E¤ect
(cid:3)
Andrew Caplin and Daniel Martin
y z
April 4, 2012
Abstract
When choice options are complex, policy makers may seek to reduce decision making errors
bymakingahighqualityoptionthedefault. Weshowthatthispositivee¤ectisatriskbecause
such a policy creates incentives for decision makers to “drop out”by paying no attention to the
decision and accepting the default sight unseen. Using decision time as a proxy for attention,
we con…rm the importance of this e¤ect in an experimental setting. A key challenge for policy
makers is to measure, and if possible mitigate, such drop out behavior in the …eld.
Key Words: Default E¤ects, Nudges, Bounded Rationality, Limited Attention, Rational
Inattention, Mistakes
1 Introduction
When choice options are complex, consumers may be confused and thus make mistakes. Figure
1 shows that even a simpli…ed presentation of the available Medicare plans in the U.S. requires
decision makers to process a signi…cant amount of information. For those seeking to understand
(cid:3)We thank Ste¤en Altmann, Nabil Al-Najjar, Douglas Bernheim, Ann Caplin, Gabriel Carroll, David Cesarini,
Mark Dean, Je¤ Ely, Sen Geng, Paul Glimcher, Muriel Niederle, Leonardo Pejsachowicz, Aldo Rustichini, Andy
Schotter, Natalia Shestakova, Jonathan Weinstein, Ruth Wyatt, and seminar participants at SITE, Stanford, and
Brown for valuable comments.
yCenterforExperimentalSocialScienceandDepartmentofEconomics,NewYorkUniversityandNationalBureau
of Economic Research.
zCenter for Experimental Social Science and Department of Economics, New York University.
1

Figure 1: Screenshot from www.medicare.gov
the options and make a suitable choice, “spending an hour or two is not going to get the job done”
(Thaler and Sunstein [2008], p.168).
In such complex decision environments, it is common for policy makers to make one option the
“default”, and to implement this option unless the decision maker actively opts out. In the past,
it has been common for policy makers to use little or no discretion in selecting which alternative
will be the default. This leaves decision quality somewhat to chance, since many decision makers
appear reluctant to opt out of defaults (Madrian and Shea [2001]).1
Rather than set defaults in an essentially random manner, Thaler and Sunstein [2008] propose
instead that policy makers deliberately select a default option that is as good as possible for those
who blindly accept it. The policy goal in so selecting the default is to “help people who make
errors while having little e¤ect on those who are fully rational”(O’Donoghue and Rabin [2002],
p.186). Just such a policy was implemented for Medicare choice in Maine, where in an e¤ort to
identify an appropriate default, “the ten plans meeting state coverage benchmarks were evaluated
according to three months of historical data on prescription use”(Thaler and Sunstein [2008], p.
172). Analogous policies are now being considered, developed, and applied in many arenas, from
choiceofsavingsplan,throughchoiceofconsumer…nancialproducts,tochoiceofmedicalinsurance
options. Also under consideration is the “active choice”policy of Carroll, Choi, Laibson, Madrian,
and Metrick [2009], which places the onus directly on the decision maker to make a choice, without
1See also Carroll, Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick [2009] and Beshears, Choi, Madrian, and Laibson [2011].
2