NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCIAL REGULATION IN GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM
Charles A.E. Goodhart
Anil K Kashyap
Dimitrios P. Tsomocos
Alexandros P. Vardoulakis
Working Paper 17909
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17909
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2012
The views in this paper are those of the authors only and not necessarily of the institutions with which
they are affiliated, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank Tobias Adrian, David
Aikman, Fernando Alvarez, Robert Lucas, Jamie McAndrews, Jean-Charles Rochet, and seminar participants
at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the European Central Bank, Banco de España, CEMFI,
the International College of Economics and Finance SU-HSE, the First Conference of the Macro-prudential
Research (MaRs) network of the EuroSystem, the SUERF conference on ESRB, the University of
Chicago, the University of Zurich Institute of Banking and Finance, Bank of Cyprus, Said School
of Business University of Oxford for helpful comments. Kashyap thanks the Initiative on Global Markets
and the Center for Research on Securities Prices at Chicago Booth for research support. For information
on his outside compensated activities, see http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/anil.kashyap/. All errors
are our own. Correspondence should be sent to: alex.vardoulakis@gmail.com.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w17909.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Charles A.E. Goodhart, Anil K Kashyap, Dimitrios P. Tsomocos, and Alexandros P. Vardoulakis.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Regulation in General Equilibrium
Charles A.E. Goodhart, Anil K Kashyap, Dimitrios P. Tsomocos, and Alexandros P. Vardoulakis
NBER Working Paper No. 17909
March 2012, Revised April 2012
JEL No. G38,L51
ABSTRACT
This paper explores how different types of financial regulation could combat many of the phenomena
that were observed in the financial crisis of 2007 to 2009. The primary contribution is the introduction
of a model that includes both a banking system and a “shadow banking system” that each help households
finance their expenditures. Households sometimes choose to default on their loans, and when they
do this triggers forced selling by the shadow banks. Because the forced selling comes when net worth
of potential buyers is low, the ensuing price dynamics can be described as a fire sale. The proposed
framework can assess five different policy options that officials have advocated for combating defaults,
credit crunches and fire sales, namely: limits on loan to value ratios, capital requirements for banks,
liquidity coverage ratios for banks, dynamic loan loss provisioning for banks, and margin requirements
on repurchase agreements used by shadow banks. The paper aims to develop some general intuition
about the interactions between the tools and to determine whether they act as complements and substitutes.
Charles A.E. Goodhart Dimitrios P. Tsomocos
London School of Economics Said Business School and St. Edmund Hall
caegoodhart@aol.com University of Oxford
Dimitrios.Tsomocos@sbs.ox.ac.uk
Anil K Kashyap
Booth School of Business Alexandros P. Vardoulakis
University of Chicago Banque de France
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue alexandros.vardoulakis@banque-france.fr
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
anil.kashyap@chicagobooth.edu

1. Introduction
This paper explores how different types of financial regulation could combat many of the
phenomena that were observed in the financial crisis of 2007 to 2009. The primary contribution
is the introduction of a model that includes both a banking system and a “shadow banking
system” that each help households finance their expenditures. Households sometimes choose to
default on their loans, and when they do this triggers forced selling by the shadow banks.
Because the forced selling comes when net worth of potential buyers is low, the ensuing price
dynamics can be described as a fire sale. The presence of the banking and shadow banking
system, and the possibility that their interaction can create fire sales distinguishes our analysis
from previous studies.
The model builds on past work by Tsomocos (2003) and Goodhart, Tsomocos and
Vardoulakis (2010) and uses many of the same ingredients as their general equilibrium model. In
particular, the model includes two periods and allows for heterogeneous agents who borrow and
lend to each other through financial intermediaries. When the borrowers default, the
intermediaries suffer losses and tighten lending standards to future borrowers. Thus, the model
also includes a possible credit crunch.
While extremely stylized, the model is still rich enough to compare the efficacy of several
regulatory tools that are otherwise difficult to assess. In particular, the proposed framework can
contrast five different policy options that officials have advocated for combating defaults, credit
crunches and fire sales, namely: limits on loan to value ratios, capital requirements for banks,
liquidity coverage ratios for banks, dynamic loan loss provisioning for banks, and margin
requirements on repurchase agreements used by shadow banks. The paper aims to develop some
general intuition about the extent to which different regulatory tools act as complements and
substitutes.
Perhaps the most compelling conclusion from the analysis is the importance of taking a
stand on the economic function played by the shadow banks and the precise risks that their
presence creates for the rest of the financial system. This manifestation of the model embeds one
rationale for the shadow banks existence and pinpoints the problems that emerge because of the
way that they contribute to producing fire sales.
While these assumptions generate many specific predictions, the most general implication
is that fire-sale risk can be controlled in three very different ways. One approach is to create
2

incentives to make fewer mortgage loans initially, in which case a house prices crash generates
fewer losses for lenders. A second approach is to push banks to be better capitalized in the event
of a bust. This approach helps contain the follow-on effects of mortgage defaults. A third
approach is to attempt to offset the spillovers between the bust and the boom. Most policies that
mitigate the effects of house price decline have the unintended effect of exacerbating house price
increases during a boom. Hence another policy option is to try to limit this spillover. In this
model, the primary difference in the incidence and efficacy of different regulations turns on
which of these channels that they operate through.
While this conclusion seems quite intuitive, this research program is just beginning and
the modeling approach is very flexible. So this model is better thought of as a framework for
comparing different potential financial externalities and for regulating them. Hence the longer
term conclusions about regulatory design will depend on analyzing many variants of the model
and determining which are robust to the many possible formalizations of the financial system.
The findings here should be viewed as provisional first steps.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 introduces the broad features
of the model, motivating agent heterogeneity, the restrictions on market structure that are
imposed, and introducing the notation used to describe each agent’s choices. The optimization
problems for the consumers, banks and non-banks are introduced and the model’s externalities
are also described. Section 3 introduces the regulatory tools that can be used to control the
externalities. Section 4 solves a calibrated version of the model that can be used to conduct
regulatory experiments. Section 5 shows the effects of the various policies one at a time and an
example of a combined regulatory intervention. No single tool can offset the many knock-on
effects that follow from defaults. Section 6 concludes.
2. Model Ingredients and Motivation
Because the model has many moving parts it is helpful to start with a broad overview that
explains why such complexity is necessary. Two features of the model are taken for granted.
One is that these issues must be analyzed in a general equilibrium model with fully endogenous
prices that embody all the effects of potential regulations. Secondly, the analysis must be
dynamic because many potential regulations differ in their ex-ante and ex-post effects. Without
3