NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INFLATION TARGETING AND FINANCIAL STABILITY
Michael Woodford
Working Paper 17967
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17967
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2012
Revised text of a talk given as a keynote address at a conference, "The Future of Central Banking,"
at the Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance, Rome, September 30, 2010. I would like to thank
Jean Boivin, Steve Cecchetti, Vasco Curdia, Stefan Ingves, Jean-Pierre Landau, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes,
Rick Mishkin, Benoit Mojon, and Lars Svensson for helpful discussions, and Claes Berg for editorial
comments on an earlier draft. This research was supported by the National Science Foundation. The
author is also a consultant for the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on research questions that can
include general issues of monetary policy strategy. The opinions expressed here are however those
of the author alone, and do not represent the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the
Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Michael Woodford. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Inflation Targeting and Financial Stability
Michael Woodford
NBER Working Paper No. 17967
April 2012
JEL No. E52
ABSTRACT
A number of commentators have argued that the desirability of inflation targeting as a framework
for monetary policy analysis should be reconsidered in light of the global financial crisis, on the ground
that it requires neglect of the implications of monetary policy for financial stability. This paper argues
that monetary policy may indeed affect the severity of risks to financial stability, but that it is possible
to generalize an inflation targeting framework to take account of financial stability concerns alongside
traditional stabilization objectives. The resulting framework can still be viewed as a form of flexible
inflation targeting; in particular, the paper proposes a target criterion that would still imply an invariant
long-run price level, despite fluctuations over time in risks to financial stability or even the occurrence
of occasional financial crises.
Michael Woodford
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 W. 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
mw2230@columbia.edu

A number of commentators have suggested that central banks should reconsider the
desirability of inflation targeting in the light of the global financial crisis. Early on, Paul
DeGrauwe (2007) asserted that the crisis had “unveiled the fallacy” of the consensus view in
favor of inflation targeting as an approach; a little later, Axel Leijonhufvud (2008) argued
that inflation targeting “has failed” as a strategy, and that “the problems we now face are
in large part due to this policy failure”; and more recently, Francesco Giavazzi and Alberto
Giovannini (2010) have proposed that inflation targeting, as conventionally practiced, “can
... increase the likelihood of a financial crisis.”
How seriously should inflation-targeting central banks take these charges? I think it is
important to distinguish between inflation targeting as such and the more specific doctrine
— enunciated by some prominent proponents of inflation targeting, but not, in my view, a
defining feature of this approach to the conduct of monetary policy — according to which
central banks need not pay attention to asset prices, or more generally to concerns relating
to financial stability, when making monetary policy decisions.
I do not believe that the central claims that were made by proponents of inflation tar-
geting on behalf of this approach are challenged in any direct way by the events of the crisis.
It is worth recalling what inflation targeting was intended to achieve. It was expected,
above all, to serve to stabilize medium-term inflation expectations. This, it was asserted,
would allow monetary policy to be used more aggressively for purposes of stabilization of
the real economy, without so much sacrifice of price stability as would be required in the ab-
sence of such well-anchored inflation expectations. It was expected to eliminate a particular
source of macroeconomic instability, namely, the possibility of wage-price spirals triggered
by commodity-price shocks, of the kind that had been problematic in the 1970s. And it was
expected to allow countries to avoid the possibility of a deflationary trap of the kind experi-
enced by many countries in the 1930s, in which expectations of deflation, once entrenched,
become self-fulfilling.
Failures of any of these central claims to be born out in practice would give one serious
reason to reconsider the basic theory of inflation targeting. But thus far they have held up
quite well. Rather than discrediting inflation targeting, one could argue that the events of
the last several years have provided further vindication for it. Despite a serious disruption
1

of the world financial system, that some have compared in magnitude to that suffered in the
1930s, this time none of the major economies fell into deflationary spirals. And despite large
swings in oil prices, the effects on the dynamics of wages and prices this time have been
modest. These comparatively benign outcomes are surely due in large part to the fact that
inflation expectations in most of the major economies have remained quite well anchored in
the face of these substantial disturbances. And it is arguable that the credibility with regard
to control of the rate of inflation that the leading central banks have achieved over the past
twenty years deserves a great deal of the credit for this stability.
Of course, the global financial crisis has done great damage, and this has understandably
led to questions as to whether the disaster might have been avoided, or its severity reduced,
had policies been different. The aspects of policy that have most obviously been called into
question have to do with the regulation of the financial system. But it is also worth asking
whether alternative monetary policies might have made a difference.
In particular, the crisis does justify reconsideration of at least one aspect of the inflation
targeting doctrine that had developed over the previous two decades. This is the thesis that
a central bank with an inflation target need not pay attention to financial developments —
such as a credit-financed real estate boom — except to the extent that such developments
affect the outlook for inflation (or perhaps, either for inflation or for real activity). While
this thesis is not, in my view, a central, definitional aspect of an inflation targeting regime, it
was undoubtedly a common view among proponents of inflation targeting prior to the crisis.
It is therefore important to reconsider both the extent to which such a view is defensible, and
the extent to which it is a necessary element of a coherent approach to inflation targeting.
Can this previously conventional view still be maintained, after recent experience? And if
not, would this require abandonment of inflation targeting as well?
I shall begin by reviewing some common arguments that have been offered for setting
aside the question of financial stability in the conduct of monetary policy. I conclude that
there is a persuasive case for taking this issue into account, as at least one factor, when
making decisions about interest rates. But I shall also argue that it is possible to do this in
a way that represents a natural extension of “flexible inflation targeting,” as that concept
has been developed in the literature prior to the crisis. It should thus be possible to adapt
2