NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW MUCH DO FIRMS PAY AS BRIBES AND WHAT BENEFITS DO THEY GET?
EVIDENCE FROM CORRUPTION CASES WORLDWIDE
Yan Leung Cheung
P. Raghavendra Rau
Aris Stouraitis
Working Paper 17981
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17981
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2012
The paper has benefited from financial assistance from City University of Hong Kong (with which
the third author was affiliated when the project began), and from a General Research Fund grant from
Hong Kong's University Grants Committee. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Yan Leung Cheung, P. Raghavendra Rau, and Aris Stouraitis. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How much do firms pay as bribes and what benefits do they get? Evidence from corruption
cases worldwide
Yan Leung Cheung, P. Raghavendra Rau, and Aris Stouraitis
NBER Working Paper No. 17981
April 2012
JEL No. F23,G14,G34,K42,M14
ABSTRACT
We analyze a hand-collected sample of 166 prominent bribery cases, involving 107 publicly listed
firms from 20 stock markets that have been reported to have bribed government officials in 52 countries
worldwide during 1971-2007. We focus on the initial date of award of the contract for which the bribe
was paid (rather than of the revelation of the bribery). Our data enable us to describe in detail the
mechanisms through which bribes affect firm value. We find that firm performance, the rank of the
politicians bribed, as well as bribe-paying and bribe-taking country characteristics affect the magnitude
of the bribes and the benefits that firms derive from them.
Yan Leung Cheung Aris Stouraitis
Hong Kong Baptist University Hong Kong Baptist University
Wing Lung Bank Building Rm 812, Wing Lung Bank Building
Department of Finance and Decision Sciences Department of Finance and Decision Sciences
Renfrew Road, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong Renfrew Road, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong
scheung@hkbu.edu.hk stoura@hkbu.edu.hk
P. Raghavendra Rau
Cambridge Judge Business School,
Trumpington Street,
University of Cambridge,
Cambridgeshire, CB2 1AG
United Kingdom
r.rau@jbs.cam.ac.uk

1. Introduction
Bribery is increasingly becoming an important concern for governments and companies.
Over the past 30 years, firms like Siemens, BAE Systems, Hyundai, Lockheed Martin, and
Halliburton were reported to have bribed government officials worldwide. These are not isolated
incidents. The Dow Jones State of Anti-Corruption Survey (2011) reports that over 40% of
companies claim to have lost business to competitors that won contracts unethically. In a 2006
survey, 11% of OECD firms reported that “firms like theirs” bribe in other OECD countries, and
26% reported bribery in developing countries (D’Souza and Kaufmann, 2010).
Early literature on bribery suggests that it promotes efficiency and growth by removing
bureaucratic rigidities and “greasing the wheels of bureaucracy” (Leff, 1964; Huntington, 1968),
since the most efficient firms, who can afford to pay the largest bribes, will be assigned projects
(Lui, 1985; Beck and Maher, 1986). By paying bribes, efficient firms lower the transaction costs
they would incur if they instead complied with bureaucratic regulations. A recent stream of
literature takes a negative view, arguing that governments’ “grabbing hand” extracts rents from
firms (Shleifer and Vishny, 1993; 1994; 1998; Frye and Shleifer, 1997). In this sense, bribery
acts as “sand in the machine” by inducing administrative delays (Ades and Di Tella, 1997 or
Kaufmann and Wei, 2000).1
Despite a huge academic literature on bribery, there is little direct evidence on the factors
that influence the magnitude of these bribes, and the benefits that firms derive from them. This is
not surprising since this kind of activity is usually undisclosed. Most of the literature has
attempted to measure bribery indirectly, by relying on questionnaires or by constructing indices
at the country-level using survey evidence of corruption perceptions.2 There is little analysis of
1 Bardhan (1997), Jain (2001), and Svensson (2005) survey the literature. Corruption can distort resource allocation
by acting as an arbitrary tax, limiting private investment (Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny, 1991; Mauro, 1995; Keefer
and Knack, 1995; Mauro, 1997), and foreign direct investment (Wei, 2000; Lambsdorff, 1999), affects the size and
composition of public expenditure (Arvind, 2001; Shleifer and Vishny, 1993; Tanzi and Davoodi, 1997), distorts the
allocation of entrepreneurial talent (Bhagwati, Brecher, and Srinivasan, 1984), influences the resource distribution
between official and unofficial sectors of the economy (Johnson, Kauffman, and Shleifer, 1997; Friedman, Johnson,
Kauffman, and Zoido-Lobaton, 2000), and it affects the firm’s cost of capital (Garmaise and Liu, 2005).
2 Examples include Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index (www.transparency.org), indices by
International Country Risk Guide (www.prsgroup.com), Global Competitive Report, Business Environment and
- 1 -

firm-level data, with firm-level evidence also being largely derived from surveys (Hellman and
Schankerman, 2000; Svensson, 2003; Cull and Xu, 2005; Fisman and Svensson, 2007; D’Souza
and Kaufmann, 2010). However, other studies have identified several potential problems with
self-reported survey evidence and the indices commonly used to measure corruption. 3
Consequently, there are calls in the literature for moving away from survey data to the
analysis of real-world decisions associated with corruption (Svensson, 2005; Fisman and Miguel,
2007; Reinikka and Svensson, 2004; Olken, 2006). The sparse literature on corruption that uses
firm-level data from actual bribery incidents typically focuses on the date of the revelation of the
bribery incident, and examines its impact on stock prices (Smith, Stettler, and Beedles, 1984;
Karpoff, Lee, and Martin, 2010) and on leverage (Fan, Rui, and Zhao, 2008).
In our paper, we take a different approach to most of the previous studies. We analyze a
hand-collected sample of 166 prominent bribery cases, involving 107 publicly listed firms from
20 stock markets that have been reported to have bribed government officials in 52 countries
worldwide, during 1971-2007. We analyze actual documented bribery incidents (rather than
perceptions or self-reported survey evidence), and we focus on the initial date of award of the
contract for which the bribe was paid (rather than the date of revelation of the bribery). We
attempt to answer three questions. Which firm performance, government official, bribe-paying
country and bribe-taking country characteristics affect the magnitude of the bribes that firms pay?
What benefits do firms receive by paying bribes and which factors affect these benefits? What
Enterprise Performance Surveys (Hellman, Jones, Kaufmann, and Schankerman, 2000), and Worldwide Governance
Indicators (Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi, 2009).
3 Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001) argue that subjective dependent variables are biased because the measurement
error is likely to correlate in a causal way with the explanatory variables. Knack (2006) identifies numerous biases
with the indices used to measure corruption, which involve whether the surveys record the participants’ “expert
opinions” (or perceptions of what “other firms” are doing) rather than their own actual experience, whether
respondents are influenced by previous ratings in their responses (or by optimism, recent economic performance,
recent publicized corruption scandals), whether the ratings are determined centrally by a small number of people,
whether the responses refer to corruption at the central/federal level or local level, how individual constituents are
weighted, interdependence of sources for some of the ratings, selection bias in the firms included in surveys,
changes in the questionnaires over time, regression to the mean of ratings as previous “errors” are corrected in
subsequent ratings, and uncertainties about the actual (as opposed to the intended) content of some indicators.
Aggregating information from numerous sources appears to be less accurate than using a single source. Donchev
and Ujhelyi (2009) claim that economic development, political system and cultural variables tend to bias perceptions
of corruption away from experience. Fan, Lin, and Treisman (2009) report that countries with similar levels of
corruption frequency (gleaned from surveys) may have very different levels of corruption perceptions and vice versa.
- 2 -