NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO PRIVATE EQUITY MANAGERS EARN THEIR FEES? COMPENSATION, OWNERSHIP,
AND CASH FLOW PERFORMANCE
David T. Robinson
Berk A. Sensoy
Working Paper 17942
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17942
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2012
We thank Dan Bergstresser, Harry DeAngelo, Steve Kaplan, Anna Kovner, Josh Lerner, Andrew Metrick,
Oguzhan Ozbas, Ludovic Phalippou, Antoinette Schoar, Per Strömberg, René Stulz, Mike Weisbach,
and seminar and conference participants at Baylor University, UC San Diego, AFA 2012 Annual Meeting,
Duke/Kaufmann Entrepreneurial Finance Conference, and Kaufmann/RCFS Entrepreneurial Finance
and Innovation Conference for helpful comments and discussions. This paper, along with a companion
paper entitled "Cyclicality, Performance Measurement, and Cash Flow Liquidity in Private Equity",
supersedes the paper that previously circulated under the title "Private Equity in the 21st Century:
Cash Flows, Performance, and Contract Terms from 1984-2010". The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by David T. Robinson and Berk A. Sensoy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Do Private Equity Managers Earn Their Fees? Compensation, Ownership, and Cash Flow
Performance
David T. Robinson and Berk A. Sensoy
NBER Working Paper No. 17942
March 2012
JEL No. G00,G23,G24,G34
ABSTRACT
We study the relation between compensation practices, incentives, and performance in private equity
using new data that connect ownership structures, management contracts, and quarterly cash flows
for a large sample of buyout and venture capital funds from 1984-2010. Although many critics of private
equity argue that PE firms earn excessive compensation and have muted performance incentives, we
find no evidence that higher compensation or lower managerial ownership are associated with worse
net-of-fee performance, in stark contrast to other asset management settings. Instead, compensation
is largely unrelated to net-of-fee cash flow performance. Nevertheless, market conditions during fundraising
are an important driver of compensation, as pay rises and shifts to fixed components during fundraising
booms. In addition, the behavior of distributions around contractual triggers for fees and carried interest
is consistent with an underlying agency conflict between investors and general partners. Our evidence
is most consistent with an equilibrium in which compensation terms reflect agency concerns and the
productivity of manager skills, and in which managers with higher compensation earn back their pay
by delivering higher gross performance.
David T. Robinson
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
davidr@duke.edu
Berk A. Sensoy
Ohio State University
2100 Neil Ave.
Columbus, OH 43210
sensoy_4@fisher.osu.edu

I. Introduction
In private equity, the agency relationship between fund managers (the general partners,
or GPs) and investors (the limited partners, or LPs) is governed by a management contract
signed at the inception of the fund. This contract specifies the compensation of the GPs and
the GPs’ own investment in the fund. Because private equity involves long-term financial
commitments from LPs (funds typically last 10 to 13 years), and because LPs have limited
recourse to alternative governance mechanisms, understanding how the incentives provided
by these contracts affect fund performance and GP behavior is a critical question in private
equity,andisimportantforourunderstandingofdelegatedassetmanagementmoregenerally.
As private equity has grown in prominence, the industry’s compensation practices and
incentive structures have come under increasing scrutiny by industry observers and limited
partners alike. Critics argue that the typical private equity contract allows GPs to earn
excessive compensation and does too little to discipline GPs or provide them with incentives
to maximize LP returns. For example, Phalippou (2009) argues that the confusing nature of
management contracts allows GPs to charge high fees for low average performance. Others
have argued that excessive fees dampen managers incentives to deliver good performance.1
Concerns about such excesses are particularly acute in boom fundraising periods and among
large funds. The fact that private equity contractual arrangements and performance are
typically shielded from public disclosures not only adds fuel to these claims, but also makes
them inherently difficult to evaluate.
Inthispaper,weuseanoveldatasetof837buyoutandventurecapital(VC)privateequity
funds from 1984-2010 to study the relations between contracting terms and performance and
cash flow behavior in private equity. The data include information on the fixed management
fees and performance-based carried interest that the GP earns as compensation, as well as
the GP’s own investment in the fund, which determines their ownership stake. The data
also contain the complete sequence of cash flows between LPs and GPs, which we use to
construct detailed relative performance measures and to examine cash flow behavior directly.
The dataset is the first available in the literature to combine information on management
1See, for example, “Private Equity Firms Reap Big Fees, Report Says”, New York Times DealBook,
November 1, 2010.
1

contract terms with fund cash flows.
We begin by offering new descriptive evidence on GP compensation and ownership terms.
This part of our analysis enhances the picture of private equity compensation previously
painted in work by Metrick and Yasuda (2010a) and Gompers and Lerner (1999). The
typical fund follows a “2/20/1” rule: 2% management fee, 20% carried interest, and 1%
GP ownership. At the same time, there is substantial variation in terms, both in the cross-
section and over time. Our results indicate that during boom periods in private equity, when
fund sizes grow, overall pay goes up (even as a fraction of fund size) and shifts towards fixed
compensation (fees) and away from variable compensation (carry).
By itself, this finding is consistent with the idea that compensation practices in boom
periods undermine the incentives of GPs to deliver good performance. Yet, the real question
is whether performance suffers as a result of these practices. We find no evidence that funds
with higher fixed management fees underperform net of fees. This basic result is robust to a
variety of controls and performance measures and is unlikely to be driven by differences in
systematic risk. This result also holds true among high-fee funds raised in boom fundraising
periods, as well as funds that are both large in size and have high fractional fees.
This result means that, relative to lower fee funds, more expensive private equity funds
earn sufficiently higher gross returns to offset their higher fees. This pattern stands in
striking contrast to results in the mutual fund literature, which finds a strong negative
relation between mutual fund fees and net-of-fee performance (e.g. Carhart, 1997; Fama
and French, 2010), consistent with the relative lack of sophistication of retail mutual fund
investors (Berk and van Binsbergen, 2011).
We find no evidence that funds with low GP ownership underperform, despite concerns
that managers of such funds are insufficiently bonded to the fund. In fact, for buyout funds
the opposite is true: low-ownership buyout funds outperform. This is consistent with the
view that high-ability GPs prefer to diversify their personal portfolios.
Turning to carried interest, despite the limited variation in carried interest in the data,
we find some evidence that buyout funds with high carried interest outperform, which is
contrary to the view that high carried interest is excessive. On the other hand, we find that
high-carry venture capital funds underperform. While this result is weak overall, it grows
2