NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TAILSPOTTING: IDENTIFYING AND PROFITING FROM CEO VACATION TRIPS
David Yermack
Working Paper 17940
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17940
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2012
This paper previously circulated as "Tailspotting: How Disclosure, Stock Prices and Volatility Change
When CEOs Fly to Their Vacation Homes." For helpful comments I thank Yakov Amihud, Sreedhar
Bharath, Jonathan Cohn, Claudia Custodio, Ran Duchin, Robert Engle, Dan Galai, Marc Gabarro,
William Greene, Peter Koudijs, Michael Knobler, Kate Litvak, Vikas Mehrotra, Lalitha Naveen, Ed
Rice, Rik Sen, Denis Sosyura, Christopher Stanton, Nancy Su, Ralph Walkling, Wei Wang, an anonymous
referee, and seminar participants at Adelaide, Alberta, Arizona State, Bocconi, Copenhagen, Frankfurt
Center for Financial Studies, Hong Kong Polytechnic, LSU, Melbourne, Michigan, Norwegian School
of Business, Oklahoma, Purdue, Queens University, Utah, University of Western Australia, Yale Law
School, and the Drexel University Corporate Governance, Erasmus University Rotterdam Corporate
Governance, and NYU-Penn Law and Finance conferences. Mark Maremont of The Wall Street Journal
offered invaluable help with aircraft flight data, and Maria Aristizabal and Emiliya Schain provided
superb research assistance. Part of this research was completed while I was a visiting professor at Erasmus
University Rotterdam. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by David Yermack. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Tailspotting: Identifying and profiting from CEO vacation trips
David Yermack
NBER Working Paper No. 17940
March 2012, Revised December 2013
JEL No. G14,G34
ABSTRACT
This paper shows close connections between CEOs’ absences from headquarters and corporate news
disclosures. I identify CEO absences by merging corporate jet flight histories with records of CEOs’
property ownership near leisure destinations. I find that CEOs go to their vacation homes just after
companies report favorable news, and CEOs return to headquarters right before subsequent news is
released. When CEOs are away, companies announce less news than usual, mandatory disclosures
are more likely to occur late, and stock prices exhibit sharply lower volatility. Volatility increases
when CEOs return to work. CEOs spend fewer days out of the office when their ownership is high
and when the weather is bad at their vacation homes.
David Yermack
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-160
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
dyermack@stern.nyu.edu

Tailspotting:
Identifying and profiting from CEO vacation trips
I. Introduction
This paper documents a close connection between the timing of corporate news
disclosures and CEOs’ absences from headquarters. I identify CEO absences by merging
publicly available flight histories of corporate jets with real estate records of CEOs’ property
ownership near leisure destinations. I find that CEOs go to their vacation homes just after
companies report favorable news, and CEOs return to headquarters right before subsequent news
is released. More good news is released when CEOs are back at work, and CEOs appear not to
leave headquarters at all if a firm has adverse news to disclose. When CEOs are away from the
office, stock prices behave quietly with sharply lower volatility. Volatility increases immediately
when CEOs return to work. Mandatory Form 8-K disclosures of material company news are
more likely to be filed late if news occurs while CEOs are at their vacation homes.
An example illustrating many of these patterns appears in Figure 1. On January 7, 2010,
aerospace manufacturer Boeing Co. disclosed a 28% increase in annual commercial airliner
deliveries and also issued an earnings forecast for the year ahead. Boeing stock rose 4%, capping
three days in which it outperformed the market by almost 10%. The company’s shares were
quiet for the next several weeks, not moving significantly again until January 27, when Boeing
1

announced strong quarterly earnings and its stock rose more than 7%. In between these
announcements, Boeing’s CEO appears to have been at his vacation home, an inference based
upon Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records of company aircraft trips to and from an
airport near his vacation residence in Hobe Sound, FL. During this period, the annualized
volatility of Boeing’s stock dropped to 0.16, an unusually low level for a major blue chip.
During the three days before and three days after his trip, the volatility was more than twice as
high at 0.40. I find patterns similar to Figure 1 for a sample of 217 trips to vacation homes
lasting five work days or longer, taken by CEOs of 65 major U.S. companies during the four year
period 2007-2010.
The paper’s results seem consistent with an agency cost hypothesis, under which CEOs
might slow down their firms’ news disclosures for personal convenience on the days that they
requisition company aircraft for golf or ski trips. However, the observed associations between
news disclosures and vacation schedules may well be endogenous, if CEOs plan to be away from
the office when the company expects to have little news to announce. To understand more
clearly the direction of causation between disclosures and CEO absences, I conduct a variety of
tests, examining how company news announcements change when CEOs return to headquarters
at unexpected times. I also estimate a bivariate probit model of news days and vacation days, in
which weather at the CEO’s vacation site is used as an instrumental variable that should be
associated with trips to the vacation home but not be connected to company news developments.
Much of the analysis from these tests supports the agency interpretation, with news releases
appearing to occurr less frequently simply because the CEO is absent from the office. However,
it is difficult to test causation in the other direction, which would require an instrumental variable
2