NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INVESTMENT BUSTS, REPUTATION, AND THE TEMPTATION TO BLEND IN
WITH THE CROWD
Steven Grenadier
Andrey Malenko
Ilya A. Strebulaev
Working Paper 17945
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17945
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2012
We thank Robert Gibbons, Deborah Lucas, Nadya Malenko, Kelly Shue, Youchang Wu (ASU WFC
discussant), seminar participants at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, New Economic School,
Ohio State University, Stanford University, University of Rochester, University of Virginia, and Washington
University in St. Louis, and participants at the 2012 ASU Sonoran Winter Finance Conference for
their helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Steven Grenadier, Andrey Malenko, and Ilya A. Strebulaev. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Investment Busts, Reputation, and the Temptation to Blend in with the Crowd
Steven Grenadier, Andrey Malenko, and Ilya A. Strebulaev
NBER Working Paper No. 17945
March 2012
JEL No. G01,G24,G31,G32,G33
ABSTRACT
We provide a dynamic model of an industry in which agents strategically time liquidation decisions
in an effort to protect their reputations. As in traditional models, agents delay liquidation attempting
to signal their quality. However, when the industry faces a common shock that indiscriminately forces
liquidation of a subset of projects, agents with bad enough projects choose to liquidate even if their
projects are unaffected by the shock. Such "blending in with the crowd" creates an additional incentive
to delay liquidation, further amplifying the shock. As a result, even minuscule common shocks can
be evidenced by massive liquidations. As agents await common shocks, the industry accumulates "living
dead" projects. Surprisingly, the potential for moderate negative common shocks often improves agents
values.
Steven Grenadier Ilya A. Strebulaev
Graduate School of Business Graduate School of Business
Stanford University Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305 655 Knight Way
sgren@stanford.edu Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
Andrey Malenko istrebulaev@stanford.edu
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street
Cambridge, MA 02142
amalenko@mit.edu

1 Introduction
None love the messenger who brings bad news. Love can be even harder to find if the bad
news speaks ill of the messenger’s abilities. When decision makers face the unappealing task
of revealing unsuccessful outcomes that impact their reputations, delay may be their first
instinct.1 Delay becomes even more enticing if they can wait for industry-wide downturns
in order to hide individual failings and instead “blend in with the crowd,” by liquidating
their projects strategically when many other projects have to be terminated. In this paper
we argue that real investment decisions can be substantially affected by such a blend-in-
with-the-crowd mechanism. More importantly, this may have far-reaching repercussions for
the dynamics of whole industries and conceivably for the economy at large and provide
an explanation for industry-wide investment busts. Our results can be applied to various
contexts - the decision maker could be a corporate manager, a fund manager, a bank loan
officer, or an entrepreneur. For clarity, in what follows we use the latter term.
The economic mechanism works as follows. If liquidation of a project is perceived as a
negative signal of the entrepreneur’s intrinsic ability, she has incentives to delay the aban-
donment decision. If, in addition, informativeness of liquidation varies over time, the en-
trepreneur has incentives to time liquidation strategically when informativeness of the liqui-
dation is the lowest. This is the case when an industry is hit by a negative common shock,
and some good projects are forced to be liquidated for an exogenous reason. In an attempt to
fool outsiders into believing that their projects got hit by the shock, entrepreneurs managing
bad enough projects “blend in with the crowd” and choose to liquidate their projects even
if they are unaffected by the shock. In a dynamic model, expectations of a common shock
in the future create incentives for entrepreneurs of lower quality to further delay liquidation
in hope of blending in with forced liquidations of good projects at the time of the shock.
Importantly, this also leads high quality entrepreneurs to delay their liquidation decisions
in an effort to separate themselves from lower types. This delay creates a large number of
“living dead” projects outstanding when the common shock arrives, thereby amplifying its
effect even more. As a result, even small common shocks can lead to massive liquidations.
Taken together, this mechanism gives rise to a disproportionately low rate of liquidations in
normal times and, when an industry is hit by a negative common shock, a disproportionately
high rate of liquidations, far exceeding the size of the shock itself.
Toseetheintuition,consideranexamplefromtheventurecapitalindustry. Entrepreneurs
1See, e.g., Miller (2002) and Kothari, Shu, and Wysocki (2009).
2

care not just about the payoffs on current projects, but also about their reputations, which
arecriticalinattractingfuturefundingsources. Thus, perceptionofone’sabilitybyoutsiders
links the payoff on a current project with future payoffs. Now suppose an entrepreneur real-
izes that a project is unlikely to pay off, and thus should be scrapped. As liquidation reveals
negative information about her ability, she may reconsider the decision to scrap the project.
First, she may delay her liquidation decision simply hoping for unexpected resurrection of
the project’s fortunes. Second, and more importantly, by delaying she may hope to time her
decision so that it would be more difficult for the market to judge her low ability correctly.
She may strategically attempt to blend in with the crowd at a time when higher-ability
entrepreneurs have to liquidate their projects as well, either during a recession or a nega-
tive industry-wide shock. In such a case she can successfully hide the negative information,
avoiding truthful revelation altogether.
This intuition is not constrained to entrepreneurial firms. General partners of private
equity funds typically receive approximately the same amount of compensation from running
futurefundsastheydoindirectcompensationfromcurrentperformance(Chungetal.,2011).
If they realize that their current fund is not performing well, they may want to time the
liquidation of their unsuccessful investments when liquidation is the least informative signal
of the general partners’ poor abilities, i.e., when many funds have to liquidate due to a
common shock. Similarly, bank loan officers may have substantial private information about
the performance of the loans they authorized and their fear of tarnishing their reputations
may lead them to delay foreclosing on bad loans until a recession hits, when the loans’
poor performance could be attributed to systematic factors rather than their screening and
monitoring abilities.
Strategic attempts to blend in with the crowd by individual entrepreneurs may have
far-reaching consequences for their industries. In particular, even relatively small common
shocks could launch an avalanche of liquidations and lead to investment busts. The standard
intuition for many liquidations in recessions is the severity of a downturn. However, such an
avalanche may also be accounted for by strategic timing of project liquidations. This effect is
exaggerated by accumulation of “living dead” projects that entrepreneurs delay terminating
in expectations of the shock. Thus, this economic mechanism can potentially explain the
magnitude of investment activity cyclicality observed in many industries in which reputation
plays an important role, such as venture capital. Consistent with our results, recent work of
Agarwal and Kolev (2012) provides evidence of clustering in corporate layoffs in public firms
during recessions.
3