NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PLATFORM PRICING AT SPORTS CARD CONVENTIONS
Ginger Zhe Jin
Marc Rysman
Working Paper 17959
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17959
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2012
We would like to thank University of Maryland and Boston University for financial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Ginger Zhe Jin and Marc Rysman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Platform Pricing at Sports Card Conventions
Ginger Zhe Jin and Marc Rysman
NBER Working Paper No. 17959
March 2012
JEL No. D4,L1,L8
ABSTRACT
We study a new data set of US sports card conventions in order to evaluate the pricing theory of two-sided
markets. Conventions are two-sided because organizers must set fees to attract both consumers and
dealers. We have detailed information on consumer price, dealer price and, since most conventions
are local, the market structure for conventions. We present several findings: first, consumer pricing
decreases with competition at any reasonable distance, but pricing to dealers is insensitive to competition
and in longer distances even increases with competition. Second, when consumer price is zero (and
thus constrained), dealer price decreases more strongly with competition. These results are compatible
with existing models of two-sided markets, but are difficult to explain without such models.
Ginger Zhe Jin
University of Maryland
Department of Economics
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742-7211
and NBER
jin@econ.umd.edu
Marc Rysman
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
mrysman@bu.edu

1 Introduction
The theory of platform competition and two-sided markets is an important recent development in in-
dustrial organization (see Armstrong, 2006; Caillaud & Jullien, 2003; Rochet & Tirole, 2006; Rysman,
2009; Weyl, 2010; Hagiu & Wright, 2011), but empirical work has been restricted. While the empirical
literature is growing, we argue below that significant gaps remain. In particular, there is little research
that focuses on descriptive analysis of data sets with a large number of platforms or in relatively simple
settings that are easily interpretable by theory. This paper analyzes sports card conventions in the US,
which must attract both buyers and sellers of cards to be successful. We provide a series of empirical
results, particularly about the relationship between competition and pricing, and especially competition
that we expect affects one side more than the other. Our results would be difficult to rationalize with a
one-sided market model, but we argue that our results can be generated by a model based on two-sided
markets. The theory of two-sided markets is difficult to test in the sense of falsifiability because it is
very flexible. Rather than a direct test, our aim is to provide descriptive results from a market that
appears to be two-sided, and discuss our results in the context of theoretical models. Our results go
beyond existing theoretical models in that we consider markets with many platforms, whereas existing
theoretical research considers markets with at most two. Thus, we evaluate whether intuition obtained
from duopoly markets can be extended to more complex market structures.
By definition, two-sided markets involve two (or more) groups of agents in which (1) agents interact
through an intermediary and (2) participation or usage of each group affects the utility of the other
groups. The intermediating firm is often referred to as a “platform” and each group of agent is referred
to as one “side” of the market. The economics of two-sided markets focus on agent’s choice of platform
and the pricing decisions of possibly competing platforms.1 Hagiu & Wright (2011) argue that this
literature would be better termed the study of “multi-sided platforms.”
For example, consumers value video game consoles that are served by many game developers, and
developersvalueconsolesthatattractmanyconsumers. Inthiscase,theconsoleproduceristheplatform
firm, accounting for interactions between game players and game developers. Similarly, a local sports
card convention provides a platform for dealers of sports cards (most time acting as sellers) to interact
with consumers that visit the convention. Sports card dealers prefer conventions with many consumers
(holding competition constant) and consumers prefer conventions with many dealers.
For several reasons, sports card conventions provide an excellent environment to study the theory of
two-sided markets, particularly for the relationship between platform pricing and platform competition.
First, conventions are two-sided markets. A successful convention requires both buyers and dealers to
1This focus differentiates the literature on two-sided markets from the literature on network effects. The definition
of a two-sided market is very similar to the definition of a market with indirect network effects. However, the literature
on network effects tended to focus on technology adoption and network size, rather than the choices of the intermediary
(although this distinction is not perfect). For more on network effects, and definitional issues in two-sided markets, see
Farrell&Klemperer(2007),Rochet&Tirole(2006)andRysman(2009).
2

appear at the convention, and a convention organizer must take this into account in setting prices.
Second, pricing is very simple and observable. Dealers and consumers pay separate entrance fees only.
There are no transaction fees or other complicating issues. We observe these fixed fees in a set of
uniformly formatted classified advertisements in a trade magazine. Third, there are a huge number of
conventions in the United States, more than two thousand per month at the height of their popularity,
which gives us tremendous leverage for econometric estimation, as well as important panel variation in
market structure.
In comparison, many two-sided markets (e.g. yellow pages directories, radio, internet search engine)
have zero price on one side and therefore restrict platform pricing to the other side only. Contexts in
whichweseepricingonbothsidesareoftencomplex. Forexample, videogamesconsolesareacanonical
example of a two-sided market, but the number of important platforms and game developers are less
than 25, contracts are complex and secret, and technological change makes time series variation difficult
to interpret.
We highlight several empirical results. We show that consumer pricing responds to increases in
competition at any reasonable distance. However, pricing to dealers is more complex: it does not
respond to competition within relatively long distances, up to 100 miles. As we consider even longer
distances, past 100 miles, dealer prices actually increase in competition. We also distinguish between
dealer pricing by conventions that allow free consumer admission and those that charge consumers. We
interpret conventions that charge free admission, about half of our data set, to be constrained on the
consumer side. We show that conventions with free consumer admission reduce the price to dealers in
response to competition, whereas conventions with positive consumer admission do not change dealer
prices in response to competition.
We argue that these results are difficult to explain in a one-sided model: why would price increase
in or does not respond to competition if the firm has set price and responded negatively to competition
for another product in the market? However, these results arise naturally in reasonable models of two-
sided markets. For instance, if dealers multi-home (i.e. attend multiple conventions) and consumers
single-home (i.e. attend a single convention), increased competition between conventions (for instance,
exogenously moving them closer together) leads to lower prices for consumers but not for dealers. The
resultthatthesingle-homingsidebenefitsmorefromcompetitionthanthemulti-homingsideisacommon
result and appears in a number of set-ups (see Rochet & Tirole, 2003; Armstrong, 2006; Gomes, 2011).
A second result is that if both sides single-home, and consumer face higher travel costs than dealers,
prices fall on the consumer side but can actually increase on the dealer side. Intuitively, since increased
competition lowers market shares of consumers, the value of attracting dealers goes down, and the
platforms raise price. This result can be inferred from Weyl (2010) and we present a model in the
appendix that makes this point explicitly. Thus, a model in which consumers single-home and dealers
multi-homewhencompetingconventionsarenearbybutsingle-homewhentheyarefarapart(i.e. greater
than 100 miles) generates the pricing pattern we observe. Our discussions with industry participants
3