NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REMEDIES FOR SICK INSURANCE
Daniel L. McFadden
Carlos E. Noton
Pau Olivella
Working Paper 17938
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17938
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2012
McFadden acknowledges support from the E. Morris Cox fund at the University of California, Berkeley,
the Presidential fund at USC, the Schaeffer Center for Health Economics and Policy at USC, and National
Institute on Aging (NIA) grants No. P01 AG005842 to the NBER and No. RC4 AG039036 to USC;
Olivella acknowledges support from the Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia, project ECO2009-07616.
We thank Peter Diamond, Mike Rothschild, Victor Fuchs, and Jonathan Gruber for useful comments.
All conclusions of this research are solely those of the authors, and not necessarily those of the supporting
institutions or of the individuals cited. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Daniel L. McFadden, Carlos E. Noton, and Pau Olivella. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Remedies for Sick Insurance
Daniel L. McFadden, Carlos E. Noton, and Pau Olivella
NBER Working Paper No. 17938
March 2012
JEL No. D4,D62,I13,I18
ABSTRACT
This expository paper describes the factors that contribute to failure of health insurance markets, and
the regulatory mechanisms that have been and can be used to combat these failures. Standardized
contracts and creditable coverage mandates are discussed, along with premium support, enrollment
mandates, guaranteed issue, and risk adjustment, as remedies for selection-related market damage.
An overall conclusion of the paper is that the design and management of creditable coverage mandates
are likely to be key determinants of the performance of the health insurance exchanges that are a core
provision of the PPACA of 2010. Enrollment mandates, premium subsidies, and risk adjustment can
improve the stability and relative efficiency of the exchanges, but with carefully designed creditable
coverage mandates are not necessarily critical for their operation.
Daniel L. McFadden Pau Olivella
University of California, Berkeley Departament Economia i Historia Economica
Department of Economics Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona
549 Evans Hall #3880 08193 Cerdanyola del Valles
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880 Barcelona
and NBER Spain
mcfadden@econ.berkeley.edu and Barcelona GSE
pau.olivella@uab.es
Carlos E. Noton
Department of Economics
University of Warwick
Coventry
Post Code: CV4 7AL
United Kingdom
C.Noton@warwick.ac.uk

REMEDIES FOR SICK INSURANCE
Daniel McFadden, Carlos Noton, Pau Olivella
March 2012
1. BACKGROUND
Heterogeneity in consumer tastes and needs, and in cost and quality of goods and services, are
ubiquitous features of resource allocation. When these variations are observed, competitive markets
price, sort, and match them efficiently. For example, in a market in which private information cannot
improve upon information available to all participants in predicting the expected costs and benefits from
contracts for goods and services, such as maintenance contracts on furnaces, competition will price these
contracts at their expected marginal costs to the sellers, buyers will chose among contracts and sellers to
maximize their expected values, and market efficiency will be achieved. An important feature of these
efficient contracts are clauses, offered and priced, that spell out and limit actions of the contracting parties
in response to downstream events and experience.
When market participants have informative private information on states or actions that affect costs or
values, this can interfere with market incentives, and cause markets to operate inefficiently, or even unravel.
For example, if firms providing furnace maintenance vary in reliability, and this is difficult for buyers to
assess, price may be used as a signal of quality, distorting its role as a signal of scarcity. Further, when
government intervenes to promote fairness in markets that are not delivering socially acceptable outcomes,
this can have the unintended side effect of introducing problems similar to those caused by private
information.
In well-functioning insurance markets where competitive underwriting can price contracts at their
actuarial cost based on public information, without adverse effects from private information of buyers,
risk-adverse consumers will be able to buy insurance contracts at close to their individualized actuarial
values. In the United States, health insurance markets fail to achieve this efficient competitive market
ideal. A significant portion of the population is uninsured or under-insured, either because they are denied
coverage, or because they believe that the contracts available to them in the market are actuarially
unattractive or contain clauses that make their promised benefits risky.1 The health cost of incomplete
coverage is substantial. Tardy diagnoses and inconsistent follow-ups are more common among the
1 See Card-Dobles-Maestas (2008), Gruber (2008), Heiss-McFadden-Winter (2009).
3

uninsured, and these exacerbate chronic conditions and lead to complications. In comparison with other
countries, the United States ranks 25th in the survival rate from age 15 to age 60, which impacts the
population of workers and young parents whose loss is a substantial cost to families and to the economy.2
If the U.S. could raise its survival rate for this group to that of Switzerland, a country that has mandatory
standardized coverage offered by private insurers, this would prevent more than 190,000 deaths per year.
The elderly in the United States aged 65 and older do have universal coverage under the Medicare program,
with prescription drug coverage (Medicare Part D) added in 2006. This may explain the somewhat better
comparative performance of the United States for seniors, a rank of 14th in life expectancy at age 65.
Since the U.S. has a population that at retirement has the poorest health in the developed world, this is a
medical accomplishment, but it is very costly – U.S. health expenditures per capita are 50 percent higher
than those in any other country. Causes other than health insurance market failure contribute to the
shortcomings of the health care delivery system in the United States, but the way health insurance is
organized is one of the most striking differences in provision of health care in the United States and other
developed countries.
Major contributors to health insurance market failure are (1) private information on states leading to
adverse selection and passive moral hazard, (2) private information on actions leading to active moral
hazard, (3) performance risk, (4) inefficient screening and signaling, (5) conflicts between social sentiment
and competitive underwriting, (6) consumer misperception of risk, (7) market concentration, and (8) weak
and inconsistent incentives induced by government intervention and regulation. Contracts offered in
health insurance markets can vary on four primary dimensions: scope of conditions covered; benefit
design that determines the share of losses uncovered, or copayments; levels of risk classification,
reclassification, and screening based on available information and experience; and price (premium).
Private information and other contributing factors can lead to wasteful competition on the first three of
these dimensions, and to failure of price competition to guide efficient resource allocation.
This expository paper discusses regulatory mechanisms that can limit market damage from the factors
listed above. We first define the factors, and list the most common regulatory mechanisms. After that,
we concentrate particularly on the use of standardized contracts and creditable coverage standards,
guaranteed issue, premium subsidies, and enrollment mandates to control adverse selection and channel
competition to prevent health insurance market failure. These topics are also addressed in a more technical
companion paper, McFadden-Noton-Olivella (2012). The term “creditable coverage” has a specific legal
definition under the 2003 Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act as an
2 These statistics are based on World Health Organization data for 2006, and U.S. Census data on population by age in
2006.
4