NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A THEORY OF OPTIMAL CAPITAL TAXATION
Thomas Piketty
Emmanuel Saez
Working Paper 17989
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17989
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2012
We are grateful to seminar participants at the Paris School of Economics, the London School of Economics,
the National Bureau of Economic Research (Public Economics Program), the University of California
at Berkeley, the Massachussetts Institute of Technology, and Stanford University for their comments.
We thank Tony Atkinson, Alan Auerbach, Peter Diamond, Emmanuel Farhi, Mikhail Golosov, Louis
Kaplow, Wojciech Kopczuk, Matt Weinzierl and Ivan Werning for helpful and stimulating discussions.
We acknowledge financial support from the Center for Equitable Growth at UC Berkeley. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

A Theory of Optimal Capital Taxation
Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez
NBER Working Paper No. 17989
April 2012
JEL No. H21
ABSTRACT
This paper develops a realistic, tractable theoretical model that can be used to investigate socially-optimal
capital taxation. We present a dynamic model of savings and bequests with heterogeneous random
tastes for bequests to children and for wealth per se. We derive formulas for optimal tax rates on capitalized
inheritance expressed in terms of estimable parameters and social preferences. Under our model assumptions,
the long-run optimal tax rate increases with the aggregate steady-state flow of inheritances to output,
decreases with the elasticity of bequests to the net-of-tax rate, and decreases with the strength of preferences
for leaving bequests. For realistic parameters of our model, the optimal tax rate on capitalized inheritance
would be as high as 50%-60%–or even higher for top wealth holders–if the social objective is meritocratic
(i.e., the social planner puts higher welfare weights on those receiving little inheritance) and if capital
is highly concentrated (as it is in the real world). In contrast to the Atkinson-Stiglitz result, the optimal
tax on bequest remains positive in our model even with optimal labor taxation because inequality is
two-dimensional: with inheritances, labor income is no longer the unique determinant of lifetime resources.
In contrast to Chamley-Judd, the optimal tax on capital is positive in our model because we have finite
long run elasticities of inheritance to tax rates. Finally, we discuss how adding capital market imperfections
and uninsurable shocks to rates of return to our optimal tax model leads to shifting one-off inheritance
taxation toward lifetime capital taxation, and can account for the actual structure and mix of inheritance
and capital taxation.
Thomas Piketty
Paris School of Economics
48 Boulevard Jourdan
75014 Paris, France
piketty@ens.fr
Emmanuel Saez
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
saez@econ.berkeley.edu

1 Introduction
According to the profession’s most popular theoretical models, optimal tax rates on capital
should be equal to zero in the long run–including from the viewpoint of those individuals or
dynasties who own no capital at all. Taken literally, the policy implication of those theoretical
results would be to eliminate all inheritance taxes, property taxes, corporate profits taxes,
and individual taxes on capital income and recoup the resulting tax revenue loss with higher
labor income or consumption or lump-sum taxes. Strikingly, even individuals with no capital
or inheritance would benefit from such a change. E.g. according to these models it is in the
interest of propertyless individuals to set property taxes to zero and replace them by poll taxes.
Few economists however seem to endorse such a radical policy agenda. Presumably this
reflects a lack of faith in the standard models and the zero-capital tax results - which are indeed
well known to rely upon strong assumptions.1 As a matter of fact, all advanced economies
impose substantial capital taxes. For example, the European Union currently raises 9% of GDP
in capital taxes (out of a total of 39% of GDP in total tax revenues) and the US raises about
8% of GDP in capital taxes (out of a total of about 27% of GDP in total tax revenues).2
However, in the absence of an alternative tractable model, the zero capital tax result remains
an important reference point in economics teaching and in policy discussions.3 For instance,
a number of economists and policy-makers support tax competition as a way to impose zero
optimal capital taxes to reluctant governments.4 We view the large gap between optimal capital
tax theory and practice as one of the most important failures of modern public economics.
The objective of this paper is to develop a realistic, tractable, and robust theory of socially
optimal capital taxation. By realistic, we mean a theory providing optimal tax conclusions
that are not fully off-the-mark with respect to the real world (i.e., positive and significant
capital tax rates–at least for some parameter values). By realistic, we also mean a theory
offering such conclusions for reasons that are consistent with the reasons that are at play in the
real world which–we feel–are related to the large concentration of inherited capital ownership.
1In particular, Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976; 1980, pp. 442-451) themselves have repeatedly stressed that
their famous zero capital tax result relies upon unplausibly strong assumptions (most notably the absence of
inheritanceandtheseparabilityofpreferences), andhaslittlerelevanceforpracticalpolicydiscussions. Seealso
Atkinson and Sandmo (1980) and Stiglitz (1985).
2See European Commission (2011), p.282 (total taxes) and p.336 (capital taxes), for GDP-weighted EU 27
averages, and OECD (2011) for the United States.
3Lucas (1990, p.313) celebrates the zero-capital-tax result of Chamley-Judd as “the largest genuinely free
lunch I have seen in 25 years in this business.”
4See Cai and Treisman (2005) and Edwards and Mitchell (2008) for references.
1

By tractable, we mean that optimal tax formulas should be expressed in terms of estimable
parameters and should quantify the various trade-offs in a simple and plausible way. By robust,
we mean that our results should not be too sensitive to the exact primitives of the model nor
depend on strong homogeneity assumptions for individual preferences. Ideally, formulas should
be expressed in terms of estimable “sufficient statistics” such as distributional parameters and
behavioralelasticitiesandhenceberobusttochangesintheunderlyingprimitivesofthemodel.5
In our view, the two key ingredients for a proper theory of capital taxation are, first, the
largeaggregatemagnitudeandthehighconcentrationofinheritance,and,next,theimperfection
of capital markets. In models with no inheritance (as in the Aktinson-Stiglitz model where all
wealth is due to life-cycle savings or as in Chamley-Judd where life is infinite) or with egalitarian
inheritance (representative agent model), and with perfect capital markets (i.e. if agents can
transferresourcesacrossperiodsatafixedandrisklessinterestrater), thenthelogicforthezero
optimal capital taxation result is compelling–as in the standard Atkinson-Stiglitz or Chamley-
Judd models. Hence, our paper proceeds in two steps.
First, we develop a theory of optimal capital taxation with perfect capital markets. We
presenta dynamic modelof savings andbequests withheterogeneousrandom tastesforbequests
to children and for wealth accumulation per se. The key feature of our model is that inequality
permanentlyarisesfromtwodimensions: differencesinlaborincomeduetodifferencesinability,
and differences in inheritances due to differences in parental tastes for bequests and parental
resources. Importantly, top labor earners and top successors are never exactly the same people,
implying a non-degenerate trade-off between the taxation of labor income and the taxation of
capitalized inheritance. In that context, in contrast to the famous Atkinson-Stiglitz result, the
tax system that maximizes social welfare includes positive taxes on bequests even with optimal
labor taxation because, with inheritances, labor income is no longer the unique determinant
of life-time resources. In sum, two-dimensional inequality requires two-dimensional tax policy
tools.
We derive formulas for optimal tax rates τ on capitalized inheritance expressed in terms
B
of estimable parameters and social preferences. The long run optimal tax rate τ increases
B
with the aggregate steady-state flow of bequests to output b , decreases with the elasticity of
y
bequests with respect to the net-of-tax rate e , and decreases with the strength of preferences
B
5Such an approach has yielded fruitful results in the analysis of optimal labor income taxation (see Piketty
and Saez, 2012 for a recent survey).
2