NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
NONLINEAR ADVENTURES AT THE ZERO LOWER BOUND
Jesús Fernández-Villaverde
Grey Gordon
Pablo A. Guerrón-Quintana
Juan Rubio-Ramírez
Working Paper 18058
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18058
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2012
ˆWe thank Michael Woodford for useful comments. We also thank Larry Christiano for explaining to
us several aspects about his work on the topic. Keith Kuester provided valuable comments on earlier
drafts. Beyond the usual disclaimer, we must note that any views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, the Federal Reserve Bank
of Philadelphia, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Finally,
we also thank the NSF for financial support.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Jesús Fernández-Villaverde, Grey Gordon, Pablo A. Guerrón-Quintana, and Juan Rubio-
Ramírez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Nonlinear Adventures at the Zero Lower Bound
Jesús Fernández-Villaverde, Grey Gordon, Pablo A. Guerrón-Quintana, and Juan Rubio-Ramírez
NBER Working Paper No. 18058
May 2012
JEL No. E30,E50,E60
ABSTRACT
Motivated by the recent experience of the U.S. and the Eurozone, we describe the quantitative properties
of a New Keynesian model with a zero lower bound (ZLB) on nominal interest rates, explicitly accounting
for the nonlinearities that the bound brings. Besides showing how such a model can be efficiently computed,
we find that the behavior of the economy is substantially affected by the presence of the ZLB. In particular,
we document 1) the unconditional and conditional probabilities of hitting the ZLB; 2) the unconditional
and conditional probabilty distributions of the duration of a spell at the ZLB; 3) the responses of output
to government expenditure shocks at the ZLB, 4) the distribution of shocks that send the economy
to the ZLB; and 5) the distribution of shocks that keep the economy at the ZLB.
Jesús Fernández-Villaverde Pablo A. Guerrón-Quintana
University of Pennsylvania Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
160 McNeil Building pablo.guerron@phil.frb.org
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104 Juan Rubio-Ramírez
and NBER Duke University
jesusfv@econ.upenn.edu P.O. Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
Grey Gordon juan.rubio-ramirez@duke.edu
University of Pennsylvania
160 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
greygordon@gmail.com

1. Introduction
How does the economy behave when it faces the zero lower bound (ZLB) on the nominal
interest rate? To answer this basic question in macroeconomics, we build a New Keynesian
model with the ZLB and solve it nonlinearly using a projection method and rational expec-
tations. Besides showing how the model can be e¢ ciently computed, this paper documents
1) the unconditional and conditional probabilities of hitting the ZLB; 2) the unconditional
and conditional probability distributions of the duration of a spell at the ZLB; 3) the dis-
tributions of shocks that send the economy to the ZLB and the ones that keep it there; 4)
the responses of output to government expenditure shocks at the ZLB; and 5) the impulse
response functions of the economy at and away from the ZLB.
Our investigation is motivated by the recent U.S. and Eurozone experience of (nearly)
zero short-term nominal interest rates after 2008. This experience has rekindled the interest
in understanding the theoretical and quantitative e¤ects of the ZLB in dynamic stochastic
general equilibrium (DSGE) models. These e¤ects are consequential for the conduct of policy
as illustrated, for instance, by Eggertsson and Woodford (2003)—for monetary policy—and
Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011)—for …scal policy.
However, the quantitative analysis of the ZLB is complicated by the essential nonlinearity
that it generates. Along the equilibrium path of the model, the nominal interest rate is a
function of the states of the economy and government policy. Since, in the typical model, the
nominal interest rate will be zero for some states of the economy and government policies but
notforothers,thefunctionthatdeterminesinterestratesmustbenonlinear. Thisnonlinearity
is an obstacle both for traditional linearizations techniques and for the increasingly popular
higher-order perturbations. These methods, by construction, cannot handle the ZLB in a
model with rational expectations.
The literature has tried to get around this problem using di¤erent approaches. We high-
light three of the most in‡uential. Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) log-linearize the equi-
librium relations except for the ZLB constraint, which is retained in its exact form. They
then solve the corresponding system of linear expectational di¤erence equations with the lin-
ear inequality constraint. To obtain numerical results, Eggertsson and Woodford assume a
2-state Markov chain with an absorbing state for an exogenous disturbance that drives the
dynamicsofthemodel.1 Christiano, Eichenbaum, andRebelo(2011)linearizethetwomodels
they use: a simple model without capital and a model with capital. In the …rst model, they
assume that there is a 2-state Markov chain with an absorbing state for the discount factor.
1EggertssonandWoodfordalsoderiveanalyticalresults,suchanoptimalmonetarypolicy,formoregeneral
disturbance processes.
3

The economy starts with a high discount factor that sends the nominal interest rate to zero
and, in every period, there is a probability that the discount factor will move to its long run
value and never change again. In the model with capital, the path for the discount factor
(and hence, for the economy, conditional on some …scal policy) is deterministic. Braun and
Körber (2010) employ a variant of extended shooting, which solves the model forward for an
exogenously …xed number of periods (after which the economy reverts to the steady state)
given some initial conditions and assuming that in these periods, shocks are set to zero.
Although a big step toward understanding the ZLB, the existing solutions have made sim-
plifying assumptions that may have unexpected implications. First, linearizing equilibrium
conditions such as the Euler equations may hide some nonlinear interactions between the
ZLB and the policy functions of the agents. Second, linear approximations provide a poor
description of the economy during deep recessions such as the 2007-2009 one. Hence, our
approach is a step forward to analyze the role of policy during contractions a icted by the
ZLB. Third, dynamics driven by exogenous variables that follow 2-state Markov chains with
absorbing states or have deterministic paths imply the durations of spells at the ZLB have
very simple expectations and variances. When we solve the model nonlinearly, however, these
expectations and variances change substantially over time. This is key because the shape of
the distribution of future events and the uncertainty it implies have material consequences
for quantities important to policy analysis such as the size of the …scal multiplier.
Weaddressthesenonlinearinteractionsandthetime-varyingdistributionsoffutureevents
by computing a fully nonlinear New Keynesian model with a ZLB and rational expectations.
We incorporate monetary and …scal policy and a set of shocks that push the model into the
ZLB. In that way, the agents in the model have the right expectations about the probability
of hitting the ZLB. To solve the model, we approximate the equilibrium functions of con-
sumption, in‡ation, and one auxiliary variable that controls the pricing decision of …rms as
a nonlinear function of the states. More concretely, we employ Chebyshev polynomials as a
basis for the projection of these endogenous variables on the states of the model. Since we are
working in a high-dimensional space, the coe¢ cients are solved for with the Smolyak colloca-
tionmethodlaidoutinKrueger, Kubler, andMalin(2011).Thismethodsigni…cantlyreduces
the burden of the curse of dimensionality. However, to maintain tractability and provide eas-
ier insight, we will specify a relatively simple model with only …ve state variables. Once we
have the nonlinear functions for consumption, in‡ation, and the one auxiliary variable, we
exploit the rest of the equilibrium conditions of the model to solve for all other variables
of interest. In particular, we …nd the nominal interest rate from the exact Taylor rule with
a ZLB with its kink at zero holding exactly. This feature of our solution method is crucial
because it allows us tocircumvent the di¢ cultyindirectlyapproximatinganon-di¤erentiable
4