NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEBT OVERHANGS: PAST AND PRESENT
Carmen M. Reinhart
Vincent R. Reinhart
Kenneth S. Rogoff
Working Paper 18015
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18015
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2012
This paper was prepared for the Journal of Economic Perspectives. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research
or the institutions that they are affiliated with.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Carmen M. Reinhart, Vincent R. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Debt Overhangs: Past and Present
Carmen M. Reinhart, Vincent R. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff
NBER Working Paper No. 18015
April 2012
JEL No. E44,E62,E63,F30,F41,H6,H63,N1
ABSTRACT
We identify the major public debt overhang episodes in the advanced economies since the early 1800s,
characterized by public debt to GDP levels exceeding 90% for at least five years. Consistent with
Reinhart and Rogoff (2010) and other more recent research, we find that public debt overhang episodes
are associated with growth over one percent lower than during other periods. Perhaps the most striking
new finding here is the duration of the average debt overhang episode. Among the 26 episodes we
identify, 20 lasted more than a decade. Five of the six shorter episodes were immediately after World
Wars I and II. Across all 26 cases, the average duration in years is about 23 years. The long duration
belies the view that the correlation is caused mainly by debt buildups during business cycle recessions.
The long duration also implies that cumulative shortfall in output from debt overhang is potentially
massive. We find that growth effects are significant even in the many episodes where debtor countries
were able to secure continual access to capital markets at relatively low real interest rates. That is,
growth-reducing effects of high public debt are apparently not transmitted exclusively through high
real interest rates.
Carmen M. Reinhart Kenneth S. Rogoff
Peterson Institute for International Economics Thomas D Cabot Professor of Public Policy
1750 Massachusetts Avenue, NW Economics Department
Washington, DC 20036-1903 Harvard University
and CEPR Littauer Center 216
and also NBER Cambridge, MA 02138-3001
creinhart@piie.com and NBER
krogoff@harvard.edu
Vincent R. Reinhart
Morgan Stanley
New York, NY
vincent.reinhart@morganstanley.com

I. Introduction
Among the legacies of the recent financial crisis across the advanced economies is
a historically high and rising level of public indebtedness. The central policy debate
across Europe, Japan, and the United States now centers on how fast to stabilize soaring
public debt/income ratios given that post-crisis growth remains fragile. Those concerned
about the tentative nature of economic expansion argue that the risks from elevated rich-
country government indebtedness are wildly overblown, except of course for
impecunious borrowers in the Eurozone periphery such as Greece. After all, market real
interest rates for the very largest economies are extraordinarily low. If markets are not
yet worried about long-term insolvency risks, why should policymakers? Shouldn’t
government tolerate even bigger deficits to counterbalance post-crisis private sector
deleveraging?1
The counter to such cyclical concerns is worry about the secular consequences of
high debt loads on economic performance. In this paper, we use recently developed long-
dated cross-country historical data on public debt levels to examine the long-term growth
consequences of prolonged periods of exceptionally high public debt, defined here to be
debt over 90% of GDP.2 In the event, the cumulative effects can be quite dramatic. Over
the twenty-six public debt overhang episodes we consider, encompassing the
preponderance of such episodes in advance economies since 1800, growth averages 1.2%
less than in other periods. That is, debt levels above 90% are associated with an average
growth rate of 2.3% (median 2.1%) versus 3.5% in lower debt periods. Notably, the
average duration of debt overhang episodes was 23 years, implying a massive cumulative
1 Reinhart and Reinhart (2010) employ private debt data to examine deleveraging cycles around financial
crises.
2 Long-dated cross-country public debt data have recently been developed by Reinhart and Rogoff (2009).
2

output loss. Indeed, by the end of the median episode, the level of output is nearly a
quarter below that predicted by the trend in lower-debt periods. This long duration also
suggests the association of debt and growth is not just a cyclical phenomenon.
Our work is not the first to use the new debt data to document the association
between high debt and low growth. Reinhart and Rogoff (2010) show periods where debt
is over 90% of GDP are associated with roughly 1% lower growth while at lower debt
thresholds, the correlation with growth is small. Kumar and Woo (2010) and Cecchetti,
Mohanty, and Zampolli (2011) also find statistical support of a similarly sized effect.
In this paper, we go beyond regressions and aggregative statistics to look at more
detailed evidence on each of the individual twenty-six episodes. Previous studies of high
public debt episodes have focused on the very small number of cases where debt data is
readily available, including mainly the post-World-War-II United States and United
Kingdom and contemporary Japan. Our historical approach allows us to more easily
discriminate between cases where high debt resulted from wars and cases where high
debt resulted from peacetime buildups and/or financial crises.
Importantly, this paper provides the first systematic evidence on the association
between high public debt and real interest rates. Contrary to popular perception, we find
that in 11 of the 26 debt overhang cases, real interest rates were either lower or about the
same as during the lower debt/GDP years. Those waiting for financial markets to send
the warning signal through higher interest rates that government policy will be
detrimental to economic performance may be waiting a long time.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section provides a
brief tour of the evolution of the concept of debt overhangs in the literature; an appendix
that discusses the findings of individual papers complements this review. We next
3