NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TRACKING VARIATION IN SYSTEMIC RISK AT US BANKS DURING 1974-2013
Armen Hovakimian
Edward J. Kane
Luc Laeven
Working Paper 18043
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18043
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2012
Previously circulated as "Variation in Systemic Risk at US Banks During 1974-2010." The authors
thank Charlie Calomiris, Gerald O'Driscoll, Bob DeYoung, Douglas Evanoff, Greg Udell, seminar
participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Bocconi
University, and the Institute for New Economic Thinking for helpful comments on earlier drafts of
this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the ECB, the International Monetary Fund, its Executive
Board, or its management.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Armen Hovakimian, Edward J. Kane, and Luc Laeven. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Tracking Variation in Systemic Risk at US Banks During 1974-2013
Armen Hovakimian, Edward J. Kane, and Luc Laeven
NBER Working Paper No. 18043
May 2012, Revised August 2015
JEL No. G01,G21,G28
ABSTRACT
This paper proposes a theoretically based and easy-to-implement way to measure the systemic risk
of financial institutions using publicly available accounting and stock market data. The measure models
the credit enhancement taxpayers provide to individual banks in the Merton tradition (1974) as a combination
put option for the deep tail of bank losses and a knock-in stop-loss call on bank assets. This model
expresses the value of taxpayer loss exposure from a string of defaults as the value of this combination
option written on the portfolio of industry assets. The exercise price of the call is the face value of
the debt of the entire sector. We conceive of an individual bank’s systemic risk as its contribution
to the value of this sector-wide option on the financial safety net. To the extent that authorities are
slow to see bank losses or reluctant to exercise the call, the government itself becomes a secondary
source of systemic risk. We apply our model to quarterly data over the period 1974-2013. The model
indicates that systemic risk reached unprecedented highs during the financial crisis years 2008-2009,
and that bank size, leverage, and asset risk are key drivers of systemic risk.
Armen Hovakimian Luc Laeven
Department of Economics and Finance Research Department
Baruch College Zicklin School of Business European Central Bank
1 Bernard Baruch Way Frankfurt am Main
New York, NY 10010 GERMANY
Armen_Hovakimian@baruch.cuny.edu Luc.Laeven@ecb.europa.eu
Edward J. Kane
2325 E Calle Los Altos
Tucson, AZ 85718
a n d NBER
edward.kane@bc.edu

Each new financial crisis intensifies efforts by policymakers and academics to improve
strategies and protocols for monitoring and resolving losses at large, complex, and politically
influential financial institutions. Key problems include the need to develop timely measures such
as CoVar (Adrian and Brunnermier, 2008) and SRISK (Brownlee and Engel, 2015) that link the
risk exposures undertaken by individual institutions to the risk of a breakdown in the financial
system as a whole. This risk of breakdown is known as systemic risk.
We follow Engle, Jondeau, and Rockinger (2012) in defining an individual bank’s
systemic risk as its propensity to be undercapitalized when the financial system as a whole is
undercapitalized. This definition allows us to include in the risk-generation process the channels
through which regulation and supervision might mitigate or amplify this risk. It is well known
that the existence of a safety net incentivizes banks to increase their exposure to ruinous losses,
to under-reserve for these loss exposures, and to conceal such losses when they occur (Kane,
1989; Demirguc-Kunt and Huizinga, 2004; and Skinner, 2008). Profit-driven safety net abuse is
deeply implicated in modern financial crises (Rochet, 2008). Even though policymakers
recognize the depth of this incentive problem and seek to monitor the regulatory arbitrage it
produces, profit-maximizing managers are driven to extract value from financial safety net
support in hard-to-observe ways.
When tail risks drive a large, complex, or politically influential bank into insolvency, the
difficulty of exercising the government’s call can transform safety-net management into a nasty
game of chicken whose outcome generates bailout expense for taxpayers.1 When deep or
widespread insolvencies emerge, fiscal and monetary authorities typically shift losses to
1 This is essentially what is known popularly as the “too big to fail” problem.
2

taxpayers because it is the path of administrative and political least resistance (Honohan and
Klingebiel, 2003; Veronesi and Zingales, 2010; Laeven and Valencia, 2013).
Regulators such as Timothy Geithner argue that it is in society’s best interest to minimize
the possibility of contagious defaults. As long as sovereign and cross-country credit support
remains credible, authorities can prevent widespread substantial spillovers of actual defaults
from taking place. This has led officials around the world to block actual defaults by
“systemically important” firms. They have done this by guaranteeing such a firm’s access to
credit even when difficulties it encountered in rolling over its liabilities strongly suggested that it
had become economically insolvent.
The goal of this paper is to propose a measure of systemic risk that is based in theory and
easy to implement using publicly available financial and stock market data. Our methods are
rooted in academic literature for modeling credit risk pioneered by Merton (1974). Merton
models stockholder equity as a put option that stockholders write on firm assets. Merton (1977,
1978), Marcus and Shaked (1984), Ronn and Verma (1986), Duan, Moreau and Sealey (1992)
and others have adapted this approach to express the value of US deposit insurance as if it were a
one-year put option written by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). In this paper,
we build on this tradition, but reinterpret the losses to which banking-sector activity exposes
taxpayers through the safety net as an implicit contra-liability that transfers responsibility for
covering the losses of insolvent banks to taxpayers.
To fashion a role for forbearance, we interpret this contra-liability as the value of the
combination of a put option written on the losses that can be generated by a portfolio of
aggregate bank assets with a call on these same bank assets whose exercise price equals the face
3