NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CHINA AND THE TPP:
A NUMERICAL SIMULATION ASSESSMENT OF THE EFFECTS INVOLVED
Chunding Li
John Whalley
Working Paper 18090
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18090
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2012
We are grateful to the Ontario Research Fund for financial support and to a seminar group at UWO
for comment and discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Chunding Li and John Whalley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

China and the TPP: A Numerical Simulation Assessment of the Effects Involved
Chunding Li and John Whalley
NBER Working Paper No. 18090
May 2012
JEL No. C68,F47,F53
ABSTRACT
The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) is a new negotiation on cross border liberalization of goods and
service flows going beyond WTO disciplines and focused on issues such as regulation and border
controls. Though the US, Australia and other pacific countries are included, China is notable for its
exclusion from the process thus far. This paper uses numerical simulation methods to assess the potential
effects of a TPP agreement on China and the other participating countries. We use a numerical five-country
global general equilibrium model with trade costs and monetary structure incorporating inside money
to allow for impacts on trade imbalances. Trade costs are calculated using a method based on gravity
equations. Simulation results reveal that China will be hurt by TPP initiatives, but the negative effects
are relatively small given the geographical and commodity composition of China’s trade. Other non-TPP
countries will be hurt but member countries will all gain. Japan’s joining TPP would be beneficial
to both herself and all other TPP countries, but negative effects on China and other non-TPP countries
will increase further. If China takes part in TPP, it will increase China’s and other TPP countries’ gain,
but non-TPP countries will be hurt more. As a regional free trade arrangement, TPP effects are different
from global free trade effects which will benefit all countries (not just member countries) in the world,
and the positive effects of global free trade are stronger than TPP effects.
Chunding Li
Institute of World Economics and Politics
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences
No.5 Jianguomenneidajie
Beijing, PRC
Postcode: 100732
cli428@uwo.ca
John Whalley
Department of Economics
Social Science Centre
University of Western Ontario
London, ON N6A 5C2
CANADA
and NBER
jwhalley@uwo.ca

1. Introduction
The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) is a proposed nine-country Asia-Pacific free
trade arrangement being negotiated among the United States (US), Australia, Brunei,
Chile, Malaysia, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam. The aim is to go beyond
WTO liberalization and focus on issues of regulation and border controls. As such it
differs from tariff based liberalization in there being no revenues involved with the
border measures. They also compound with conventional tariffs. The intuition,
therefore, is that larger gains may accrue to the importing countries compared to
previously studied liberalization. The negotiating partners have agreed that this
proposed “living agreement” cover new trade topics and include new members that
are willing to adopt the proposed agreement’s higher standards. To that end, Japan,
Canada and Mexico all have stated that they would have an interest in joining the
negotiations. This free trade pact, even without Mexico and Canada, would affect 600
million people in countries that produce 20 trillion US$ of annual economic output
(COC, 2011).
As a big country in the Asia-Pacific area, China has not been invited to take part
in the TPP initiative. Here we analyze how a TPP arrangement could potentially affect
both China and other participating and non-participating countries if this proposal
resulted in a true free trade agreement (FTA) among participants. The answer to this
question is important for policy making and related research, and depends critically
both on the size of barriers involved and their negotiability. Present literature on TPP
3

is limited and is mostly analytical or simple newsletters and comments, such as
Williams (2012), James (2010), Lewis (2011), and Ezell and Atkinson (2011). Few
numerical methods have been used to capture potential TPP effects for other countries
and the whole world, except Petri et al (2011) and Itakura and Lee (2012). Our point
of departure is to use numerical general equilibrium simulation methods to explore
TPP effects on both China and other countries.
We use a five-country (China, US, Japan, other TPP countries and the rest of
world (ROW)) Armington type global general equilibrium model. Each country
produces two-goods (Tradable goods and Non-tradable goods) and has two-factors
(capital and labor). The model captures trade costs and uses a monetary structure of
inside money both so as to also endogenously determine trade imbalance effects from
the trade initiative and also allow calibration to a base case capturing China’s large
trade surplus. We use a trade cost calculation method that recognizes limitations of
data by using an estimation treatment that follows Wong (2012) and Novy (2008). We
capture endogenously determined trade imbalances by incorporating both current
consumption and expected future incremental consumption from saving into the
model using an analytical structure attributed to Patinkin (1947), also adopted in
Archibald and Lipsey (1960), and used more recently in Whalley et al (2011) and Li
and Whalley (2012). We calibrate the model to 2010 data and use counterfactual
simulations to explore TPP effects.
Our simulation results show, not surprisingly, that the TPP initiative will hurt
China, but these effects are relatively small under the present TPP proposal, and so
4