NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE POLITICAL RISKS OF FIGHTING MARKET FAILURES:
SUBVERSION, POPULISM AND THE GOVERNMENT SPONSORED ENTERPRISES
Edward L. Glaeser
Working Paper 18112
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18112
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2012
I am grateful to Yueran Ma and Kristina Tobio for research assistance. The Taubman Center for State
and Local Government provided financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Edward L. Glaeser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Political Risks of Fighting Market Failures: Subversion, Populism and the Government
Sponsored Enterprises
Edward L. Glaeser
NBER Working Paper No. 18112
May 2012
JEL No. D0,G0,H0
ABSTRACT
There are many possible ways of reforming the Government-Sponsored Enterprises that insure mortgages
against default, including a purely public option, complete privatization or a hybrid model with private
firms and public catastrophic insurance. If the government is sufficiently capable and benign, either
public intervention can yield desirable outcomes; the key risks of any reform come from the political
process. This paper examines the political risks, related to corruption and populism, of differing approaches
to the problems of monopoly, externalities and market breakdowns in asset insurance. If there is a
high probability that political leadership will be induced to pursue policies that maximize the profitability
of private entities at the expense of taxpayers, then purely public options create lower social losses.
If there is a high probability that leaders will pursue a populist agenda of lowering prices or borrowing
costs, then catastrophic risk insurance can lead to lower social losses than either complete laissez-faire
of a pure public option.
Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

I. Introduction
The Federal Housing Finance Agency projects that the bailouts of the Federal Home
Loan Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac) and the Federal National Mortgage
Association (Fannie Mae) will require between 220 and 311 billion dollars (“FHFA
Updates”). It is striking that two enterprises, allegedly operating without any government
guarantee, received a bailout bigger than the gross domestic product (GDP) of Ireland or
Egypt, but the financial distress and ensuing bailout were hardly unexpected. For many
years before the downturn, analysts warned of ensuing disaster, while the market treated
their securities as if they were essentially backed with the full faith and credit of the
United States government (Jaffee 2006).
In response the crisis, observers have offered the full range of reform proposals
ranging from complete public control of Fannie and Freddie to total government exit
from the mortgage-insurance business. These proposals have swirled within a larger
debate over banking sector regulation and taxation, where advocates have urged bank
size limitations, bans on proprietary trading, and Tobin taxes, and even temporary
nationalization. In some cases, it is difficult to understand what even the most well-
managed public intervention would achieve, but in every case, it is difficult to assess the
political risks that may distort any reform operation.
Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae might be privatized with stern assurances that even
though the government has bailed them out in the past, this will never, ever happen again,
but should investors believe those assurances? The institutional rules may be written to
prevent bailouts, but those rules can be changed; profit-making mortgage insurance giants
will certainly have the resources and incentives to influence congress and regulators. The
institutional arrangements for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac will face the twin political
risks of subversion, where private companies capture policy (Stigler 1971), and political
favoritism, where public leaders use government policy to pursue their own pet
objectives, such as populism.
3

These risks help determine the consequences of any institutional reform. If private
mortgage insurer entities are replaced with a purely public mortgage entity, then political
leaders may seek to use that entity for political benefits that are barely related to general
welfare. If the private entities are re-privatized, then their new leaders may be able to
influence the system and again obtain de facto free public insurance for a private entity.
Such political risks are endemic in any public response to market failure, and the
benefits of reducing market failures can be offset by the risks of political failure. Public
ownership once seemed like a reasonable response to the downsides of natural
monopolies, which is why distinguished Progressive Era economists, such as Ely (1901)
argued for municipal ownership of utilities and transit systems. Yet public ownership has
often been associated with operating losses, and allegations of excessively generous
union contracts (Pashigian 1976). Since Stigler (1971), economists have argued that
regulatory agencies, such as the Interstate Commerce Commission, are often captured by
the industries that they are meant to control.
This paper examines the impact of the competing political risks of corruption and
political favoritism in three settings with market failures. The paper follows the
institutional design literature (e.g. Laffont and Tirole 1991) and assumes that the broad
contours of the policy are set optimally, but that the implementation of the policy faces
the risks of private influence and public malfeasance. In these settings, the risk of
corruption is modeled by assuming that with some probability policies are implemented
to maximize the profits of a favored firm (or firms). The risk of political favoritism is
addressed by assuming that, with some probability, political leaders just seek to
maximize the well-being of some segment of society. In this paper, I typically refer to
favoritism as populism and assume that populist leaders favor the poor, but a more
realistic assumption might be that politicians favor the strongest political groups, which
might mean public sector unions or agricultural workers or the wealthy.
In the formal models, the risks of corruption and populism are treated as exogenous
variables that help determine optimal institutions. Section II of this paper discusses the
forces that determine these risks. While there is significant evidence suggesting that
cultural norms strongly influence corruption (Fisman and Miguel 2007), there is also
4