NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A THEORY OF DEBT MATURITY:
THE LONG AND SHORT OF DEBT OVERHANG
Douglas W. Diamond
Zhiguo He
Working Paper 18160
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18160
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2012
Booth School of Business, University of Chicago, and NBER. The authors gratefully acknowledge
research support from the Center for Research in Security Prices at Chicago Booth. Diamond gratefully
acknowledges support from the Nation Science Foundation. We thank two referees, seminar participants
at MIT Sloan, OSU Fisher, Chicago Booth, Columbia, Yale, Harvard, UCLA, NBER 2010 Corporate
Finance meeting in Chicago, AFA 2011 in Denver, Nittai Bergman, Hui Chen, Gustavo Manso, Gregor
Matvos, Victoria Ivashina, Henri Pages, Raghu Rajan, Berk Sensoy, Jeremy Stein, Rene Stulz, Sheridan
Titman and especially Stewart Myers and Charles Kahn for insightful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Douglas W. Diamond and Zhiguo He. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

A Theory of Debt Maturity: The Long and Short of Debt Overhang
Douglas W. Diamond and Zhiguo He
NBER Working Paper No. 18160
June 2012
JEL No. G32
ABSTRACT
Debt maturity influences debt overhang: the reduced incentive for highly- levered borrowers to make
real investments because some value accrues to debt. Reducing maturity can increase or decrease
overhang even when shorter-term debt’s value depends less on firm value. Future overhang is more
volatile for shorter-term debt, making future investment incentives volatile and influencing immediate
investment incentives. With immediate investment, shorter-term debt typically imposes lower overhang;
longer-term debt can impose less if firm value is more volatile in bad times. For future investments,
reduced correlation between the value of assets-in-place and profitability of investment increases the
overhang of shorter-term debt.
Douglas W. Diamond
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
douglas.diamond@chicagobooth.edu
Zhiguo He
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
zhiguo.he@chicagobooth.edu

1. Introduction
This paper studies the effects of the debt maturity on current and future real investment decisions
of an owner of equity (or a manager who is compensated by equity). Our analysis is based on
debt overhang first analyzed by Myers (1977), who points out that outstanding debt may distort
the firm’s investment incentives downward. A reduced incentive to undertake profitable
investments when decision makers seek to maximize equity value is referred to as a problem of
“debt overhang,” because part of the return from a current new investment goes to make existing
debt more valuable.
Myers (1977) suggests a possible solution of short-term debt to the debt overhang problem.
In part, this extends the idea that if all debt matures before the investment opportunity, then the
firm without debt in place can make the investment decision as if an all-equity firm. Hence,
following this logic, debt that matures soon--although after relevant investment decisions, as
opposed to before--should have reduced overhang.
However, short-term debt is known to have several disadvantages. For firms without access
to outside funds to meet debt repayments, short-term debt can lead to early firm closure and
liquidation (e.g., Diamond (1991), Gertner and Scharfstein (1991)). More relevant to our paper,
Gertner and Scharfstein (1991) show that, conditional on ex-post financial distress, making a
fixed promised debt payment due earlier (i.e., shorter-term) raises the market value of the debt
and thus the firm’s market leverage, leading to more debt overhang ex-post. In addition, certain
drawbacks of short-term debt have also been suggested by some quantitative models (Titman and
Tsyplakov (2007), Moyen (2007)) that focus on equity holders’ differential abilities and
incentives to adjust leverage in response to new information given different debt maturity
structures.1
Our paper aims to provide a thorough analysis on the effects of debt maturity on the equity
incentives to undertake both current and future investments, and, more importantly, to identify
the forces that determine overhang. We show why the ideas based on Myer’s suggestion have
merit, and show how and why they can be reversed under different settings. Throughout, we first
illustrate our results via simple examples; these results are then generalized in the context of
standard models used by practitioners and researchers, allowing us to establish their generality
and introduce more complicated issues.
1 For more details, see literature review at the end of the introduction.
2

We stress the importance of the relative timing of investment decisions, debt maturity, and
news about the prospect of the firm’s existing assets (including past investment). In a nutshell,
shorter-term debt--because of earlier repayment and less risk sharing—usually receives less
benefit from an immediate investment, leading to a lower overhang. This is consistent with the
ideas in Myers (1977). However, for firms with future investment opportunities, the future
prospects and value of existing assets fluctuate before investment decisions, and the sharing of
less risk by shorter-term debt implies more volatile equity value and hence more volatile debt
overhang. Shorter-term debt thus imposes stronger overhang especially in bad times, and this
result is related to Gertner and Scharfstein (1991) and Titman and Tsyplakov (2007).
The first setting that we analyze is the one with immediate investment decisions that are
made right after the issuance of the debt but before any new information is released. Extending
the logic of Myers (1977), shorter-term debt would impose less overhang on immediate
investment, and we illustrate this result by simple examples. There, a shorter maturity makes the
debt market value less sensitive to changes in the firm value, and equity holders’ investment
incentives are distorted (downward) exactly by the increased value of claims other than equity.
However, this intuitive idea is incomplete, as we further show that the effect of maturity could
reverse, depending on the timing of investment decisions and the way that uncertainty is resolved
over time (i.e., state-dependent volatility).
Moving from examples to standard model frameworks, Proposition 1 in Section 3 proves that,
holding the debt value and hence the firm’s leverage constant,2 shorter-term debt imposes less
overhang on immediate investment in the classic setting based on Black and Scholes (1973) and
Merton (1974). To our knowledge, this analytical result is new to the literature, and appears to be
the basis for the logic extending Myers (1977).
In the Black-Scholes-Merton setting, the asset volatility is constant. With covariation of
volatility and the value of assets-in-place, especially when the timing of resolution of uncertainty
leads to sufficiently increased remaining uncertainty after bad outcomes, shorter-term debt may
have a stronger overhang even for immediate investment decisions. We show this by an example
in Section 2.5, more formally by adding state dependent volatility to the Black-Scholes-Merton
2 Holding constant the borrower’s leverage has not been stressed in previous studies about the effect of maturity on
debt overhang, e.g., Gertner and Scharfstein (1991).
3