NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES MUTUAL FUND PERFORMANCE VARY OVER THE BUSINESS CYCLE?
André de Souza
Anthony W. Lynch
Working Paper 18137
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18137
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2012
This paper supersedes an earlier paper with the same title, coauthored by Anthony Lynch and Jessica
Wachter, that used the same methodology, but a different mutual fund data set. The earlier paper used
the Elton-Gruber-Blake mutual fund database, while this paper uses the CRSP mutual fund database.
The authors would like to thank Wayne Ferson, Jeff Busse, participants at the 2005 AFA Meeting,
seminar participants at NYU, University of Queensland, Queensland University of Technology, Australian
Graduate School of Business, Melbourne Business School, University of Piraeus, and University of
Toronto for their comments and suggestions on the earlier paper. All remaining errors in this paper
are of course the authors' responsibility. Anthony Lynch wrote parts of the earlier paper while visiting
the University of Queensland, and so he would like to thank the people there for their hospitality. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by André de Souza and Anthony W. Lynch. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Does Mutual Fund Performance Vary over the Business Cycle?
André de Souza and Anthony W. Lynch
NBER Working Paper No. 18137
June 2012, Revised August 2012
JEL No. G11,G23
ABSTRACT
We develop a new methodology that allows conditional performance to be a function of information
available at the start of the performance period but does not make assumptions about the behavior
of the conditional betas. We use econometric techniques developed by Lynch and Wachter (2011)
that use all available factor return, instrument, and mutual fund data, and so allow us to produce more
precise parameter estimates than those obtained from the usual GMM estimation. We use our SDF-based
method to assess the conditional performance of fund styles in the CRSP mutual fund data set, and
are careful to condition only on information available to investors, and to control for any cyclical performance
by the underlying stocks held by the various fund styles. Moskowitz (2000) suggests that mutual funds
may add value by performing well during economic downturns, but we find that not all funds styles
produce counter-cyclical performance when using dividend yield or term spread as the instrument:
instead, many fund styles exhibit pro-cyclical or non-cyclical performance, especially after controlling
for any cyclicality in the performance of the underlying stocks. For many fund styles, conditional performance
switches from counter-cyclical to pro- or non- cyclical depending on the instrument or pricing model
used. Moreover, we find very little evidence of any business cycle variation in conditional performance
for the 4 oldest fund styles (growth and income, growth, maximum capital gains and income) using
dividend yield or term spread as the instrument, despite estimating the cyclicality parameter using
the GMM method of Lynch and Wachter (2011) that produces more precise parameter estimates than
the usual GMM estimation. Our results are important because they call into question the accepted
wisdom and Moskowitz's conjecture that the typical mutual fund improves investor utility by producing
counter-cyclical abnormal performance.
André de Souza
School of Business
Fordham University
1790 Broadway, Suite 1327
New York, NY 10023
adesouza1@fordham.edu
Anthony W. Lynch
New York University
44 W. 4th Street, #9-190
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
alynch@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
Mutual fund performance has long been of interest to financial economists, both because of its
implications for market efficiency, and because of its implications for investors. A key issue in
evaluating performance is the choice of the benchmark model. Recently, the asset pricing literature
has emphasized the distinction between unconditional and conditional asset pricing models.1 The
relative success of conditional models at explaining the cross-section of expected stock returns
raises important questions for the mutual fund researcher. How does one evaluate performance
when the underlying model is conditional? Might performance itself be conditional? In principle,
a conditional model allows both risk loadings and performance over a period to be a function of
informationavailableatthestartoftheperiod. Severalrecentpapersallowriskloadingstobetime-
varying, but they either assume that conditional performance is a constant (Farnsworth, Ferson,
Jackson, Todd, 2002, for mutual funds), conditional betas are linear in the information variables
(Avramov and Wermers, 2006 for mutual funds in a Baysian setting, Christopherson, Ferson and
Glassman, 1998, for pension funds, Ferson and Harvey, 1999, and Avramov and Chordia, 2006 for
stocks) or both (Ferson and Schadt, 1996, for mutual funds,an important early contribution to the
conditional performance literature).2 Moskowitz (2000) suggests that mutual funds may add value
by performing well during economic downturns.
We develop a new methodology that allows conditional performance to be a function of infor-
mation variables available at the start of the period, but without assumptions on the behavior of
the conditional betas.3 This methodology uses the Euler equation restriction that comes out of
a factor model rather than the beta pricing formula itself. It only assumes that the stochastic
discount factor (SDF) parameters are linear in the information variables. While the Euler equa-
tion does not provide direct information about the nature of time variation in the risk loadings, it
can provide direct information about time variation in conditional performance. In contrast, the
classic time-series regression methodology can only provide direct information about time-varying
performance if strong assumptions are made about time-varying betas.
We are careful to condition only on information available to investors at the start of the period,
andtocontrolforanycyclicalperformancebytheunderlyingstocksheldbythevariousfundstyles.
1See, for example, Jagannathan and Wang (1996) and Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b).
2Lynch and Wachter (2007), which is an earlier version of this paper, allows conditional performance to be time-
varying, but uses the Elton, Gruber, Blake (1996) mutual fund database rather than the much more comprehensive
CRSP mutual fund database that we use.
3Independently, Ferson, Henry and Kisgen (2006) developed a similar methodology, but used it to evaluate the
performance of bond funds rather than equity funds which is our focus.
1

One of our main results is that not all funds styles produce counter-cyclical performance when div-
idend yield or term spread is used as the instrument: instead, many fund styles exhibit pro-cyclical
ornon-cyclicalperformance, especiallyaftercontrollingforanycyclicalityintheperformanceofthe
underlying stocks. For many fund styles, conditional performance switches from counter-cyclical
to pro- or non-cyclical depending on the instrument or pricing model used. Moreover, we find very
little evidence of any business cycle variation in conditional performance for the 4 oldest fund styles
(growth and income, growth, maximum capital gains, and income) using dividend yield or term
spread as the instrument, despite using the GMM method of Lynch and Wachter (2011) that uses
all available factor, instrument, and fund return data to estimate the cyclicality parameter. Our
results are important because they call into question the accepted wisdom and Moskowitz’s conjec-
ture that the typical mutual fund improves investor utility by producing counter-cyclical abnormal
performance.
This important conclusion, that the empirical evidence for countercyclical variation in mutual
fund performance is very weak, is well illustrated by the conditional performance results for the
equal-weighted portfolio of all mutual funds in our sample each month.4 We measure the per-
formance of this portfolio’s excess-of-riskfree return conditional on either dividend yield or term
spread, and relative to either the Fama-French or the Cahart pricing model. The portfolio’s condi-
tional performance is only significantly counter-cyclical for one of the four specifications: the one
for which performance conditions on dividend yield and is measured relative to the Fama-French
model. When we use, for each fund, its return in excess of the return on a matched portfolio (one
of the 25 Fama-French size and book-to-market portfolios) to construct a return on the portfolio
in excess of a matched portfolio of underlying stocks, we again find that the only specification with
significant business-cycle variation in performance is the one that uses dividend yield as the instru-
mentandFama-Frenchasthepricingmodel. However, theperformanceissignificantlypro-cyclical,
not countercyclical, which is in stark contrast to the case that uses the portfolio’s excess-of-riskfree
return. Thisresultshowsthatanyevidenceofcountercyclicalvariationinmutualfundperformance
is typically not robust to controlling for business-cycle variation in the conditional alphas of the
underlying stocks held by the funds based on their styles.
Asetoffactorsconstitutesaconditionalbeta-pricingmodeliftheconditionalexpectedreturnon
any asset is linear in the return’s conditional betas with respect to the factors. It is well known (see
Cochrane,2001)thatasetoffactorsconstitutesaconditionalbeta-pricingmodelifandonlyifthere
4These results are unreported, but available from the authors on request.
2