NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TRADE CREDIT AND TAXES
Mihir A. Desai
C. Fritz Foley
James R. Hines Jr.
Working Paper 18107
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18107
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2012
The statistical analysis of firm-level data on U.S. multinational companies was conducted at the Bureau
of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce under arrangements that maintain legal confidentiality
requirements. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not reflect official positions of the
U.S. Department of Commerce. We thank seminar participants at Columbia Law School, Harvard
Law School, Oxford University, the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, the University of
Michigan, the UNC Tax Symposium, and ITPF for helpful comments. Foley and Desai thank the Division
of Research of the Harvard Business School for financial support. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Mihir A. Desai, C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Trade Credit and Taxes
Mihir A. Desai, C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 18107
May 2012
JEL No. F23,G31,G32,H25
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the extent to which firms use trade credit to reallocate capital in response to tax
incentives. Tax-induced differences in pretax returns encourage the use of trade credit to reallocate
capital from firms facing low tax rates to those facing high tax rates. Evidence from the worldwide
operations of U.S. multinational firms indicates that affiliates in low-tax jurisdictions use trade credit
to lend, whereas those in high-tax jurisdictions use trade credit to borrow: ten percent lower local tax
rates are associated with net trade credit positions that are 1.4 percent higher as a fraction of sales.
The use of trade credit to get capital out of low-tax, low-return environments is also illustrated by
reactions of U.S. firms to the temporary repatriation tax holiday in 2005, when affiliates with positive
net trade credit positions were significantly more likely than others to repatriate dividends to parent
companies in the United States.
Mihir A. Desai James R. Hines Jr.
Graduate School of Business Administration Department of Economics
Harvard University University of Michigan
Soldiers Field 343 Lorch Hall
Boston, MA 02163 611 Tappan Street
and NBER Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
mdesai@hbs.edu and NBER
jrhines@umich.edu
C. Fritz Foley
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
ffoley@hbs.edu

(cid:3)
1. Introduction
This paper examines the extent to which taxation influences trade credit practices by
affecting returns to investment. High rates of taxation generally increase the cost of capital,
reducing investment levels and driving up pretax returns. As a result, tax rate differences create
incentives to transfer capital from low-tax, low-capital-cost, low-return users to high-tax, high-
capital-cost, high-return users by delaying or accelerating the payment of trade accounts.
The effects of taxation on the use of trade credit are most readily observed
internationally, where tax rate differences are sizeable and apparent. The empirical work in this
paper uses comprehensive data collected by the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) on the
operations of U.S. multinational firms to examine the extent to which international tax rate
differences account for their trade credit practices. Foreign affiliates of U.S. multinational firms
make extensive use of trade credit: at yearend 2004 these affiliates held current accounts
receivable of $1.49 trillion and had current accounts payable of $1.39 trillion; each of these
exceeded 30 percent of total annual affiliate sales.
The analysis of detailed affiliate-level data suggests that tax effects are large and
statistically significant in explaining trade credit choices. Figure 1 offers descriptive evidence,
drawn from published BEA data, of the extent to which tax incentives may influence the use of
trade credit by multinational affiliates. The figure presents information on the foreign affiliates
of U.S. multinational firms sorted by tax rates in their host foreign countries. The bars depict
average accounts receivable, accounts payable, and net working capital (the difference between
accounts receivable and accounts payable) for affiliates in countries with designated tax rates, all
scaled by affiliate sales. Each bar is the mean of the country aggregate values, by varying levels
of corporate tax rates. The figure shows that accounts receivable and accounts payable, as well
as differences between the two, are greater in low-tax jurisdictions than in high-tax jurisdictions.
The evidence that low tax rates are associated with high net working capital positions is
consistent with incentives to use trade credit to allocate capital to places where it generates high
pretax returns.
The regression analysis presented in section 3 investigates the effects of local tax rates in
specifications that control for observable firm-level factors. Regressions using parent company
fixed effects confirm that affiliates in low-tax countries have larger net working capital positions
1(cid:3)
(cid:3)

(cid:3)
than do other affiliates. The association of tax rate differences and net working capital positions
is strongest for wholly-owned affiliates and for those with high levels of trade with related
parties. These patterns suggest that tax-influenced use of trade credit is most easily facilitated
when borrowers and lenders are controlled by the same firm. Furthermore, the net working
capital positions of affiliates with strong idiosyncratic capital needs, as reflected by unusually
large capital expenditures or little cash on hand, appear to be largely unaffected by local tax
rates.
Responses to recent changes in U.S. international tax policy offer additional evidence of
the use of trade credit to reallocate capital to more productive uses. The 2004 U.S. Homeland
Investment Act provided for a one-time tax holiday in 2005 for repatriated foreign earnings.
Prior to the holiday, U.S. multinational firms with accumulated foreign profits but without
attractive foreign investment opportunities could use trade credit arrangements to reallocate a
certain amount of capital to the United States or another high-tax country. The 2004 Act greatly
lowered the cost of reallocating capital to the United States, albeit only for a single year, by
permitting many firms to pay U.S. tax on only 15 percent of the dividends they received from
foreign affiliates. Among foreign affiliates that prior to 2005 were using trade credit to
reallocate capital elsewhere, the sudden appearance of an attractive new alternative should be
associated with significant dividend repatriations to the United States in 2005.
Figure 2 depicts aggregate dividend payout ratios for two samples of foreign affiliates of
U.S. firms in 2004 and 2005. The left two bars display dividend payout ratios for directly owned
affiliates that had positive net working capital positions in 2004. If these affiliates used working
capital arrangements to reallocate capital to a high-tax location such as the United States prior to
the tax holiday, they should respond to the tax holiday in a more pronounced manner than other
affiliates, whose behavior is described by the two bars on the right. The shaded bars present
aggregate payout ratios for 2004, and the unshaded bars present payout ratios for 2005. The
evidence indicates that those affiliates that were directly owned and had positive net working
capital positions prior to the tax change increased their dividend payout ratios much more than
did other affiliates. This apparent reaction to the tax change is consistent with pre-2005 use of
trade credit to reallocate capital to locations where it earns higher returns, and the emergence in
2005 of a more permanent and cost-effective method of doing so.
2(cid:3)
(cid:3)