NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MONEY DOCTORS
Nicola Gennaioli
Andrei Shleifer
Robert W. Vishny
Working Paper 18174
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18174
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2012
The authors are from CREI and UPF, Harvard University, and University of Chicago, respectively. We
are grateful to Charles Angelucci, Nick Barberis, John Campbell, Roman Inderst, Sendhil Mullainathan,
Lubos Pastor, Raghuram Rajan, Jonathan Reuter, Josh Schwartzstein, Charles-Henri Weymuller, Luigi
Zingales and Yanos Zylberberg for extremely helpful comments.
Disclosure: Shleifer was a co-founder of LSV Asset Management, a money management firm, but
is no longer a shareholder in the firm. Shleifer’s wife is a partner in a hedge fund, Bracebridge Capital.
Vishny was a co-founder of LSV Asset Management. He retains an ownership interest. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Nicola Gennaioli, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Money Doctors
Nicola Gennaioli, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny
NBER Working Paper No. 18174
June 2012
JEL No. G11,G23
ABSTRACT
We present a new model of money management, in which investors delegate portfolio management
to professionals based not only on performance, but also on trust. Trust in the manager reduces an
investor’s perception of the riskiness of a given investment, and allows managers to charge higher
fees to investors who trust them more. Money managers compete for investor funds by setting their
fees, but because of trust the fees do not fall to costs. In the model, 1) managers consistently underperform
the market net of fees but investors still prefer to delegate money management to taking risk on their
own, 2) fees involve sharing of expected returns between managers and investors, with higher fees
in riskier products, 3) managers pander to investors when investors exhibit biases in their beliefs, and
do not correct misperceptions, and 4) despite long run benefits from better performance, the profits
from pandering to trusting investors discourage managers from pursuing contrarian strategies relative
to the case with no trust. We show how trust-mediated money management renders arbitrage less
effective, and may help destabilize financial markets.
Nicola Gennaioli Robert W. Vishny
CREI Booth School of Business
Universitat Pompeu Fabra The University of Chicago
Ramon Trias Fargas 25-27 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
08005 Barcelona (Spain) Chicago, IL 60637
ngennaioli@crei.cat and NBER
Rvishny@gmail.com
Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M-9
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu

1. Introduction
It has been known since Jensen (1968) that professional money managers underperform
passive investment strategies net of fees. Gruber (1996) estimates average mutual fund
underperformance of 65 basis points per year; French (2008) updates this to 67 basis points per
year. Even such poor performance of mutual funds is only the tip of the iceberg. Many
investors pay substantial fees to brokers and investment advisors, who then direct them toward
the mutual funds that underperform (Bergstresser et al. 2009, Chalmers and Reuter 2012, Del
Guercio, Reuter and Tkac 2010, Hacketal, Haliasos, and Japelli 2011). Once all fees are taken
into account, some studies find 2 percent investor underperformance relative to indexation2.
This evidence is difficult to reconcile with the view that investors are comfortable investing in a
low fee index fund on their own, but nonetheless seek active managers to improve performance.
In fact, performance seems to be only part of what money managers seek to deliver.
Many leading investment managers and nearly all registered investment advisors advertise their
services based not on past performance but on trust, experience, and dependability
(Mullainathan et al. 2008). Some studies of mutual funds note that investors hiring advisors
must be obtaining some “intangible benefits” or “babysitting”. In this paper, we take this
perspective seriously, and propose an alternative view of money management, based on the idea
that investors do not know much about finance, are too nervous or anxious to take risk on their
own, and hence hire money managers and advisors to help them invest. Managers may have
skills such as knowledge how to diversify or even ability to earn an alpha, but in addition they
provide investors with peace of mind. Just as most patients needing care visit a doctor they
trust, investors hire managers they trust to help them make risky investments. We focus on
individual investors, but similar issues apply to institutional investors (Lakonishok et al. 1992).
2 Berk and Green (2004) argue that low net of fee alphas result from competition among investors for
access to more skilled managers, who charge higher fees. This theory is challenging to reconcile with
negative average after-fee performance, with large fees many investors pay to brokers and advisors who
help choose funds, and with the evidently negative relationship between fees and gross-of-fees
performance (e.g., Gil-Bazo and Ruiz-Verdu 2009).
2

Critically, we do not think of trust as deriving from past performance. Rather, trust
describes confidence in the manager, based on personal relationships, familiarity, persuasive
advertising, connections to friends and colleagues, communication and schmoozing. There are
(at least) two distinct aspects of such confidence and trust. The first, stressed by Guiso,
Sapienza, and Zingales (2004, 2008) and Georgarakos and Inderst (2011), sees trust as security
from expropriation or theft. Another aspect of trust, emphasized here, has to do with reducing
investor anxiety about taking risk. With US securities laws, most investors in mutual funds
probably do not fear that their money will be stolen; rather, they want to be “in good hands.”
We think of money doctors as families of mutual funds, registered investment advisors,
financial planners, brokers, bank trust departments, and others who give investors confidence to
take risks. Some investors surely do not need advice, and invest on their own, although
research by Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini (2007) suggests that many such investors do not
diversify properly. But many other investors, ranging from relatively poor employees asked to
allocate their defined contribution pension plans (Chalmers and Reuter 2012) to millionaires
hiring “wealth managers,” rely on experts to help them take risk. And just as doctors guide
patients toward treatment, and are trusted by patients even when providing routine advice
identical to that of other doctors, in our model money doctors help investors take risk and are
trusted to do so even when their advice is costly, generic, and occasionally self-serving.
We present a model of the money management industry in which the allocation of assets
to managers is mediated by trust. We model trust as reducing the utility cost for the investor of
taking risk, much as if lower anxiety reduces the investors‟ subjective perception of the risk of
investments. Managers differ in how much different investors trust them: an investor who trusts
a manager a lot perceives risky investments guided by this manager as substantially less risky.
This simple formulation has significant implications. Other things equal, an investor would
prefer to make a given investment with the manager he trusts most, enabling this manager to
charge the investor a higher fee and still keep him. Even if managers compete on fees, these
fees do not fall to cost, and substantial market segmentation remains. In fact, in our model fees
3