NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANKRUPTCY AS IMPLICIT HEALTH INSURANCE
Neale Mahoney
Working Paper 18105
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18105
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2012
I thank my advisers Liran Einav, Caroline Hoxby, and Jonathan Levin for their guidance and support.
I am grateful to Didem Bernard and Ray Kuntz at AHRQ for help with the restricted access MEPS
data, Richard Hynes for sharing data on asset exemptions, and Amanda Kowalski for sharing data
on insurance market regulations. I thank Martin Anderson, Marika Cabral, Amy Finkelstein, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham,
Tal Gross, Kathy Swartz, Alessandra Voena, Gui Woolston, and numerous seminar participants for
their comments. Financial support from a Kapnick Fellowship, Ric Weiland Fellowship, and Shultz
Fellowship is gratefully acknowledged. All errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Neale Mahoney. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Bankruptcy as Implicit Health Insurance
Neale Mahoney
NBER Working Paper No. 18105
May 2012
JEL No. H51,I13,K35
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the implicit health insurance households receive from the ability to declare bankruptcy.
Exploiting cross-state and within-state variation in asset exemption law, I show that uninsured households
with greater seizable assets make higher out-of-pocket medical payments, conditional on the amount
of care received. In turn, I find that households with greater wealth-at-risk are more likely to hold health
insurance. The implicit insurance from bankruptcy distorts the insurance coverage decision. Using
a microsimulation model, I calculate that the optimal Pigovian penalties are similar on average to the
penalties under the Affordable Care Act (ACA).
Neale Mahoney
RWJF Scholar in Health Policy Research
1730 Cambridge Street, S410
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
neale.mahoney@gmail.com

1 Introduction
A large literature evaluates the effects of government policy on health insurance coverage.1 The
question of why so many U.S. households are uninsured is less well understood.2 To better un-
derstand the insurance coverage decision, this paper examines a mechanism that has received
little attention but may be important to households on the margin of insurance choice: implicit
insurancefromtheabilitytodeclarebankruptcy.
Theimplicitinsurancefrombankruptcyarisesfromtheconfluenceofthreefactors. First,due
tofederallaw,hospitalsarerequiredtoprovideemergencytreatmentoncredit—andinmostcases
providenonemergencycarewithoutanupfrontpaymentaswell. Second,underChapter7ofthe
U.S.bankruptcycode,householdscandischargemedicaldebt,givingupassetsaboveexemption
limits in return.3 Third, because of the deadweight cost of the bankruptcy process, households
andcreditorshavehaveincentivestoreachnegotiatedagreementsthatavoidformalbankruptcy
filings.
Bankruptcy,asaresult,provideshouseholdswithaformofhigh-deductiblehealthinsurance.
Households are exposed to the financial risk from medical shocks up to the level of assets that
can be seized in bankruptcy and insured against financial risk above this level. This implicit
insurance affects the demand for health insurance. For households with lower levels of seizable
assets, bankruptcy insurance may crowd out conventional coverage. Health insurance is wealth
insurance,toacertaindegree,andislessvaluabletothosewithfewerassets.
The main objective of this paper is to assess the quantitative importance of this mechanism.
Hospitals have complex objective functions that may only place partial weight on profits. They
may choose to provide charity care even when unconstrained by the threat point of bankruptcy.
Householdsmayviewbankruptcyinsuranceasanincompletesourceofcoverage,bettersuitedto
acutehealthshocksthanongoingchronicconditions. Theymayworryaboutothercosts—suchas
reducedaccesstothecreditmarkets—fromusingthismechanism.
1SeeGruberandSimon(2008)forareviewofthetake-upandcrowd-outeffectsofpublicinsuranceexpansions.See
Gruber(2005)forareviewoftheimpactoftaxsubsidiesontheemployerprovisionofinsurance. SeeLiuandChollet
(2006)forareviewoftheeffectsoftaxpolicyoninsurancetake-upinthenongroupmarket.
2InareviewoftheliteratureGruber(2008)concludes,“Thereareavarietyofhypothesesforwhysomanyindivid-
ualsareuninsured,butnoclearsensethatthissetofexplanationscanaccountforthe47millionindividuals.”
3The Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act (BAPCPA) of 2005 was implemented after the
periodIanalyze. ItpreventshouseholdswithmorethanthestatemedianincomefromfilingunderChapter7inmost
circumstances.Thehouseholdsmostaffectedbythereformareunlikelytobeonthemarginofinsurancechoice.
1

Iassesstheeconomicsignificanceoftheimplicitinsurancefrombankruptcywithtwosetsof
empirical analysis. First, I examine how out-of-pocket costs paid by the uninsured are affected
by the assets these households would give up in bankruptcy. Second, I examine how insurance
coverageisaffectedbyahousehold’sseizableassets.
Anumberofunobservedfactorsmakeidentifyingtheimpactofbankruptcyanempiricalchal-
lenge. I address these issues by isolating cross-state and within-state variation in the state-level
asset exemption laws that specify the type and level of assets that can be seized in bankruptcy.
These laws vary considerably. Kansas, for example, allows households to exempt an unlimited
amountofhomeequityandupto$40,000invehicleequity. NeighboringNebraskaallowshouse-
holdstokeepnomorethan$12,500inhomeequityortakea$5,000wildcardexemptionthatcan
beusedforanytypeofasset.
I create simulated instrumental variables (Currie and Gruber, 1996) to isolate different types
of variation in these laws. I construct a cross-state instrument by calculating the mean level of
seizableassetsforaconstant,nationallyrepresentativesampleofhouseholdsasthoughtheylived
ineachstate. ThisprovideswhatCurrieandGruber(1996)calla“convenientparameterization”of
thegenerosityofeachstate’sassetexemptionlaws,purgedofvariationduetothecharacteristics
ofeachstate’sactualresidents.
I construct a within-state simulated instrument by partitioning the constant, nationally rep-
resentative sample into demographic groups based on plausibly exogenous household charac-
teristics.4 The mean level of seizable assets for each demographic group in each state captures
within-state heterogeneity in how asset exemption laws interact with cross-group variation in
wealth.5 WhenIincludecontrolsfordemographicgroupsandstatefixedeffects, thisinstrument
isolates within-state variation in asset exemption law, addressing concerns that the results might
be driven by unobserved state-level factors. My preferred instrument combines both the cross-
stateandwithin-statevariationinwhatItermapooledsimulatedinstrument.
Using these sources of variation and cost data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey
4Thesegroupsaredefinedbythefullinteractionofagegroup,race,familystructure,andeducationlevel.
5Amongstateswiththesameaveragelevelofassetexemptiongenerosity,stateswithrelativelylargervehicleand
wildcardexemptions(andrelativelysmallerhomesteadexemptions)aremoregeneroustodemographicgroupswith
alargershareofwealthintheseassets(andalowershareofhomeequity). Inparticular,theslopeoftherelationship
betweenwealthandseizableassetsissteeperinstateswithrelativelymoregenerousvehicleandwildcardexemptions
(andrelativelysmallerhomesteadexemptions)aslow-wealthdemographicgroupshavealargeshareofassetsinthese
categories.
2