NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MEASURING MANAGERIAL SKILL IN THE MUTUAL FUND INDUSTRY
Jonathan B. Berk
Jules H. van Binsbergen
Working Paper 18184
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18184
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2012
We could not have conducted this research without the help of the following research assistants for
which we are grateful: Ashraf El Gamal, Maxine Holland, Christine Kang, Fon Kulalert, Ian Linford,
Binying Liu, Jin Ngai, Michael Nolop, William Vijverberg and Christina Zhu. We thank George Chacko,
Rick Green, Ralph Koijen, David Musto, Paul Pfleiderer, Anamaria Pieschacon, Robert Stambaugh
and seminar participants at Robeco, Stockholm School of Economics, Stanford, University of Chicago,
University of Toronto, Vanderbilt, Wharton, the NBER summer institute, and the Stanford Berkeley
joint seminar for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Jonathan B. Berk and Jules H. van Binsbergen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Measuring Managerial Skill in the Mutual Fund Industry
Jonathan B. Berk and Jules H. van Binsbergen
NBER Working Paper No. 18184
June 2012, Revised August 2012
JEL No. G11,G2,G20,G23
ABSTRACT
Using the dollar-value a mutual fund manager adds as the measure of skill, we find that not only does
skill exist (the average mutual fund manager adds about $2 million per year), but this skill is persistent,
as far out as 10 years. We further document that investors recognize this skill and reward it by investing
more capital with skilled managers. Higher skilled managers are paid more and there is a strong positive
correlation between current managerial compensation and future performance.
Jonathan B. Berk
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
518 Memorial Way
Stanford CA 94305-5015
and NBER
jonathan.b.berk@gmail.com
Jules H. van Binsbergen
Kellogg Graduate School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60201
and Stanford University
and also NBER
j-vanbinsbergen@kellogg.northwestern.edu

An important principle of economics is that agents earn economic rents if and only if they
have a skill in short supply. As central as this principle is to microeconomics, surprisingly
little empirical work has addressed the question of whether or not talent is actually rewarded,
or, perhaps more interestingly, whether people without talent can earn rents. One notable
exception is the research on mutual fund managers. There, an extensive literature in financial
economicshasbeenamassedthathasfocusedonthequestionofwhetherstockpickingormarket
timing talent exists. The overall conclusion of that literature is that it does not. Considering
that mutual fund managers are amongst the highest paid members of society, this conclusion
appears to represent a challenge to the economic principle relating skill to rents. It implies that
it is possible to make economic rents without possessing a skill in short supply.
Given the importance of the question, the objective of this paper is to re-examine whether
or not mutual fund managers do earn economic rents without possessing skill. In contrast to
the existing literature, we find that the average mutual fund manager uses his talents to add
about $2 million a year. As to be expected, this skill is persistent. We show that it is possible
to predict long-term outperformance as far out as 10 years into the future. We find that the
distribution of managerial talent is consistent with the predictions of Lucas (1978) — higher
skilled managers manage larger funds and reap higher rewards. One of our most surprising
results is that investors appear to be able identify talent and compensate it. We demonstrate
that there is a tight relationship between compensation and value added. In addition, current
compensation predicts future performance.
Our methodology for measuring the value managers add differs from prior work in a number
ofimportantrespects. Firstweuseallactivelymanagedmutualfundstherebygreatlyincreasing
thepowerofourtests. Priorworkhasusedshortertimeperiodsandfocusedattentionexclusively
on funds that hold only U.S. stocks. Second, we use a tradable benchmark to evaluate managers
— all available Vanguard index funds (including balanced funds and funds that hold non-U.S.
stocks). Priorworkhasusedbenchmarksthatnotonlyarenottraded(andsoignoretransactions
costs) but were also not necessarily known or marketed at the time.
Finally, most prior studies use the net alpha to investors, i.e., the average abnormal return
net of fees and expenses, as the measure of managerial skill. However, as Berk and Green
(2004) argue, if managerial skill is in short supply, the net return is determined in equilibrium
by competition between investors, and not by the skill of managers. One might hypothesize,
based on this insight, that the gross alpha (the average abnormal return before fees) would be
the correct measure of managerial skill, but this hypothesis is also flawed. The gross alpha is a
return measure, not a value measure. That is, a manager who adds a gross alpha of 1% on a $10
billionfundaddsmorevaluethanamanagerwhoaddsagrossalphaof10%ona$1millionfund.
Thus the correct measure of managerial skill is the expected value the manager adds, i.e., the
product of the manager’s abnormal return (his return before fees minus the benchmark return)
1

and assets under management. This measure consists of two pieces: the amount of money the
manager takes home for himself (his fee multiplied by the assets-under-management) plus the
amounthetakesfromorgivestoinvestors(theoveralldollarunder-orover-performancerelative
to the benchmark).
The primary objective of this paper is to measure the skill of mutual fund managers. Our
perspectiveisthereforedifferentfrommostpapersinthemutualfundliteraturethatareprimar-
ily concerned with the abnormal return investors earn in the fund. However we do provide new
insight on that question as well. Once we evaluate managers against a tradable benchmark we
no longer find evidence of underperformance. Over the time period in our sample, the equally
weighted net alpha is 3 b.p./month and the value weighted net alpha is -1 b.p./month. Neither
estimate is statistically significantly different from zero.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section we briefly review the
literature. In Section 2 we derive our measure of skill and in the following section explain how
we estimate it. We describe the data in Section 4. Section 5 demonstrates that skill exists.
We then analyze how this skill is rewarded in Section 6. Section 7 investigates what portion
of managerial skill is attributable to diversification services rather than other sources such as
stock picking or market timing and the following section shows the importance of using the full
sample of active funds rather than the subset most researchers have used in the past. Section 9
concludes the paper.
1 Background
Theideathatactivemutualfundmanagerslackskillhasitsrootsintheveryearlydaysofmodern
financial economics (Jensen (1968)). Indeed, the original papers that introduced the Efficient
Market Hypothesis (Fama (1965, 1970)) cite the evidence that, as a group, investors in active
mutual funds underperform the market, and, more importantly, mutual fund performance is
unpredictable. Although an extensive review of this literature is beyond the scope of this paper,
theconclusionoftheliteratureisthat, asinvestmentvehicles, activefundsunderperformpassive
ones, and, on average, mutual fund returns before fees show no evidence of outperformance. As
we have already mentioned, this evidence is taken to imply that active managers do not have
the skills required to beat the market, and so in Burton Malkiel’s words: the “study of mutual
funds does not provide any reason to abandon a belief that securities markets are remarkably
efficient.” (Malkiel, 1995, p. 571)
In a recent paper on the subject, Fama and French (2010) re-examine the evidence and
conclude that the average manager lacks skill. They do find some evidence of talent in the
upper tail of the distribution of managers. However based on their estimate of skill (gross
alpha) they conclude that this skill is economically small. In this paper we argue that the
2