NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MULTINATIONALS AND THE HIGH CASH HOLDINGS PUZZLE
Lee Pinkowitz
René M. Stulz
Rohan Williamson
Working Paper 18120
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18120
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2012
Respectively, Associate Professor, Georgetown University, Professor of Finance, Everett D. Reese(cid:3)Chair
of Banking and Monetary Economics, Ohio State University, and Professor of Finance, Georgetown
University. We are grateful for comments from seminars at Georgetown University and at the Ohio
State University and to Adam Davidson and Jason Sturgess for useful conversations. We thank Yeejin
Jang, Robert Prilmeier, and Matt Wynter for helpful research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Lee Pinkowitz, René M. Stulz, and Rohan Williamson. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Multinationals and the High Cash Holdings Puzzle
Lee Pinkowitz, René M. Stulz, and Rohan Williamson
NBER Working Paper No. 18120
June 2012
JEL No. F23,G32
ABSTRACT
Defining as normal cash holdings the holdings a firm with the same characteristics would have had
in the late 1990s, we find that the abnormal cash holdings of U.S. firms after the crisis represent on
average 1.86% of assets. While U.S. firms held less cash than comparable foreign firms in the late
1990s, by 2010 they hold more. However, only U.S. multinational firms experience an increase in
abnormal cash holdings during the 2000s. U.S. multinational firms had cash holdings similar to those
of purely domestic firms in the late 1990s, but they hold over 3% more assets in cash than comparable
purely domestic firms after the crisis. Further, U.S. multinationals increased their cash holdings since
the late 1990s relative to foreign multinationals by roughly the same percentage as they increased their
cash holdings relative to U.S. domestic firms. A detailed analysis shows that the increase in cash holdings
of multinational firms cannot be explained by the tax treatment of profit repatriations, that it is intrinsically
linked to their R&D intensity, and that firms that become multinational do not increase their abnormal
cash holdings after they become multinational. There is no evidence that poor investment opportunities,
regulation, or poor governance can explain the abnormal cash holdings of U.S. firms after the crisis.
Lee Pinkowitz Rohan Williamson
Georgetown University Georgetown University
260 Hariri Building Finance Group
Washington, DC 20057 McDonough School of Business
lfp@georgetown.edu 587 Hariri Building
Washington, DC 20057
René M. Stulz WILLIARG@georgetown.edu
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz_1@cob.osu.edu

1. Introduction
Since the financial crisis, considerable attention has been paid to the apparently record high cash
holdings of American firms. A common view is that companies have been hoarding cash while shying
“away from investing for the future.”1 As one headline puts it, “Firms have record $800 billion of cash
but still won’t hire.”2 The high cash holdings have been attributed to many factors, but many observers
have argued that firms do not invest and accumulate cash because of a poor regulatory climate and
excessive uncertainty. An article states, for instance, that “Companies are hoarding a record amount of
cash as fears of another Lehman-like credit crisis, weak demand and a lack of incentives from the Obama
Administration cause chief executives to choose a negative real return on their money over hiring workers
or building a new plant.”3 Another explanation frequently mentioned for the high cash holdings of
American firms is that repatriation of cash held abroad by multinationals has adverse tax consequences,
so that it is advantageous to keep their profits abroad in the form of cash. For instance, an article in the
New York Times noting the increase in cash holdings of multinationals states that “Tax policy is driving
much of this trend.”4
In this paper, we investigate whether the cash holdings of American companies are abnormally high
after the financial crisis and whether these cash holdings can be explained by the theories summarized in
the previous paragraph. We show that the extent to which cash holdings are unusually high after the crisis
depends critically on the measure used. We would expect larger firms to hold more cash. Since corporate
assets tend to grow over time, the dollar amount of cash holdings would grow even if the ratio of cash to
assets stays constant. Consequently, at the very least, cash holdings should be measured relative to a
firm’s assets. Using all non-financial and non-regulated public firms with assets and market capitalization
greater than $5 million per year, the average cash/assets ratio is 20.18% in 2009-2010 compared to
20.50% in the 2004-2006 pre-crisis period. However, when we consider the median ratio, it is higher by
1 “What is business waiting for?” by Joe Nocera, The New York times, August 15, 2011.
2 “Firms have record $800 billion of cash but still won’t hire,” by John Melloy, CNBC, June 22, 2011.
3 Ibid.
4 “Bringing cash piles back home,” by Steven M. Davidoff, The New York Times, AugU.S.t 17, 2011.
1

0.87% in 2009-2010 than in 2004-2006. Similarly, the asset-weighted ratio is higher by 0.74% in the
recent period. The larger increase in the asset-weighted ratio than in the equally-weighted ratio suggests
that large firms increased their holdings more and we show that this is the case. However, the changes in
cash holdings from 2004-2006 to 2009-2010 are dwarfed by the changes in cash holdings from 1998-
2000 to 2004-2006. Over that latter period, the average cash/assets ratio increases by 3.77%, the median
by 6.39%, and the asset-weighted average by 3.62%. When we distinguish between private and public
firms, we show that there is no evidence of an increase in the cash/assets ratio for private firms.
Having established that cash holdings are much higher during the 2000s than in the late 1990s, and
higher after the crisis than before for some measures, we investigate whether this increase in cash
holdings is a U.S. phenomenon or a worldwide phenomenon. Cash/assets ratios increase across the world
in the 2000s compared to the late 1990s. However, the increase in average cash holdings across the world
is smaller than the increase in average cash holdings in the U.S. A striking result is that median cash
holdings in the US in the late 1990s are lower than median cash holdings in foreign countries, but the
opposite is true by 2010. As for U.S. firms, there is little evidence of an increase in average cash holdings
from the pre-crisis period to the post-crisis period for foreign firms.
While univariate statistics of the cash/assets ratio are useful to understand how cash holdings have
changed over time and differ across countries, they are of little help in assessing whether the cash
holdings are somehow abnormal or unusual. There is a vast literature that explains that cash holdings are
related to firm characteristics. Among other results, this literature shows that firms with more growth
opportunities hold more cash, firms with more uncertain prospects hold more cash, and firms with higher
capital expenditures hold less cash.5 Over time, firms drop out or enter the sample, the characteristics of
firms that stay in the sample can change, and macroeconomic conditions evolve. As a result, comparisons
of cash holdings that do not take into account firm characteristics may be comparisons across firm
populations with different characteristics, so that it is possible that cash holdings have changed simply
because firm characteristics have changed. If this were the case, there might be nothing abnormal about
5 See, for instance, Opler, Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (1999).
2