NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE DEMAND OF LIQUID ASSETS WITH UNCERTAIN LUMPY EXPENDITURES
Fernando Alvarez
Francesco Lippi
Working Paper 18152
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18152
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2012
We thank David Andolfatto, Avner Bar-Ilan, Cyril Monnet, and Julio Rotemberg for their comments.
Alvarez thanks the Templeton foundation for financial support. We are grateful to Helmut Stix for
kindly providing us with the Austrian data, and to Luigi Guiso and Unicredit Bank for giving us access
to the Italian investors’ data. An earlier version of this paper circulated under the title “The demand
for currency with uncertain lumpy purchases”. See Alvarez personal webpage for full disclosure of
sources of finding and relevant financial relationships. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18152.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Fernando Alvarez and Francesco Lippi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Demand of Liquid Assets with Uncertain Lumpy Expenditures
Fernando Alvarez and Francesco Lippi
NBER Working Paper No. 18152
June 2012
JEL No. E41
ABSTRACT
We consider an inventory model for a liquid asset where the per-period net expenditures have two
components: one that is frequent and small and another that is infrequent and large. We give a theoretical
characterization of the optimal management of liquid asset as well as of the implied observable statistics.
We use our characterization to interpret some aspects of households’ currency management in Austria,
as well as the management of demand deposits by a large sample of Italian investors.
Fernando Alvarez
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
f-alvarez1@uchicago.edu
Francesco Lippi
University of Sassari
Department of Economics
and EIEF
via Sallustiana, 62
00184 Rome - Italy
and CEPR
flippi@uniss.it

1 Introduction
This paper studies some implications of uncertain lumpy purchases for the management of
liquid assets in the context of inventory theoretical models. By lumpy purchases we mean
large-sized expenditures that must be paid with a liquid asset. The paper accomplishes
three objectives. First, it shows that some of the theoretical predictions of this problem are
in stark contrast compared to those of canonical inventory models. In particular, a novel
feature introduced by the lumpy purchases is the possibility that liquidity gets withdrawn
and spent immediately. This feature changes the relationship between the size of liquidity
withdrawals and the average liquidity holdings compared to canonical models. Equivalently,
this affects the relationship between the average cash holdings and its “scale variable”, e.g.
the average expenditures in a period. Second, our analysis of the optimal policy breaks
some new ground on the mathematical analysis of inventory models, as the solution of the
model with jumps turns out to be non-trivial. For instance, we show that the standard
boundary conditions used to characterize the optimal policy are necessary but not sufficient,
for an optimum. Third, the paper brings new evidence to bear on the model predictions
concerning households’ liquidity management. We use two novel datasets of Austrian and
Italian households to summarize the main patterns in the data concerning the management
of currency and of broader liquid assets. We show that our model can explain some empirical
regularities that traditional models cannot account for. Although this paper focuses on
households, mostly because of data availability, our model has clear implications for the
management of liquid assets by firms, and reserve management by banks, which we discuss
in the concluding section.
The standard inventory model solves the problem of an agent trading off the holding cost
of an inventory with the cost of adjusting the inventory. In simple models the inventories
are assumed to be needed to finance an exogenous consumption flow (for households), or net
sales (for firms). These models are typically set up in continuous time and the uncontrolled
dynamics ofinventories isdescribed by aprocesswithcontinuous paths. Theclassic examples
1

of this setup when applied to households are Baumol (1952), Tobin (1956), where the process
describes the household’s consumption that needs to be paid with currency. When applied
to firms, as in Miller and Orr (1966), the process is the firm’s net cash revenue. In this case
one of the inventory cost is given by the low return the liquid asset. This paper studies the
implications for cash-management of having lumpy uncertain purchases: thus we explore the
consequences of departing from the assumption that net cash consumption has continuous
paths, allowing the unregulated inventories to follow a jump process.
The ideas in this paper can be sketched in the context of a simple model. Suppose that
in each period the agent must finance a consumption in cash of size c per unit of time and
also that with a probability κ per unit of time the agent must make a cash payment of
size z. In this case the expected consumption to be financed with cash is e = c + κz per
unit of time. One strategy for the agent is to withdraw enough money so that, at least if
this happens soon after the time of the withdrawal, all payments can be financed with the
cash at hand. This strategy has the advantage of saving on the adjustment cost, but it
has the disadvantage of incurring a holding cost on the inventory of cash. The inventory
cost increases with the purchase size z, since the agent has to withdraw more money. An
alternative strategy is to withdraw money when the purchase z happens. This strategy saves
in holding cost, since the agent spends the money right away, but it involves paying the
adjustment cost more frequently. This strategy is preferred when the probability κ is small.
Thus, as the size of the large purchases z increases, and/or as they become infrequent (κ
small), the optimal policy is to withdraw every time the large purchase occurs. In this simple
extreme case the expected value of large purchases κz has no effect on the average cash
holdings. The size of the withdrawal, when triggered by a large purchase, increases by the
amount of this purchase, and an amount z of cash is spent immediately. These results, in
some sense, turn the logic of the classical model up-side down: cash is not spent slowly and
adjustment is not triggered by the crossing of some sS bands. Instead, it is the arrival of the
large purchase that triggers an adjustment and a simultaneous withdrawal and large use of
2