NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE PRICE THEORY OF MONEY, PROSPERO'S LIQUIDITY TRAP, AND SUDDEN STOP:
BACK TO BASICS AND BACK
Guillermo A. Calvo
Working Paper 18285
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18285
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012
I wish to express my gratitude to Fernando Alvarez, Sara Calvo, Fabrizio Coricelli, Maurice Obstfeld,
Pablo Ottonello, Juan Carlos de Pablo, Carmen Reinhart, and Aaron Tornell for useful and incisive
comments. I would also like to thank Heriberto Tapia for skillful research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Guillermo A. Calvo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Price Theory of Money, Prospero's Liquidity Trap, and Sudden Stop: Back to Basics and
Back
Guillermo A. Calvo
NBER Working Paper No. 18285
August 2012
JEL No. E31,E41,E44,E58,F31,F41,F42
ABSTRACT
Fiat money contains the seeds of its own destruction. It has no intrinsic value and, yet, it can be exchanged
for valuable consumption and production goods. As Hahn (1965) shows, this situation puts fiat money's
market value or liquidity premium at the brink of collapse. In this paper I will argue that (1) sticky
prices, especially when staggered, provide output backing to fiat money, helping to sustain fiat money's
liquidity premium and, thus, lowering the risk of a liquidity meltdown. I call this view the Price Theory
of Money; (2) fixed-income assets linked to fiat money, especially if they are perceived to have low
counter-party risk (like US Treasury bills, AAA bonds or Asset-Backed Securities) can take advantage
of point (1) to become quasi-moneys; (3) this gives incentives to the private sector to create those assets;
(4) however, unless protected by a Lender of Last Resort, the new assets' liquidity premium can quickly
and massively evaporate in what I call (with a wink to the Bard) a Prospero's Liquidity Trap; (5) the
latter lowers the market value of loan collateral and clogs the credit channel, bringing about a credit
event or Sudden Stop, with severe output and employment consequences.
Guillermo A. Calvo
Columbia University
School of International and Public Affairs
420 West 118th St, Room 1303B
MC3332
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
gc2286@columbia.edu

"[...] the fact that contracts are fixed, and wages are usually somewhat stable
in terms of money, unquestionably plays a large part in attracting to money so
high a liquidity-premium" Keynes (1961, Chapter 17, p. 236)
I. Introduction
The subprime crisis shattered old certainties, and is prompting economists to revise the notions
of money and liquidity that were taken for granted. The crisis has brought those issues to the
fore only to make us aware of our astounding ignorance. Monetary theory, for instance,
succeeded in obliterating money from its elegant models (for a discussion see Calvo (2011 b)).
Fortunately, the situation is improving noticeably thanks to a veritable flood of new papers that
attempt to bridge the gap between macro and finance – a task that requires taking more
explicit account of financial issues in macro models, but also requires that finance theory
incorporates principal-agent problems of the sort that became apparent in the course of the
present crisis.1
These notes collect some of my thoughts on these issues. Initially, it was an attempt at compte
rendu, but as the text evolved I realized that the pieces of a puzzle generated by a rich literature
on monetary economics – especially material which is relevant for understanding the current
crisis – did not blend with each other in a smooth and faultless fashion. I found some gaps in
the literature that raised long forgotten or simply disregarded questions, which, when taken
into account, shed new light on topical theoretical and policy issues. That is why the subtitle to
the paper starts with the phrase "back to basics." However, if that was the point of destination
of these notes, they would be of interest to other monks that spend their waking hours splitting
hairs, but hardly anyone else. Fortunately, it turns out that a return from the center of the
earth, still blinded by the bright colors, one can make out patterns that are too vague for the
eye accustomed to the lively and colorful prairie. The current events can be seen under a new
perspective, potentially pregnant with new insights – that is why the subtitle ends with the
words "and back."
The general design of the paper is such that current events are the main motivation and pop up
along the text, but instead of exploring every nook and cranny served to us by those events, I
will attempt to keep the analysis tightly linked to the "basics" in the hope that this will
eventually help us to see the layout of the forest in high definition. But, to ensure that the
1 An avowedly partial list would include Allen (2011), Fostel and Geanakoplos (2012), Shin (2010 and 2012), Stein
(2012), Calvo (2005).

analysis does not lose touch with reality, I will occasionally employ the intuitions gathered
underground to address some relevant and/or topical policy issues.
Money and liquidity are concepts that cannot be ignored in any credible narrative of current
events. In fact, the intuition that set me off this route is that money and liquidity are
fundamental for sustaining a modern and increasingly globalized economy, but their own
grounds – their fundamentals if you wish – are extremely flaky. If we continue treating money
and liquidity as if they were regular "goods," we run the risk of repeating the same mistakes
that led us to the current crisis. Thus, I will start by discussing a basic question that has
bedeviled economists for many years and that, perhaps out of frustration, the profession tends
to ignore, namely, What makes money valuable in terms of output? A satisfactory answer to
this question must precede any serious attempt to explain financial crisis that exhibits a major
liquidity component.
Hahn (1965) threw a wrench into monetary theory by showing that, if you take your theory
seriously, a barter equilibrium cannot be easily ruled out. In this paper I argue that standard
answers to the riddle leave a lot to be desired, and put forward a conjecture that has strong
support in price-setting mechanisms in modern economies (especially in retailing and labor
markets). I am referring, in particular, to nominal price/wage stickiness. Under nominal
stickiness suppliers broadcast, far and wide, their willingness to take fiat money in exchange for
the wares and services they own. Moreover, they reaffirm their willingness to do so over
extended stretches of time (consider labor contracts in non-inflationary economies, for
example). I will christen this approach the Price Theory of Money (PTM). 2
No doubt, government support in the form of legal-tender regulations and requirements to
defray taxes in fiat money, provide further anchors, but price-setting validates the output worth
of fiat money over the whole expanse of the market, and on a regular, even boring, basis. This
leads me to surmise that price/wage stickiness can do the job even though government's
buttressing is completely absent. True, a full rationale for this conjecture should be able to
identify the factors behind that peculiar way of posting prices and wages. We are still not there
yet, which forces the analysis to take price-setting mechanisms as axioms, determined outside
the model. However, a strong appeal of the PTM is that price/wage stickiness has a strong
empirical support and, perhaps more to the point, that the conventional approach in monetary
theory also relies on assumptions that are ad-hoc in the context of the standard general
equilibrium model (which is grounded on utility and production functions), and that, as shown
in Hahn (1965), the conventional approach is seriously incomplete. Price stickiness, blamed by
2 A germ of this approach can be found in the General Theory. See quotation at the outset.
1