NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LEGISLATING STOCK PRICES
Lauren Cohen
Karl B. Diether
Christopher Malloy
Working Paper 18291
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18291
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012
We would like to thank Yakov Amihud, Jonathan Berk, Simon Gervais, Roni Michaely, Daniel Paravisini,
Andrei Shleifer, Clemens Sialm, Pietro Veronesi, and seminar participants at Jane Street Capital, the
IDC Conference in Herzliya, and the Western Finance Association (WFA) meeting in Las Vegas for
helpful comments and suggestions. We are grateful for funding from the National Science Foundation.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Lauren Cohen, Karl B. Diether, and Christopher Malloy. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Legislating Stock Prices
Lauren Cohen, Karl B. Diether, and Christopher Malloy
NBER Working Paper No. 18291
August 2012
JEL No. G02,G12,G14
ABSTRACT
In this paper we demonstrate that legislation has a simple, yet previously undetected impact on firm
stock prices. While it is understood that the government and firms have an important relationship,
it remains difficult to determine which firms any given piece of legislation will affect, and how it will
affect them. By observing the actions of legislators whose constituents are the affected firms, we can
gather insights into the likely impact of government legislation on firms. Specifically, focusing attention
on “interested” legislators’ behavior captures important information seemingly ignored by the market.
A long-short portfolio based on these legislators’ views earns abnormal returns of over 90 basis points
per month following the passage of legislation. Further, the more complex the legislation, the more
difficulty the market has in assessing the impact of these bills. Consistent with the legislator incentive
mechanism, the more concentrated the legislator’s interest in the industry, the more informative are
her votes for future returns.
Lauren Cohen Christopher Malloy
Harvard Business School Harvard Business School
Baker Library 273 Baker Library 277
Soldiers Field Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163 Boston, MA 02163
and NBER and NBER
lcohen@hbs.edu cmalloy@hbs.edu
Karl B. Diether
Dartmouth College
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
karl.b.diether@tuck.dartmouth.edu

An important but understudied relationship that impacts firms is the one between
firms and the government. Specifically, governments pass laws that affect firms’
competitive environment, products, labor force, and capital, both directly and indirectly.
While this relationship is well-understood, it is often difficult to determine which firms
any given piece of legislation will affect, and how it will affect them. However, we do
observe the behavior of agents with a direct interest in the firms affected by legislation.
By observing the actions of legislators whose constituents are the affected firms (its
employees, suppliers, other local stakeholders, etc.), we can gather insights into the likely
impact of government legislation on firms. Specifically, focusing attention on the
legislators who have the largest vested interests in firms affected by a given piece of
legislation gives a powerful lens into the impact of that legislation on the firms in
question; a lens that the market does not appear to be gazing through.
It turns out that very rich data exists on the behavior of legislators. Legislator
voting behavior is public and detailed going back decades for both chambers of the U.S.
Congress (the Senate and House of Representatives). Further, this data gives a fair
amount of power in that each firm (by definition) is headquartered in at least one
legislator’s constituency, but for each firm and industry being affected by a given bill
there will be a large group of "un-interested" legislators to compare against. There are
enough "un-interested" legislators that are alike in nearly every other dimension (party-
affiliation, ideology, voting on all other bills, etc.) that we can form very fine control
groups to tease out solely the part of legislators’ voting behaviors that is driven by their
direct interest in a given firm or industry.
If the market does not fully incorporate the information in legislator behavior to
infer each bill’s full effect on firms, then that leaves rich, important information for firms’
underlying values that is unincorporated into market prices. The advantage of this
approach is that we can use the actions of legislators to predictably identify the
subsequent impact of each law on each firm.
An important issue will of course be how much of a bill’s impact on firm values is
already incorporated by the market into firms’ prices. To answer this question, we show
that there is almost no run-up in terms of firm returns in the 6- (or 12-) month period
Legislating Stock Prices — Page 3

prior to the bill’s passage. Additionally, and interestingly, there are zero abnormal
returns in the month that the bill is actually passed. Only over the post-passage period
does the market sluggishly begin to realize the impact of the bill for firm values.
The measurement of which firms are materially impacted by a given bill is at the
crux of this paper. As mentioned above, we measure this by using the simple but
powerful method of listening closely to only those legislators who have a vested interest in
the given bill. We identify interests by the amount of economic activity in that
legislator’s state that is likely affected by the bill in question. Specifically, we look at
number of firms, number of employees, and aggregate size of firms, for each industry in
each state, and assign each legislator’s interests based on these measures. We focus on
industries rather than firms as only very rarely can a legislator put language into a bill
that solely affects an individual firm (empirically, we only see this a handful of times in
our 20 year sample of all legislation). This may be for cosmetic reasons, or simply
because a legislator often has many firms from a given industry in her state, and so does
not want to appear to favor one, at the perceived detriment to others. This also may be
impacted by (or be the driver behind) most powerful lobbying groups (which we measure
and discuss later in the paper) forming at the industry level.
Given that our classification scheme of bills (described in Section II) assigns
affected industries to bills based on the text of the bill regarding each industry, we can
then see how these “interested” legislators vote versus uninterested legislators on each
respective bill. Given that these interested and uninterested legislator groups change for
each bill depending solely on industry, this forms finely specified treatment and control
groups that allow us to control for other voting determinants, and identify solely this
vested interest impact on each vote.
We then simply see whether interested legislators are more positive or more
negative for the bill (relative to the uninterested control group). If the interested
legislators vote more in favor of a bill covering their vested industries than uninterested
legislators, we code this as a positive bill for the underlying industry. If they vote more
negatively for a bill that passes1 than uninterested legislators, we code this as a negative
1 We limit to bills that pass as these are the bills that have the potential to actively change the regulatory
Legislating Stock Prices — Page 4