NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF RUNS ON EARLY 'SHADOW BANKS':
TRUST COMPANIES AND THE IMPACT OF THE PANIC OF 1907
Carola Frydman
Eric Hilt
Lily Y. Zhou
Working Paper 18264
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18264
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2012
We would like to thank Harald Uhlig (the editor), three anonymous referees, Charles Calomiris, Stanley
Engerman, Dan Fetter, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Paola Sapienza, Ellis Tallman, and Eugene White,
along with participants at the NBER Corporate Finance and Monetary Economics meetings, the Economic
History Association meetings, and various seminars, for helpful comments and suggestions. Richard
Baker, Asaf Bernstein, Jack Chen, Francis Cho, Hannah Galin, Kimberly Le, Angela Lei, Andrew
Marok, Ryan Munoz, Laura Salisbury, Yang Sun, and Veronica Wilson provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Carola Frydman, Eric Hilt, and Lily Y. Zhou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Economic Effects of Runs on Early 'Shadow Banks': Trust Companies and the Impact of the
Panic of 1907
Carola Frydman, Eric Hilt, and Lily Y. Zhou
NBER Working Paper No. 18264
July 2012, Revised October 2014
JEL No. E44,G01,G21,N11,N21,N81
ABSTRACT
We use the unique circumstances that led to the Panic of 1907 to analyze its impact on economic activity.
The panic was fuelled by runs on the ‘shadow banks’ of the time, New York’s trust companies. But
the shock that triggered the runs was unrelated to the nonfinancial corporations affiliated with those
institutions. Using newly collected data, we find that small corporations with close ties to the trust
companies that lost the most deposits experienced an immediate decline in their stock price of 10.4
percentage points, and performed worse in the years following the panic across a range of outcomes,
including their return on equity, which fell 13.1 percent, their dividend rate, which fell 22 percent,
and their average interest costs, which rose 8.3 percent, relative to mean pre-panic levels. The effect
on their investment rate was much greater: it fell by nearly 50 percent. The relative decline in investment
induced by affiliations with the worst-affected trust companies alone accounted for at least 18.4 percent
of the total decline in corporate investment in the United States in 1908. This effect diminished in
magnitude over time but persisted for at least five years following the panic.
Carola Frydman Lily Y. Zhou
Department of Economics Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Boston University 33 Liberty Street
270 Bay State Road New York, NY 10045
Boston, MA 02215 lily.y.zhou@ny.frb.org
and NBER
cfrydman@bu.edu
Eric Hilt
Wellesley College
Department of Economics
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
ehilt@wellesley.edu

1. Introduction
The recent economic crisis has rekindled interest in financial history, in recognition
of the insights it offers for the analysis of modern financial markets. Among the many
crises in America’s past, the Panic of 1907 resembles the recent panic perhaps most closely,
in that it originated in runs on the ‘shadow banks’ of the time, New York’s trust companies.
At the time of the panic, those institutions had grown so rapidly that they rivaled the city’s
national banks in scale: New York’s shadow banking system was nearly as large as its
traditional banking system. Less regulated than commercial banks, trust companies held low
cash reserve balances and did not belong to the city’s private clearinghouse, which could act
as a lender of last resort. Early in the crisis, Knickerbocker Trust, one of the largest
institutions of its kind, was denied assistance and closed. As with Lehman Brothers’
bankruptcy in 2008, Knickerbocker’s closure triggered more runs and spread turmoil
throughout the financial system. And as with the extraordinary lending facilities created by
the Federal Reserve to bring the 2008 panic under control, the runs on trust companies were
ultimately arrested by emergency loans organized by J.P. Morgan, and partly funded by the
U.S. Treasury.
We study the effects of the contraction in financial intermediation during the Panic
of 1907 on the American economy and, in particular, on aggregate investment. A robust
statistical relationship between historical crises and the depth of recessions has been
established (e.g., Reinhart and Rogoff 2009), but that relationship may not reflect causation:
financial crises may be triggered by severe recessions or by the conditions that precipitate
such recessions. In addition, since financial crises may influence credit demand as well as
its supply, it is particularly difficult to isolate effects arising from the contraction in
intermediation. The Panic of 1907 presents these challenges: the economic contraction was
2

already underway when the runs on trust companies began, and the fall in lending was likely
influenced by the ongoing recession.1
But the unique circumstances that led to the onset of the panic present an opportunity
to isolate the effects of the disruption in financial intermediation provided by early shadow
banks. More than commercial banks, trust companies were heavily involved in long-term
corporate finance, and established relationships with large numbers of major nonfinancial
corporations. But the runs that broke out in October 1907 were triggered by fears that a few
trust company directors were involved in a scandal, and had no connection to any of the
corporate clients of those institutions.
To establish the impact of the contraction in intermediation, we analyze the relative
performance of the nonfinancial corporations affiliated with the trust companies that were
most severely affected by the runs. Our sample includes all industrial and railroad
corporations listed on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), which accounted for around
19 percent of total corporate investment in the United States prior to the panic.2 The
affiliations between trust companies and their clients are observed through the presence of
board interlocks, which were a common part of lending and underwriting relationships in
the early twentieth century.3 At the firm level, we analyze the impact of the shock on a
range of outcomes, including share prices, profitability, borrowing costs, dividend rates, and
investment rates. An important contribution of our study is that we are then able to
determine the impact of the financial contraction at the aggregate level. Specifically, we use
the total decline in firm investment that can be attributed to connections to the worst-
affected trust companies to assess the contribution of the financial shock to the overall
1 The NBER dates a peak in May of 1907; the panic began in October. Over the following year, real GNP
declined by 11 percent, industrial production contracted by 16 percent, and the unemployment rate nearly
doubled (Balke and Gordon 1986; Davis 2004; Romer 1983).
2 Our measure of investment for our sample firms totals $534 million in 1907; aggregate investment in the
United States by nonfinancial corporations was $2.8 billion in that year (see the Data Appendix for sources).
3 On the significance of the roles of financiers on nonfinancial firms’ boards in the early twentieth century, see
DeLong (1991), Ramirez (1995), and Cantillo Simon (1998).
3