NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TARGET REVALUATION AFTER FAILED TAKEOVER ATTEMPTS – CASH VERSUS
STOCK
Ulrike Malmendier
Marcus Matthias Opp
Farzad Saidi
Working Paper 18211
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18211
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2012
Previously circulated as "Cash is King - Revaluation of Targets after Merger Bids." This paper benefited
significantly from the comments of an anonymous referee and discussions by Nihat Aktas, Audra Boone,
Matthew Rhodes-Kropf and Pavel Savor, as well as the detailed input from Javed Ahmed, Dirk Jenter,
and Marlena Lee. We also acknowledge helpful comments by Yakov Amihud, Malcolm Baker, Xavier
Gabaix, Boyan Jovanovic, Steven Kaplan, Alessandro Lizzeri, Atif Mian, Adair Morse, Stewart Myers,
Terrance Odean, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, Michael Weber, Jeffrey Wurgler, David Yermack,
as well as seminar participants at Berkeley, Princeton, LSE, NYU Stern, Ohio State, Harvard, MIT
Sloan, ESMT Berlin, Columbia GSB, University of Houston, the Kellogg Junior Finance conference,
the 2011 NBER Summer Institute, the 2012 EFA Meeting, and the 2012 WFA Meeting. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Ulrike Malmendier, Marcus Matthias Opp, and Farzad Saidi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Target Revaluation after Failed Takeover Attempts – Cash versus Stock
Ulrike Malmendier, Marcus Matthias Opp, and Farzad Saidi
NBER Working Paper No. 18211
July 2012, Revised April 2015
JEL No. G14,G34,D03,D82
ABSTRACT
Cash- and stock-financed takeover bids induce strikingly different target revaluations. We exploit
detailed data on unsuccessful takeover bids between 1980 and 2008, and show that targets of cash
offers are revalued on average by +15% after deal failure, whereas stock targets return to their pre-announcement
levels. The differences in revaluation do not revert over longer horizons. We find no evidence that
future takeover activities or operational changes explain these differences. While the targets of failed
cash and stock offers are both more likely to be acquired over the following 8 years than matched
control firms, there are no differences between cash and stock targets, neither in the timing nor in the
value of future offers. Similarly, we cannot detect differential operational policies following the failed
bid. Our results are most consistent with cash bids revealing prior undervaluation of the target. We
reconcile our findings with the opposite conclusion in earlier literature (Bradley, Desai, and Kim, 1983)
by identifying a "look-ahead" bias built into their sample construction.
Ulrike Malmendier Farzad Saidi
Department of Economics Cambridge Judge Business School
549 Evans Hall # 3880 Trumpington Street
University of California, Berkeley Cambridge CB2 1AG
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880 United Kingdom
and NBER fs412@cam.ac.uk
ulrike@econ.berkeley.edu
Marcus Matthias Opp
UC Berkeley
Haas School of Business
Student Services Bldg. #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
mopp@haas.berkeley.edu

1. Introduction
Takeovers are among the largest and most disruptive events in a corporation’s life-
time. The proper assessment of their value implications has been of foremost interest to
policymakers and academic researchers alike. One set of stylized facts the literature has
been wrestling to explain is the large difference in returns of cash- and stock-financed
takeovers, as well as the different motives of acquirers for choosing one type of payment
over the other (see, e.g., Shleifer and Vishny, 2003; Rhodes-Kropf and Viswanathan,
2004; Fishman, 1989). Announcement returns of cash deals are consistently found to be
higher than those of stock deals, both in the short run (Huang and Walkling, 1987) and
in the long run (Loughran and Vijh, 1997), and not only for the acquirer but also for the
target (Andrade, Mitchell, and Stafford, 2001).1
The correct interpretation of the return differences between cash and stock bids de-
pends on the underlying information the market responds to (see, for instance, Bradley,
Desai, and Kim, 1983). A bid might reveal information about the value implications
of the takeover, e.g., match-specific synergies reaped by the acquirer or the size of the
premium paid to target shareholders. A bid might also reveal information about value
implications that are independent of the specific takeover, e.g., information about the
parties’ stand-alone values or about the target firm’s general attractiveness as a takeover
target. As Bhagat, Dong, Hirshleifer, and Noah (2005) argue, disentangling these non-
exclusive sources is a first-order building block in estimating the real value created by
mergers and acquisitions.
Our paper contributes to this debate by identifying and quantifying the economic rel-
evance of the different channels in the context of failed takeover attempts. The difference
in valuations before bid announcement and after bid failure allows us to separate out
the value implications of the takeover itself, and to estimate the extent to which firms
are revalued in response to the bid, independently of the completion of the takeover.
Focusing on the target, we then go one step further, and distinguish between revaluation
due to expected future takeover activity (i.e., the target firm’s general attractiveness as
a takeover target) and revaluation of the target’s stand-alone value.
For our empirical analysis, we collect a detailed data set on unsuccessful merger bids
andtenderoffersintheU.S.between1980and2008, includinghand-collectedinformation
about the failure reasons. We show that, on average, targets of cash offers are revalued
by +15%, but there is no revaluation of stock targets.2 Specifically, after an initial
announcement effect (including the 25-trading-day run-up) of +25% for cash targets
and +15% for stock targets,3 the value of the average cash target remains at +15%
1See also the overview paper by Betton, Eckbo, and Thorburn (2008).
2Wealsoshowthat,consistentwithpreviousstudies,stockacquirers tradeonaverageatsignificantly
lower prices post failure (−17.6%), while cash acquirers remain at their pre-announcement level. See
Rhodes-Kropf, Robinson, and Viswanathan (2005) and Dong, Hirshleifer, Richardson, and Teoh (2006)
for similar findings on acquirers. Savor and Lu (2009) compare unsuccessful and successful bids, and
find that unsuccessful stock acquirers perform worse.
3The estimates are almost identical to those found by Huang and Walkling (1987) in their sample
1

cumulative abnormal returns (CAR) at the time of deal failure, relative to the pre-
announcement level, while the CAR of stock targets is statistically insignificant (with a
slightly negative point estimate). These results hold controlling for a host of deal- and
firm-level characteristics, including target size, relative deal size, offer premium, hostility,
and deal form (tender offer versus merger). We also show that this difference persists in
the long run. Over the next five years after failure of the bid, targets of cash and stock
offers do not exhibit abnormal stock-market performance.
Since deal failure is not exogenous, we cannot easily generalize our findings beyond
the sample of failed deals. The issue is not that deals that ultimately fail are different
from deals that do not fail; common deal-failure bias would not affect the differential
revaluation of cash and stock targets.4 Instead, the concern is a more subtle selection
bias, namely that selection into bid failure differs between cash and stock targets.
We address the concern of differential sample-selection bias following the approach of
Savor and Lu (2009). We classify failure reasons for failed deals into categories such as
regulatory intervention, negative shocks to the bidder, or uncovering of new information
about the target post announcement of the bid. Based on our hand-collected news-search
analysis and detailed categorization of failure reasons, we replicate our analysis for each
of the 12 identified failure categories. We find that the cash-stock revaluation difference
for targets is positive in every category other than failure due to “market-wide shocks,”
although the statistical significance naturally varies given the small subsamples.
Suchcategorizationinvolvesaninevitableamountofjudgment, andnoneofthefailure
categories can be definitely established as exogenous to target value as convincingly as in
a randomized experiment. However, endogeneity concerns (with respect to target value)
should be less relevant for deals that failed due to regulatory intervention or negative
shockstothebiddercomparedtobidsthatfailedbecauseofnegativeshockstothetarget,
such as the uncovering of accounting fraud in the due-diligence process. Based on the
extent of such endogeneity concerns, we then aggregate deal-failure categories into larger
subsamples. Our results are robust, regardless of variations in how exactly we form these
subsamples.
To investigate the source of revaluation, we first test whether future takeover bids
explain our findings. Do targets of (failed) cash bids receive significantly more or signifi-
cantly higher future bids than stock targets? For each target of a failed deal, we measure
the time from the date of deal failure until the arrival of a future successful offer (or the
censoring event determined by the data sample). Employing hazard-rate models, we find
that both cash and stock targets are significantly more likely to be targeted in subsequent
offers, compared to a sample of matched control firms. For example, after 5 years, 50%
of the targets with failed bids have received a successful bid, compared to 20% in the
of successful and unsuccessful deals, +29.3% for cash and +14.4% for stock deals, suggesting that the
market assesses (eventually) failed deals to be quite similar ex ante.
4If, hypothetically, revaluations were lower in failed than in completed transactions by a common
percentage for both cash and stock deals, the revaluation difference between cash and stock deals in the
sample of failed bids would be representative of that in the full sample.
2