NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FX COUNTERPARTY RISK AND TRADING ACTIVITY IN CURRENCY FORWARD
AND FUTURES MARKETS
Richard M. Levich
Working Paper 18256
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18256
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2012
The author gratefully acknowledges financial support from the CME Group Foundation. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Richard M. Levich. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

FX Counterparty Risk and Trading Activity in Currency Forward and Futures Markets
Richard M. Levich
NBER Working Paper No. 18256
July 2012
JEL No. F31,G15
ABSTRACT
The Global Financial Crisis initiated a period of market turbulence and increased counterparty risk
for financial institutions. Even though the Dodd-Frank Act is likely to exempt interbank foreign exchange
trading from a central counterparty mandate, market participants have the option to trade currency
futures on existing futures markets which standardize counterparty risks. Evidence for the period 2005-11
indicates that the market share of currency futures trading has grown relative to the pre-crisis period.
This shift may be the result of a perceived increase in counterparty risk among banks, as well as changes
in relative trading costs or changes in other institutional factors.
Richard M. Levich
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
RLEVICH@STERN.NYU.EDU

FX Counterparty Risk and Trading Activity in
Currency Forward and Futures Markets
I. Introduction
The Global Financial Crisis initiated a period of turbulence the effects of which are still
impacting financial markets. In some respects, the foreign exchange (FX) market performed well
during the crisis. Trading volume held up throughout the crisis and continues to be robust. The
CLS Bank, a relatively new intermediary for settling a substantial fraction of interbank FX
transactions worked as planned, eliminating delivery risk for counterparties using the CLS
system.1 However, in other respects the FX market was like a barometer for gauging market
disruption. After the first signs of a developing crisis in summer 2007, deviations from Covered
Interest Parity, the arbitrage condition that links the forward premium on currency to the short-
term offshore interest differential between a pair of currencies, ballooned from under 10 basis
points to 50 and then several hundred basis points after the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy in
September 2008. Around the same time, the TED spread (i.e. the spread between short-term U.S.
Treasuries and short-term Eurodollar bank rates) experienced a similar pattern where the spread
moved sharply upward in the summer of 2007, and then shot up to unparalleled levels after the
Lehman bankruptcy. While policy changes and the process of normalization of market
conditions have had the beneficial impact of reducing CIP deviations and the TED spread
considerably, both measures are still substantially greater than in the pre-crisis period. And both
measures are yet two more indicators of a new normal where heightened risk and risk aversion
1 CLS Bank estimates that they provided settlement risk elimination services for 68% of the global foreign exchange
market in April 2010 for the 17 currencies that are CLS eligible.
1

seem to be driving a larger wedge between the traditional linkages in international financial
markets.
In this paper, our interest is in exploring some of the implications that follow based on
the perception that counterparty risk has grown among many traditional FX market participants.
Of special interest here, the Dodd-Frank Act (2010) mandated that swap transactions must be
traded and cleared through a centralized counterparty (CCP). Despite the critical importance of
foreign exchange and the enormous volume of daily interbank FX trading, in April 2011 the U.S.
Treasury proposed that FX swaps and forward contracts be exempted from the CCP mandate.2
Whether or not the U.S. Treasury proposal is adopted, market participants have the
alternative to substitute the use of currency futures contracts traded and cleared through a CCP in
place of currency forward contracts traded and settled through the interbank market. The general
hypothesis we wish to examine is whether these developments (i.e. preservation of the status quo
in trading and settling arrangements for FX swaps and forwards; and rising idiosyncratic risks
among various important financial institutions) have helped induce FX market participants to
migrate trading activity toward centralized trading and clearing organizations. As currency
market participants assess their risks of dealing in the FX market, counterparty risks may be
greater or more difficult to gauge in the current environment, inducing a preference for the
transparency and reliability afforded by a CCP.
Because data on interbank market trading is more limited than data on futures market
activity, our statistical methodology is somewhat limited. However, based on the data that are
2 In the 2010 survey, FX swaps and outright forwards accounted for 47% and 13% respectively of the nearly $4
trillion daily global turnover volume. However, the U.S. Treasury (2011, p. 7) reaffirmed that FX options, currency
swaps, and non-deliverable forwards would not be exempted from the Commodity Exchange Act’s definition of a
swap. In other words, these contracts would still be subject to the CCP mandate in the Dodd-Frank Act.
2