NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AS CERTAIN AS DEBT AND TAXES:
ESTIMATING THE TAX SENSITIVITY OF LEVERAGE FROM EXOGENOUS STATE TAX CHANGES
Florian Heider
Alexander Ljungqvist
Working Paper 18263
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18263
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2012
We gratefully acknowledge helpful comments from Laurent Bach, Vicente Cunat, Todd Gormley,
John Graham, Evgeny Lyandres, Thomas Noe, Olga Kuzmina, Stefano Rossi, Clemens Sialm, Irina
Stefanescu, Sheridan Titman, and Margarita Tsoutsoura (our discussants); and Heitor Almeida, Malcolm
Baker, Bo Becker, Dick Brealey, Francesca Cornelli, Peter DeMarzo, Joan Farre-Mensa, Murray Frank,
Oliver Hart, Zhiguo He, Stewart Myers, Josh Rauh, Amit Seru, Phil Strahan, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen,
Toni Whited, and various seminar audiences. We thank Alexandre Da Cruz, Katerina Deligiannidou,
Geoffroy Dolphin, Petar Mihaylovski, and Edvardas Moseika for competent research assistance and
Ashwini Agrawal and David Matsa for sharing data constructed from the 2007 Commodity Flow
Survey. Ljungqvist gratefully acknowledges the generous hospitality of the European Central Bank
while working on this project. The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect those of
the ECB, the Eurosystem, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18263.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Florian Heider and Alexander Ljungqvist. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

As Certain as Debt and Taxes: Estimating the Tax Sensitivity of Leverage from Exogenous
State Tax Changes
Florian Heider and Alexander Ljungqvist
NBER Working Paper No. 18263
July 2012, Revised April 2014
JEL No. G0,G32
ABSTRACT
We use a natural experiment in the form of 121 staggered changes in corporate income tax rates across
U.S. states to show that tax considerations are a first-order determinant of firms’ capital structure choices.
Over the period 1990-2011, firms increase long-term leverage by 104 basis points on average (or $32.5
million in extra debt) in response to an average tax increase of 131 basis points. Contrary to static
trade-off theory, the tax sensitivity of leverage is asymmetric: firms do not reduce leverage in response
to tax cuts. Using treatment reversals, we find this to be true even within-firm: tax increases that are
later reversed nonetheless lead to permanent increases in a firm’s leverage – an unexpected and novel
form of hysteresis. Our findings are robust to various confounds such as unobserved variation in local
business conditions, union power, or unemployment risk. Treatment effects are heterogeneous and
confirm the tax channel: tax sensitivity is greater among profitable and investment-grade firms which
respectively have a greater marginal tax benefit and lower marginal cost of issuing debt.
Florian Heider
European Central Bank
Kaiserstrasse 29 D-60311
Frankfurt am Main, Germany
and florian.heider@gmail.com
florian.heider@ecb.int
Alexander Ljungqvist
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street, #9-160
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
aljungqv@stern.nyu.edu

As is well known, debt confers a tax benefit on firms when interest payments can be deducted from
taxable income. While this tax advantage of debt has been a cornerstone of corporate finance since
at least Modigliani and Miller (1963), its empirical relevance continues to be disputed: opinions in
the literature range from irrelevance to the belief that taxes are the key driver of debt policy.1
We contribute to this debate by providing well-identified evidence showing that taxes are a first-
order determinant of U.S. firms’ capital structure choices. In the past, identifying the effect of taxes
on capital structure has proven to be empirically challenging owing to a variety of endogeneity
problems. We address this identification challenge by exploiting variation in corporate income tax
rates across U.S. states and time. Unlike federal tax changes, which occur infrequently and affect all
firms simultaneously, many states change their corporate tax rates (we identify 121 changes over
the period 1989 to 2011). Importantly, they do so at different times. The staggered nature of the tax
changes provides a set of counterfactuals for how leverage would have evolved in the absence of
the tax changes and so allows us to disentangle the effect of taxes on leverage from other forces
shaping debt policy. Because the tax changes vary firms’ marginal benefit of debt without, as we
will show, affecting their marginal cost of debt, we can trace out the marginal-cost-of-debt curve for
U.S. firms.
Our first contribution is to show that leverage responds to tax changes. Using a difference-in-
difference approach, we find that firms increase the amount of debt in their capital structure
following an increase in the rate at which their home state taxes corporate income, relative to a set
of control firms operating in the same industry at the same time but located in states without tax
changes. Total assets are unchanged, implying that firms swap debt for equity when tax rates rise.
Interestingly, the estimated tax sensitivity is asymmetric: while firms borrow more in response
to tax rises, tax cuts do not lead to a corresponding cut in leverage. This is true even within-firm: tax
rises that are later reversed nonetheless increase leverage permanently. This dynamic pattern
suggests that leverage not only responds asymmetrically to tax changes but also is path-dependent
and so exhibits hysteresis. While hard to reconcile with static models, asymmetry (arising from
1 See Graham and Leary (2011) for a recent survey documenting this range of opinions.
1

differences in adjustment costs) is often imposed by assumption in dynamic models of capital
structure; our results lend support to this assumption. Hysteresis is a dynamic implication of
asymmetry: if shareholders have a preference for leverage increases, leverage will ratchet up over
time (see Admati et al. (2013) for a model rationalizing our findings). Uncovering asymmetry and
hysteresis, neither of which has previously been documented, is our second contribution.
To understand our identification strategy and relate our findings to the literature, consider the
ideal experiment. The capital structure argument typically found in finance textbooks2 decomposes
the value of a levered firm into the value of the unlevered firm plus the tax benefit of debt minus the
(net) cost of debt.3 The optimal level of debt then equates the marginal tax benefit and the marginal
cost. Figure 1a illustrates this textbook “trade-off theory” of capital structure. The ideal experiment
to test the trade-off theory is shown in Figure 1b: it consists of randomly assigning different tax
rates to firms and then comparing their debt policies to see if higher tax rates lead to higher
leverage. Random assignment would ensure that observed differences in leverage could not be
caused by unobserved firm-level heterogeneity. This, in turn, would allow us to estimate the
marginal-cost curve from shifts in the marginal (tax) benefit curve.
Observational data are, of course, not random. Many empirical studies relate observed
differences in debt policies among firms to differences in their actual tax rates. This approach is
fraught with difficulties; it risks falsely attributing observed differences in leverage to differences in
taxes when other unobserved differences across firms also likely affect leverage. For example, prior
work exploits the fact that higher profits put firms into a higher tax bracket. As a result, high-profit
firms may borrow more to take advantage of tax shields, as shown in Figure 1c. But it is equally
possible that they borrow more because their default risk is lower than that of low-profit firms.
Figure 1d illustrates the extreme case in which the null hypothesis of irrelevance (i.e., taxes have no
effect on leverage) is true. As drawn, we would falsely reject the null, as all of the observed change
2 See, for example, Brealey, Myers, and Allen (2011), chapter 18.
3 Debt is costly due to bankruptcy (Kraus and Litzenberger (1973)) and debt-overhang inefficiencies (Myers (1977)). To
isolate the tax benefit of debt, non-tax benefits of debt (e.g., curbing free-cash flow problems (Jensen (1986)) are
usually counted as negative costs for expositional purposes (see, e.g., van Binsbergen, Graham, and Yang (2010)).
2