NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AIRPORTS AND URBAN GROWTH:
EVIDENCE FROM A QUASI-NATURAL POLICY EXPERIMENT
Bruce A. Blonigen
Anca D. Cristea
Working Paper 18278
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18278
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012
We thank James Harrigan, David Hummels, Jason Lindo, Alex Vrtiska, Glen Waddell and Wes Wilson
for helpful discussions, and Mitchell Johnson for excellent research assistance. Any remaining errors
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸˛
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Bruce A. Blonigen and Anca D. Cristea. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Airports and Urban Growth: Evidence from a Quasi-Natural Policy Experiment
Bruce A. Blonigen and Anca D. Cristea
NBER Working Paper No. 18278
August 2012
JEL No. O18,R11,R4
ABSTRACT
While significant work has been done to examine the determinants of regional development, there
is little evidence on the contribution of air services toward this outcome. This paper exploits the unexpected
market changes induced by the 1978 Airline Deregulation Act to bring new evidence on the link between
airline traffic and local economic growth. Using data for almost 300 Metropolitan Statistical Areas
(MSAs) over a two decade time period centered around the policy change, we exploit time variation
in long-run growth rates to identify the effects of airline traffic on population, income and employment
growth. Our results suggest that air service has a significant positive effect on regional growth, with
the magnitude of the effects differing by MSA size and industrial specialization.
Bruce A. Blonigen
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
and NBER
bruceb@uoregon.edu
Anca D. Cristea
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
cristea@uoregon.edu

1 Introduction
Almost since the invention of the airplane, policymakers at all levels of government have
spent considerable resources to promote air services for their constituents. Currently in
the United States, local airports and communities are quite active in providing subsidies
and pledging future travel tickets in order to deter airlines from terminating strategic
routes (e.g., Portland1), or from downgrading a city from its hub status (e.g., Cleve-
land2), or to encourage airlines to add new routes for their region (e.g., Tampa3). A
2009 survey by Airports Council International North America found that of the 52 re-
sponding airports, 33 had incentive agreements involving domestic air service, and 23
airports had incentive agreements for international air service.4
The universal justification for these government policies is the stated belief that
air transport is crucial for regional economic growth. In support of this belief, there is
certainly anecdotal evidence suggesting that air transport improves business operations
byprovidingquickaccesstoinputsupplies,stimulatesinnovativeactivitiesbyfacilitating
face-to-face meetings, and represents an essential input for certain industries.5 On the
other hand, it is not clear how much economic activity significantly relies on air service,
nor the extent to which other modes of transportation and communication can easily
substitute for air services. In the end, a positive correlation between air services and
economic growth may make policymakers erroneously believe that there is a causal
1See “Port’s gamble on Delta pays off” from 06/11/2010 on www.oregonlive.com.
2See “Pittsburgh could foreshadow future of Cleveland Hopkins International Airport” from
11/22/2009 on www.cleveland.com
3See “Intense competition boosts airport incentives to airlines” at:
http://www.tampabay.com/news/business/airlines/intense-competition-boosts-airport-incentives-to-
airlines/1042035
4McAllister, Brad, ”Regaining stability,” Airport Business Magazine, september 15, 2011 at:
http://www.airportbusiness.com/print/Airport-Business-Magazine/Regaining-stability/137314
5Several channels could explain the productivity effect of air transport. First, air travel facilitates
face-to-facecommunication,whichisessentialforinnovation,technologydiffusion,andforcoordination
and efficient allocation of resources (see, among others, Gaspar and Glaeser, 1998; Autretsch and
Feldman, 1996; Hovhannisyan and Keller, 2011). Second, the availability of air transport reduces
transactioncosts,increasingtheopennessofaregiontotrade(Poole,2010;Cristea,2011). Thisinturn
fosters labor and industrial specialization at micro level, as well as product diversification at regional
level, leading to increased aggregate productivity (Glaeser, Kallal, Scheinkman and Schleifer, 1992;
Feenstra and Kee, 2006). Finally, air traffic could raise regional productivity via agglomeration effects
andtheassociatedpositiveexternalities(see,amongothers,RosenthalandStrange,2004). Thelocation
decision of exporters and multinational firm headquarters is influenced by the quality of air services
(Lovely, Rosenthal, and Sharma, 2005; Bel and Fageda, 2008). At the same time, both types of firms
are shown to exert positive spillovers on local businesses, further affecting productivity (Blomstrom
and Kokko, 1998; Arnold, Javorcik and Mattoo, 2011). Our intention in this study is to identify
an aggregate net effect of air traffic on urban development, working in part through either of these
productivity effects.
2

relationship that they can affect, when other factors out of their control may be driving
the positive correlation.
Estimating the economic benefits of infrastructure projects in general, and of air
transport in particular, is difficult because there is a strong interdependence between
infrastructure investments and regional development. Communities that benefit from
more rapid economic growth tend to also invest more in infrastructure, and in turn
the stock of infrastructure further stimulates regional development. Thus, disentangling
the causal effect of transportation on economic growth from the natural tendency of
infrastructure to increase with the growth of a region is not easy.
Perhaps due to the difficulty of identification, there are only a couple prior studies
examining the effect of air transport on regional growth. Brueckner (2003) estimates the
effect of airline traffic on employment using cross-sectional data at the Metropolitan Sta-
tistical Area (MSA) level and finds that a 10 percent increase in passenger enplanements
leads to approximately 1 percent increase in MSA employment, with service sectors re-
sponsible for most of the effect. Brueckner uses hub status of an airport, as well as the
MSAs centrality within the U.S. and proximity to the nearest large metropolitan area, to
instrument for the endogeneity of the level of air transport services. However, hub status
may be endogenous with current and expected growth of an MSA, while geographic fac-
tors may affect general economic growth of a region just as much as air service.6 Green
(2007) exploits time series rather than cross-sectional data variation to estimate the ef-
fect of air transport infrastructure on regional growth. Using information on 83 MSAs,
he regresses passenger air traffic levels in 1990 on subsequent decennial population and
employment growth, and finds that a 10 percent increase in boardings per capita gener-
ate a 3.9 percent higher population growth and 2.8 percent higher employment growth
for the period 1990-2000. However, economic outcomes such as population, employment,
and even air service are persistent processes. This too makes identification difficult in
the absence of any major exogenous and long-lasting shock to the airline service.
To overcome these challenges in identifying the relationship between air services
and regional economic growth, we employ a quasi-natural experiment that stems from
the dramatic changes in the aviation network following the U.S. Deregulation Act of
1978. This policy change marked the switch of the U.S. aviation industry from tight
government regulation to free market. Importantly, it saw the swift dissolution of a
regulatory environment that implicitly subsidized (and hence oversupplied) air service
6Thereisasignificanteconomicgeographyliteratureshowinghowspatiallocationinfluencesregional
development and income growth via market access or market potential effects. Among others, see for
example Redding and Venables (2004) for a cross-country analysis, or Hanson (2005) and Head and
Mayer (2006) for a regional analysis.
3