NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CARRY-ALONG TRADE
Andrew B. Bernard
Emily J. Blanchard
Ilke Van Beveren
Hylke Y. Vandenbussche
Working Paper 18246
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18246
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2012
A special thanks goes to Jean-Marc Troch at the National Bank of Belgium for assistance and help
with the data. We are also grateful to Stefania Garetto, David Green and seminar participants at the
NBER, ERWIT, Dartmouth and UBC for helpful comments, Christophe Piette and Kris de Spiegelaere
for data clarifications and Danny Delcambre for providing us with supplementary files and help with
the CN concordance. Vandenbussche thanks ARC, UCL and Excellence Centre LICOS for support.
This paper was written while Van Beveren and Vandenbussche were visiting the National Bank of
Belgium. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bank of Belgium, the National Bureau of Economics Research or the Centre
for Economic Policy Research. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Andrew B. Bernard, Emily J. Blanchard, Ilke Van Beveren, and Hylke Y. Vandenbussche.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Carry-Along Trade
Andrew B. Bernard, Emily J. Blanchard, Ilke Van Beveren, and Hylke Y. Vandenbussche
NBER Working Paper No. 18246
July 2012
JEL No. F12,F13,F14,L11
ABSTRACT
Large multi-product firms dominate international trade flows. This paper documents new facts about
multi-product manufacturing exporters that are not easily reconciled with existing multi-product models.
Using novel linked production and export data at the firm-product level, we find that the overwhelming
majority of manufacturing firms export products that they do not produce. Three quarters of the exported
products and thirty percent of export value from Belgian manufacturers are in goods that are not produced
by the firm, so-called Carry-Along Trade (CAT). The number of CAT products is strongly increasing
in firm productivity while the number of produced products that are exported is weakly increasing
in firm productivity. We propose a general model of production and sourcing at multi-product firms.
While the baseline model fails to reconcile the relationships between firm productivity and the numbers
of exported products observed in the data, several demand and supply-side extensions to the model
are more successful. Looking at export price data, we find support for a novel theoretical extension
based on demand-scope complementarities.
Andrew B. Bernard Ilke Van Beveren
Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth KU Leuven, Lessius
100 Tuck Hall Department of Business Studies
Hanover, NH 03755 Korte Nieuwstraat 33
and NBER 2000 Antwerp, Belgium
Andrew.B.Bernard@dartmouth.edu ilke.vanbeveren@kuleuven.be
Emily J. Blanchard Hylke Y. Vandenbussche
Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth Université Catholique de Louvain
100 Tuck Hall Department of Economics
Hanover, NH 03755 Place Montesquieu 3
emily.j.blanchard@tuck.dartmouth.edu 1348 Louvain-la-neuve
Belgium
hylke.vandenbussche@uclouvain.be

Carry-Along Trade
1 Introduction
Exports are well-known to be highly concentrated in a relatively small number of firms that ship
many products abroad. Existing models of multi-product exporters describe firms that make
one or more products and ship some or all of those products abroad.1 We present the first
evidence that these multi-product exporters are, in fact, not making most of the products that
they export. Instead, the most productive firms both make and source products that they then
selltothemarket.Inthispaper, weexplorethisphenomenonbothempiricallyandtheoretically.
Thisresearchcontributestothesmallbutgrowingliteraturedocumentingtheprevalenceand
importance of multi-product firms in international trade. Unlike most previous work on multi-
product firms, we are able to link data on domestic production and international trade at the
firm-product level. This allows us to compare domestic output and exports at the firm-product
level. We document the surprising fact that a large majority of manufacturing exporters export
manyproductsthattheydonotproduce. Inaddition,asmallersetofthelargestmanufacturing
firms produce goods where they export more than they produce. We refer to these export
activities together as Carry-Along Trade (CAT).
We find that Carry-Along Trade, i.e. exports of goods where the firm exports more than
it produces, is widespread and important, occurring at more than 90 percent of exporters,
appearing in more than 95 percent of exported products and accounting for more than 30
percent of export value.
While most firms export products they do not make, it is the most productive firms that are
mostheavilyengagedinCarry-AlongTrade. Firmproductivityhasbeenshowntobepositively
relatedbothtothenumberofproductsmadebythefirmandespeciallytothenumberofproducts
exported.2 Our findings confirm those results but highlight the relationship between measures
of firm productivity and exported CAT products. The total number of products supplied to
export markets is strongly increasing in firm productivity. While more productive firms do
export more of their own produced products, most of the increase in export scope is due to
a strong positive relationship between firm productivity and sourced (CAT) products that are
exported. The share of CAT products in total exported products is rising in productivity.
Totalfirmexportsarealsoknowntobestronglypositivelyassociatedwithfirmproductivity.
In contrast to the number of products, the majority of export value does come from products
that are produced by the firm. The share of CAT exports in total export value is much smaller
than that of produced products and does not systematically change with firm productivity.
1Bernardetal. (2007)andMayerandOttavianio(2008)provideevidenceontheimportanceofmulti-product
exporters. Theoretical models of multi-product exporting firms include Eckel and Neary (2010), Bernard et al.
(2011), Arkolakis and Muendler (2011) and Mayer et al. (2011).
2See Bernard et al. (2011), Arkolakis and Muendler (2011) and Mayer et al. (2011).
1

Carry-Along Trade
To understand the observed phenomenon where firms sell more products to the market than
they actually produce, we develop a general model of multi-product producers and sourcing.
Althoughthetheoreticalexerciseismotivatedbytradedata, ourmodelisintentionallydesigned
to study how firms serve markets, broadly defined. Our modeling approach is intrinsically
agnostic so that we can consider a variety of potential explanations for Carry-Along Trade.
For each, we outline the plausible underlying cause of CAT, formalize the implied relationship
between CAT and firm characteristics, and then briefly evaluate the relative likelihood that the
mechanism is at play given observed patterns in the data.
Our model features heterogeneous, multi-product firms that face a two-tiered problem: to
choose the optimal product scope (how many varieties to sell to the market, and how much at
what price for each variety), and a make or source decision – the question of whether (or to
what extent) to produce goods in-house versus through arms-length suppliers, i.e. CAT. In the
spirit of Mrazova and Neary (2011), we focus on equilibrium selection among heterogeneous
firms – specifically the relationship between firm productivity, product scope, and the make-or-
source decision margin – and purposely set aside derivation of the full general equilibrium. This
approach has the important advantage that we are not compelled to make specific functional
form assumptions, allowing us to develop a unified framework in which to identify and discuss
important differences among broad classes of both supply side and preference structures.
We adopt a three step approach to the theoretical exercise. We begin by outlining a simple
versionofamulti-productheterogeneousfirmmodelwithamake-or-sourcedecision. Weobserve
that a broad class of models shares the common feature that core productivity and the extent
of Carry-Along Trade is sub-modular in a firm’s payoff structure. Intuitively, for any given total
numberofproductsdeliveredtothemarketbyafirm, productivefirmswillmakeagreatershare
of those products in-house – and thus necessarily source fewer products via CAT – than will less
productive firms. The empirical prediction from this baseline modeling structure is thus that
the least productive firms would do the most Carry-Along Trade – which is the opposite of what
we observe in the data.
We go on to introduce simple extensions of the model, first on the supply side, then on the
demandside. Ineverycase,weoutlineasetofnecessaryconditionsthatwouldhavetoholdfora
model to rationalize the key features of the data. Again, the intuition is straightforward: higher
productivity firms must have sufficiently greater total product scope than lower productivity
firms, inorderforbothin-houseandsourcedproductscopetobeincreasinginfirmproductivity.
Many natural extensions of the basic multi-product model do not reconcile the theory with
the data. However, we find that it is possible to match the empirical facts through certain
adjustments to either the supply or demand side of the basic model.
2