NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF THE FED'S TERM AUCTION FACILITY
Efraim Benmelech
Working Paper 18304
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18304
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012
I thank Ian Dew-Becker, Charlie Calomiris, Simon Gilchrist, James Hamilton, Laura Jones Dooley,
Ross Levine, Jeff Miron, and seminar participants at the Cato Papers on Public Policy Conference
for useful comments. I acknowledge financial support from the Cato Institute. All errors are my own.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Efraim Benmelech. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

An Empirical Analysis of the Fed's Term Auction Facility
Efraim Benmelech
NBER Working Paper No. 18304
August 2012
JEL No. E44,E52,E58,G01,G21,G28
ABSTRACT
The U.S. Federal Reserve used the Term Auction Facility (TAF) to provide term funding to eligible
depository institutions from December 2007 to March 2010. According to the Fed, the purpose of
TAF was to inject term funds through a broader range of counterparties and against a broader range
of collateral than open market operations. The overall goal of the TAF was to ensure that liquidity
provisions could be disseminated efficiently even when the unsecured interbank markets were under
stress. In this paper I use the TAF micro-level loan data and find that about 60 percent of TAF loans
went to foreign banks that pledged asset-backed securities as collateral for these loans. The data and
analysis illustrate the major role that foreign – in particular, European – banks currently play in the
U.S. financial system and the resultant currency mismatch in their balance sheets. The data suggest
that foreign banks had to borrow from the Federal Reserve Bank to meet their dollar-denominated
liabilities.
Efraim Benmelech
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
e-benmelech@kellogg.northwestern.edu

An Empirical Analysis of the Fed’s Term Auction Facility
Abstract
The U.S. Federal Reserve used the Term Auction Facility (TAF) to provide term funding to eligible
depository institutions from December 2007 to March 2010. According to the Fed, the purpose
of TAF was to inject term funds through a broader range of counterparties and against a broader
range of collateral than open market operations. The overall goal of the TAF was to ensure that
liquidity provisions could be disseminated efficiently even when the unsecured interbank markets
were under stress. In this paper I use the TAF micro-level loan data and find that about 60
percent of TAF loans went to foreign banks that pledged asset-backed securities as collateral for
these loans. The data and analysis illustrate the major role that foreign – in particular, European
– banks currently play in the U.S. financial system and the resultant currency mismatch in their
balance sheets. The data suggest that foreign banks had to borrow from the Federal Reserve Bank
to meet their dollar-denominated liabilities.
1. Introduction
The Term Auction Facility (TAF) program was one of the main tools used by the Federal Reserve
and the U.S. fiscal authorities during the financial crisis. The goal of this program – as described
by the Federal Reserve Bank – was to intervene in the interbank money markets because of the
difficulties experienced by banks in the United States and Europe. Initially, the Federal Reserve
Bank used open market operations to maintain the effective federal funds rate near its target rate
and enacted several measures to encourage borrowing at the discount window.1 However, these
moves failed to stimulate the market as the Fed has expected. On December 12, 2007, therefore,
the Federal Reserve Bank introduced the Term Auction Facility. The TAF provided longer-term
financing to eligible depository institutions through auctions at predetermined dates. At its peak,
the TAF amounted to more than $500 billion and was the largest expansion on the Federal Reserve
1To encourage banks to borrow at the discount window, the Federal Reserve Bank reduced the discount window
penalty rate from 100 basis points to 50 basis points on August 17, 2007, and extended the term of financing from
overnight to as long as thirty days.

Bank’s balance sheet. Lending through the TAF gradually faded away, and the final TAF auction
was conducted on March 8, 2010.
One of the reasons for the introduction of TAF during the early stages of the financial crisis
was to provide banks with Federal Reserve liquidity without forcing them to face the stigma of
borrowing from the discount window. Indeed, according to the chairman of the Federal Reserve
Bank, the associated stigma made banks reluctant to use the discount window:
In August 2007,..., banks were reluctant to rely on discount window credit to address
their funding needs. The banks’ concern was that their recourse to the discount window,
if it became known, might lead market participants to infer weakness – the so-called
stigma problem.
Speech at the Federal Reserve Board Conference on Key Developments in Monetary
Policy, Washington, D.C., by Chairman Ben Bernanke (Bernanke (2009))
However, even borrowing from the TAF had a stigma attached to it, and as a result, data on the
loans that were made in TAF, as well as identity of the banks that participated in the auctions,
were not disclosed initially. Later, the Federal Reserve Bank disclosed data on the loans made
under the TAF, as well as information on the other credit and liquidity programs it used during
the crisis.
While the effectiveness of TAF in reducing rates in the interbank market has been debated by
both academic economists and policy makers (see e.g., McAndrews, Sarkar and Wang 2008 and
Taylor and Williams 2009), little is known about the identity of the banks that participated in
the auctions, the nature of the collateral used, and the terms on the individual loans. This paper
fills the gap by using the micro-level loan dataset released by the Federal Reserve. The TAF data,
whichcontaindetailedinformationontheloansandtheparticipatingfinancialinstitutions, provide
a rare glimpse into the injection of emergency liquidity by the Federal Reserve Bank, as well as the
identity of the banks obtaining credit and in particular the type of assets they pledged as collateral.
I find that foreign banks accounted for 58 percent of TAF lending, with a total amount of
$2.2 trillion, compared to $1.6 trillion for U.S. banks. During the auction of December 2007 and
through most of 2008, foreign banks accounted for the vast majority of the lending, with amounts
that ranged between twofold and fourfold the total lending to U.S banks. U.K.-based Barclays
was the largest borrower in the TAF, followed by Bank of America, Royal Bank of Scotland, Wells
1