NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE COST OF FINANCIAL FRICTIONS FOR LIFE INSURERS
Ralph S.J. Koijen
Motohiro Yogo
Working Paper 18321
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18321
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012
(cid:3)
(cid:3)
A.M. Best Company, WebAnnuities Insurance Agency, and Compulife Software own the copyright
to their respective data, which we use with permission. We thank Mary Anomalay, Jahiz Barlas, Minsoo
Kim, Peter Nebres, and Julia Pei for assistance in putting together the data on annuity and life insurance
prices. For comments and discussions, we thank three referees, Jennie Bai, Jeffrey Brown, Itamar Drechsler,
Kenneth Froot, Stefano Giglio, Victoria Ivashina, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Zain Mohey-Deen, Lubos
Pastor, Anna Paulson, Michael Roberts, David Scharfstein, Amir Sufi, and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen.
We also thank seminar participants at Aalto University; Copenhagen Business School; Emory University;
Erasmus University; Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Kansas City, Minneapolis,
New York, and San Francisco; Harvard University; London Business School; MIT; Northwestern
University; Norwegian Business School; Oxford University; Princeton University; Stanford University;
Tilburg University; University of British Columbia, Chicago, Hong Kong, Houston, Melbourne, Minnesota,
New South Wales, Sydney, Technology Sydney, Tokyo, Washington, and Wisconsin; UCLA; UCSD;
2012 SED Annual Meeting; 2012 NBER Summer Institute Capital Markets and the Economy Workshop;
2012 System Committee Meeting on Financial Structure and Regulation; 2012 Wharton Conference
on Liquidity and Financial Crises; 2012 NBER Public Economics Program Meeting; 2012 Boston
University/Boston Fed Conference on Macro-Finance Linkages; 2013 Utah Winter Finance Conference;
2013 NBER Insurance Working Group Meeting; 2013 Shanghai Macroeconomics Workshop; 2013
EFA Annual Meeting; and 2014 AFA Annual Meeting. The authors declare that they have no relevant
or material financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Ralph S.J. Koijen and Motohiro Yogo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Cost of Financial Frictions for Life Insurers
Ralph S.J. Koijen and Motohiro Yogo
NBER Working Paper No. 18321
August 2012, Revised November 2014
JEL No. G01,G22,G28
ABSTRACT
During the financial crisis, life insurers sold long-term policies at deep discounts relative to actuarial
value. The average markup was as low as –19 percent for annuities and –57 percent for life insurance.
This extraordinary pricing behavior was due to financial and product market frictions, interacting with
statutory reserve regulation that allowed life insurers to record far less than a dollar of reserve per
dollar of future insurance liability. We identify the shadow cost of capital through exogenous variation
in required reserves across different types of policies. The shadow cost was $0.96 per dollar of statutory
capital for the average company in November 2008.
Ralph S.J. Koijen
London Business School
Regent's Park
London NW1 4SA
United Kingdom
rkoijen@london.edu
Motohiro Yogo
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Research Department
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55401-1804
yogo@minneapolisfed.org

Traditional theories of insurance markets assume that insurance companies operate in
an efficient capital market and supply policies at actuarially fair prices. Consequently, the
market equilibrium is primarily determined by the demand side, either by life-cycle demand
(Yaari 1965) or by informational frictions (Rothschild and Stiglitz 1976). In contrast to
these traditional theories, we find that the pricing behavior of these financial institutions is
significantly affected by financial frictions as well as product market frictions that lead to a
price war.
Our key finding isthatlifeinsurers reduced theprice oflong-termpoliciesfromNovember
2008 to February 2009, when falling interest rates implied that they should have instead
raised prices. The average markup, relative to actuarial value (i.e., the present value of
future insurance liabilities), was −16 percent for 30-year term annuities and −19 percent
for life annuities at age 60. Similarly, the average markup was −57 percent for universal
life insurance at age 30. This pricing behavior contrasts sharply with the 6 to 10 percent
markup that life insurers earn in ordinary times (Mitchell et al. 1999). In the cross section
of policies, the price reductions were larger for those policies with looser statutory reserve
requirements. In the cross section of insurance companies, the price reductions were larger
for those companies that suffered larger balance sheet shocks (i.e., lower asset growth, higher
leverage, and larger deficit in risk-based capital).
This extraordinary pricing behavior coincided with two unusual circumstances. First,
the financial crisis had an adverse impact on insurance companies’ balance sheets, especially
those companies with large deferred (fixed and variable) annuity liabilities whose guarantees
(i.e., embedded put options) turned out to be unprofitable. Second, statutory reserve reg-
ulation in the United States allowed life insurers to record far less than a dollar of reserve
per dollar of future insurance liability around December 2008. This allowed life insurers to
generate accounting profits by selling policies at a price far below actuarial value, as long as
that price was above the reserve value. Insurance companies care about accounting profits
insofar as it increases statutory capital (i.e., assets relative to accounting liabilities), which
is an important metric of capital adequacy for rating agencies and state regulators.
We develop a model of optimal insurance pricing to show that the extraordinary pric-
ing behavior implies a high shadow value of statutory capital. In our model, an insurance
company sets prices for various types of policies to maximize the present value of profits,
subject to both financial and product market frictions. Financial frictions enter as a leverage
constraint on statutory capital, which captures the fact that insurance companies are rated
and regulated because of their incentives for excessive risk taking (i.e., moral hazard). Prod-
uct market frictions enter through search frictions that make future demand increasing in
statutory capital (e.g., through higher ratings). The insurance company may reduce prices,
2

even below actuarial value, either to relax its leverage constraint or to boost future demand.
The shadow cost of capital embeds both financial and product market frictions, which are
not separately identified by the first-order conditions of the model.
We estimate the shadow cost of capital using panel data on the pricing of term annuities,
life annuities, and universal life insurance, which are merged with the financial statements
of the insurance companies. Relative to other industries, life insurance presents a unique
opportunity to identify the shadow cost for two reasons. First, life insurers sell relatively
simple products whose marginal cost can be accurately measured. Second, statutory reserve
regulation specifies a constant discount rate for reserve valuation, regardless of the maturity
of the policy. This mechanical rule generates exogenous variation in required reserves across
policies of different maturities, which acts as relative shifts in the supply curve that are
plausibly exogenous.
We find that the shadow cost of capital was $0.96 per dollar of statutory capital for
the average company in November 2008. This cost varies from $0.10 to $5.53 per dollar of
statutorycapitalforthecrosssectionofinsurancecompaniesinoursample. Thosecompanies
with higher shadow cost sold morepolicies while reducing prices, consistent with adownward
shift in the supply curve. In addition, those companies with higher shadow cost raised or
retained more capital, through capital injections from their holding companies and reduction
of stockholder dividends. Many of the holding companies in our sample appear constrained
during the financial crisis, as evidenced by application for government assistance such as the
Troubled Asset Relief Program, issuance of public equity, or suspension of dividends. Hence,
capital injections from these holding companies to their insurance subsidiaries could have
been limited by frictions in external capital markets. However, we cannot conclusively rule
out a price war arising from product market frictions as an alternative explanation.
We rule out default risk as an alternative explanation for several reasons. First, the
markups on term annuities are too low to be justified by default risk, given reasonable
assumptions about the recovery rate. Second, the term structure of risk-neutral default
probabilities implied by term annuities does not match that implied by credit default swaps
in magnitude, slope across maturity, or variation across insurance companies. Finally, the
absence of discounts on life annuities during the Great Depression serves as out-of-sample
evidence against default risk as a sole explanation.
The extraordinary pricing of liabilities complements related evidence on the asset side
of the balance sheet during the financial crisis. Financially constrained life insurers sold
corporatebonds with thehighest unrealized capital gains, carried at historical cost according
to the accounting rules, in order to improve their capital positions (Ellul et al. 2012). They
alsosolddowngradedbondsatfire-salepricesinordertoreducetheirrequiredcapital(Merrill
3