NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MORTGAGE MARKET DESIGN
John Y. Campbell
Working Paper 18339
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18339
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012
This paper is based on a keynote address to the annual meeting of the European Finance Association,
delivered in Stockholm, Sweden on August 19, 2011. I am grateful to Tom Powers for able research
assistance, and to an anonymous referee, Joao Cocco, Andreas Fuster, Stefano Giglio, Robert Hall,
Howell Jackson, Anton Korinek, Parag Pathak, James Poterba, Tarun Ramadorai, Ulrich Seubert,
Neil Shephard, Robert Shiller, and Arjen Siegmann for comments on earlier drafts. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
The author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research. Further information
is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18339.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by John Y. Campbell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Mortgage Market Design
John Y. Campbell
NBER Working Paper No. 18339
August 2012
JEL No. G21,R21,R31
ABSTRACT
This paper explores the causes and consequences of cross-country variation in mortgage market structure.
It draws on insights from several fields: urban economics, asset pricing, behavioral finance, financial
intermediation, and macroeconomics. It discusses lessons from the credit boom, the challenges of
mortgage modification in the aftermath of the boom, consumer financial protection, and alternative
mortgage forms and funding models. The paper argues that the US has much to learn from mortgage
finance in other countries, and specifically from the Danish implementation of the European covered
bonds system.
John Y. Campbell
Morton L. and Carole S.
Olshan Professor of Economics
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 213
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
john_campbell@harvard.edu

1 Introduction
Residential mortgages are of …rst-order importance for households, for …nancial institutions,
and for macroeconomic stability. The typical household in a developed economy has one
dominant asset –a house –and one dominant liability –a mortgage. Mortgages are a
major fraction of bank assets, despite …nancial innovations that allow banks to securitize
mortgage pools. And the …nancial crisis that began in 2007 has made it abundantly clear
that problems in mortgage lending have the potential to destabilize the …nancial system and
the economy.
Despite their importance, mortgages have traditionally been a specialty topic in …nance,
and most mortgage research has been published in real estate and housing …nance journals,
not general-interest …nance or economics journals. In this paper I argue that to understand
mortgage markets we need a much broader perspective that integrates insights from across
our discipline: not only from …elds within …nance such as asset pricing, behavioral …nance,
and …nancial intermediation, but also from urban economics and macroeconomics. Each of
these …elds can be compared to the proverbial blind man groping an elephant, accurately
recording one aspect of the phenomenon but unable to perceive the whole. Here I attempt
a sketch of the whole elephant.
There is striking variation in mortgage market structure across countries. An obvious
question is whether this variation has deep fundamental causes or is the result of historical
accident. To the extent that not all cross-country di¤erences are attributable to di¤erent
circumstances, it may be possible to identify best practices in mortgage markets and transfer
them from one country to another. A theme of this paper is that the United States, in
particular, has much to learn from practices in certain parts of Europe.
To set the stage, I graphically summarize key properties of mortgage markets in a range
of developed countries. Figure 1 plots the ratio of residential mortgage debt to GDP in
2009 against the homeownership rate (the fraction of properties that are owner-occupied in
the most recently available data from each country), for sixteen developed countries studied
by the International Monetary Fund (IMF 2011). The United States is middle-of-the-road
in both respects. The lowest homeownership rates are in northern European countries,
particularly Germany whose homeownership rate is only 43%, while the highest rates are
in southern European countries such as Greece, Italy, and Spain with about 80% home-
ownership. The lowest level of mortgage debt (22% of GDP) is in Italy, while the highest
levels (above 100% of GDP) are in Denmark and the Netherlands. It may at …rst seem
surprising that homeownership rates are not positively correlated with levels of mortgage
debt; this re‡ects cross-country variation in house prices, patterns of homeownership (with
many southern European homes owned either by foreigners or by locals who own rural
homes and rent urban apartments), and reliance on family and life-cycle savings to …nance
homeownership.
1

Although the US has roughly average levels of homeownership (67%) and mortgage debt
(72% of GDP), it is unusual in two other respects. Figure 2 plots the average number of
years that a mortgage carries a …xed rate. The lowest values (around 1 year) are in southern
European countries such as Portugal, Spain, and Italy, where adjustable-rate mortgages
predominate. The UK and Ireland similarly rely heavily on adjustable-rate mortgages.
The average …xed-rate period is 5 years in Canada, 7-10 years in Belgium, France, and
Germany, almost 20 years in Denmark, and 27 years in the US re‡ecting a roughly 90%
market share for 30-year nominal …xed-rate mortgages. These instruments, which are taken
for granted in the US, are anomalous within the global mortgage system. The dominance
of long-term …xed-rate mortgages in the US is likely the result both of a relatively stable
in‡ation history, and of public policy promoting these mortgages.
Figure 3 plots an index of government participation in housing …nance, constructed by
the IMF (2011), against the homeownership rate. The IMF index combines information on
subsidies to home purchases, government funding or guarantees for mortgage loans, prefer-
ential tax treatment for mortgage interest or capital gains on housing, and the existence of a
dominant state-owned mortgage lender. The …gure shows that US housing policy is highly
interventionist, moresothananyothercountryillustratedexceptSingapore. Thehighvalue
of the government participation index for the US results from subsidies to low and middle
income homebuyers, subsidized mortgage guarantees by the government sponsored entities
(GSEs), and favorable tax treatment of mortgage borrowing and housing capital gains. The
main stated goal of much US housing policy is to increase the homeownership rate, but
as previously noted the US has only average homeownership, and more generally there is
only a very weak positive cross-country correlation between housing market intervention and
homeownership.2
The remainder of this paper summarizes the literature on mortgages within speci…c sub-
…elds. In section 2 I begin with urban economics, a …eld that emphasizes externalities from
homeownership and from mortgage foreclosures. Such externalities provide an important
rationale for public policy towards mortgages. Insection 3 I present insights fromasset pric-
ing, which regards mortgages as ways to share risks between borrowers and lenders. From
this point of view, mortgage defaults and foreclosures are merely another way to allocate
risks. Section 4 turns to behavioral …nance, a …eld that takes seriously variation across
households in personal circumstances (such as the propensity to move) and …nancial sophis-
tication. Behavioral …nance can also be used to justify consumer …nancial protection in
mortgage markets.
Mortgageloansneedtobefunded, andtheproblemofassuringareliablesupplyofcapital
for mortgage lending is a topic in …nancial intermediation. I review insights from this …eld
in section 5. Finally, mortgage markets are in‡uenced by macroeconomic conditions, for
example in‡ation volatility, and problems in mortgage markets have an important in‡uence
2Warnock and Warnock (2008) present a detailed cross-country empirical analysis of housing …nance
systems, arguing that legal rights, credit information, and macroeconomic stability all encourage the devel-
opment of housing …nance.
2