NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEBT- AND EQUITY-LED CAPITAL FLOW EPISODES
Kristin J. Forbes
Francis E. Warnock
Working Paper 18329
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18329
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012
This paper will be published in Capital Mobility and Monetary Policy (ed. Carmen Reinhart and Miguel
Fuentes), volume 18 of "Central Banking, Analysis, and Economic Policies" (Central Bank of Chile).
The authors thank for helpful comments and conversations José de Gregorio, Ramon Moreno, Carmen
Reinhart, and participants at the Central Bank of Chile Annual Research Conference. Vahid Gholampour
provided research assistance. We thank the Central Bank of Chile for generous support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Kristin J. Forbes and Francis E. Warnock. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Debt- and Equity-Led Capital Flow Episodes
Kristin J. Forbes and Francis E. Warnock
NBER Working Paper No. 18329
August 2012, Revised March 2013
JEL No. F30,G01
ABSTRACT
Forbes and Warnock (2012) identify episodes of extreme capital flow movements—surges, stops,
flight, and retrenchment—and find that global factors, especially global risk, are significantly associated
with extreme capital flow episodes whereas domestic macroeconomic characteristics and capital controls
are less important. That analysis leads naturally to the question of which types of capital flows are
driving the episodes and if debt- and equity-led episodes differ in material ways. After identifying
debt- and equity-led episodes, we find that most episodes of extreme capital flow movements around
the world are debt-led and the factors associated with debt-led episodes are similar to the factors behind
episodes identified with aggregate capital flow data. In contrast, equity-led episodes are less frequent,
more idiosyncratic, and differ in nature from other episodes.
Kristin J. Forbes
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-416
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
kjforbes@mit.edu
Francis E. Warnock
Darden Business School
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
and NBER
warnockf@darden.virginia.edu

1. Introduction
Forbes and Warnock (2012) helped to switch the focus of studies of extreme capital flow
movements toward the use of data on gross inflows (mainly driven by foreigners) and outflows (mainly
driven by domestics) rather than relying on net flows (the sum of the two). The old focus on net flows is
understandable; in the early and mid-1990s net capital inflows roughly mirrored gross inflows, so the
capital outflows of domestic investors could often (but not always) be ignored and changes in net
inflows could be interpreted as being driven by changes in foreign flows. More recently, however, as the
size and volatility of gross flows have increased while net capital flows have been more stable, the
differentiation between gross inflows and gross outflows has become more important. Foreign and
domestic investors can be motivated by different factors and respond differently to various policies and
shocks. Policymakers might also react differently based on whether episodes of extreme capital flow
movements are triggered by domestic or foreign sources. Analysis based solely on net flows, while
appropriate a few decades ago, would miss the dramatic changes in gross flows that have occurred over
the past decade and ignore important information contained in the these flows. As domestic investors’
flows have become increasingly important, changes in net flows can no longer be interpreted as being
driven solely by foreigners. This point was made forcefully in Forbes and Warnock (2012).
One question immediately emerges from the Forbes and Warnock (2012) analysis: To what
extent are the extreme episodes of surges, stops, retrenchment, and flight driven by different types of
capital flows? This paper tackles this question by dividing up episodes into those that are “debt-led” and
those that are “equity-led”. For a given episode—for example, consider a surge of inflows—if the
increase in flows was mainly through debt (specifically, bonds and banking flows) we identify that
episode as a debt-led surge. If in contrast the surge resulted mainly from an increase in equity inflows
2

(specifically, portfolio equity and FDI), it is an equity-led surge. We use the same approach to define
equity- and debt-led stops, retrenchment, and flight.
Our underlying quarterly data on gross inflows and gross outflows is identical to that in Forbes
and Warnock (2012). It covers the period from 1980 (at the earliest) through 2009 and includes over 50
emerging and developed economies.1 Using this database, we document the incidence of each type of
episode of extreme capital flow movements over time, by income level and region. We show an
unprecedented incidence of stops and retrenchment during the recent Global Financial Crisis (GFC), as
investors around the world liquidated foreign investment positions and brought money home.
Importantly, we show that the vast majority of extreme capital flow episodes across our sample—80%
of inflow episodes (surges and stops) and 70% of outflow episodes (flight and retrenchments)—are
fueled by debt, not equity, flows.
Next, the paper shifts to its second goal of understanding the factors that are associated with
debt- and equity-led episodes of extreme capital flows. We follow the Forbes and Warnock (2012)
analysis here by describing capital flow episodes as being driven by specific global factors, contagion,
and/or domestic factors. To a first approximation equity-led episodes appear to be idiosyncratic, bearing
little systematic relation to our explanatory variables. Notably, even the risk measures that were
highlighted in Forbes and Warnock (2012) as being significantly related to extreme movements in
aggregate capital flows have little or no significant relationship with equity-led episodes. In contrast,
risk measures are important in explaining debt-led episodes; when risk aversion is high, debt-led surges
are less likely and debt-led stops are more likely. Contagion, especially regional, is also important for
debt-led episodes. Country-level variables are largely insignificant, except for domestic growth shocks;
debt-led stops are more likely in countries experiencing a negative growth shock and debt-led surges are
1 In some graphs we include 2010 data, but not in empirical analysis because recent years’ balance of payments data are
subject to substantial revisions.
3