NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RESIDENT NETWORKS AND FIRM TRADE
Lauren Cohen
Umit G. Gurun
Christopher J. Malloy
Working Paper 18312
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18312
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012
This paper previously circulated as "Channels of Influence." We are grateful for funding from the
National Science Foundation. We thank Joshua Aizenman, Gennaro Bernile, Lee Branstetter, Geoffrey
Booth, Bill Cready, Robert Feenstra, Fritz Foley, Rob Hansen, George Korniotis, John McLaren, Florian
Peters, and seminar participants at the NBER International Trade and Investment Meeting at Stanford,
Brigham Young University, Australia National University, Ozyegin University, Michigan State University,
University of Alabama, University of Arizona, Baruch College, University of Amsterdam/Duisenberg
School of Finance, University of Melbourne, University of Miami, University of South Florida, University
of Texas at Dallas, University of Virginia, Washington University in Saint Louis, University of Mannheim,
and Tulane University, for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Lauren Cohen, Umit G. Gurun, and Christopher J. Malloy. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Resident Networks and Firm Trade
Lauren Cohen, Umit G. Gurun, and Christopher J. Malloy
NBER Working Paper No. 18312
August 2012, Revised April 2013
JEL No. F16,F30,G14
ABSTRACT
We demonstrate that simply by using the ethnic makeup surrounding a firm’s location, we can predict,
on average, which trade links are valuable for firms. Using customs and port authority data on the
international shipments of all U.S. publicly-traded firms, we show that firms are significantly more
likely to trade with countries that have a strong resident population near their firm headquarters. We
use the formation of World War II Japanese Internment Camps to isolate exogenous shocks to local
ethnic populations, and identify a causal link between local networks and firm trade links. Firms that
exploit their local networks (strategic traders) see significant increases in future sales growth and profitability,
and outperform other importers and exporters by 5%-7% per year in risk-adjusted stock returns. In
sum, our results document a surprisingly large impact of immigrants’ economic role as conduits of
information for firms in their new countries.
Lauren Cohen Christopher J. Malloy
Harvard Business School Harvard Business School
Baker Library 273 Baker Library 277
Soldiers Field Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163 Boston, MA 02163
and NBER and NBER
lcohen@hbs.edu cmalloy@hbs.edu
Umit G. Gurun
University of Texas at Dallas
School of Management
800 W Campbell Rd. SM41
75080 Richardson, TX
umit.gurun@utdallas.edu

Firms buy and sell goods in a global marketplace. As this becomes increasingly true,
understanding how firms differentially navigate this marketplace is critical to identifying
which firms will ultimately succeed, and how investors should allocate capital amongst
these firms. Success in this global setting depends not only on the goods or services
that firms can provide, but also on the information networks that firms can access. We
show that these networks have a first-order impact on the trade decisions undertaken by
these firms, both in terms of imports and exports. We further explore how quickly the
capital markets can separate the “strategic” importers and exporters from other firms,
and show that the market appears to have a difficult time deciphering even openly
observable channels.
Increasing exposure to foreign operations has been a consistent time-series trend
in the United States. The Bureau of Economic Analysis’s National Income and Product
Accounts (NIPA) broad measure of economy-wide firm profits shows that the
percentage of NIPA national profits coming from overseas has increased from roughly
21% in 2000 to 38% in 2010 (Hodge (2011)). Further, this is not a small firm
phenomenon, as the entire S&P 500 received 46% of their sales revenue from overseas in
2010, growing from only 30% ten years prior.
Although a large and growing number of public firms engage in international
transactions, we still do not have a full understanding of why firms choose to trade with
firms in certain countries, and how these decisions affect firm value. To shed light on
this question, we exploit variation in ethnic population breakdowns across metropolitan
statistical areas (MSAs) in the U.S. Specifically, we examine how local residents’ ties to
their home-countries can play a role in creating bilateral trade linkages and whether
(and importantly which of) these trade links are value-enhancing for firms.
We do this by focusing on the import and export activity of all US publicly-
traded firms for the past seventeen years. We obtain import and export data through
public records that must be reported by shippers, and then made publicly available
through customs and port authorities. We use this data to ask the question of whether
there are strategic trade decisions that a firm can make, given the immigration patterns
that result in concentrated ethnic populations close to certain firms.
1

An example of our identification strategy is the following. Suppose we consider a
firm located in Jersey City, New Jersey, where a common ethnicity is Indian. We first
test whether this firm is more likely to trade (either import or export) with a firm in
India, than a firm located in Bangor, Maine, where Indian is not a common ethnicity.
We hypothesize that local ethnicities may help lower the information barriers for local
companies, and thus that firms may enjoy benefits from this local advantage. In
addition, ethnic make-up may also proxy for local demand for a firm’s goods, which can
impact optimal importing decisions. We then test the value enhancement of these links.
We find evidence that firms export more to (and import more from) countries
with which they have stronger information links. We measure firm-country information
networks as the share of residents in a firm’s headquarter MSA that have the same
ethnicity as the country to which the firm is exporting/importing (a variable we call
“Connected Population”). A one standard deviation increase in connected population
increases the amount the firm exports to (imports from) a country by 63%, t=4.71
(33%, t=2.66).
Next we use the formation of World War II Japanese Internment Camps to
isolate exogenous shocks to local ethnic populations, and identify a causal link between
local networks and firm trade links. These internment camps were established
throughout the country to house Japanese and Japanese-Americans originally from the
West Coast who were relocated to camps following the bombing of Pearl Harbor in
1941. The camps represented a sizable shock to the Japanese populations surrounding
them, and had an enduring impact on these areas as many internees ultimately settled
around these camps, having no home or work to return to when the war ended. We
find that sixty years later, these internment camp locations had significantly higher
Japanese populations. Further, using the instrumented value of Japanese population
(with internment camp locations as an instrument), we show that this exogenously
determined Japanese ethnic population density had a large and significant impact on
local firm trading decisions, establishing more cleanly a causal link from surrounding
ethnic population to firm-level import and export decisions.
2