NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SOME REFLECTIONS ON THE RECENT FINANCIAL CRISIS
Gary B. Gorton
Working Paper 18397
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18397
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Gary B. Gorton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Some Reflections on the Recent Financial Crisis
Gary B. Gorton
NBER Working Paper No. 18397
September 2012
JEL No. E02,E3,E30,E32,E44,G01,G1,G2,G21
ABSTRACT
Economic growth involves metamorphosis of the financial system. Forms of banks and bank money
change. These changes, if not addressed, leave the banking system vulnerable to crisis. There is no
greater challenge in economics than to understand and prevent financial crises. The financial crisis
of 2007-2008 provides the opportunity to reassess our understanding of crises. All financial crises
are at root bank runs, because bank debt—of all forms—is vulnerable to sudden exit by bank debt
holders. The current crisis raises issues for crisis theory. And, empirically, studying crises is challenging
because of small samples and incomplete data.
Gary B. Gorton
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu

1
1. Introduction
Economic development does not result in the elimination of financial crises. The recent financial crisis of
2007-2009 in the United States and Europe shows that market economies, however much they grow
and change, are still susceptible to collapse or near-collapse from financial crisis. This is a staggering
thought. And it came as a surprise, as financial crises were thought to be things of the past for
developed economies, now only occurring in emerging markets. The fact of the crisis occurrence should
give pause to economists. While it may take many years to fully understand the recent crisis, in this
essay I offer some preliminary thoughts on crises. I do not review the academic literature, but rather
selectively raise some issues and in passing mention some research.
The recent crisis emphasizes that a “crisis” is a distinct, singular, event. It also raises questions about
what constitutes bank money, and what is a “bank,” and what is the “banking system”? Understanding
the crisis has run into problems from a lack of data, leaving researchers in the dark on many important
questions. Of course, knowing what data to collect requires an understanding of the crisis. Ironically, if
governments and economists knew what data to collect prior to a crisis, they would then likely
understand the fragility of the system and could possibly avoid a crisis. It seems that a lack of data and
the occurrence of a crisis go hand-in-hand. A crisis is a surprise, coming from an unexpected source. As
a result, there is little data. There are other inherent difficulties in studying crises. Although crises are
perhaps more common than many supposed before the current crisis, still the usable sample size of
events is small.
Central to understanding a crisis must be a concept of a crisis. A crisis is a systemic event involving an
exit from bank debt. It is sudden and unexpected. In the crisis, the banking system is insolvent if not for
suspension of convertibility or government and central bank actions. While this is clear, as an empirical
matter, it has been both easy and hard to define a “crisis.” Events are observable, but the whole story is
often not observable. Historically, in the face of bank runs, banks suspended convertibility so this could
be taken as indicating the outbreak of a crisis, although even this has a number of difficulties. In the
modern era, it is much harder to define an event as a crisis and to date the start and the end of a crisis.
This is usually because of government and central bank involvement or expectations of such
involvement. But, governments usually act late and there are not runs on banks in every case. The
upshot is that there is no unanimity on which events are crises, and less unanimity with respect to the
start and end dates of crises. This is a manifestation of the lack of data.
Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2138390

2
What do we know about financial crises? In fact, despite of the above difficulties, we know quite a bit
about crises. There are a number of stylized facts about crises that have been identified, some rather
recently. The stylized facts can help guide the development of models. It should be the case that models
incorporate these facts, some of which have to do with the build-up of fragility prior to the crisis and
others with the aftereffects, as well as the crisis itself.
First, we know that financial crises occur in all market economies, though sometimes there are long
periods of quiet. Crises occur in developed countries, not just emerging markets. The recent financial
crisis shows that the financial system can morph in such a way that a crisis can occur after a fairly long
period of quiet. The frequency of financial crises historically and internationally strongly suggests that
there is a structural or inherent problem with bank debt.
Secondly, we know that crises are exits from bank debt. But, the recent crisis centered on forms of bank
debt that are quite different from most (but not all!) previous crises. Can our theories accommodate
these other forms of debt? Generating such an event in a model seems harder when the money
involved is, for example, sale and repurchase agreements (repo). In this form of money, each
“depositor” receives a bond as collateral. There is no common pool of assets on which bank debt
holders have a claim. So, strategic considerations about coordinating with other agents do not arise.
This is a challenge for theory and raises issues concerning notions of liquidity and collateral, and
generally of the design of trading securities—private money.
There are other facts we know about crises. A crisis is a sudden event, a structural break or a regime
switch. A crisis is not just a bad outcome in a setting where there is a range of bad outcomes. A crisis is
a uniquely bad outcome. Crises are preceded typically by credit booms. They tend to occur at business
cycle peaks. They are very costly.
But, there are many things we do not know about crises. We do not know about the dynamics of crises,
why agents form suspicions about the value of the assets or collateral backing bank debt. We do not
know how agents’ expectations of government actions affect the dynamics of crises. We do not know if
the preceding credit booms finance productive activity. We do not know what policies can prevent
crises, without repressing the banking system. We do not know much about which regulatory systems
have been successful at mitigating the occurrence of crises (except by casual observation). We do not
know much about how to update measurement systems to detect the buildup of systemic risk.