NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHICH FINANCIAL FRICTIONS? PARSING THE EVIDENCE FROM THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS OF 2007-9
Tobias Adrian
Paolo Colla
Hyun Song Shin
Working Paper 18335
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18335
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012
Paper presented at the NBER Macro Annual Conference, April 20-21, 2012. We thank Daron Acemoglu,
Olivier Blanchard, Thomas Eisenbach, Mark Gertler, Simon Gilchrist, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Guido
Lorenzoni, Jonathan Parker, Michael Woodford and participants at the Chicago Macroeconomic Fragility
conference and the 2012 AEA meetings for comments on earlier versions of the paper. We also thank
Michael Roberts and Simon Gilchrist for making available data used in this paper. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or the Federal Reserve System.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Tobias Adrian, Paolo Colla, and Hyun Song Shin. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Which Financial Frictions? Parsing the Evidence from the Financial Crisis of 2007-9
Tobias Adrian, Paolo Colla, and Hyun Song Shin
NBER Working Paper No. 18335
August 2012
JEL No. E2,E5,G01,G21
ABSTRACT
The financial crisis of 2007-9 has sparked keen interest in models of financial frictions and their impact
on macro activity. Most models share the feature that borrowers suffer a contraction in the quantity
of credit. However, the evidence suggests that although bank lending to firms declines during the
crisis, bond financing actually increases to make up much of the gap. This paper reviews both aggregate
and micro level data and highlights the shift in the composition of credit between loans and bonds.
Motivated by the evidence, we formulate a model of direct and intermediated credit that captures
the key stylized facts. In our model, the impact on real activity comes from the spike in risk premiums,
rather than contraction in the total quantity of credit.
Tobias Adrian Hyun Song Shin
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Department of Economics
Capital Market Research Princeton University
33 Liberty Street Princeton, NJ 08544
New York, NY 10045 and NBER
tobias.adrian@ny.frb.org hsshin@princeton.edu
Paolo Colla
Department of Finance, room 2-D2-08
Università Bocconi
Via Röntgen 1
20136 Milano, Italy
paolo.colla@unibocconi.it
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18335

1 Introduction
The financial crisis of 2007-9 has given renewed impetus to the study of financial frictions
and their impact on macroeconomic activity. Economists have refined existing models
of financial frictions to construct narratives of the recent crisis. Although the recent
innovations to the modeling of financial frictions share many common elements, they also
differ along some key dimensions. These differences may not matter so much for story-
telling exercises that focus on constructing logically consistent narratives that highlight
particularaspectsofthecrisis. However,thedifferencesbegintotakeonmoresignificance
wheneconomists turn their attentionto empirical or policy-related questionsthat bear on
the costs of financial crises. Since policy questions must make judgments on the relative
weight given to specific features of the models, the underpinnings of the models matter
for the debates.
Along-runningdebateinmacroeconomicsiswhetherfinancialfrictionsmanifestthem-
selvesmainlythroughshockstothedemandforcreditortoitssupply. Frictionsoperating
through shocks to demand may be the result of the deterioration of the creditworthiness
of borrowers, perhaps through tightening collateral constraints or to declines in the net
present value of the borrowers’ projects. Shocks to supply arise from tighter lending
criteria applied by the lender, especially by the banking sector. The outcome of this
debate has consequences not only for the way that economists approach the theory but
also for the conduct of financial regulation and macro stabilization policy.
Our paper has two main objectives. The first is to revisit the debate on the demand
and supply of credit to firms in the light of the evidence from the recent crisis. We
argue that the evidence points overwhelmingly to a shock in the supply of intermediated
credit by banks and other financial intermediaries. Firms that had access to direct credit
through the bond market took advantage of their access and tapped the bond market
in large quantities. For such firms, the decline in bank lending was largely made up
through increased borrowing in the bond market. However, the cost of credit rose steeply,
whether for direct or intermediated credit, suggesting that the demand curve for bond
financing shifted out as a response to the inward shift in the bank credit supply curve.
OurfindingechoestheearlierstudybyKashyap, SteinandWilcox(1993), whopointedto
the importance of shocks to the supply of intermediated credit as a key driver of financial
frictions.
1

The evidence suggests a number of follow-up questions. Our second objective in this
paper is to enumerate these questions and explore possible routes to answering them.
What is so special about the banking sector? Why did the recent economic downturn
affect the banking sector so differently from the bond investors? Kashyap, Stein and
Wilcox (1993) envisaged a specific shock to the banking sector through tighter reserve
constraints coming from monetary policy tightening, thereby squeezing bank lending.
However, the downturn in 2007-9 was more widespread, hitting not only the banking
sector but the broader economy. We still face the question of why the banking sector
behaves in such a different way from the rest of the economy.
If banks were simply a veil, and merely reflected the preferences of the depositors who
provide funding to the banks for on-lending, then banks would be irrelevant for financial
conditions. A challenge for any macro model with a banking sector is to explain how
one dollar that goes through the banking system is different from one dollar that goes
directly to borrowers from savers. Holding savers’ wealth fixed, when the banking sector
contracts in a deleveraging episode, money that used to flow to borrowers through the
banking sector now flows to borrowers directly through the bond market. Thus, showing
thatthebankingsector“matters”inamacrocontextentailsshowingthattherelativesize
of the direct and intermediated finance in an economy matters for financial conditions.
We begin in Section 2 by laying out some aggregate evidence from the Flow of Funds
and highlight the points of contact with the theoretical literature on financial frictions.
In Section 3, we delve deeper into the micro evidence on firm-level financing decisions and
find that it corroborates the evidence in the aggregate data. Based on the evidence, we
draw up a checklist for a theory of financial frictions, and sketch a simple static model of
direct and intermediated credit that attempts to address the checklist.
Along the way, we review the theoretical literature in the light of the evidence. Al-
though many of the recent modeling innovations bring us closer to addressing the full set
of facts, there are a number of areas where modeling innovations are still needed. We
hope that our paper may be a spur to further efforts at closing these gaps.
2