NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE IN THE U.S.:
PERCEPTIONS, FACTS AND CHALLENGES
Steven N. Kaplan
Working Paper 18395
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18395
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012
Kaplan serves on public company and mutual fund boards. Douglas Baird, Effi Benmelech, Carola
Frydman, Austan Goolsbee, Jeff Miron, Lawrence Mishel, Raghu Rajan, Amir Sufi, Luke Taylor and
Rob Vishny provided helpful comments. Wei Wu provided excellent research assistance. A version
of this paper will appear in the Cato Papers on Public Policy. This paper also formed the basis for
the 2012 Martin Feldstein Lecture at the NBER. I thank the Cato Institute, the Center for Research
in Security Prices and the NBER for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Steven N. Kaplan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Executive Compensation and Corporate Governance in the U.S.: Perceptions, Facts and Challenges
Steven N. Kaplan
NBER Working Paper No. 18395
September 2012, Revised September 2012
JEL No. G30,G32,J33,L2
ABSTRACT
In this paper, I consider the evidence for three common perceptions of U.S. public company CEO
pay and corporate governance: (1) CEOs are overpaid and their pay keeps increasing; (2) CEOs are
not paid for their performance; and (3) boards do not penalize CEOs for poor performance. While
average CEO pay increased substantially through the 1990s, it has declined since then. CEO pay levels
relative to other highly paid groups today are comparable to their average levels in the early 1990s
although they remain above their long-term historical average. The ratio of large-company CEO pay
to firm market value is roughly similar to its level in the late-1970s and lower than its pre-1960s levels.
These patterns suggest that similar forces, likely technology and scale, have played a meaningful role
in driving CEO pay and the pay of others with top incomes. With regard to performance, CEOs are
paid for performance and penalized for poor performance. Finally, boards do monitor CEOs. The
rate of CEO turnover has increased in the 2000s compared to the 1980s and 1990s, and is significantly
tied to poor stock performance. While corporate governance failures and pay outliers as well as the
very high average pay levels relative to the typical household undoubtedly have contributed to the
common perceptions, a meaningful part of CEO pay appears to be market determined and boards do
appear to monitor their CEOs. Consistent with that, top executive pay policies at over 98% of S&P
500 and Russell 3000 companies received majority shareholder support in the Dodd-Frank mandated
Say-On-Pay votes in 2011.
Steven N. Kaplan
Booth School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
steven.kaplan@chicagobooth.edu

1. Introduction
Chief Executive Officers (CEOs) of public companies are routinely perceived to be overpaid and
their boards are perceived to provide poor or limited oversight. These perceptions have three typical
components: (1) CEOs are overpaid and their pay keeps increasing; (2) CEOs are not paid for
performance; and (3) boards are not doing their jobs as monitors. For example, Bebchuk and Fried
(2006) claim that, “flawed compensation arrangements have not been limited to a small number of ‘bad
apples’; they have been widespread, persistent, and systemic.”
In the last decade, the U.S. has implemented two major pieces of legislation designed to improve
corporate governance. The scandals of Enron, WorldCom and others early in this century led to the
Sarbanes-Oxley legislation in 2002. And the financial crisis led to the Dodd-Frank legislation in 2010
that includes a requirement that all public companies obtain an annual advisory shareholder vote on top
executive pay (“say-on-pay”). Despite the legislation and attention, the perceptions and criticism
continue. Recently, the New York Times wrote, “the top brass generally do much, much better than the
rest of us, whether times are good or bad.”1 And Forbes wrote, “Our report on executive compensation
will only fuel the outrage over corporate greed.”2
In this paper, I consider the accuracy of these perceptions today. What are the facts about CEO
pay? Is it true that the typical CEO is not paid for performance? How much and how well do public
company boards monitor their CEOs, particularly for poor performance? The recurring question I address
is what are the drivers of CEO pay? Is pay driven by the power that CEOs wield over their boards
leading CEOs to be overpaid? Is pay driven by a competitive market for talent (and CEOs are paid
appropriately)? Or is pay driven by a combination of those and other forces?
What has happened to CEO pay over time? There are two ways to measure CEO pay. The first,
estimated or grant-date pay, includes salary, bonus, restricted stock and the estimated value of stock
1
Natalie Singer, April 8, 2012, http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/08/business/in-chief-executives-pay-a-rich-game-
of-thrones.html.
2 Scott DeCarlo, April 23, 2012, “Gravity-Defying CEO Pay,” http://www.forbes.com/forbes/2012/0423/ceo-
compensation-12-company-earnings-highest-gravity-defying-pay.html
1

options when they are granted. This is the compensation package the board has awarded the CEO that
year. The second, realized pay, values stock options at their realized values only if and when they are
exercised and realized.
In looking at CEO pay levels, I focus on estimated pay because that is the pay under the board’s
control. Average estimated CEO pay (adjusted for inflation) is at roughly the same level in 2010 as it was
in 1998 and lower than it was in 2000. In other words, average CEO pay has not continued to increase. It
has declined since the large run up of the 1990s.
While public company CEO pay has declined, it is still very high relative to the typical
household. But that also is true of the pay of top performers in other professions such as lawyers,
investors, and private company executives.
I extend the analysis in Kaplan and Rauh (2010) to measure average CEO pay relative to the pay
of others with top incomes. The ratio of average CEO pay to the average pay of those with top incomes
(the top 0.1%) is comparable to or lower than the ratios in the early 1990s. And the results in Bakhija et
al. (2012) suggest that the pay of public company executives has increased by less than the pay of private
company executives since 1980.
Over the longer-term, the ratio of public company CEO pay to the top 0.1 percent of taxpayers in
the late 2000s is comparable to its level in the late 1930s as well as the early 1990s, but higher than its
long-term average.3 The ratio of large-company CEO pay to firm market value is roughly similar to its
level in the late-1970s and lower than its pre-1960s levels.
I also extend the analysis in Kaplan and Rauh (2010) to show the increase in compensation for
several particular highly paid groups. Top lawyers have seen their pay increase by roughly the same
percentage as S&P 500 CEOs. Hedge fund, private equity, and venture capital investors have seen their
fees increase markedly. The top 25 hedge fund managers as a group regularly earn more than all 500
CEOs in the S&P 500.
3 See also Murphy (2012) and Frydman and Jenter (2010) for excellent surveys on CEO pay. They show similar
time series evidence on CEO compensation.
2