NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SYSTEMATIC RISK, DEBT MATURITY, AND THE TERM STRUCTURE OF CREDIT
SPREADS
Hui Chen
Yu Xu
Jun Yang
Working Paper 18367
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18367
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012
We thank Viral Acharya, Heitor Almeida, Jennifer Carpenter, Chris Hennessy, Burton Holli˝eld, Nengjiu
Ju, Thorsten Koeppl, Leonid Kogan, Jun Pan, Monika Piazzesi, Ilya Strebulaev, Wei Xiong and seminar
participants at the NBER Asset Pricing Meeting, Texas Finance Festival, China International Conference
in Finance, Summer Institute of Finance Conference, Bank of Canada Fellowship Workshop, London
School of Economics, and London Business School for comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Hui Chen, Yu Xu, and Jun Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Systematic Risk, Debt Maturity, and the Term Structure of Credit Spreads
Hui Chen, Yu Xu, and Jun Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 18367
September 2012
JEL No. E32,G32,G33
ABSTRACT
We build a dynamic capital structure model to study the link between firms' systematic risk exposures
and their time-varying debt maturity choices, as well as its implications for the term structure of credit
spreads. Compared to short-term debt, long-term debt helps reduce rollover risks, but its illiquidity
raises the costs of financing. With both default risk and liquidity costs changing over the business
cycle, our calibrated model implies that debt maturity is pro-cyclical, firms with high systematic risk
favor longer debt maturity, and that these firms will have more stable maturity structures over the cycle.
Moreover, pro-cyclical maturity variation can significantly amplify the impact of aggregate shocks
on the term structure of credit spreads, especially for firms with high beta, high leverage, or a lumpy
maturity structure. We provide empirical evidence for the model predictions on both debt maturity
and credit spreads.
Hui Chen Jun Yang
MIT Sloan School of Management Bank of Canada
77 Massachusetts Avenue, E62-637 junyang@bankofcanada.ca
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
huichen@mit.edu
Yu Xu
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Ave
Cambridge, MA 02139
yu_xu@mit.edu

1 Introduction
The aggregate corporate debt maturity has a clear cyclical pattern: the average debt maturity
is longer in economic expansions than in recessions. Using data from the Flow of Funds
Accounts, we plot in Figure 1 the trend and cyclical components of the share of long-term
debt for nonfinancial firms from 1952 to 2010. There is distinct pro-cyclical variation in the
aggregate long-term debt share, with the cyclical component dropping by 4% on average from
peak to trough.1 These facts raise important questions for firms’ debt maturity management
and corporate bond pricing. First, how do firms with different exposures to aggregate risks
make their debt maturity choices? Second, given that a reduction of the debt maturity
typically leads to higher rollover risk, how much can the cyclical variation in debt maturity
amplify the fluctuations in credit risk over the business cycle?
Our paper addresses these two questions using a dynamic capital structure model with
maturity choice. The model not only endogenously determines firms’ default risk for a given
maturity choice, but also shows how firms can manage their systematic risk exposures through
optimal maturity choice. In the model, firms face business cycle fluctuations in growth,
economic uncertainty, and risk premia. They choose how much debt to issue based on the
trade-off between the tax benefits of debt and the costs of financial distress. Default occurs
due to equity holders’ inability to commit to servicing the debt, especially when debt needs
to be rolled over at high yields. A longer debt maturity helps reduce this rollover risk. At
the same time, long-term bonds are more costly to issue than short-term bonds due to their
illiquidity, which we model in reduced form and calibrate to the data. Firms choose their
debt maturity based on these trade-offs.
In the model, systematic risk affects maturity choice through two channels. For firms
with high systematic risk, default is more likely to occur in aggregate bad times. Since the
risk premium associated with the deadweight losses of default raises the expected bankruptcy
costs, these firms choose longer debt maturity during normal times to reduce rollover risk,
1The sample mean of long-term debt share is 62%. We do not study the long-term trend in debt maturity
in this paper. Greenwood, Hanson, and Stein (2010) argue that this trend is consistent with firms acting as
macro liquidity providers.
1

75
70
65
60
55
50
1952 1960 1969 1977 1985 1994 2002 2011
)%(erahS
A.Long termdebtsharetrend
4
2
0
−2
−4
1952 1960 1969 1977 1985 1994 2002 2011
Time
)%(erahS
B.Long termdebtsharecycle
Figure 1: Long-term debt share for nonfinancial corporate business. The top panel
plots the trend component (via the Hodrick-Prescott filter) of aggregate long-term debt share.
The bottom panel plots the cyclical component. The shaded areas denote NBER-dated
recessions. Source: Flow of Funds Accounts (Table L.102).
which in turn lowers their default risk and bankruptcy costs. Next, in recessions, risk premium
rises, and so does the liquidity premium for long-term bonds. On the one hand, firms with
low systematic risk exposures respond by replacing the long-term bonds that is maturing in
recessions with short-term bonds, which lowers their average debt maturity. On the other
hand, firms with high systematic risk become even more concerned about the rollover risk
associated with short maturity during such times. In response, they continue rolling over the
matured long-term bonds into new long-term bonds despite the higher liquidity costs. As a
result, their maturity structures are more stable over the business cycle than firms with low
systematic risk.
Our calibrated model generates reasonable predictions for leverage, default probabilities,
credit spreads, and equity pricing. Through the model, we also analyze the impact of debt
maturity dynamics on the term structure of credit spreads.
2