NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANKS, SOVEREIGN DEBT AND THE INTERNATIONAL TRANSMISSION OF
BUSINESS CYCLES
Luca Guerrieri
Matteo Iacoviello
Raoul Minetti
Working Paper 18303
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18303
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012
The views expressed in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted
as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, any other person
associated with the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Replication
codes and an Appendix containing detailed derivations are available from the authors upon request.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Luca Guerrieri, Matteo Iacoviello, and Raoul Minetti. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Banks, Sovereign Debt and the International Transmission of Business Cycles
Luca Guerrieri, Matteo Iacoviello, and Raoul Minetti
NBER Working Paper No. 18303
August 2012
JEL No. F4,G21,H63
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the international propagation of sovereign debt default. We posit a two-country
economy where capital constrained banks grant loans to firms and invest in bonds issued by the domestic
and the foreign government. The model economy is calibrated to data from Europe, with the two countries
representing the Periphery (Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain) and the Core, respectively. Large contractionary
shocks in the Periphery trigger sovereign default. We find sizable spillover effects of default from Periphery
to the Core through a drop in the volume of credit extended by the banking sector.
Luca Guerrieri Raoul Minetti
The Federal Reserve Board Michigan State University
Mail Stop 20 minetti@msu.edu
20th and C Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20551
luca.guerrieri@frb.gov
Matteo Iacoviello
Federal Reserve Board
Mail Stop 20
20th and C st NW
Washington DC 20551
matteo.iacoviello@frb.gov

1 Introduction
Inthelastfifteenyears,followingtheintroductionoftheeuroandtheresultingeliminationofexchange
rateriskamongeuroareamembers,Europeanbankshaveincreasingly,“happilyownedregional,rather
than merely national, government bond portfolios” (The Economist, 2012). In particular, banks of the
core European countries (e.g., France and Germany) have turned into major holders of the sovereign
debt of periphery countries, such as Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain. For instance, combining data
from the Bank for International Settlements with data from the Bank of France reveals that in the
last quarter of 2009, just before the outbreak of the eurozone sovereign debt crisis, the ratio of French
banks’ holdings of Periphery’s sovereign debt over their holdings of French government debt equaled
56 percent, up from 19 percent in the first quarter of 2005. Figure 1 plots various ratios for French
banks’ holdings of Periphery’s sovereign debt from the first quarter of 2005 to the third quarter of
2011.1 The figure shows a dramatic increase in the holdings of Periphery sovereign debt by French
banks, whether these are normalized by banks’ total assets, their holdings of French government debt
or by the total sovereign debt of Periphery countries.2
During the current sovereign debt crisis in Europe, the large holdings of government bonds
accumulated in recent years have significantly exposed European banks to the default risk of periphery
countries. Thishasbeenexacerbatedbythefactthat,asshownbytherestructuringofGreeksovereign
debt in March 2012, banks and other private investors are treated as junior creditors relative to official
investors (e.g., the central banks of the Eurosystem) during sovereign debt restructurings.3 European
banks have thus suffered from a sizable erosion of their capitalization and a severe difficulty to tap
wholesale funding and interbank markets. Allegedly, this has resulted, in turn, into reduced ability
and propensity to extend credit to firms.
The propagation of sovereign default to the banking sector and, ultimately, to the corporate
sector poses challenges that have been largely unexplored, thus far. A first question regards the
magnitudeofthepossibleeffects. Howlargecanabankcreditcrunchinducedbyasovereigndebtcrisis
be and how important the international spillovers? Second, how does the degree of banks’ exposure
1We choose data for France since analogous data for German banks are available only starting in 2010Q4.
2The holdings of Belgian, Italian and Spanish government debt exceeded the tier 1 capital of banks in the three
countries and 50 percent of the tier capital of banks in France and Germany (see Shambaugh, 2012).
3The restructuring of Greek debt in March 2012 involved bonds for a total value of about 199 billion Euros. The
exchange of new bonds for old ones reduced the face value of bonds by almost 55 percent.
2

to foreign sovereign debt affect the transmission of shocks across countries?4 If banks deleverage by
selling governmentbonds, they will aggravatethe financing problems of the government, but will avoid
a credit crunch on firms. If instead banks deleverage by contracting credit to the corporate sector,
they will not exacerbate the funding pressures on the government, but their actions will push up firms’
financing costs.5 In an international setting, these issues are more complex since banks hold both
domestic and foreign government bonds and may also deleverage by scaling down their holdings of
foreign government bonds.
To answer these questions, we develop an equilibrium business cycle model. The model features
two country blocs, Periphery (Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain) and Core (the rest of the Europe).
Prices and wages are assumed to be flexible, so that, absent sovereign default, our model behaves
not too differently from a standard international real business cycle model. In each bloc there are
households, entrepreneurs, final good firms, and a government. In addition, in each bloc a banking
sectorintermediatesfundsbetweenhouseholdsandentrepreneurs. Householdssupplylabortodomestic
entrepreneurs and deposit savings in local banks. Banks, in turn, grant loans to entrepreneurs and
invest in bonds issued by the domestic and the foreign government. Agents in both countries derive
utility from consumption. In each country, entrepreneurs produce final goods using capital and labor.
Banks are subject to an exogenous capital requirement that constrains their supply of loanable funds.
The government maximizes the utility from its expenditure, finances itself through taxes and bonds
and can choose to default on its outstanding debt. In each period, its debt capacity is related to its
repayment history, reflecting the possibility that default induces punishment in the form of partial
exclusion from financial markets.
We use the model to understand cause and effects of sovereign default. Regarding the cause,
default occurs when contractionary shocks in a country are large enough that the government prefers
to stop honoring its debt in order to curb the contraction in spending. Regarding the consequences
of default, we decompose them in two effects, a debt repudiation effect, and a punishment effect.
Repudiation represents a transfer of wealth from banks and domestic households to the government.
4Intheanalysis,weabstractfromtheinterbankmarketandpositthatbanksfundthemselvesthroughretaildeposits
and equity.
5Duringtheeurozonecrisis,banksofcoreEuropeancountrieshaveonlyslightlydecreasedorincreasedtheirholdings
of domestic government debt. By contrast, they have reduced both their holdings of foreign government bonds and the
credit extended to firms.
3