NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ELECTIONS AND THE QUALITY OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS:
EVIDENCE FROM U.S. STATE COURTS
Claire S.H. Lim
James M. Snyder, Jr.
Working Paper 18355
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18355
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012
The research conducted for this article was supported by a research grant from the American Bar Association
(ABA) Section of Litigation; however, the views expressed here are not intended to represent ABA
positions or policies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Claire S.H. Lim and James M. Snyder, Jr.. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Elections and the Quality of Public Officials: Evidence from U.S. State Courts
Claire S.H. Lim and James M. Snyder, Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 18355
September 2012
JEL No. D72,D78,H70,K40
ABSTRACT
We investigate the influence of electoral rules and voter information in elections on voting outcomes
and the quality of public officials, using new data on state court judge elections in 39 states in the U.S.
from 1990 to 2010. We find, first, that voting is very partisan in partisan judicial elections – i.e., there
is a strong correlation between the Democratic "normal vote'' and the Democratic vote share for judges
– but not in non-partisan or non-competitive "retention'' elections. This partisan voting behavior cannot
be attributed to clear differences between Democratic and Republican judges in their sentencing decisions,
since such differences, if any, are small and not consistent. Second, we find that incumbent judges'
quality has little effect on their vote share or probability of winning in partisan general elections. By
contrast, it has a substantial effect in non-partisan elections and partisan primary elections. It also has
a noticeable effect on their vote share in retention elections, but the magnitude is often too small to
affect reelection. Evidence on turnout is consistent with a simple "voting cue'' hypothesis. We find
that about 83\% of the voters who vote on the top office on the ballot also vote on judicial elections
in partisan elections. In contrast, in nonpartisan and retention elections, only 76\% and 67\% of those
who vote on the top office also vote on judicial candidates, respectively. In addition, the amount of
newspaper coverage affects voter turnout only in non-partisan elections.
Claire S.H. Lim
Cornell University
clairelim@cornell.edu
James M. Snyder, Jr.
Harvard University
1737 Cambridge Street, CGIS
Knafel Building Room 413
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jsnyder@gov.harvard.edu

1 Introduction
How can citizens select good government officials and hold them accountable for their behavior?
This has long been an important question in economics (e.g., Barro (1973) and Ferejohn (1986)).
Recently, therehasbeenagrowinginterestinhowtheoptimalityofselectionandretentionsystems
for public officials depends on the nature of the tasks they perform (e.g. Alesina and Tabellini
(2007)). This paper studies electoral systems used for public officials who perform bureaucratic
tasks: U.S. state court judges.1
Most countries use the appointment system for public officials who perform bureaucratic tasks,
such as trial court judges, prosecutors, regulators, school district superintendents, and city coun-
cillors. In contrast, a large number of U.S. states employ direct elections of such public officials.
Manyimportantissuessurroundingthisvariationarenotclearlyunderstood. Howvotersbehavein
such elections? Under what circumstances is the direct election of these public officials desirable?
On one hand, direct election of public officials may lead to selection of those whose preferences
are well-aligned with voters.2 On the other hand, voters may largely be uninformed, as argued
by Downs (1957), and voter behavior may be influenced by idiosyncratic and irrelevant factors, as
argued by Bartels (2008). Additionally, the paucity of voter information in elections may lead to
poor quality of elected public officials, or poor performance due to insufficient monitoring.
This paper empirically analyzes the institutional design of electoral processes, with a focus on
voters’ partisan voting behavior and the influence of candidate quality on voting outcomes. We
highlight two comparisons: (1) partisan elections vs. non-partisan elections, and (2) competitive
elections vs. non-competitive “retention” elections. We ask how much these features affect the
degree to which voters base their votes on candidates’ party affiliation, and whether these appear
to increase or decrease the degree to which higher quality or better performing candidates receive
more votes, and win more elections.
Why should these features of the electoral systems matter? On one hand, given the relatively
strong party attachments of most U.S. voters, when voters know that candidates’ party affiliations
are listed on the ballot they might not search for other information that is more difficult to find
and remember.3 Information about candidate quality or performance is likely to fall into the
“relatively difficult to find and remember” category. Moreover, party polarization in the U.S. has
been relatively high for at least the past two decades, and a variety of different models predict
that when polarization is high, candidate quality and performance will have less impact on voting
outcomes.4 In addition, many voters choose to abstain in non-partisan elections. It is possible that
1Although state supreme court judges have some “policy-making” function, they constitute only about 3.5% of
our election data. Most judges in our data are state trial court judges, in charge of routine tasks such as keeping an
order in court trials rather than ideological policy making.
2BesleyandCoate(2003)showthatselectingregulatorsthroughdirectelectionasopposedtoappointmentyields
thetypesofregulatorswhowillconformtovoters’preferenceratherthantheorganizedinterestsoftheelectricpower
industry.
3Stumpf and Culver (1992) make this argument: “In partisan [judicial] races, the political party label may give
most voters all the information they seek.”
4See, for example, Ashworth and Bueno de Mesquita (2008), Padro i Miquel (2007), and Besley et al. (2005).
2

those who vote in non-partisan elections have more information of the “relatively difficult to find
and remember” variety than those who do not. On the other hand, partisan competition may also
have an opposite effect. When there is strong inter-party competition, political parties may have
strong incentives to recruit, support, and disseminate information about high-quality candidates,
leading to a better quality of elected public officials.5
The state judiciary is an ideal context to study these issues for several reasons. First, there is
uniquevariationintherulesbywhichstatecourtjudgesareselectedandretained. Specifically,three
systems are dominantly used: in partisan elections, candidates compete with party affiliation; in
nonpartisanelections,candidatescompetewithoutpartyaffiliation;andinretentionelections,there
are no challengers, and voters cast a yes-or-no vote on incumbents. (See Table 1 and Section 2.1
for details.) Second, in many states, one or more bar associations routinely evaluate the “quality”
of judges and judicial candidates and publish these evaluations. In a few states, a state commission
compiles and publishes evaluations. Newspapers often print stories about these evaluations as well.
We use two newly collected data sets, one on election results and one on judicial evaluations. The
election data covers state court judges in 39 U.S. states over the period 1990-2010. The judicial
evaluation data covers 24 states, and its time frame varies considerably across states and localities.
Third, the nature of judges’ tasks and the scope of their discretion are fairly uniform across states,
which makes cross-state comparison of their selection systems and their behavior viable.
Our findings are summarized as follows. First, we find that voting is highly partisan in partisan
judicial elections – i.e., there is a strong correlation between the Democratic “normal vote” and the
Democratic vote share for judges – but not in non-partisan or retention elections.6 This partisan
votingbehaviorcannotbeattributedtocleardifferencesbetweenDemocraticandRepublicanjudges
in their sentencing decisions, since such differences, if any, are small and not consistent.
Second, we find that the quality of judicial candidates has relatively little effect on their vote
share or probability of winning in partisan general elections. By contrast, the quality of judicial
candidates has a substantial effect on their vote share and probability of winning in non-partisan
elections and in partisan primary elections.7 Incumbent judges’ quality also has a noticeable effect
on their vote share in retention elections, although the magnitude is rarely large enough to affect
reelection. It is possible that the presence of opposing candidates and a relatively high degree of
Banerjee and Pande (2007) yields similar kinds of predictions in a multi-party environment.
5Besleyetal. (2010)showthatstronginter-partycompetitionleadstopro-growtheconomicpoliciessuchaslower
tax rates, higher capital spending, and increased use of right-to-work laws.
6Wearenotthefirsttodocumentthis. SeeDubois(1980)foranearlyanalysis,andSquireandSmith(1988)and
KleinandBaum(2001)forexperimentalevidence. Allofthesestudies,likealmostallexistingwork,focusexclusively
on high court judges.
7We are only aware of two previous studies that attempt to estimate the impact of bar association evaluations
on voting. Goldstein (1979-1980) studies the 1977 judicial elections in Louisville, Kentucky. Dubois (1984) studies
superiorcourtelectionsinCaliforniaovertheperiod1976-1980. Goldsteinfindsthatbarassociationevaluationshavea
largeimpactonvoting. Duboisfindsasmallereffect,althoughitisstillpositiveandstatisticallysignificant. Moreover,
Dubois includes controls for incumbency, campaign spending, and newspaper endorsements in his regressions; since
thesearecorrelatedwithquality,hisestimatesprobablyunderstatetheoverall“reducedform”effectofquality,which
is the quantity of interest to us. California and Kentucky use non-partisan elections, so these findings are generally
consistent with ours.
3