NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO PATENT POOLS ENCOURAGE INNOVATION? EVIDENCE FROM 20 U.S.
INDUSTRIES UNDER THE NEW DEAL
Ryan L. Lampe
Petra Moser
Working Paper 18316
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18316
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2012
We thank Tim Bresnahan, Christian Helmers, Eric Hilt, Rick Hornbeck, Pete Klenow, Annika Lorenz,
Mark Lemley, Josh Lerner, Shaun McRae, David Mowery, Tom Nicholas, Roger Noll, Paul Rhode,
Tim Simcoe, John Wallis, Gavin Wright, Peter Zeitz, and seminar participants at the All-UC Economic
History Conference on Science and Innovation, the Clio Meetings in Arizona, DePaul, Berkeley, Loyola,
the NBER Conference on Patents, Standards, and Innovation, the Summer Institute of the NBER’
Development of the American Economy Program, Northwestern Economics, Northwestern’s Searle
Center, Stanford University, and U.C. Irvine for helpful comments. Librarians at the National Archives
in Chicago, Kansas City, New York City, Riverside, and San Francisco were instrumental in facilitating
access to primary documents. Siyeona Chang, Josh Wagner, Aleksandra Goulioutina, and Marina
Kutyavina provided valuable research assistance. Moser thanks the Stanford Institute for Policy Research
(SIEPR) and the Olin Center for Law and Economics at Stanford for financial support. Lampe thanks
the Driehaus College of Business and the Department of Economics at DePaul University for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Ryan L. Lampe and Petra Moser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Do Patent Pools Encourage Innovation? Evidence from 20 U.S. Industries under the New
Deal
Ryan L. Lampe and Petra Moser
NBER Working Paper No. 18316
August 2012
JEL No. K0,L4,N22,O3
ABSTRACT
Patent pools, which allow competing firms to combine their patents, have emerged as a prominent
mechanism to resolve litigation when multiple firms own patents for the same technology. This paper
takes advantage of a window of regulatory tolerance under the New Deal to investigate the effects
of pools on innovation within 20 industries. Difference-in-differences regressions imply a 16 percent
decline in patenting in response to the creation of a pool. This decline is driven by technology fields
in which a pool combined patents for substitute technologies by competing firms, suggesting that unregulated
pools may discourage innovation by weakening competition to improve substitutes.
Ryan L. Lampe
DePaul University
1 East Jackson Blvd
Suite 6200
Chicago, IL 60604
rlampe@depaul.edu
Petra Moser
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
pmoser@stanford.edu

Patent pools, which allow competing firms to combine their patents as if they are a single
firm, have emerged as a prominent policy tool to address a key problem with the current
patent system: Imperfect boundaries of intellectual property rights allow multiple firms to
own mutually infringing patents for the same technology, which they use to threaten
litigation and prevent each other from producing the technologies. Patent pools can
mitigate this problem by allowing firms to combine their patents in a “pool” which all
firms can access to produce the technology and license it to outside firms. For example,
pools have been proposed to cover improvements in smart phones, tablet computers,
video compression technologies, malaria and HIV drugs, and diagnostic test kits for
breast cancer.
Whether pools encourage or discourage innovation, however, is difficult to
predict without systematic empirical analyses. Pools are expected to strengthen
incentives to invest in R&D by reducing litigation risks (Shapiro 2001; Gilbert 2004) and
by lowering the transaction costs of licensing (Merges 2001). Pools may also encourage
the adoption of new technologies by preventing double-marginalization (or “royalty
stacking”), which occurs when individual firms charge excessive license fees for
complementary parts of the same technology (Merges 2001; Shapiro 2001, p. 134).1
Pools may, however, also discourage investments in R&D by pool members, because
returns to R&D will be shared, and members may choose to free ride on other members’
research efforts (Vaughan 1956; Lerner, Strojwas, and Tirole 2007).2
Most importantly, perhaps, regulators caution, that in the absence of effective
antitrust policies, pools may form that harm competition: “participants in the pool might
be able to use it to collude, for example, by exchanging competitively sensitive
information, such as pricing, marketing, or R&D information through the mechanism of
1 Pools may also enhance welfare if a subset of firms is vertically integrated, and the existence of a pool
allows upstream firms to coordinate input prices and internalize the impact on vertically integrated
downstream members (Kim 2004). Pools may, however, be unstable, if firms choose exit the pool instead
of contributing their technologies (Aoki and Nagaoka 2004).
2 Vaughan (1956, p. 67) observes that the 1917 aircraft pool discouraged innovation by members because
“pooling all patents of members and giving each the right to use the inventions of the other took away each
member’s incentive for basic inventions.”
1

the pool” (Department of Justice and Federal Trade Commission 2007). Theoretically,
such changes in the intensity of competition may also discourage innovation by
weakening competition to improve substitute technologies, but empirical evidence is
scarce.
Existing empirical analyses have been limited to less than a handful of individual
industries. Historical data on patents and alternative measures of innovation in the 19th-
century sewing machine industry indicate that the creation of a pool discouraged
innovation (Lampe and Moser 2010), and diverted firm entry towards technologically
inferior substitutes that did not compete directly with the pool (Lampe and Moser
2012a).3 By comparison, qualitative evidence for the CD industry, indicates an increase
in innovation (Flamm 2012), while data for optical disk drives suggest a decline in
innovation comparable with that for sewing machines (Joshi and Nerkar 2011; Flamm
2012). In the open source software industry, the creation of a pool was followed by a
modest increase in entry for technologies in which IBM contributed patents to the pool
(Ceccagnoli, Forman, and Wen 2012).
This paper extends the empirical evidence with a systematic analysis of 20
industries under the New Deal. New Deal policies, such as the National Industrial
Recovery Act (NIRA, 1933-35), which exempted the majority of U.S. industries from
antitrust in exchange for higher wages (e.g., Haley 2001, p. 8), create a unique
opportunity to investigate pools that would form in the absence of effective antitrust.4
Under the New Deal, regulators allowed pools to form in the hope that they would
3 This result is particularly striking given that the pool did reduce license fees for nine complementary
(essential) patents that were required to build a state-of-the-art sewing machine, confirming predictions
about pools as a mechanism to eliminate double-marginalization (e.g., Shapiro 2001). Importantly, the
pool created differential license fees and litigation risks, which introduced a wedge in production costs that
favored members (Lampe and Moser 2012a).
4 Alchian (1970) conjectures that New Deal policies, which limited competition and increased the
bargaining power of unions, kept the economy depressed after 1933. A macro-economic model of intra-
industry bargaining between labor and firms, which allows insiders to choose the size of the worker cartel,
predicts persistent unemployment and high wages as a result of cartelization policies that limit product
market competition and increase the bargaining power of labor (Cole and Ohanian 2004). Field (2003 and
2011), however, documents productivity increases in telephones, electric utilities, railroads,
communications, public utilities, transportation, real estate, mining, trade, manufacturing, services,
construction, and finance/insurance.
2