NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEBT FRAGILITY AND BAILOUTS
Russell Cooper
Working Paper 18377
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18377
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012
Previously circulated as "Fragile Debt and the Credible Sharing of Strategic Uncertainty." I am grateful
to Antoine Camous, Andrew Gimber and Guillermo Ordonez for many comments on a previous version
of this paper, and to Hubert Kempf and Dan Peled for discussions on this topic. Comments from conference
participants at the ECB "Global Sovereign Debt" workshop in June 2012 are appreciated. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Russell Cooper. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Debt Fragility and Bailouts
Russell Cooper
NBER Working Paper No. 18377
September 2012, Revised March 2015
JEL No. E61,E63,F34,H87
ABSTRACT
This paper studies debt fragility and the sharing of the resulting strategic uncertainty through ex post
bailouts. Default arises in equilibrium because of both fundamental shocks and beliefs. The probability
of default depends on borrowing rates and, in equilibrium, on the beliefs of lenders about this probability.
This interaction creates a strategic complementarity and thus the basis for strategic uncertainty. The
paper analyzes the role of credible ex post bailouts as a means of sharing both fundamental and strategic
uncertainty. While bailouts may occur in some states, debt fragility remains.
Russell Cooper
Department of Economics
The Pennsylvania State University
611 Kern
State College, PA 16802
and NBER
russellcoop@gmail.com

Debt Fragility and Bailouts∗
Russell Cooper†
March 30, 2015
Abstract
This paper studies debt fragility and the sharing of the resulting strategic uncertainty through
ex post bailouts. Default arises in equilibrium because of both fundamental shocks and beliefs. The
probability of default depends on borrowing rates and, in equilibrium, on the beliefs of lenders about
this probability. This interaction creates a strategic complementarity and thus the basis for strategic
uncertainty. The paper analyzes the role of credible ex post bailouts as a means of sharing both
fundamentalandstrategicuncertainty. Whilebailoutsmayoccurinsomestates,debtfragilityremains.
1 Motivation
Thispaperprovidesaframeworkforunderstandingcredibleguaranteesinthepresenceofstrategicuncer-
taintyoverthevaluationofsovereigndebt. TheanalysisismotivatedbytherecentexperienceofEuropean
countries who have witnessed large movements in the price (bond spreads) of their government debt and
the consequent policy discussion of debt guarantees and bailout. What are the sources of the variations in
these spreads? What are the effects of credible bailouts on the valuation of sovereign debt?
Theframeworkaddressesthesequestions.1 Themodelhighlightstheinteractionsbetweenfundamental
andstrategicuncertaintyunderlyingthevolatilityofspreads. Thefirstformofuncertaintyarisesfromthe
stochastic natureof underlying economicvariables, suchas productivity. The secondsource ofuncertainty
reflects the interaction of investors, each responding to the beliefs of others. In this model, as in Calvo
(1988), thepowerofexpectationsreflectsastrategiccomplementaritylinkingthebeliefsofinvestorsabout
repayment, interest rates and default probabilities.2 If investors believe that default is likely, a large
∗IamgratefultoAntoineCamous,AndrewGimberandGuillermoOrdonezformanycommentsonapreviousversionof
thispaper,andtoHubertKempfandDanPeledfordiscussionsonthistopic. Commentsfromconferenceparticipantsatthe
ECB“GlobalSovereignDebt”workshopinJune2012areappreciated.
†DepartmentofEconomics,ThePennsylvaniaStateUniversity;ResearchAssociate,NBER,russellcoop@gmail.com
1ThispaperbuildsuponCooper(2012). Ithasessentiallythesamemodeloffragilityforasinglecountrybutithasnew
resultsregardingconditionsforbailout. Thispaperalsoaddsathirdcountry,followingthesuggestionofGuillermoOrdonez.
2AsimilarlogicispresentinColeandKehoe(2000)thoughthatpaperhasadynamicelementmissinginthisformulation.
Eaton(1987)studiescapitalflightinamodelwithmultipleequilibriageneratedbyacomplementaritythroughthegovernment
budgetconstraint. Morerecently,CorsettiandDedola(2012)alsouseavariantoftheCalvomodeltolookattheEuropean
debtsituation. WhilethatmodelsharesfoundationswithCalvo(1988),oneofthedistinguishingfeaturesofthispaperisthe
constructionofamulti-countryenvironmenttostudybailoutsandguaranteesandthusthesharingofstrategicuncertainty.
1

Preliminary and Incomplete 2 MODEL
premium will arise in equilibrium. Given this large premium, a country is indeed more likely to default.
Taken together, these forms of uncertainty underlie the pricing of sovereign debt and its fragility.
As its main contribution, the framework is used to evaluate bailouts as a means to deal with volatile
debt prices. Here a bailout entails the assumption of the debt obligations of one country by a federation
to which it belongs. The analysis emphasizes a couple of points.
Theprovisionofguarantees,i.e. anexante commitmenttobailout,asinthestandardmodelsofdeposit
insurance,provideameansofsharingstrategicuncertainty.3 But, these guarantees are valuable only
if they are credible.
The framework is used to provide sufficient conditions for the provision of an ex post bailout. There
are two gains to a bailout. The first entails the avoidance of a default cost through the spreading of the
debt obligation across federation members. The second gain, following the consumption smoothing motive
highlightedinCooper,Kempf,andPeled(2008),ariseswhenabailoutyieldsamoreequitableconsumption
allocation across households in countries within a federation compared to default. One leading case for
bailouts is when the country on the verge of default has lower output and consumption, both with and
without a bailout, than the country providing the bailout. In this case, the bailout leads to consumption
smoothing across the countries in a federation.
Despitethegainstoex post bailouts,thedebtofacountryisstillsubjecttostrategicuncertainty. This
is because bailouts are state contingent and thus do not occur for all realizations of fundamentals. As a
consequence, default occurs in equilibrium and strategic uncertainty remains.
Overall, the results indicates that credible debt guarantees do matter: in some states a bailout occurs
and this reduces default risk. In this sense, the strategic uncertainty is shared. But generally these
guarantees, because they are required to be credible, do not eliminate default in all states. Consequently
debt prices remain influenced by strategic uncertainty
2 Model
The model studies the issues of debt valuation and bailout in a multi-country setting with two periods.4
The analysis focuses on the pricing of a predetermined stock of government debt as a function of the
repayment decision of a second country issuing the debt and the bailout decision of second country (or a
coalition of countries as in the European Union). The first and second country, of population size N for
i
i = 1,2 belong to the same coalition. The third country, of size N , consists of households outside of the
3
coalition of countries involved in the bailout.5
3Bigelow,Cooper,andRoss(1993)andCooperandRoss(1999)studyguaranteefundsinavarietyofinteractionsinwhich
complementaritiesareprominent.
4TheinteractioncanbeembeddedinadynamicequilibriummodelallowingforthechoiceofB,forexample,asinCooper,
Kempf, and Peled (2008). But the essence of determining the interest rate on the outstanding debt and the conditions for
bailoutareaptlycapturedbytheinteractionsdescribedhere.
5ThemainresultsinCalvo(1988)onlyhaveinsidersthoughinternationallendingismentionedinSectionIII.Guillermo
Ordonezmadetheinvaluablesuggestiontoamendthemodeltoincludehouseholdsoutsideofthecoaltion.
2