NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERNATIONAL TAXATION AND CROSS-BORDER BANKING
Harry Huizinga
Johannes Voget
Wolf Wagner
Working Paper 18483
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18483
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2012
We thank Ben Lockwood and Nadine Riedel for comments on an earlier draft and Ata Can Bertay
for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Harry Huizinga, Johannes Voget, and Wolf Wagner. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

International Taxation and Cross-Border Banking
Harry Huizinga, Johannes Voget, and Wolf Wagner
NBER Working Paper No. 18483
October 2012
JEL No. F23,G21,H25
ABSTRACT
This paper examines empirically how international taxation affects the volume and pricing of cross-border
banking activities for a sample of banks in 38 countries over the 1998-2008 period. International double
taxation of foreign-source bank income is found to reduce banking-sector FDI. Furthermore, such
taxation is almost fully passed on into higher interest margins charged abroad. These results imply
that international double taxation distorts the activities of international banks, and that the incidence
of international double taxation of banks is on bank customers in the foreign subsidiary country. Our
analysis informs the debate about additional taxation of the financial sector that has emerged in the
wake of the recent financial crisis.
Harry Huizinga Wolf Wagner
Tilburg University Tilburg University
5000 LE Tilburg 5000 LE Tilburg
The Netherlands The Netherlands
H.P.Huizinga@uvt.nl wagner@uvt.nl
Johannes Voget
University of Mannheim
68131 Mannheim
Germany
voget@uni-mannheim.de

1. Introduction
The international tax system tends to discriminate against foreign-owned banks.
Specifically, domestic banks are just subject to a local corporate income tax on domestic income,
while foreign-owned banks in addition may be subject to non-resident dividend withholding tax
in the subsidiary country and corporate income tax on repatriated dividends in the parent
country. International double taxation potentially puts international banks at a competitive
disadvantage, with implications for the performance as well as the structure of the international
banking market.2 This paper examines empirically the impact of international taxation on bank
interest margins and pre-tax profitability as indices of banking-sector performance. Furthermore,
we investigate how international taxation affects banking FDI in terms of foreign-bank assets
and numbers, as measures of banking-sector structure.
Our study of the international taxation of banking offers insights that are interesting from
two main perspectives. First, in the aftermath of the financial crisis of 2008-2009, many
countries are thinking of new taxes on their financial systems to help prevent a next crisis and
also to raise the overall tax contribution of the financial sector. A main new tax being considered
is the Financial Activities Tax, which is a tax on a bank’s combined profits and wage bill (see
IMF, 2010). In a recent communication, the European Commission (2010) has announced that it
is conducting an impact assessment study of the Financial Activities Tax (among other financial
taxes), which is potentially followed by a proposal for a European directive to coordinate such
taxation in the EU. Our analysis of international income taxation as applied to the banking sector
informs about the likely incidence and dislocation effects of a Financial Activities Tax, given
that the latter tax also is a tax on income derived from the financial sector. More directly, we
gain insight into the impact of the corporate income tax when some firms in a country are subject
to a differentially high level of tax – due to international double taxation.
A second reason for studying the international double taxation of banking is that it
constitutes a barrier to further banking market integration. Regulatory barriers to international
banking have been reduced worldwide, but the drive at banking market unification has so far
stopped short of eliminating the international double taxation of banking income. This
2 International expansion only makes sense for a bank if this provides benefits that exceed the cost of international
double taxation. These benefits potentially include being able to serve internationally active customers,
diversification gains, economies of scale, access to agglomeration benefits in international financial centers, and
international regulatory arbitrage. See McCauley, McGuire and von Goetz (2010), Claessens and Van Horen (2009),
and Committee on the Global Financial System (2010).
2

potentially explains why many countries’ banking markets remain dominated by national banks,
even if many banking markets have become more international, as measured by the external
assets and liabilities of domestic banks as well as the ownership of banks.3
Our empirical analysis of the impact of international taxation on banks is based on a
sample of individual banks in 38 countries during the 1998-2008 period. We estimate that bank
interest margins almost fully reflect the additional international taxation of dividends paid by
foreign subsidiaries. The incidence of international taxation thus appears to be on a bank’s
lending and depositor customers. This result is robust to limiting the sample to intra-EU banking,
to limiting the sample to banks that are foreign subsidiaries, and to adjusting the interest margin
for a bank’s loan loss provisioning as a measure of credit risk.
We do not find that a bank’s pre-tax profitability is materially affected by international
double taxation of dividend income. This may reflect that higher international taxation of a
foreign subsidiary’s income triggers more outward profit shifting to the parent bank (and higher
tax-deductible costs to hide this profit shifting). Consistent with a profit shifting motive, we
further find that a foreign subsidiary’s reported profits are positively related to the corporate
income tax in the parent country.
Using a gravity model approach, we investigate the impact of international double
taxation on banking FDI on a bilateral aggregated basis. We find evidence that international
double taxation of dividend income reduces banking-sector FDI in terms of foreign-bank assets.
In addition, we find that the number of foreign banks is significantly reduced by international
double taxation.
The responsiveness of the number of international banking establishments to international
double taxation suggests that banks face a two-step international banking decision: first, they
consider whether to set up a foreign subsidiary and, second, they determine the pricing (and
quantity) of their foreign financial services. The endogeneity of the initial FDI decision w.r.t.
international double taxation implies that the estimation of the impact of such taxation on net
interest margins may be biased. We apply a two-stage Heckman estimation to net interest
revenue regressions to account for the possible endogeneity of the FDI decision, confirming a
major pass through of international double taxation into higher interest margins. Taken together,
3 See Allen, Beck, Carletti, Lane, Schoenmaker, and Wagner (2011, Table 1.1) for information on the development
of the external assets and liabilities of domestic banking systems relative to GDP of BIS reporting countries over the
2002-2009 period.
3