NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AGRICULTURAL DECISIONS AFTER RELAXING CREDIT AND RISK CONSTRAINTS
Dean Karlan
Robert Darko Osei
Isaac Osei-Akoto
Christopher Udry
Working Paper 18463
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18463
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2012
The authors thank the International Growth Centre, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation via the
University of Chicago Consortium on Financial Systems and Poverty, the National Science Foundation,
and the ILO for funding. Any opinions contained herein are those of the authors and not the funders.
The authors thank Ceren Baysan, Will Coggins, Ruth Damten, Emanuel Feld, Rob Fuller, Elana Safran,
Lindsey Shaughnessy and Rachel Strohm, for incredible research support throughout this project, and
Kelly Bidwell and Jessica Kiessel for their leadership on this project as IPA(cid:0)Ghana Country Directors.
Any opinions contained herein are those of the authors and not the funders. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Dean Karlan, Robert Darko Osei, Isaac Osei-Akoto, and Christopher Udry. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Agricultural Decisions after Relaxing Credit and Risk Constraints
Dean Karlan, Robert Darko Osei, Isaac Osei-Akoto, and Christopher Udry
NBER Working Paper No. 18463
October 2012, Revised July 2013
JEL No. C93,D24,D92,G22,O12,O13,O16,Q12,Q14
ABSTRACT
The investment decisions of small(cid:0)scale farmers in developing countries are conditioned by their financial
environment. Binding credit market constraints and incomplete insurance can reduce investment in
activities with high expected profits. We conducted several experiments in northern Ghana in which
farmers were randomly assigned to receive cash grants, grants of or opportunities to purchase rainfall
index insurance, or a combination of the two. Demand for index insurance is strong, and insurance
leads to significantly larger agricultural investment and riskier production choices in agriculture. The
binding constraint to farmer investment is uninsured risk: when provided with insurance against the
primary catastrophic risk they face, farmers are able to find resources to increase expenditure on their
farms. Demand for insurance in subsequent years is strongly increasing with farmer's own receipt
of insurance payouts, with the receipt of payouts by others in the farmer’s social network, as well as
with recent poor rain in their village. Both investment patterns and the demand for index insurance
are consistent with the presence of important basis risk associated with the index insurance, with imperfect
trust that promised payouts will be delivered, as well as with overweighting recent events.
Dean Karlan Isaac Osei-Akoto
Department of Economics ISSER
Yale University ioseiak@ug.edu.gh
P.O. Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520-8629 Christopher Udry
and NBER Economic Growth Center
dean.karlan@yale.edu Yale University
Box 208269
Robert Darko Osei New Haven, CT 06520
ISSER and NBER
rdosei@isser.edu.gh udry@yale.edu

1. Introduction
Incomplete markets shape the investments of firms. In the rural areas of developing countries, financial
market imperfections are pervasive, and there are broad regions in which almost every household
manages farmland, effectively a firm. In these contexts, households facing constrained access to credit
or insurance may choose to invest less, or differently, on their farms than they would under perfect
markets. Agricultural policy, particularly in Africa, focuses on increasing investment levels by farmers.
Policies have commonly focused on reducing risk or increasing access to capital, with implicit
assumptions of market failures in one or more such domains.
Before this study began, we asked smallholder farmers in northern Ghana about their farming practices
in a series of qualitative focus groups. Discussions were guided toward identifying constraints to further
investment. Farmers most often cited lack of capital as the reason they had not intensified farm
investment—but also farmers understood the risk of unpredictable rainfall, and claimed to reduce their
farm investment because of it. Thus, we seek to test the importance of capital constraints and uninsured
risk, separately and together, as financial market imperfections hindering optimal investment by
smallholder farmers. We do this with a multi‐year, multi‐arm randomized trial with cash grants, rainfall
insurance grants and rainfall insurance sales in northern Ghana.
The welfare gains from improving financial markets could be large, for three reasons. First, if either risk
or limited access to credit is discouraging investment, the marginal return on investments may be high.
Existing evidence from fertilizer in northern Ghana suggests that these returns are indeed high.1 Yet the
median farmer in northern Ghana uses no chemical inputs.2 Second, agriculture in northern Ghana is
almost exclusively rain‐fed. Thus weather risk is significant and index insurance on rainfall has promise.
Third, we have strong evidence in the region that rainfall shocks translate directly to consumption
fluctuations (Kazianga and Udry 2006). Thus mitigating the risks from rainfall should lead to not just
higher yields but also smoother consumption.
To understand how capital and risk interact, and under what circumstances underinvestment occurs, we
experimentally manipulate the financial environment in which farmers in northern Ghana make
investment decisions. We do so by providing farmers with cash grants, grants or access to purchase
rainfall index insurance or both. Using rainfall index insurance rather than crop insurance eliminates
1 Experiments on farmers’ plots across 12 districts of northern Ghana in 2010 with inorganic fertilizer in northern
Ghana showed for an additional expenditure of $60 per acre (inclusive of the additional cost of labor), fertilizer use
generates $215 of additional output per acre (Fosu and Dittoh 2011).
2 This fact is derived from the control group of farmers in the first year of our survey, described in section 3 below.
2

moral hazard and adverse selection because payouts depend only on observable rainfall realizations.
This is beneficial for theoretical and research reasons, in that it allows us to isolate the impact of risk on
investment decisions, and is relevant for policy reasons, given the historical challenges of crop insurance
(Hazell, Pomareda, and Valdés 1986) and recent policy attention to index insurance.
The experiments are motivated by a simple model which starts with perfect capital and perfect
insurance markets, and then shuts down each. Farm investment is lower than in the fully efficient
allocation if either market is missing (and land markets are also shut down, given the restrictions of the
land tenure system in northern Ghana (Yaro and Abraham 2009)). If credit constraints are binding, then
provision of cash grants increases investment, but the provision of grants of insurance reduces
investment. In contrast, when insurance markets are incomplete, provision of cash grants has a minimal
impact on investment, but investment responds positively to the receipt of an insurance grant.
To test these predictions, we turn to a three‐year multi‐arm randomized trial.3 In year one, we
conducted a 2x2 experiment: maize farmers received (a) a cash grant of $85 per acre or no cash grant
(average grant of $420 per farmer), and (b) a rainfall insurance grant with an actuarially fair value of $47
per acre or no rainfall insurance grant. In year two, we conducted another cash grant experiment, but
only offered rainfall insurance for sale at randomly‐varied prices ranging from one eighth of actuarially
fair to market price (i.e., actuarially far plus a market premium to cover servicing costs) rather than
giving some out for free as in year one. In year three, we did not conduct another cash grant
experiment, but the insurance pricing experiment continued.
Four elements distinguish our data and experiments: (1) the cash grant experiment to measure the
effect of capital constraints on investment and agricultural income (most of the existing complementary
research is on the insurance component), (2) the provision of free insurance, in order to observe
investment effects on a full population rather than just those willing to buy (Cole et al (2011) is a notable
complementary study), who provide grants of free insurance to farmers in India), (3) the multi‐year
setup, and (4) a demand curve from barely positive prices (1/8 of actuarially fair) all the way to
approximate market prices (i.e., actuarially fair plus a 50% premium to cover servicing costs). In the
Discussion section of this paper we relate our results to the complementary literature on risk and capital
capitals for agriculture.
3 Conducted as a “natural field experiment” in the sense that all grants and insurance were offered through an
NGO, and although after the first year individuals obviously knew that researchers were conducting surveys, the
grants and insurance were presented as those of an NGO, not researchers.
3