NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A GAME THEORETIC FOUNDATION OF COMPETITIVE EQUILIBRIA WITH
ADVERSE SELECTION
Nick Netzer
Florian Scheuer
Working Paper 18471
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18471
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2012
We are grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Carlos Alós-Ferrer, Abhijit Banerjee, Helmut Bester, Peter Diamond,
Dennis Gaertner, Mike Golosov, Jon Gruber, Bard Harstad, Martin Hellwig, Wanda Mimra, Klaus
Ritzberger, Casey Rothschild, Armin Schmutzler, Robert Shimer, Jean Tirole, Robert Townsend, Iván
Werning, seminar participants at Berlin, Bonn, Kellogg, LSE, MIT, Princeton, UCL, UCLA, Vienna,
Wharton, Wisconsin School of Business, Yale, Zurich, the 2009 North American Summer Meetings
of the Econometric Society at BU and the 2010 ASSA Meetings in Atlanta for valuable suggestions.
All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Nick Netzer and Florian Scheuer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

A Game Theoretic Foundation of Competitive Equilibria with Adverse Selection
Nick Netzer and Florian Scheuer
NBER Working Paper No. 18471
October 2012
JEL No. C73,D02,D82,D86,G22,H1,L1
ABSTRACT
We construct a fully specified extensive form game that captures competitive markets with adverse
selection. In particular, it allows firms to offer any finite set of contracts, so that cross-subsidization
is not ruled out. Moreover, firms can withdraw from the market after initial contract offers have been
observed. We show that a subgame perfect equilibrium always exists and that, in fact, when withdrawal
is costless, the set of subgame perfect equilibrium outcomes may correspond to the entire set of feasible
contracts. We then focus on robust equilibria that exist both when withdrawal costs are zero and when
they are arbitrarily small but strictly positive. We show that the Miyazaki-Wilson contracts are the
unique robust equilibrium outcome of our game. This outcome is always constrained efficient and
involves cross-subsidization from low to high risk agents that is increasing in the share of low risks
in the population under weak conditions on risk preferences.
Nick Netzer
Department of Economics
University of Zurich
Bluemlisalpstrasse 10
8006 Zurich, Switzerland
nick.netzer@econ.uzh.ch
Florian Scheuer
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
scheuer@stanford.edu

1 Introduction
In the wake of the recent financial crisis, considerable attention has returned to the func-
tioning of markets with adverse selection, in particular credit and insurance markets.
Much of the discussion is rooted on the seminal contribution of Rothschild and Stiglitz
(1976), which has spurred a large body of work on the nature of competitive equilibria
inmarketswithadverseselection–andunfoldedanenormousinfluenceonthedevelop-
mentoftheeconomicsofasymmetricinformationingeneral.
However,threeshortcomingsoftheoriginalRothschild-Stiglitzapproachtotheprob-
lem of competition under adverse selection have been pointed out: First, in their setting,
an equilibrium as they define it may not exist. In this case, the model is unable to make
predictions about the functioning of competitive markets with adverse selection. Sec-
ond, they restrict each firm to offer a single contract only, ruling out cross-subsidization
between different contracts by assumption. The resulting inefficiency results have been
very influential in the normative literature on government interventions, but they are
an immediate consequence of restricting the sets of contracts that firms can offer. Third,
theirapproachisnota(non-cooperative)game-theoreticone. Ratherthanfullyspecifying
a game and solving for its (subgame-perfect) Nash equilibria, they define an equilibrium
directly based on properties of sets of contracts. This raises the question to what degree
their results are specific to a particular equilibrium notion rather than properties of an
economicenvironmentascapturedbyanextensiveformgame.
This paper addresses all three of these issues. We construct a fully specified dynamic
game of complete information that captures Rothschild and Stiglitz’s original setting. In
particular, it allows firms to offer any finite number of different contracts. We show that
a standard subgame-perfect equilibrium (SPE) always exists. There is in fact a multi-
plicity of equilibria, but by invoking an appropriate robustness criterion, we obtain as
unique equilibrium outcome the so-called Miyazaki-Wilson contracts. They may involve
cross-subsidizationbetweencontractsandarealwaysParetooptimalsubjecttotheinfor-
mationalandresourceconstraints.
Manyauthorshaveaddressedvarioussubsetsofthethreeshortcomingsraisedabove.
For instance, Wilson (1977) and Riley (1979) have observed that the non-existence prob-
lem can be overcome by modifying the notion of equilibrium. Notably, defining equilib-
riuminaforward-lookingway,wherefirmsanticipatethereactionofotherfirmstotheir
contract offers, in form of withdrawal (Wilson 1977) or additional offers (Riley 1979), ei-
ther sustains the Rothschild-Stiglitz equilibrium for all parameter values (Riley 1979) or
givesrisetotheexistenceofapoolingequilibriumwhenevertheRothschild-Stiglitzequi-
1

librium does not exist (Wilson 1977). Similarly, Grossman (1979) allows for insurance
rejections and shows that the Wilson (1977) pooling equilibrium can be sustained when
agents anticipate that their insurance application may be declined if the insurer expects
it to be unprofitable. However, these contributions do not include comprehensive game
theoretic treatments. In addition, they stick to the assumption that each firm can offer
onlyasinglecontract.1
Miyazaki (1977), Engers and Fernandez (1987) and Fernandez and Rasmussen (1993)
relax the latter restriction, but still define their own particular notion of equilibrium.
Miyazaki (1977) considers Wilson’s (1977) anticipatory equilibrium concept and allows
insurers to offer menus of contracts. He shows that an equilibrium always exists and is
efficient in this setting, resulting in the so-called Miyazaki-Wilson outcome. Engers and
Fernandez (1987) proceed analogously, using the reactive equilibrium concept of Riley
(1979). They also suggest a game with an infinite number of moves and argue that the
Miyazaki-Wilson contracts are the outcome of a Nash equilibrium in this game, but only
amongmanyotherequilibriumoutcomes. FernandezandRasmussen(1993)alsopropose
a framework that generates the Miyazaki-Wilson allocation, but remain within a specific
contestablemonopolymodelandresorttoanon-standardequilibriumconcept.
Hellwig (1987) was the first to pursue a standard game theoretic approach to ana-
lyze (sequential) equilibria in the Rothschild-Stiglitz and some modified settings, but
continued to restrict firms to offer no more than one contract each, ruling out cross-
subsidization. Fewer papers simultaneously speak to the three shortcomings pointed
out above, but they do so in frameworks that go well beyond the original market setup.
Maskin and Tirole (1992) consider a very general principal-agent framework where con-
tracts can be arbitrary mechanisms. They focus mostly on signaling settings but also
provide a multiplicity result for the case of screening that is related to ours, even though
less encompassing. Asheim and Nilssen (1996) allow for renegotiation between firms
and customers after initial contract choice, imposing the constraint that firms may not
discriminatebetweentheircustomers. TheyobtaintheMiyazki-Wilsoncontractsasequi-
libriumoutcome. ThesecontractsarealsotheoutcomeinFaynzilberg(2006c),inamodel
where firms can become insolvent, which introduces an externality between agents in
a contract. In Picard (2011), a similar externality occurs because agents directly partici-
1Several other authors have provided existence results for the Rothschild-Stiglitz equilibrium through
furthermodelextensions. DasguptaandMaskin(1986)showthatequilibriumexistencecanbeguaranteed
by considering mixed-strategy equilibria. Inderst and Wambach (2001) obtain equilibrium existence in
a model with capacity constraints, Guerrieri, Shimer, and Wright (2010) show that search frictions can
eliminatethenon-existenceproblem,andvonSiemensandKosfeld(2011)restoreexistencebyintroducing
externalities between agents in labor markets with team production. None of these contributions obtain
Miyazaki-Wilsonallocationsasequilibriumoutcome,sincecross-subsidizationisruledout.
2