NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INSIDER TRADING, STOCHASTIC LIQUIDITY AND EQUILIBRIUM PRICES
Pierre Collin-Dufresne
Vyacheslav Fos
Working Paper 18451
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18451
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2012
We thank Bruno Biais, Thierry Foucault, Gur Huberman, Larry Glosten, Wei Jiang, Norman Schuerhoff,
Semyon Malamud and seminar participants at Copenhagen Business School, University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign, ESADE, the SFI-Finrisk meeting and, especially, Kerry Back, Darrell Duffie
and Julien Hugonnier for many helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Pierre Collin-Dufresne and Vyacheslav Fos. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Insider Trading, Stochastic Liquidity and Equilibrium Prices
Pierre Collin-Dufresne and Vyacheslav Fos
NBER Working Paper No. 18451
October 2012
JEL No. D4,D8,D80,D82,D83,D84,G0,G00,G1,G10,G12,G14
ABSTRACT
We extend Kyle's (1985) model of insider trading to the case where liquidity provided by noise traders
follows a general stochastic process. Even though the level of noise trading volatility is observable,
in equilibrium, measured price impact is stochastic. If noise trading volatility is mean-reverting, then
the equilibrium price follows a multivariate 'stochastic bridge' process, which displays stochastic volatility.
This is because insiders choose to optimally wait to trade more aggressively when noise trading activity
is higher. In equilibrium, market makers anticipate this, and adjust prices accordingly. More private
information is revealed when volatility is higher. In time series, insiders trade more aggressively, when
measured price impact is lower. Therefore, execution costs to uninformed traders can be higher when
price impact is lower.
Pierre Collin-Dufresne
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall 404
3022 Braodway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
pc2415@columbia.edu
Vyacheslav Fos
College of Business
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL, 61820
vfos@illinois.edu

1. Introduction
In his seminal contribution, Kyle (1985) derives the equilibrium price dynamics in a
model where a large trader possesses long-lived private information about the value of a
stock that will be revealed at some known date, and optimally trades into the stock to
maximize his expected profits. Risk-neutral market makers try to infer from aggregate
order flow the information possessed by the insider. Because order flow is also driven by
uninformed ‘noise traders,’ who trade solely for liquidity purposes, prices are not fully
revealing. Instead, prices respond linearly to order flow. Kyle’s lambda, which measures
the equilibrium price impact of order flow is constant in the model. In the cross-section,
stocks with more insider trading relative to noise trading experience larger price impact.
More precisely, Kyle’s lambda, which can be estimated from a regression of price change
on order flow, is higher for stocks with more private information (relative to the amount
of liquidity trading).
Recent empirical results (Collin-Dufresne and Fos (CF 2012)) suggest however, that
informed traders may condition their trades on such measures of price-impact, thus
leading to selection biases in estimates of liquidity measures. Specifically, CF document
that informed traders tend to trade more aggressively, when measures of stock price
liquidity are better (and measured price impact is lower). In Kyle’s model (and indeed
in many extensions, such as Back, 1992; Foster and Viswanathan, 1990) this cannot
happen because measures of market depth are constant in equilibrium (as discussed in
Back and Pedersen, 1998).
In this paper, we propose an extension of Kyle’s model that helps explain some of
these findings. We generalize Kyle’s model (in the continuous time formulation given by
Back,1992)toallownoisetradingvolatilitytochangestochasticallyovertime. Themain
(economic) restriction we put on the process is that it be independent of the insider’s
2

private information and of shocks to the order flow.
We ask the following questions. How does the insider adapt his optimal trading
strategy to account for these time-varying noise trader liquidity shocks? How are the
equilibriumpricedynamicsaffectedbytheseshocks, whicharebyassumptionorthogonal
to the private information of the insider, and to the aggregate order flow dynamics?
Kyle’s model provides the insight that the larger the noise trading liquidity for a
given amount of private information, the more aggressive the insider will trade, since, in
equilibrium, his optimal trading rule is inversely related to Kyle’s lambda (a measure of
price impact). The insider makes more profits when there is more noise trading, since
themarketmakercanrecoupmoreprofitshimselffromthegreatervolumeofuninformed
traders. In a dynamic setting where ‘noise trader volume’ changes stochastically, one
therefore expects price impact measures to move over time, and the insider to adjust his
trading to take advantage of those moments when ‘liquidity’ is greater.
At first, this problem may seem like a simple extension of the Back (1992) model,
as one might conjecture that one can simply ‘paste together’ Kyle economies with
different levels of noise-trading volatility. However, this is not so. Indeed, the insider
will optimally choose to trade less in the lower liquidity states than he would were
these to last forever, because he anticipates the future opportunity to trade more when
liquidity is better and he can reap a larger profit. Of course, in a rational expectations’
equilibrium, the market maker foresees this, and adjusts prices accordingly.
Therefore, price dynamics are more complex than in the standard Kyle model.
First, in equilibrium, price impact measures are stochastic. Price impact is larger
when noise-trading volatility is lower. When noise trading volatility is lower, the
informed trader trades less aggressively. Thus, in equilibrium, the probability of facing
an informed trader, may actually decrease in price impact (Kyle’s lambda).
Second, market depth (the inverse of price impact) is a martingale in equilibrium,
3