NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ENDOGENOUS LIQUIDITY AND DEFAULTABLE BONDS
Zhiguo He
Konstantin Milbradt
Working Paper 18408
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18408
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012
For helpful comments, we thank Nittai Bergman (MIT), Bruce Carlin (UCLA), Hui Chen (MIT), Richard
Green (CMU), Nicolae Garleanu (UC Berkeley), Barney Hartman-Glaser (Duke), Burton Hollifield
(CMU), Gustavo Manso (UC Berkeley), Holger Mueller (NYU), and seminar participants of the MIT
Sloan lunchtime workshop, NYU lunchtime workshop, Columbia GSB lunchtime workshop, NBER
Microstructure meeting, ASU winter conference, Duke-UNC asset pricing conference, Texas Finance
Festival, UNC, Boston University, University of Colorado at Boulder, INSEAD, Imperial College
London, UCLA Anderson, WFA 2012, SED 2012, NBER SI Asset Pricing meeting, and Gerzensee
ESSFM 2012. We are especially grateful to Rui Cui for excellent research assistance. Zhiguo He acknowledges
financial support from the Center for Research in Security Prices at the University of Chicago Booth
School of Business. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Zhiguo He and Konstantin Milbradt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Endogenous Liquidity and Defaultable Bonds
Zhiguo He and Konstantin Milbradt
NBER Working Paper No. 18408
September 2012
JEL No. E44,G01,G12
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the interaction between fundamental and liquidity for defaultable corporate bonds
that are traded in an over-the-counter secondary market with search frictions. Bargaining with dealers
determines a bond's endogenous liquidity, which depends on both the firm fundamental and the time-to-maturity
of the bond. Corporate default decisions interact with the endogenous secondary market liquidity via
the rollover channel. A default-liquidity loop arises: Earlier endogenous default worsens a bond's secondary
market liquidity, which amplifies equity holders' rollover losses, which in turn leads to earlier endogenous
default. Besides characterizing in closed form the full inter-dependence between liquidity premium
and default premium for credit spreads, we also study the optimal maturity implied by the model based
on the tradeoff between liquidity provision and inefficient default.
Zhiguo He
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
zhiguo.he@chicagobooth.edu
Konstantin Milbradt
Sloan School of Management
MIT
100 Main Street E62-633
Cambridge, MA 02142
milbradt@mit.edu

1 Introduction
Therecent2007-2008financialcrisisandtheongoingsovereigncrisishavevividlydemonstratedthe
intricate interaction between asset fundamental and asset liquidity in financial markets. Liquid-
ity tends to dry up for assets with deteriorating fundamentals when solvency becomes a concern,
reflected by soaring liquidity premia and/or prohibitive transaction costs in trading. In the mean
time, asset fundamentals worsen further due to endogenous reactions (say, default) of market par-
ticipants in response to worsening liquidity in financial markets.
The fundamental-liquidity spiral is at the center of the academic policy research on financial
crises,andthispaperaimstodeliversuchafeedbackloopinthecontextofcorporatebondmarkets.1
It has been well documented that secondary corporate bond markets – which are mainly over-the-
counter (OTC) markets – are much less liquid than equity markets.2 On the one hand, Edwards,
Harris, and Piwowar (2007) and Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011) document a strong empirical pattern
that the liquidity for corporate bonds (measured as the transaction cost) deteriorates dramatically
for bonds with lower fundamental, i.e., bonds that are issued by firms closer to default (reflected
by higher credit derivative swaps, CDS). On the other hand, the recent financial crisis of 2007-2008
illustrates that the deterioration of secondary market liquidity, through adversely affecting the
refinancing operations of firms, can exacerbate the incentives of equity holders to default (He and
Xiong (2012b), hereafter HX12). Taken together, these two observations imply a positive feedback
loop between the secondary market liquidity and asset fundamentals for corporate bonds.
To deliver such an default-liquidity spiral effect, we adopt two standard ingredients from the
existing literature. First, we model the endogenous liquidity in the secondary corporate bond
market as a search-based over-the-counter (OTC) market á la Duffie, Garlenau, and Pedersen
1Corporate bond markets, for both financial and non-financial firms, make up a large part of the U.S. financial
system. According to flow of funds, the values of corporate bonds reaches about 4.7 trillion in the first quarter of
2010, which consists of about one third of total liabilities of U.S. corporate businesses.
2Forinstance,Edwards,Harris,andPiwowar(2007)studytheU.S.OTCsecondarytradesincorporatebondsand
estimatethetransactioncosttobearound150bps,andBao,Pan,andWang(2011)findanevenlargernumber. The
fact that equity markets–while being presumably subject to more asymmetric information problems–are more liquid
implytheimportanceofsearchfrictionincorporatebondmarkets. Otherempiricalpapersthatinvestigatesecondary
bondmarketliquidityareHongandWarga(2000),Schultz(2001),Green,Hollifield,andSchurhoff(2007a,b);Harris
and Piwowar (2006).
1

(2005). Bond investors who are hit by liquidity shocks prefer early payments, and with a certain
matching technology they meet and trade with an intermediary dealer at an endogenous bid-ask
spread. A novel feature is that the endogenous liquidity for the secondary bond market depends
on both the firm’s distance-to-default and the bond’s time-to-maturity.
The second important ingredient for the feedback between fundamental and liquidity is the
endogenous default decision by equity holders. This mechanism is borrowed from the standard
Leland-type corporate finance structural models, i.e., Leland (1994) and Leland and Toft (1996)
(hereafter LT96). More specifically, a firm rolls over (refinances) maturing bonds by issuing new
bonds of the same face value. When firm fundamentals deteriorate, equity holders will face heavier
rollover losses due to falling prices of newly issued bonds. Equity holders default optimally when
absorbing further losses is unprofitable, at which point bond investors with defaulted claims step
in to recover part of the firm value subject to dead-weight bankruptcy cost.
The secondary market liquidity of defaulted bonds, i.e., bonds of firms that have defaulted,
is important in deriving the endogenous bond liquidity before the firm defaults. We model the
(il)liquidity of defaulted bonds based on the fact that bankruptcy leads to a delay in the payout
of any cash due to lengthy court proceedings, as for example in the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy
(see footnote 15). This serves as one of the boundary conditions needed to solve the system of
partial differential equations (PDEs) that describes the bond valuations.3 We solve for debt and
equity valuation, the endogenous default boundary, and the endogenous liquidity in closed form in
Section 3.
Consistent with empirical findings in Edwards, Harris, and Piwowar (2007) and Bao, Pan, and
Wang (2011), we show in Section 4.2 that the endogenous bid-ask spread is decreasing with the
firm’s distance-to-default, holding the time-to-maturity constant; and decreasing in the bond’s
time-to-maturity, holding the distance-to-default constant. Moreover, our model produces a novel
testable empirical prediction that the slope with respect to time-to-maturity of the bid-ask spread
3Thisarisesbecausebondvaluationsdependonfirmfundamental,thebond’stime-to-maturity,andtheliquidity
state of bond holders.
2