NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECTS OF RECONSTRUCTION FINANCE CORPORATION ASSISTANCE
ON MICHIGAN’S BANKS’ SURVIVAL IN THE 1930S
Charles W. Calomiris
Joseph R. Mason
Marc Weidenmier
Katherine Bobroff
Working Paper 18427
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18427
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012
This paper was prepared for the National Bureau of Economic Research Conference, “The Microeconomics
of New Deal Policy,” July 26-27, 2012. For helpful comments, we thank Price Fishback, Eugene White,
Kris Mitchener, Larry Neal, Gary Richardson, Eric Hilt, Shawn Kantor, and other participants in the
February 2012 “pre-conference,” and July 2012 conference for helpful comments on an earlier draft.
Adonis Antoniades and Guojun Chen provided superb research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Charles W. Calomiris, Joseph R. Mason, Marc Weidenmier, and Katherine Bobroff. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effects of Reconstruction Finance Corporation Assistance on Michigan’s Banks’ Survival
in the 1930s
Charles W. Calomiris, Joseph R. Mason, Marc Weidenmier, and Katherine Bobroff
NBER Working Paper No. 18427
September 2012
JEL No. G01,G18,G21,G28,N12,N22
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the effects of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation’s (RFC) loan and preferred
stock programs on bank failure rates in Michigan during the period 1932-1934, which includes the
important Michigan banking crisis of early 1933 and its aftermath. Using a new database on Michigan
banks, we employ probit and survival duration analysis to examine the effectiveness of the RFC’s
loan program (the policy tool employed before March 1933) and the RFC’s preferred stock purchases
(the policy tool employed after March 1933) on bank failure rates.
Our estimates treat the receipt of RFC assistance as an endogenous variable. We are able to identify
apparently valid and powerful instruments (predictors of RFC assistance that are not directly related
to failure risk) for analyzing the effects of RFC assistance on bank survival. We find that the loan program
had no statistically significant effect on the failure rates of banks during the crisis; point estimates
are sometimes positive, sometimes negative, and never estimated precisely. This finding is consistent
with the view that the effectiveness of debt assistance was undermined by some combination of increasing
the indebtedness of financial institutions and subordinating bank depositors. We find that RFC’s purchases
of preferred stock – which did not increase indebtedness or subordinate depositors – increased the
chances that a bank would survive the financial crisis.
We also perform a parallel analysis of the effects of RFC preferred stock assistance on the loan supply
of surviving banks. We find that RFC assistance not only contributed to loan supply by reducing failure
risk; conditional on bank survival, RFC assistance is associated with significantly higher lending by
recipient banks from 1931 to 1935.
Charles W. Calomiris Marc Weidenmier
Graduate School of Business Robert Day School of Economics and Finance
Columbia University Claremont McKenna College
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall 500 East Ninth Street
New York, NY 10027 Claremont, CA 91711
and NBER and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu marc_weidenmier@claremontmckenna.edu
Joseph R. Mason Katherine Bobroff
Patrick F. Taylor 2164-A Harvard Business School
E. J. Ourso College of Business Soldiers Field
Louisiana State University Boston, Massachusetts 02163
Baton Rouge, LA 70803 klbobroff@gmail.com
joseph.r.mason@gmail.com

3
I. Introduction: RFC Assistance to Banks During the Depression
This paper examines the effects of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation’s
(RFC) loan and preferred stock programs on bank failure rates of Michigan banks during
the period 1932-1934, which includes the important Michigan banking crisis of early
1933. Using a new database collected from primary sources, we employ probit and
survival duration models to examine the effectiveness of the government’s loan program
and preferred stock purchases on bank survival and failure rates, and on loan growth of
surviving banks. We study Michigan banks because the failure to stem Michigan’s
statewide banking crisis has been viewed by some historians of the Depression as a
critical precipitator of the national financial crisis of 1933 (Kennedy 1973). The
prevalence of bank failures in Michigan during the period 1932-1934 provides a rich data
set to examine the determinants of failure, and the potential salutary effects of
government assistance.
The Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) was a government-sponsored
enterprise founded to stem bank failures and reduce the economic costs of financial
disintermediation. The RFC was originally established to lend funds to troubled firms.
However, beginning in March 1933, the Corporation shifted from lending to banks to
directly recapitalized banks by purchasing their preferred stock. The program disbursed
approximately $200 billion in current U.S. dollars (Lohr 2008). When the RFC ceased
operations in the early 1950s, the government-sponsored entity sold its preferred stock
and recovered the funds provided by taxpayers.

4
Herbert Hoover established the RFC on February 2, 1932.1 The RFC was
originally established to stimulate the economy by increasing liquidity in the financial
system by loaning funds to troubled financial institutions. The RFC was an agency of the
executive branch of the federal government that had the ability to increase its lending
capacity and oversight powers by executive order. Its operations did not depend on
Congressional approval (Mason 2003).
During the Great Depression, the RFC conducted four major aid programs: a loan
program for financial institutions, a preferred stock program for financial institutions, a
railroad loan program, and a commercial and industrial loan program.2 The loan program
for financial institutions was the first program initiated by the RFC, and it was largely
replaced by a preferred stock program; there were few RFC loans made to banks after
March 1933, with the exception of loans made to assist the liquidation of failed banks.
While the RFC’s charter permitted the Corporation to make loans with maturities
of up to three years, most loans had maturities of less than six months. The threat of non-
renewal was perceived as giving the RFC necessary influence over bank management
practices. The RFC also demanded high-quality and liquid collateral for its loans, charged
an interest rate higher than the rates charged on Federal Reserve loans, and required
recipient banks to limit the salary of employees for the life of the loan.
1 This history of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation is based on Mason (2001b).
2
The RFC’s railroad loan program, like its bank loan program, was part of the original RFC Act.
However, unlike its loans to banks, the RFC’s railroad loans did not need to be fully secured. The RFC
also lent to railroads at below market rates. As a result of these lax lending polices, the RFC’s railroad loan
program was abused, and funds were used for the benefit of railroad company insiders (Mason 2001b).
The commercial and industrial loan program was the final economic stimulation program
undertaken by the RFC during the Great Depression. Because the banks had ceased lending, the RFC made
loans directly to businesses. The RFC encouraged banks to purchase the right to participate in commercial
and industrial loans instead of originating the loans themselves in order to stimulate private sector lending.
However, during the Great Depression, consumers were not increasing their demand for goods or
services. As a result, no businesses needed to invest in additional capacity. The commercial and industrial
loan program therefore had little impact on the economy.