NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CHERRIES FOR SALE:
EXPORT NETWORKS AND THE INCIDENCE OF CROSS-BORDER M&A
Bruce A. Blonigen
Lionel Fontagné
Nicholas Sly
Farid Toubal
Working Paper 18414
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18414
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012
The authors owe many thanks to seminar participants at the NBER ITI Spring Meeting 2012, Gep-ifo
conference on International Trade, Productivity and Factor Movements at CESifo, University of British
Columbia, Brown University and the Banque de France. Farid Toubal would like to thank the CEPR
project "Globalization Investment and Services Trade" funded by the European Commission under
FP7-PEOPLE-ITN-2008-21. Lionel Fontagné thanks the Bank of France for making individual firm
data available. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the Bank of France or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Bruce A. Blonigen, Lionel Fontagné, Nicholas Sly, and Farid Toubal. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Cherries for Sale: Export Networks and the Incidence of Cross-Border M&A
Bruce A. Blonigen, Lionel Fontagné, Nicholas Sly, and Farid Toubal
NBER Working Paper No. 18414
September 2012
JEL No. F12,F23,G34
ABSTRACT
This paper develops a dynamic model of cross-border M&A activity. We show that foreign firms will
be relatively more attracted to targets in the domestic country that had high productivity levels several
years prior to acquisition, but then suffered a negative productivity shock (i.e., cherries for sale). With
high ex ante productivity levels, target firms are able to invest in large export networks that are valuable
to foreign multinationals because of locational differences and trade costs. Subsequently, domestic
firms that experience reductions in productivity no longer find their established network as valuable
to serve independently, increasing the surplus generated by a foreign acquisition. From the theory
we derive a dynamic panel binary choice empirical model that uses predetermined export activity and
the evolution of target firm productivity over time to predict cross-border M&A activity. Administrative
data from French firms across 1999-2006 provide strong evidence that both the established export
networks and productivity losses among target firms promote takeover by foreign multinationals.
Bruce A. Blonigen Nicholas Sly
Department of Economics Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon 1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285 Eugene, OR 97403-1285
and NBER sly@uoregon.edu
bruceb@uoregon.edu
Farid Toubal
Lionel Fontagné Ecole Normale Supérieure de Cachan,
Paris School of Economics Paris School of Economics, and CEPII
European University Institute Bureau 503, Bat Cournot
Maison des Sciences Economiques 61, avenue du Président Wilson
106-112 Boulevard de l'Hôpital 94235 Cachan Cedex, FRANCE
75647 Paris Cedex 13 Farid.Toubal@univ-paris1.fr
FRANCE
and Banque de France
lionel.fontagne@univ-paris1.fr

1 Introduction
A significant majority of foreign direct investment (FDI), especially between developed
countries, is in the form of cross-border merger and acquisition (M&A) activity. This mode
ofinternationalinvestmentclearlyhaslargepolicyramificationsasonenation’sassetscome
under the control of an entity from another country. Policymakers may be concerned that
foreign firms are acquiring a nation’s most productive assets through such acquisitions. On
the other hand, foreign control of assets may bring important beneficial spillovers to host
countries, through higher wages, access to better technologies, and higher productivity.
Recent academic literature has only begun to examine cross-border M&A activity and
its subsequent economic effects. There are a number of recent studies that describe quite
different theoretical motives for cross-border M&A activity; these include the acquisition
of productive capabilities, market-specific expertise held by target firms, strategic motives
heldbymultinationalfirmsunderoligopoly,andtheabilityofsomemultinationalstobetter
control/manageassetsinparticularcountries.1 Generallythesemotivesarespecifictoeither
thetargetoracquiringfirm’slocalmarket. Eachofthesemotivesfailtoaddressthefactthat
a substantial volume of target firm sales are not to local markets, but instead are exported
to multiple proximate markets.
Another difficult issue that arises from the literature on M&A activity is the seemingly
opposite predictions about which types of domestic firms are targeted by foreign multi-
nationals; particularly, whether high-performing firms (“cherries”) or low-performing firms
(“lemons”)arethetargets. TheclassicnotioninthefinanceliteratureisthatM&Aactivity
isoneofnaturalselection,aswell-performingfirmstakeovertheassetsofpoorly-performing
firms (e.g., Manne (1965)). Consistent with this view, Lichtenberg and Siegel (1987) find
evidence that lemons are the primary targets in U.S. acquisitions in manufacturing. The
cross-border M&A models mentioned above also often predict that lemons will be targets,
including Nocke and Yeaple’s (2007) M-industry model and Neary (2007). However, re-
cent empirical evidence suggests that acquiring firms, especially foreign firms, are acquiring
cherries. This has been found using data for Chile (Ramondo (2009)), Indonesia (Arnold
and Javorcik (2009)), the U.S. (Criscuolo and Martin (2009)), and Spain (Guadalupe et al.
(forthcoming)). In many ways, a cherries story is more difficult to explain than a lemons
story. Why would the assets of a high-performing firm be more valuable under the man-
1These different motives for cross-border M&A are examined in Nocke and Yeaple (2007; 2008), Neary
(2007), and Head and Ries (2008). Interestingly, there seems to be no established theoretical model of
M&A activity (whether cross-border ornot) in thefinance or industrial organization literature. Alongside
thetheoreticalprogressmadetowardunderstandingthemotivationforcross-borderM&Aactivity,several
empirical studies have examined the effects of acquisitions by multinationals, in particular with regard
to local labor market outcomes. For example, see Huttunen (2007), Heyman et al. (2007), Bandick and
Gorg(2010),andHakkalaetal.(2011)forstudiesexaminingtheeffectofcross-borderM&Aonwagesand
employment in target firms. The effects on productivity and R&D is a lengthier literature, with recent
examplesincludingArnoldandJavorcik(2009),CriscuoloandMartin(2009),Ramondo(2009),Bandicket
al.(2010),andGuadalupeetal.(forthcoming).
2

agement of another firm? To our knowledge, Guadalupe et al. (forthcoming) is the only
paper to date that has provided a possible rationale - foreign firms purchase cherries in the
host country because they can earn a greater ex post return from investing in productivity
improvementswithinatargetfirmthathasahigherinitialproductivity. Whilethisprovides
a plausible explanation for why we observe cherry-picking, there are a number of remaining
questions. First, how do we reconcile the evidence of cherry-picking with the evidence in
support of lemon-picking, and with the several sources of theoretical motivation for acquir-
ers to purchase underperforming targets? Second, as firm productivities continue to change
over time, when is cross-border acquisition of target firms most likely to take place?
In this paper, we introduce a new motivation for cross-border acquisitions, as well as a
resolution to the cherry and lemon stories. First, we argue that firms with larger export
networks are attractive to foreign acquirers as export platforms to proximate markets. Ex-
port networks established by domestic targets are likely to differ from those established by
foreign acquirers due to locational differences, and are, therefore, of high value to a foreign
firm.2 This is a new dimension in which a target firm can be a “cherry” in the eyes of a
foreignacquirer. Importantly,domesticfirmsarelesslikelytoviewtargetswithlargeexport
networks as cherries, because they will independently establish similar export networks due
to their identical location. Redundancy makes the target firm’s export networks relatively
less valuable to domestic acquirers as it is to foreign firms. Thus, we are able to predict
which targets are more likely candidates for cross-border M&A, as opposed to domestic
acquisition. We note that this export-network motive for cross-border M&A is consistent
withpriorevidencethatasignificantshareofworldwideFDIactivityisforexport-platform
motives (Blonigen et al. (2007) and Ekholm et al. (2007)), and the evidence that affiliates
export a significant portion of total sales to nearby countries (Hanson et al. (2001)).
We also provide a resolution to the cherry and lemon stories. We consider a dynamic
environmentwherefirmsfacepossibleproductivityshocksthatarepersistent,andshowthat
firms with export networks are more likely to be targets of cross-border M&A when they
experienceanegativeproductivityshock. Afirmthatrealizesanegativeproductivityshock
will earn less revenue from each market within its previously established export network.
However, the productivity shock will have little to no impact on the breadth of markets
it serves, because the costs of establishing export networks are sunk investments made in
previous periods. The realization of a negative productivity shock preserves a target firm’s
assets - represented by its established export network - but makes that asset of less internal
value to the firm vis-`a-vis the external value of the export network to potential acquirers.
Asaresult,thetargetfirmismorelikelytoaccepttakeoverbidswhenitrealizesapersistent
shock to its productivity.
Acquisitionof“underperforming”firmsthathaverecentlyexperiencednegativeproduc-
2An equivalent interpretation is that established export networks are endogenously determined sources
of(trade)costsynergiesbetweenfirmsindifferentlocations
3