NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO PRICES REVEAL THE PRESENCE OF INFORMED TRADING?
Pierre Collin-Dufresne
Vyacheslav Fos
Working Paper 18452
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18452
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2012
We thank Azi Ben-Rephael, Terry Hendershott, Gur Huberman,Wei Jiang, Norman Schuerhoff, and
seminar participants at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Copenhagen Business School,
Tsinghua University, IDC Summer Conference, and, especially, Yakov Amihud and Larry Glosten
for many helpful comments. We also thank Virginia Jiang, Xinran Li, Urvi Maru, Hana Na, Shan Qiao,
Sofiya Teplitskaya, and Tong Tong for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Pierre Collin-Dufresne and Vyacheslav Fos. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Do prices reveal the presence of informed trading?
Pierre Collin-Dufresne and Vyacheslav Fos
NBER Working Paper No. 18452
October 2012
JEL No. G0,G00,G1,G10,G12,G14,G3,G34
ABSTRACT
Using a comprehensive sample of trades by Schedule 13D filers, who possess valuable private information
when they accumulate stocks of targeted companies, this paper studies whether several liquidity measures
reveal the presence of informed trading. The evidence suggests that when Schedule 13D filers trade
aggressively, both high-frequency and low-frequency measures of stock liquidity indicate a higher
stock liquidity. Importantly, measures that have been used as direct proxies for adverse selection, such
the Kyle (1985) lambda, the Easley et al. (1996) pin measure, and the Amihud (2002) illiquidity measure,
suggest that the adverse selection is lower when informed trading takes place. The evidence is consistent
with informed traders being more aggressive when measured stock liquidity is high.
Pierre Collin-Dufresne
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall 404
3022 Braodway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
pc2415@columbia.edu
Vyacheslav Fos
College of Business
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL, 61820
vfos@illinois.edu

Introduction
An extensive body of theory suggests that stock liquidity, as measured by the spread
between the bid and ask quotes and by the price impact of trades, should be informative
about the magnitude of asymmetric information between market participants (Copeland
and Galai, 1983; Glosten and Milgrom, 1985; Kyle, 1985; Easley and O’Hara, 1987;
Admati and Pfleiderer, 1988). For example, in his seminal contribution, Kyle (1985)
shows how an insider hides his private information and optimally accumulates shares at
a rate inversely proportional to his price impact,3 Kyle’s lambda, which measures the
dollar change in price due to a dollar change in order flow. In the cross-section stocks
with more informed trading relative to noise trading experience larger price impact.
Specifically, Kyle’s lambda, which can be estimated from a regression of price change on
order flow, is higher for stocks with more informed trading (relative to liquidity trading).
Following that literature there have been many attempts to measure trading costs
empirically, and to decompose such costs into different components such as a adverse
selection, order processing cost, and inventory cost (e.g., early papers include Glosten,
1987; Glosten and Harris, 1988; Stoll, 1989; Hasbrouck, 1991; Amihud, 2002). An
extensive empirical literature relies on adverse selection measures assuming they capture
information asymmetry (e.g., Barclay and Hendershott, 2004; Vega, 2006; Duarte et al.,
2008; Bharath et al., 2009; Kelly and Ljungqvist, 2011).
Do these empirical measures of stock liquidity actually capture information asym-
metry?
Most measures rely on some empirical estimate of price impact and its persistence to
identify the amount of private information in trades. There is an obvious endogeneity
issue with this approach. Ideally, one would want to separate informed from uninformed
trades ex-ante, and test their impact on price changes. Unfortunately, since we generally
3The insider’s optimal trading strategy is to trade as a linear function of the difference between his
signal and the current price, at a rate inversely proportional to his price impact, and that increases as
maturity approaches so that all the information eventually makes it into prices.
2

do not know the traders’ information sets, this is hard to do in practice. As a result,
it is often assumed that some types of investors are informed. For example, Boulatov
et al. (2009) use the institutional order flow as a proxy for informed trading.
In this paper, we use a novel data set of trades by investors we can identify as having
substantial private information, to study whether proposed liquidity measures reveal the
presence of informed trading. Specifically, we exploit a disclosure requirement to identify
trades that rely on valuable private information. Rule 13d-1(a) of the 1934 Securities
Exchange Act requires investors to file with the SEC within 10 days of acquiring more
than 5% of any class of securities of a publicly traded company if they have an interest
in influencing the management of the company. In particular, Item 5(c) of Schedule 13D
requires the filer to “... describe any transactions in the class of securities reported on
that were effected during the past sixty days or since the most recent filing of Schedule
13D, whichever is less.” Thus, Schedule 13D filings reveal the date and price at which
all trades by the Schedule 13D filer were executed during the 60 days that precede the
filing date.4
We hand collect a comprehensive sample of trades from the Schedule 13D filings. We
view this sample as an interesting laboratory to study the liquidity and the price impact
of informed trades. First, an average Schedule 13D filing in our sample is characterized
by a positive and significant market reaction upon announcement. For example, the
cumulative return in excess of the market is about 6% in the (t-10,t+1) window around
the filing date and about 3% in the (t-1,t+1) window around the filing date. Second, we
calculate several measures of profits made by Schedule 13D filers and show that these
profits are economically significant. For example, an average Schedule 13D filer gains
$1.13 million on a $30 million stake in a $404 million market cap company. Third, we
document performance of trading strategies that replicate trades of Schedule 13D filers.
The evidence suggests that these strategies exhibit positive and significant alpha when
4AsweexplaininSection2,oursampleincludesoriginalSchedule13Dfilingsonly,i.e.,amendments
to previously submitted filings are excluded from the sample.
3