NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHO RAN ON REPO?
Gary B. Gorton
Andrew Metrick
Working Paper 18455
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18455
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2012
The research funding for this paper was all from regular Yale funds. We have no relevant financial
relationships to disclose. We thank Carol Bertaut, Susan Hume McIntosh, and seminar participants
at the Federal Reserve Board of Governors for helpful comments and Lei Xie for research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Gary B. Gorton and Andrew Metrick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Who Ran on Repo?
Gary B. Gorton and Andrew Metrick
NBER Working Paper No. 18455
October 2012
JEL No. G01,G23
ABSTRACT
The sale and repurchase (repo) market played a central role in the recent financial crisis. From the
second quarter of 2007 to the first quarter of 2009, net repo financing provided to U.S. banks and broker-dealers
fell by about $1.3 trillion – more than half of its pre-crisis total. Significant details of this “run on repo”
remain shrouded, however, because many of the providers of repo finance are lightly regulated or
unregulated cash pools. In this paper we supplement the best available official data sources with a
unique market survey to provide an updated picture of the dynamics of the repo run. We provide
evidence that the run was predominantly driven by the flight of foreign financial institutions, domestic
and offshore hedge funds, and other unregulated cash pools. Our analysis highlights the danger of
relying exclusively on data from regulated institutions, which would miss the most important parts
of the run.
Gary B. Gorton
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu
Andrew Metrick
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
metrick@yale.edu

1. Introduction
Repo finance is a multi-trillion dollar market that plays a central role in the
modern financial system.1 From the second quarter of 2007 to the first quarter of 2009,
net repo financing provided to U.S. banks and broker-dealers fell by about $1.3 trillion –
more than half of its pre-crisis total. We argue in a series of papers (Gorton (2010),
Gorton and Metrick (2010a, 2010b, 2012)) that this “run on repo” played a crucial role in
the recent financial crisis. Significant details of this run remain shrouded, however,
because many of the providers of repo finance are lightly regulated or unregulated cash
pools. In this paper we supplement the best available official data sources with a unique
market survey to provide an updated picture of the dynamics of the repo run. We
provide evidence that the run was predominantly driven by the flight of foreign financial
institutions, domestic and offshore hedge funds, and other unregulated cash pools. Our
analysis highlights the danger of relying exclusively on data from regulated institutions,
which would miss the most important parts of the run.
Repo is divided into two different components – “tri-party repo” and “bilateral
repo” – with only tri-party having reliable data. In tri-party repo, a clearing bank stands
between borrowers and lenders.2 The tri-party segment is dominated by regulated
institutions, and thus the data on tri-party repo is relatively complete. In contrast,
bilateral repo is the home of hedge funds, many types of offshore institutions, and other
unregulated cash pools. This data gap is significant, with an industry survey (discussed
below) finding that bilateral repo was about three times as large as tri-party repo in 2004.
Section 2 uses Flow-of-Funds data to explore the dynamics of repo funding since
1999. These data combine all the main sources for tri-party repo with the available
1 A repo contract is an arrangement in which one party, the depositor or lender, provides cash to the
other party, the borrower or bank. The contract is often overnight and is collateralized. So, the
borrowing bank provides bonds with a market equal to or great than the amount of cash the
depositor is providing. If the deposit is overcollateralized, there is said to be “haircut.” E.g., if the
borrower deposits $90 million dollars and the backing bonds are worth a market value of $100
million, then there is a 10 percent haircut. Other aspects of the repo contract are described in Gorton
and Metrick (2012).
2 Industry terminology uses the terms “repo” and “reverse repo” to refer (not always consistently) to,
respectively, the sender and receiver of collateral. In the interest of clarity, we will avoid these
terms, instead using the traditional terms of “borrower” for the party that receives cash and provides
collateral, and “lender” for the reverse. “Borrowers” then have “repo liabilities” and “lenders” have
“repo assets”.
1

sources for bilateral repo.3 Because the borrowers are mostly banks and broker-dealers,
the flow-of-funds data on total repo liabilities should be relatively complete, even from
bilateral repo. In contrast, the lenders come from both regulated and unregulated sectors,
so that the official totals for liabilities (borrowers) typically exceed those for assets
(lenders), often by a significant amount. This “statistical discrepancy” was the single
largest contributor to total repo lending on the eve of the crisis, with an almost $1 trillion
difference between reported assets and liabilities. Over the subsequent seven quarters,
this discrepancy completely disappeared. So, a first-order (unsatisfying) answer to “who
ran on repo?” is that “the statistical discrepancy ran on repo”. We will attempt to
improve upon this unsatisfying answer in Section 3. But even without the discrepancy
there are some interesting findings from the flow-of-funds. In particular, the reporting
institutions from the “rest of world” reduced repo assets by about $400 billion, while
money-market-mutual funds – the largest reporting category pre-crisis – actually
increased repo assets by more than $100 billion from 2007Q2 through 2009Q1.
Furthermore, gross funding by broker-dealers fell significantly more than did net funding,
so that estimates of market size based only on net funding changes will understate the
dislocations in repo markets during the crisis.
Section 3 attempts to shed light on the statistical discrepancy by comparing the
flow-of-funds data with survey evidence from the Bond Market Association (BMA). The
BMA surveyed its members on their use of repo as of June 30, 2004. This survey asked
major market participants about the identity of their counterparties, and then provided
estimates of market size by counterparty-type. Counterparty data is not available in the
flow-of-funds. The BMA did not distinguish between borrowing and lending and did not
reveal its methodology for its market-size estimates, so it is not possible to make a direct
comparison to aggregate data in the flow-of-funds. Nevertheless, the survey is invaluable
for the view it gives into the composition of counterparties, particularly those that do not
report through official sources. For our purposes, the key findings from the survey –
subject to caveats explained in Section 3 – are (1) bilateral repo is about three times the
3 Our focus is on repo where at least one counterparty is from the United States. European repo is
also substantial, but is not covered by a government source as comprehensive as the Federal Reserve
flow-­‐of-­‐funds. For an industry-­‐based survey of European repo, see International Capital Market
Association (2010).
2