NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EARLY AND LATE HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENTS, BORROWING CONSTRAINTS,
AND THE FAMILY
Elizabeth M. Caucutt
Lance Lochner
Working Paper 18493
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18493
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2012
For helpful comments, we thank Flavio Cunha, Rick Hanushek, Jim Heckman, Alex Monge-Naranjo,
and Aloysius Siow, as well as participants at the 2002 and 2012 Society of Economic Dynamics Annual
Meetings, 2004 Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Workshop on Human Capital and Education, CIBC
Human Capital Conference, 2011 CESifo Area Conference on Economics of Education, Workshop
on Labour Markets and the Macroeconomy, 2011 Canadian Macro Study Group Meeting, Human
Capital Conference at ASU, and 2012 AEA Annual Meeting. We also thank seminar participants at
the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and St. Louis, Universitat of Autonoma de Barcelona, NYU,
University of Virginia, Yale University, and the University of Saskatchewan. We gratefully acknowledge
support from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Elizabeth M. Caucutt and Lance Lochner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Early and Late Human Capital Investments, Borrowing Constraints, and the Family
Elizabeth M. Caucutt and Lance Lochner
NBER Working Paper No. 18493
October 2012
JEL No. D14,E24,H52,I22,I24,J24
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the importance of family borrowing constraints in determining human capital
investments in children at early and late ages. We begin by providing new evidence from the Children
of the NLSY (CNLSY) which suggests that borrowing constraints bind for at least some families with
young children. Next, we develop an intergenerational model of lifecycle human capital accumulation
to study the role of early versus late investments in children when credit markets are imperfect. We
analytically establish the importance of dynamic complementarity in investment for the qualitative
nature of investment responses to income and policy changes. We extend the framework to incorporate
dynasties and use data from the CNLSY to calibrate the model. Our benchmark steady state suggests
that roughly half of young parents and 12% of old parents are borrowing constrained, while older children
are unconstrained. We also identify strong complementarity between early and late investments, suggesting
that policies targeted to one stage of development tend to have similar effects on investment in both
stages. We use this calibrated model to study the effects of education subsidies, loans and transfers
offered at different ages on early and late human capital investments and subsequent earnings in the
short-run and long-run. A key lesson is that the interaction between dynamic complementarity and early
borrowing constraints means that early interventions tend to be more successful than later interventions
at improving human capital outcomes.
Elizabeth M. Caucutt
Department of Economics
Social Science Center
The Univeristy of Western Ontario
London, ON N6A 5C2, Canada
ecaucutt@uwo.ca
Lance Lochner
Department of Economics, Faculty of Social Science
University of Western Ontario
1151 Richmond Street, North
London, ON N6A 5C2
CANADA
and NBER
llochner@uwo.ca

1 Introduction
By limiting the incentives and capacity to invest in human capital, financing constraints and
labor market uncertainty can play critical roles in determining aggregate productivity, national
income distributions, social mobility, and economic growth and development (Becker 1975). The
growing importance of parental income for child achievement and educational attainment (Belley
and Lochner 2007, Duncan and Murnane 2011, Reardon 2011) raises serious questions about the
ability (or willingness) of disadvantaged families to make efficient investments in their children.
In this paper, we investigate the importance of family borrowing constraints in determining
human capital investments in children at different ages. We also explore the extent to which
policies targeted to different ages can address this market failure, potentially improving economic
efficiency and equity.
Despite considerable evidence that adolescent skill levels are important in determining subse-
quent schooling and lifetime earnings (see, e.g., Cameron and Heckman 1998, Keane and Wolpin
1997, 2001, and Carneiro and Heckman 2002), only recently has the literature begun to consider
whetherborrowingconstraintsinhibitearlyinvestmentsinyoungchildren(RestucciaandUrrutia
2004, Cunha 2007, Del Boca, Flinn, and Wiswall 2010, Lee and Seshadri 2012). This is somewhat
surprising, since studies of consumption behavior often find stronger evidence of binding liquidity
constraints for younger households (e.g. Meghir and Weber 1996, Alessie, Devereux, and Weber
1997, Stephens 2008).1 Indirect evidence suggests that constraints at early ages may play a more
important role in determining human capital investment than constraints at later ages. For ex-
ample, most empirical studies find high lifetime returns for early childhood programs, especially
for disadvantaged children (e.g., see Karoly et al. 1998, Blau and Currie 2006, or Cunha, et al.
2006, Heckman, et al. 2010). Other studies find that family income received at early childhood
ages has a greater impact on adolescent achievement when compared with income received at
later ages (e.g. Duncan and Brooks-Gunn 1997, Duncan, et al. 1998, Levy and Duncan 1999,
Caucutt and Lochner 2006).2 More generally, a number of recent studies demonstrate that dif-
1In related work, Attanasio, Goldberg and Kyriazidou (2008) conclude that many younger and middle-age
American households are likely to be liquidity constrained based on differential car loan demand elasticities with
respect to interest rates and loan maturity. In the presence of income uncertainty, Gourinchas and Parker (2002)
empiricallyshowthatyoungerconsumersbehaveasbuffer-stockagents,savingsmallamounts(ratherthanborrow-
ing)duetoprecautionarymotives,whilemiddle-ageworkerssaveprimarilyforlifecyclemotives. Thepossibilityof
very low future income realizations causes young consumers to behave much like they are liquidity constrained.
2CarneiroandHeckman(2002)arguethatearlyincomeshouldhavealargereffectthanlaterincomeduepurely
to discounting (e.g. $1 at age 0 should have an effect that is (1+r)10 larger than income at age 10, where r
is the annual interest rate). Accounting for this, they estimate similar effects of ‘early’ and ‘late’ family income
on college enrolment in the Children of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (CNLSY); however, they also
2

ferences in child achievement by family income do not simply reflect unobserved differences in
families and parenting styles that are correlated with family income. These studies show that
exogenous increases in family income lead to real improvements in child development (e.g. Løken
2010, Duncan, Morris and Rodrigues 2011, Milligan and Stabile 2011, Dahl and Lochner 2012,
Løken, Mogstad and Wiswall 2012).
Table 1 provides new evidence from the Children of the National Longitudinal Survey of
Youth (CNLSY) that, in the U.S., early income is a more important determinant of educational
attainment than is income earned at later ages. This table reports results from regressing ed-
ucational attainment indicators on early and late family income.3 Estimates reported in Panel
A control only for maternal education, while those in Panel B also control for other important
child and mother characteristics. Specifications described in the first four columns use total re-
ported parental earnings to measure family income, while the specifications reported in columns
5-8 use an adjusted ‘full’ earnings measure that adjusts for the possibility that some mothers
work part-time to spend more time investing in their children.4 The estimated effects are quite
similar across specifications and reveal that a $10,000 increase in discounted annual income over
ageszero to elevensignificantlyreduces highschool dropout ratesbyabout 2.5 percentagepoints,
whileitincreasescollegeattendanceratesbyasmuchas4.6percentagepoints. Thesameincrease
in discounted annual income when the child is 12-23 has smaller (and statistically insignificant)
effects on these education margins; however, the effects of early and late income are more sim-
ilar for college completion. For many specifications, differences in the effects of early and late
family income on high school completion and/or college attendance are statistically significant at
conventional levels.
Creditconstraintsarenaturalcandidatestoexplainwhysomelow-incomefamiliesdonotmake
controlforage12achievementlevelswhichmayabsorbmuchoftheeffectofearlierincome. CaucuttandLochner
(2006)estimatethat(discounted)incomereceivedatearlierageshasalargerimpactonage5-14mathandreading
achievement in the CNLSY than (discounted) income received at later ages.
3Income in Table 1 is measured in $10,000 year 2008 dollars, using the CPI-U to account for inflation. Income
is averaged over ages 0-11 (early income) and 12-23 (late income) after discounting income each year back to the
year the child was born using a discount rate of 5%. These assumptions and age ranges are consistent with those
used later in the calibration of our model.
4In Panel B, specifications include measures of child’s year of birth, race/ethnicity, and gender, while mother’s
characteristics include educational attainment, whether she was a teenager when the child was born, living in an
intactfamilyatage14,foreign-born,andArmedForcesQualifyingTestscores. Theadjusted‘full’earningsmeasure
inflates earnings for mothers working less than 1,500 hours per year to its 1,500 hour equivalent (i.e. multiplies
theirearningsby1,500anddividesbyreportedhours). SinceNLSYmotherswereages14-22in1979,manyoftheir
children are still young. Thus, our sample sizes are smaller when looking at college attendance or completion at
age24comparedwithmeasuresofhighschooldropoutasofage21. Wealsolosesomeobservationsduetomissing
mother or child characteristics (Panel B) or missing measures of hours worked (columns 5-8). See Appendix A for
additional details on the CNLSY data and our sample.
3