NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ANALYZING THE EFFECTS OF INSURING HEALTH RISKS:
ON THE TRADE-OFF BETWEEN SHORT RUN INSURANCE BENEFITS VS. LONG RUN INCENTIVE COSTS
Harold L. Cole
Soojin Kim
Dirk Krueger
Working Paper 18572
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18572
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012
We thank Hanming Fang, Iourii Manovskii and participants at EUI, EIEF, the Penn Macro Lunch
and the Annual Meeting for Society for Economic Dynamics 2012 for many helpful comments. Krueger
gratefully acknowledges financial support from the NSF under grant SES-0820494. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Harold L. Cole, Soojin Kim, and Dirk Krueger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Analyzing the Effects of Insuring Health Risks: On the Trade-off between Short Run Insurance
Benefits vs. Long Run Incentive Costs
Harold L. Cole, Soojin Kim, and Dirk Krueger
NBER Working Paper No. 18572
November 2012
JEL No. E61,H31,I18
ABSTRACT
This paper constructs a dynamic model of health insurance to evaluate the short- and long run effects
of policies that prevent firms from conditioning wages on health conditions of their workers, and that
prevent health insurance companies from charging individuals with adverse health conditions higher
insurance premia. Our study is motivated by recent US legislation that has tightened regulations on
wage discrimination against workers with poorer health status (Americans with Disability Act of 2009,
ADA, and ADA Amendments Act of 2008, ADAAA) and that will prohibit health insurance companies
from charging different premiums for workers of different health status starting in 2014 (Patient Protection
and Affordable Care Act, PPACA). In the model, a trade-off arises between the static gains from better
insurance against poor health induced by these policies and their adverse dynamic incentive effects
on household efforts to lead a healthy life. Using household panel data from the PSID we estimate
and calibrate the model and then use it to evaluate the static and dynamic consequences of no-wage
discrimination and no-prior conditions laws for the evolution of the cross-sectional health and consumption
distribution of a cohort of households, as well as ex-ante lifetime utility of a typical member of this
cohort. In our quantitative analysis we find that although a combination of both policies is effective
in providing full consumption insurance period by period, it is suboptimal to introduce both policies
jointly since such policy innovation induces a more rapid deterioration of the cohort health distribution
over time. This is due to the fact that combination of both laws severely undermines the incentives
to lead healthier lives. The resulting negative effects on health outcomes in society more than offset
the static gains from better consumption insurance so that expected discounted lifetime utility is lower
under both policies, relative to only implementing wage nondiscrimination legislation.
Harold L. Cole Dirk Krueger
Economics Department Economics Department
University of Pennsylvania University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk 160 McNeil Building
160 McNeil Building 3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104 Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER and NBER
colehl@sas.upenn.edu dkrueger@econ.upenn.edu
Soojin Kim
Economics Department
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
160 McNeil Building
Philadelphia, PA 19104
soojink@sas.upenn.edu

Analyzing the Effects of Insuring Health Risks:∗
On the Trade-off between Short Run Insurance Benefits vs. Long Run Incentive Costs
Harold L. Cole Soojin Kim
University of Pennsylvania and NBER University of Pennsylvania
Dirk Krueger
University of Pennsylvania, CEPR and NBER
November 29, 2012
Abstract
Thispaperconstructsadynamicmodelofhealthinsurancetoevaluatetheshort-andlongruneffects
of policies that prevent firms from conditioning wages on health conditions of their workers, and that
prevent health insurance companies from charging individuals with adverse health conditions higher in-
surancepremia. OurstudyismotivatedbyrecentUSlegislationthathastightenedregulationsonwage
discrimination against workers with poorer health status (Americans with Disability Act of 2009, ADA,
and ADA Amendments Act of 2008, ADAAA) and that will prohibit health insurance companies from
charging different premiums for workers of different health status starting in 2014 (Patient Protection
andAffordableCareAct,PPACA).Inthemodel,atrade-offarisesbetweenthestaticgainsfrombetter
insurance against poor health induced by these policies and their adverse dynamic incentive effects on
household efforts to lead a healthy life. Using household panel data from the PSID we estimate and
calibrate the model and then use it to evaluate the static and dynamic consequences of no-wage dis-
criminationandno-priorconditionslawsfortheevolutionofthecross-sectionalhealthandconsumption
distribution of a cohort of households, as well as ex-ante lifetime utility of a typical member of this
cohort. In our quantitative analysis we find that although a combination of both policies is effective in
providingfullconsumptioninsuranceperiodbyperiod,itissuboptimaltointroducebothpoliciesjointly
since such policy innovation induces a more rapid deterioration of the cohort health distribution over
time. This is due to the fact that combination of both laws severely undermines the incentives to lead
healthier lives. The resulting negative effects on health outcomes in society more than offset the static
gainsfrombetterconsumptioninsurancesothatexpecteddiscountedlifetimeutilityislowerunderboth
policies, relative to only implementing wage nondiscrimination legislation.
JEL Codes: E61, H31, I18
Keywords: Health, Insurance, Incentive
1 Introduction
In this paper we study the impact of social insurance policies aimed at reducing households’ exposure to
health related risk during their working life. These risks come through higher medical costs, higher medical
premiums and lower earnings. Historically there have been major insurance efforts aimed at the elderly
through Medicaid and Social Security, and the poor through Medicare and income support programs like
Welfare and Food Stamps. Recently the extent of these programs and the scope of the different groups
they impact on has been greatly expanded. On the health insurance front, HIPPA in 1966 and the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act in 2010 sought to increase access to health care and to prevent health
insurance being differentially priced based upon pre-existing conditions. On the income front, the 1990
∗WethankHanmingFang,IouriiManovskiiandparticipantsatEUI,EIEF,thePennMacroLunchandtheAnnualMeeting
forSocietyforEconomicDynamics2012formanyhelpfulcomments. Kruegergratefullyacknowledgesfinancialsupportfrom
theNSFundergrantSES-0820494.
1

Americans with Disabilities Act and its Amendment in 2009 sought to restrict the ability of employers to
employ and compensate workers differentially based upon health related reasons.
In order to analyze the impact of these policies we construct a dynamic model of health insurance
with heterogeneous households. As in Grossman (1972), health for these households is a state variable. A
household’s health state helps to determine both their productivity at work and the likelihood that they
will be subject to adverse health shocks. Our model features the two-way interaction between health and
income that has been emphasized in the literature. Our model of health shocks includes temporary health
shocks that impact on productivity and can be offset by medical expenditures (as in Dey and Flinn 2005),
and catastrophic health shocks which require nondiscretionary health expenditures to avoid death. Health
status in our model is persistent and evolves stochastically. This evolution is affected by the household’s
efforts to maintain their health which results in a moral hazard problem as health related insurance reduces
households’ incentives to maintain their health. We explicitly model the choice of medical expenditure and
thereby endogenously determine the health insurance policy and how it responds both to the household’s
state in terms of health status, age and education.
Thefocusofouranalysisishowthedistributionsofhealthstatus,earningsandhealthinsurancecostswill
evolveunderdifferentpolicychoicesandtheimpactofthesechoicesonwelfare. Weconsiderseveraldifferent
policyregimes. Thefirstisacompleteinsurancebenchmarkinwhichthesocialplannercandictateboththe
health insurance contract, the effort made to maintain health and the extent of redistributive transfers that
provide full insurance against all health related shocks. The second is pure competition in which workers
enter into one-period employment and insurance contracts. Competition leads these contracts to partially
insure the worker against within period temporary health shocks, but not against his initial health status
and the transition of this status. The second is a version of the no-prior conditions restriction on health
insurance in which health insurance companies compete to offer one-period health insurance contracts in
which they cannot differentially charge based upon the worker’s health status. The third is a version of the
no-discrimination restrictions on employment in which firms cannot differentially hire or pay workers based
upon their health status. In the fourth version we consider the impact of both the no-prior conditions and
the no-discrimination restrictions jointly.
We study both the static and the dynamic impact of these policies. One of the key aspects of the
dynamic analysis is the impact these policies have on individuals’ incentives to maintain their health and
thefeedbackthiscreatesbetweenthehealthdistributionofthepopulationandthecostsofhealthinsurance
and productivity of the workforce.
We evaluate the quantitative impacts of the different policies on consumption insurance, incentives and
aggregate outcomes, and, ultimately, welfare. To do so, we first estimate and calibrate the model using
PSID data to match key aggregate statistics on labor earnings, medical expenditures and observed physical
exercise levels. We then use the parameterized version of the model as a laboratory to evaluate different
policyscenarios. Ourresultsshowthatacombinationofwagenon-discriminationlawandnopriorconditions
law provides full insurance against health risks and restores the first-best consumption insurance allocation
intheshortrun,butleadstoaseveredeteriorationofincentivesandthusthepopulationhealthdistribution
inthelongrun. Quantitativelyevaluatingthewelfareconsequencesofthistrade-offwefindthateventhough
both policies improve upon the laissez-faire equilibrium, implementing them jointly is suboptimal, relative
to introducing a wage nondiscrimination in isolation.
1.1 Institutional Background
The U.S. has a long history of policy initiatives in relation to health risk. Implicitly Welfare programs,
which date back to the 1930s and were greatly expanded by the Great Society in the 1960s, insure workers
against a variety of shocks, implicitly including health related shocks insofar they affect earnings. Since
1965 Medicare has sought to provide health insurance to the elderly and the disabled. Medicaid has sought
to provide health insurance to the poor since the 1990s. The last two decades legislation in the U.S. was
passed that limits the ability of employers to condition wages on the health conditions of employees, and to
discriminate against applicants with prior health conditions when filling vacant positions.
2