NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOLLAR FUNDING AND THE LENDING BEHAVIOR OF GLOBAL BANKS
Victoria Ivashina
David S. Scharfstein
Jeremy C. Stein
Working Paper 18528
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18528
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012
We are grateful for helpful comments from Michael Palumbo, and from seminar participants at Northwestern
University (Kellogg), the Banque de France/OSEO Conference, and the 4th Paris Spring Corporate
Finance Conference. We thank Peter Crane from Crane Data LLC for sharing money-market-fund
data with us, Toomas Laarits and Chris Allen for research assistance, and the Division of Research
at Harvard Business School for research support. The analysis and conclusions set forth are those
of the authors and do not indicate concurrence by other members of the Board of Governors. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18528.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Victoria Ivashina, David S. Scharfstein, and Jeremy C. Stein. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Dollar Funding and the Lending Behavior of Global Banks
Victoria Ivashina, David S. Scharfstein, and Jeremy C. Stein
NBER Working Paper No. 18528
November 2012
JEL No. F36,F44,F6,G01,G21
ABSTRACT
A large share of dollar-denominated lending is done by non-U.S. banks, particularly European banks.
We present a model in which such banks cut dollar lending more than euro lending in response to
a shock to their credit quality. Because these banks rely on wholesale dollar funding, while raising
more of their euro funding through insured retail deposits, the shock leads to a greater withdrawal
of dollar funding. Banks can borrow in euros and swap into dollars to make up for the dollar shortfall,
but this may lead to violations of covered interest parity (CIP) when there is limited capital to take
the other side of the swap trade. In this case, synthetic dollar borrowing becomes expensive, which
causes cuts in dollar lending. We test the model in the context of the Eurozone sovereign crisis, which
escalated in the second half of 2011 and resulted in U.S. money-market funds sharply reducing the
funding provided to European banks. Coincident with the contraction in dollar funding, there were
significant violations of euro-dollar CIP. Moreover, dollar lending by Eurozone banks fell relative
to their euro lending in both the U.S. and Europe; this was not the case for U.S. global banks. Finally,
European banks that were more reliant on money funds experienced bigger declines in dollar lending.
Victoria Ivashina Jeremy C. Stein
Harvard Business School Federal Reserve Board of Governors
Baker Library 233 20th Street and Constitution Ave., N.W.
Soldiers Field Washington, DC 20551
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
vivashina@hbs.edu
David S. Scharfstein
Harvard Business School
Baker 239
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
dscharfstein@hbs.edu

1. Introduction
A striking fact about international financial markets is the large share of dollar-
denominated intermediation done by non-U.S. banks. This point is illustrated in Figure 1.
Drawing on data from the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), the figure shows that both
the dollar assets and the dollar liabilities of foreign banking entities have grown rapidly in the
last two decades, and currently are on the order of $10 trillion, which puts them roughly on a par
with U.S. banks (see also Shin, 2012). A significant part of this activity by foreign banks
represents interactions with customers located outside of the United States. However, foreign
banks also play a major role in domestic U.S. markets. As we discuss in more detail below,
European banks alone accounted for approximately 28% of the U.S. syndicated loan market over
the period 2005-2007.
[FIGURE 1]
The large footprint of global banks in dollar funding and lending markets raises a number
of questions. Some of these have to do with the dollar’s role as a favored currency for
transactions by non-U.S. residents and firms—e.g., why is it that a Brazilian manufacturer might
prefer to borrow in dollars as opposed to in reals? Others have to do with understanding the
comparative advantage of foreign banks in lending to U.S. firms—e.g., why might an American
manufacturer end up borrowing from, say, Credit Agricole as opposed to J.P. Morgan?
In this paper, we take the presence of global banks in dollar loan markets as a given, and
focus on exploring the consequences of this arrangement for cyclical variation in credit supply
across countries. In particular, we ask how shocks to the ability of a foreign bank to raise dollar
funding translate into changes in its lending behavior, both in the U.S., and in its home market.
This question is especially important in light of the observation that many foreign banks operate
1

in the U.S. with a largely “wholesale” funding model. In other words, rather than relying in part
on sticky insured deposits—as do domestic U.S. banks—foreign banks raise the majority of their
short-term dollar financing from uninsured institutional sources, such as commercial paper
purchased by U.S. money-market funds.1 This makes the cost and availability of such dollar
funding highly sensitive to changing perceptions of their creditworthiness.
To understand how such shocks might affect lending activity, we build a simple model,
which can be described as follows. Imagine a global bank based in France that lends in euros to
European firms, and in dollars to American firms. The bank has a fixed amount of equity capital
that it can use to support all of its lending.2 To finance the euro-denominated lending, it funds
itself by issuing insured euro deposits to its local retail deposit base. By contrast, to finance the
dollar-denominated lending, it funds itself by issuing uninsured commercial paper to a set of
U.S. money-market funds. Initially, the bank is viewed as having near-zero credit risk, so its
lack of insurance in the U.S. market does not have a material impact on its dollar funding costs.
Now suppose that there is an adverse shock to the bank’s perceived creditworthiness.
Given the wholesale nature of its dollar liabilities (i.e., the lack of insurance), this leads to a
spike in its dollar funding costs, as the money-market funds rationally seek to cut their exposure
to the bank. At the same time, the cost to the bank of funding in euros is unchanged, given the
deposit insurance in that market. Said differently, as the bank becomes increasingly risky, the
advantage of funding in euros relative to dollars goes up, since the former enjoys an increasing
subsidy from the deposit insurance fund.
1 When, as is often the case, foreign banks operate in the U.S. via a branch—as opposed to a separately
capitalized subsidiary—they are legally precluded from raising FDIC-insured deposits.
2 This could be because the bank finds it costly to raise new equity in the short run, and because capital
regulation puts an upper bound on the ratio of total loans to book equity.
2