NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAPITAL AND LABOR REALLOCATION INSIDE FIRMS
Xavier Giroud
Holger M. Mueller
Working Paper 18592
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18592
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012
We thank Simon Gervais, Cam Harvey, Marcin Kacperczyk, Owen Lamont (NBER discussant), David
Matsa, Gordon Phillips, Adriano Rampini, Joshua Rauh, Michael Roberts, Philipp Schnabl, Antoinette
Schoar, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, and seminar participants at the NBER Corporate Finance Summer
Institute (2012), the Micro@Sloan Conference (2012), MIT, NYU, HBS, Duke, INSEAD, Utah, ASU,
Florida, Bentley, and Stockholm School of Economics for helpful comments. The research in this
paper was conducted while the authors were Special Sworn Status researchers of the U.S. Census Bureau
at the New York and Boston Census Research Data Centers. Any opinions and conclusions expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau
or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential
information is disclosed.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Xavier Giroud and Holger M. Mueller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Capital and Labor Reallocation Inside Firms
Xavier Giroud and Holger M. Mueller
NBER Working Paper No. 18592
December 2012
JEL No. D24,G3,J63
ABSTRACT
We document how a plant-specific shock to investment opportunities at one plant of a firm ("treated
plant") spills over to other plants of the same firm--but only if the firm is financially constrained. While
the shock triggers an increase in investment and employment at the treated plant, this increase is offset
by a decrease at other plants of the same magnitude, consistent with headquarters channeling scarce
resources away from other plants and toward the treated plant. As a result of the resource reallocation,
aggregate firm-wide productivity increases, suggesting that the reallocation is beneficial for the firm
as a whole. We also show that--in order to provide the treated plant with scarce resources--headquarters
does not uniformly "tax" all of the firm's other plants in the same way: It is more likely to take away
resources from plants that are less productive, are not part of the firm's core industries, and are located
far away from headquarters. We do not find any evidence of investment or employment spillovers
at financially unconstrained firms.
Xavier Giroud
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-639
Cambridge, MA 02142
xgiroud@mit.edu
Holger M. Mueller
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street
Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
hmueller@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
When firms face binding financing constraints, headquarters can create value by actively
reallocating scarce resources across projects. In particular, headquarters’ control rights
allow it to take away resources from some projects and allocate them to other, more
deserving ones (Alchian, 1969; Williamson, 1975; Stein, 1997). Among other things, this
implies an interdependence between otherwise unrelated projects:
“Thus, for example, if a company owns two unrelated divisions A and B, and
the appeal of investing in B suddenly increases, the argument would seem
to imply that investment in A would decline–even if it is positive NPV at
the margin–as corporate headquarters channels relatively more of its scarce
resources toward B” (Stein, 1997, p. 112).1
This rationale for an internal capital market–based on the notion that headquarters
channels scarce resources toward the most deserving projects–has implications for the
boundaries of the firm. As Stein (1997) shows, it provides a plausible theory of optimal
firm size and scope that is consistent with firms (not individual managers) owning the
assets employed in the production process.2 It has also implications for the design of a
firm’s internal organizational structure, as the fear of losing scarce resources may lead to
managerial rent-seeking and, more generally, may distort managers’ incentives (e.g., Mil-
grom, 1988; Milgrom and Roberts, 1988; Rajan, Servaes, and Zingales, 2000; Scharfstein
and Stein, 2000; Brusco and Panunzi, 2004).
As the quote above illustrates, a key hypothesis of the efficient internal capital mar-
kets paradigm is that–when firms face binding financing constraints–an increase in the
appeal of investing in one project should lead to a decline in investment in other projects.
And yet, little is known about whether this hypothesis is true in the data. The paper
1Similarly, Shin and Stulz (1998, p. 543) define an internal capital market to be efficient if “its
allocation of funds to a segment falls when other segments have better investment opportunities.”
2A shortcoming of the Grossman-Hart-Moore property-rights paradigm (Grossman and Hart, 1986;
Hart and Moore, 1990) is that it cannot explain why firms, as opposed to individual managers, own
productive assets. See Bolton and Scharfstein (1998) and, especially, Holmström (1999) for a critique
along these lines.
2

that perhaps comes closest to testing this hypothesis is Shin and Stulz (1998). Using
Compustat segment data, the authors regress investment by a segment on the industry
qs of the firm’s other segments. They overwhelmingly reject that the qs of the other
segments affect the segment’s investment and conclude: “Unless one believes that firms
face no costs of external finance, this evidence suggests that the internal capital market
does not allocate resources efficiently” (Shin and Stulz, 1998, p. 544).
This paper takes a fresh look at the efficient internal capital markets hypothesis using
plant-level data from the U.S. Census Bureau. We consider a “natural experiment” that
is close in spirit to the thought experiment outlined in Stein’s quote: Suppose the appeal
of investing in one plant suddenly increases–does investment in other plants of the same
firm decline? To obtain exogenous variation in the “sudden increase in the appeal of
investing in one plant,” we use the introduction of new airline routes that reduce the
travel time between headquarters and plants. Giroud (2012) uses this source of variation
to study whether proximity to headquarters affects plant-level investment. The idea is
thatareductionintraveltimemakesiteasierforheadquarterstomonitoraplant, thereby
making investment in the (treated) plant more appealing.34
In this paper, we use the “sudden increase in the appeal of investing in one plant”
as our starting point and examine whether it leads to a reallocation of resources within
the firm, whether headquarters–in order to provide the treated plant with resources–
“taxes” some plants more than others, and whether the reallocation is beneficial for the
3The motivation for using travel time instead of geographical proximity is that the former entails
plausiblyexogenousvariation. Furthermore,itconstitutesamoredirectproxyfortheeaseofmonitoring:
A plant may be located far away from headquarters, yet monitoring may be easy, because there exists a
short direct flight. Conversely, a plant may be located in the same state as headquarters, yet monitoring
may be costly, because it involves a long and tedious trip by car.
4Anecdotalevidencethatproximitymattersformonitoringabounds. Forexample,RayKroc,founder
ofMcDonald’s,writesinhisautobiography: “OnethingIlikedaboutthathousewasthatitwasperched
on a hill looking down on a McDonald’s store on the main thoroughfare. I could pick up a pair of
binoculars and watch business in that store from my living room window. It drove the manager crazy
when I told him about it. But he sure had one hell of a hard-working crew” (Kroc, 1992, p. 141).
For anecdotal evidence that top-level managers consider traveling to plants important, see the following
quotefromChief Executive magazine(October1,2003): “Lillieconsiderstravelfromheadquarterstosee
a company’s other plants or offices a must. “You need to see it, feel it, touch it, taste it before you make
a good decision,” says Lillie.” (James Lillie is the current CEO and former COO of Jarden, a Fortune
500 company based in Rye, N.Y., with over 23,000 employees.)
3