NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INFORMATION ACQUISITION IN RUMOR BASED BANK RUNS
Zhiguo He
Asaf Manela
Working Paper 18513
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18513
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012
We thank the editor Bruno Biais, the Associate Editor, three anonymous referees, Fernando Anjos
(discussant), Douglas Diamond, Philip Dybvig, Itay Goldstein, Rajkamal Iyer, Doron Levit (discussant),
Dmitry Livdan, Alan Moreira, Uday Rajan, and Robert Vishny as well as seminar participants at AEA,
Chicago Booth, Jackson Hole Finance Group, NY Fed, Rothschild Caesarea, SED, SFS Cavalcade,
Southwest University of Finance and Economics (China), Tel Aviv U, Financial Theory Group workshop,
and Wash U for helpful comments. Part of this project was completed while Zhiguo He visited the
Institution of Financial Studies at Southwest University of Finance and Economics in Chengdu (China)
in summer 2011. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Zhiguo He and Asaf Manela. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Information Acquisition in Rumor Based Bank Runs
Zhiguo He and Asaf Manela
NBER Working Paper No. 18513
November 2012, Revised June 2014
JEL No. E61,G01,G21
ABSTRACT
We study information acquisition and dynamic withdrawal decisions when a spreading rumor exposes
a solvent bank to a run. Uncertainty about the bank’s liquidity and potential failure motivates depositors
who hear the rumor to acquire additional noisy signals. Depositors with less informative signals may
wait before gradually running on the bank, leading to an endogenous aggregate withdrawal speed and
bank survival time. Private information acquisition about liquidity can subject solvent-but-illiquid
banks to runs, and shorten the survival time of failing banks. Public provision of solvency information
can mitigate runs by indirectly crowding-out individual depositors’ effort to acquire liquidity information.
Zhiguo He
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
zhiguo.he@chicagobooth.edu
Asaf Manela
Campus Box 1133
One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130
amanela@wustl.edu

1 Introduction
Bank runs are unfortunately still with us. Runs occurred recently on major traditional banks such
asNorthernRockandIndyMac,andonnon-traditional“shadow”banks. InSection2,wedocument
several intriguing features of the largest ever bank failure, which resulted from the 2008 run on
WashingtonMutual: (i)thebanksurvivedafirstrun, followedbydepositinflows; (ii)rumorscircu-
lated, but there was no public information of the first run happening; (iii) uncertainty about bank
liquidity played a key role in a second fatal run; (iv) both runs had an important time dimension;
(v) worried depositors (even those covered by FDIC insurance) acquired additional information,
then some withdrew immediately, while others decided to wait. The empirical pattern that runs
have an important time dimension and that uncertainty and learning play a key role, has been
documented as far back as the 1857 run on the Emigrant Industrial Savings Bank, and is especially
important for the uninsured shadow banking system (e.g., money market funds behavior amid the
European debt crisis discussed in Section 2). The dynamic effects of information acquisition and
theincentivestowait,ontheexistenceanddurationofbankruns,havenotbeenstudiedbyexisting
bank run models. We aim to fill this gap.
Westudydynamicrumor-basedbankrunswithendogenousinformationacquisition. Ourmodel
incorporatesuncertaintyaboutbankliquidityintotheasynchronousawarenessframeworkofAbreu
and Brunnermeier (2003). A liquidity event occurs at some unobservable random time, at which
point a solvent bank becomes illiquid with a known probability or remains liquid. An illiquid bank
has only a limited amount of cash exposing it to a run, while a liquid bank has sufficient reserves to
avoidarun. Inthe07/08financialcrisis,theliquidityeventcanbethoughtof as bankswithopaque
exposure to mortgage-backed securities becoming weak and thus “illiquid” following adverse shocks
in the housing market. The liquidity event triggers the spread of a rumor saying the liquidity event
has occurred and the bank may be illiquid, exposing the bank to a run. Agents (depositors) can
withdraw or deposit funds back at any time for a small transaction cost, but in the unique bank
run equilibrium, upon hearing the rumor, agents wait, fully withdraw, and then redeposit if the
bank survives. The optimal withdrawal time trades-off the marginal benefit of waiting inside the
bank due to the yield on deposits, with the marginal cost of waiting due to risk of loss in a bank
failure.
1

We first show that a straightforward application of Abreu and Brunnermeier (2003) to bank
runs without information acquisition is rather uninteresting: in equilibrium, either bank runs never
occur, or depositors run on the bank immediately upon hearing the rumor. Intuitively, if the
conjectured (off-equilibrium) bank survival time is so long that every agent decides to wait a bit
longer, then the illiquid bank would fail later. This longer survival time pushes agents to wait even
longer. This force is so strong that, in equilibrium, agents never withdraw and the bank survives
indefinitely, i.e. runs never occur. On the other hand, if every agent decides to withdraw a bit
earlier, then the equilibrium force of a shorter bank survival time pushes all agents to withdraw
immediately upon hearing the rumor. In this bank run equilibrium, the withdrawal speed and the
implied bank survival time are exogenously determined by the rumor spreading speed.1
We then allow uncertainty-motivated informed agents who hear the rumor to acquire additional
noisy signals. Our main result shows that private information acquisition about liquidity exposes
otherwise safe banks to destructive runs with endogenous waiting. There are three potential signal
realizations: good,fair,andbad,whichareindependentacrossagentsconditionalonthebankliquid-
ity state. Information acquisition with noisy signals creates belief heterogeneity among depositors,
which is key to our result. A good or bad signal reveals the liquidity state perfectly. Receiving
a fair signal can be interpreted as seeing mixed evidences, leaving the agent still uncertain about
bank liquidity as his prior. A higher quality signal is more likely to reveal the state perfectly. If the
bank is indeed illiquid, then in aggregate a higher quality implies more agents receive bad signals
thus knowing the bank is illiquid.
Fixing the signal quality, we show that in a setting where bank runs never exist otherwise, an
interesting bank run equilibrium with endogenous waiting emerges once we allow agents to acquire
information. Conditional on the bank being illiquid, agents with bad signals perceive a high bank
failure hazard rate and withdraw immediately. Agents with uninformative fair signals maintain
the same beliefs they had before acquiring the signals, but now also worry about withdrawals by
bad-signalagents—hencefair-signalagents withdrawearlierthantheywouldotherwise. Thiseffect
goes a long way in changing the qualitative nature of the bank run equilibrium. In equilibrium,
insteadofwaitingindefinitely,agentswithfairsignalswaitsomeendogenoustime,earningayieldon
1In deriving the endogenous bubble burst time, Abreu and Brunnermeier resolve this issue by assuming that the
bubble component increases over time. This would be a hard assumption to swallow in a bank run setting: it would
require that for a perfectly liquid bank the value of a dollar deposited declines over time.
2