NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PUBLIC LIABILITIES AND HEALTH CARE POLICY
Kristopher J. Hult
Tomas J. Philipson
Working Paper 18571
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18571
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012
Previously circulated as "Health Care Reforms and the Value of Future Public Liabilities." We are
thankful to Gary Becker and Casey Mulligan for comments and to Ralph Koijen for many discussions.
We are also grateful to seminar participants at Peking University, University of Chicago, University
of Southern California, and Yale University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Kristopher J. Hult and Tomas J. Philipson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Public Liabilities and Health Care Policy
Kristopher J. Hult and Tomas J. Philipson
NBER Working Paper No. 18571
November 2012, Revised May 2013
JEL No. I1,I11,I13,I18
ABSTRACT
Many countries have large future public liabilities attributable to health care programs. However, little
explicit analysis exists about how health care policies affect these program liabilities. We analyze
how reimbursement and approval policies affect public liabilities through their impact on the returns
to medical innovation, a central factor driving spending growth. We consider how policies impact
innovative returns through expected earnings, their risk-adjustment, and their timing and defaults through
the approval process. Our analysis implies that cutbacks in government programs may raise government
liabilities and expansions may lower them. We quantitatively calibrate these non-standard effects for
the US Medicare program.
Kristopher J. Hult
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
khult@uchicago.edu
Tomas J. Philipson
Irving B. Harris Graduate School
of Public Policy Studies
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
t-philipson@uchicago.edu

1 Introduction
Many developed nations are increasingly concerned about the growth of future government liabilities
in health care and how to assess the effects of changes in health policy on these liabilities. In the US,
many private and public efforts have attempted to limit the growth in overall health care spending
andpublicliabilities,includingprospectivepaymentMedicarereformsinthe1980s,thedramaticrisein
managedcarefirmsinthe1980sand1990s,andthecurrentexpansionsofconsumer-orientedhealthcare.
The most recent incarnations include Accountable Care Organizations, bundled payments, and other
measures of the Affordable Care Act (ACA). Despite these repeated efforts, the health care economy
has grown and is predicted to continue to grow faster than the rest of the economy.
These private and public efforts to slow down spending growth run into difficulty partly because
they are motivated by their impact on incentives at a given point in time rather than the impact on
the growth in spending across time. For example, many argue that prospective payment or bundling
reformsreducetheincentivetospendatagiventimewithoutanyexplicitunderstandingofwhygrowth
may be altered. Indeed, little explicit economic analysis exists of how various policies will affect the
growth of future health care spending over time. As a result, there is little explicit analysis on how
various reforms affect the present value of future public liabilities. This paper addresses this gap in the
literature by offering a framework in which they can be analyzed explicitly and quantitatively.
We analyze how health care policies affect future spending growth through their impact on the
returnsfrommedicalinnovation. FollowingtheworkofNewhouse(1992),researchsuggeststhatmedical
innovation is central to the growth in health care spending. Moreover, public programs are central to
drivingglobalinnovativereturns,asalargeshareoftheworld’scareispubliclyfinancedinrichcountries.
Therefore, public reforms have large impacts on the uncertain future profits associated with medical
innovation, which drive future spending growth in both the public and the private sector.
We consider cases in which the impact of government policies on medical research and development
(R&D) returns comes from three different sources: expected earnings, their risk-adjustment, and their
timing and “defaults” through the approval process. For the impact on expected earnings, we stress
the non-monotonic effects of government expansions on innovative returns. In particular, we stress that
government expansions often lower both demand prices (premiums plus copays) to raise access but also
supplyprices(reimbursements)throughgovernmentmonopsonypower. ThisresultmayimplythatR&D
returnsrisewhengovernmentexpansionsincludepoorerpartsofthepopulationbyraisingquantitymore
than lowering markups. For example, Medicaid may slightly raise innovative returns in this manner.
However, innovative returns fall when expansions include richer parts of the population when markups
may fall more than quantity rises. For example, the single-payer European payment systems may lower
innovative returns in this manner. The non-monotonic impact of government expansions across the
income distribution implies that innovation incentives may rise with program cut backs and fall with
program expansions.
The second way in which reforms may affect innovative returns is through risk-adjustments of ex-
pected earnings due to both private-sector risk such as the business cycle as well as public-sector risk
such as future policy uncertainty. For private sector risk, if pro-cyclical earnings are undesirable (e.g., a
CAPM world), a means-tested program such as Medicaid lowers risk because means-testing buffers the
demand of the poor in recessions. For public sector risk, policy uncertainty surrounding new reforms
may counteract expected earnings effects. An example would be the uncertainty of the ACA Medicaid
expansions, which may lower R&D even though under certainty such expansions should raise R&D.
2

We analyze the impact common policy changes have on the present value of public program liabil-
ities through affecting innovative returns. More precisely, we consider when the innovation incentives
discussed drive the future growth rate of a public program. The present value of liabilities of any pro-
gram, such as say Medicare, is determined by the discounted value of all future annual spending levels
of the program. Given the non-monotonic effects of program expansions on innovation incentives, they
may impact future program liabilities in non-standard ways. In particular, government cutbacks may
raise future public liabilities and government expansions may lower them. This occurs when innovation
incentivesarenegativelyrelatedtoprogramexpansion. Ifthisisthecase,thenasmallerprogramgrows
faster,potentiallyoffsettingthatitstartedatalowerlevelindeterminingthepresentvalueofliabilities.
We calibrate these program effects using existing utilization and reimbursement data in the US.
First, we show that our calibration methods performed well on the historical program expansion for
the Medicare Part D program for drugs. In particular, using pre-implementation data, we calibrate the
price and quantity effects and show they were close to those observed post-implementation of about a
20% fall in supply prices and about a 5-10% rise in utilization. Consequently, as prices fell more than
quantity rose, innovation incentives declined with this program expansion, making differences in short-
and long-run effects relevant. We then use the same type of calibration methods to assess the impact of
cut-backs in the Medicare part A&B program covering hospital and physician services, and indirectly
the devices and products used in supplying those services. In particular, we consider means-testing the
program to a larger extent than is done presently. We calibrate the non-monotonic nature of innovative
returns due to such mean-testing using existing utilization and reimbursement data. As implied by
our analysis, we calibrate that cutting the program by means-testing Medicare Part A&B would raise
innovative returns by about 22%. We calibrate the upward pressure this program cut would have on
Medicare program liabilities.
Our analysis naturally relates to several strands of previous work. Chernew and Newhouse (2011)
summarize models of health care spending growth in the literature. Baumgardner (1991) presents the
role of managed care in controlling spending. Weisbrod (1991) discussed forms of third-party pricing
affecting the profits and type of medical R&D undertaken, and Finkelstein (2004) and Clemens (2012)
documented evidence on the link between third party coverage and innovation. More closely related to
thispaper, Koijen, Philipson, andUhlig(2012)documentedalarge“medicalinnovationpremium”that
historically is paid to medical R&D investors and the growth of the health care sector this premium
implied. Malani and Philipson (2012) considered the nonstandard impacts of reforms on clinical trials,
byfarthelargestcomponentofmedicalR&Dcosts. Ourworkextendsthisworkbyprovidinganexplicit
and quantifiable framework for analyzing the policy impacts on program liabilities. The purpose of this
work is mainly positive in nature; we do not argue that more or less spending, whether privately or
publicly financed, is desirable or not. Rather, we are primarily concerned with predicting how program
changes affect program liabilities.
2 Health Policy and Public Liabilities: A General Formulation
Let a government program be defined by a set of policy variables represented by a vector g, such as the
supplyprice(reimbursement),demandprice(premiumorcopay),eligibilitycriteria(e.g.,means-testing),
andpaymentstructures(suchasfee-for-serviceorcapitation),allofwhichultimatelydrivequantityand
markups in both the private and public sector. Let F(g) denote the share of the population eligible for
3