NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REPO AND SECURITIES LENDING
Tobias Adrian
Brian Begalle
Adam Copeland
Antoine Martin
Working Paper 18549
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18549
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012
This paper was prepared for the NBER Systemic Risk Measurement Initiative meeting on October
27, 2010. The authors thank Markus Brunnermeier, Michael Fleming, Ken Garbade, Frank Keane,
Jamie McAndrews, and Arvind Krishnamurthy for constructive comments on earlier versions of this
paper. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Tobias Adrian, Brian Begalle, Adam Copeland, and Antoine Martin. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Repo and Securities Lending
Tobias Adrian, Brian Begalle, Adam Copeland, and Antoine Martin
NBER Working Paper No. 18549
November 2012
JEL No. G18,G23,G28,G38
ABSTRACT
We provide an overview of the data required to monitor repo and securities lending markets for the
purposes of informing policymakers and researchers about firm-level and systemic risk. We start by
explaining the functioning of these markets and argue that it is crucial to understand the institutional
arrangements. Data collection is currently incomplete. A comprehensive collection would include,
at a minimum, six characteristics of repo and securities lending trades at the firm level: principal amount,
interest rate, collateral type, haircut, tenor, and counterparty.
Tobias Adrian Adam Copeland
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Capital Market Research adam.copeland@gmail.com
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045 Antoine Martin
tobias.adrian@ny.frb.org Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Antoine.Martin@ny.frb.org
Brian Begalle
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
brian.begalle@ny.frb.org

Introduction
The markets for repurchase agreements (repos) and securities lending (sec lending) are part of
the collateralized U.S.-dollar-denominated money markets. The markets for repos and sec
lending are crucial for the trading of fixed-income securities and equities.3 Repos are especially
important for allowing arbitrage in the Treasury, agency, and agency mortgage-backed securities
markets, thus enhancing price discovery and market liquidity. Securities lending markets play
key roles in allowing shorting, both in fixed-income and equity markets. Given the essential role
of these markets to the functioning and efficiency of the financial system, it is important to better
understand and monitor repo and sec lending.
The key question addressed in this paper is, what are the data requirements for
monitoring repo and sec lending markets so as to inform policymakers and researchers about
firm-level and systemic risk?
One conclusion emerging from the paper is the need to better understand the institutional
arrangements in these markets. To that end, we find that existing data sources are incomplete.
More comprehensive data collection would both deepen our understanding of the repo and sec
lending markets and facilitate monitoring firm-level and systemic risk in these markets.
Specifically, we argue that, at a minimum, six shared characteristics of repo and sec lending
trades would need to be collected at the firm level: 1) principal amount, 2) interest rate (or
lending fee for certain securities loan transactions), 3) collateral type, 4) haircut, 5) tenor, and 6)
counterparty.
In addition, we believe there would be value in collecting data at the firm level on the
instruments in which securities lending cash collateral is invested. The reinvestment of cash
collateral as practiced by securities lending agents potentially introduces a source of risk in
addition to the “run” risk that also exists in repo markets.
These data would create a complete picture of the repo and sec lending trades in the
market, allowing for a deeper understanding of the institutional arrangements in these markets
and for accurate measurement of firm-level risk. Further, these data would allow for measures of
the interconnectedness of the repo and sec lending markets, which would allow for better gauges
3 Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Orlov (2011) offer a detailed comparison of these collateralized money
markets. See Covitz, Liang, and Suarez (2009) for an excellent overview of the market for asset-backed
commercial paper, which constitutes another important secured money market.
1

of the systemic risk in these markets. The involvements of custodians, sec lending agents, and
tri-party repo banks contribute to the riskiness of each transaction.
Background on Repurchase Agreements and Securities Lending
A repurchase agreement is the sale of securities coupled with an agreement to repurchase the
securities, at a specified price, at a later date (see Duffie (1996) and Garbade (2006)). Securities
lending agreements are economically similar to repo agreements.4 Both agreements resemble a
collateralized loan, but their treatment under the U.S. bankruptcy law is more beneficial to cash
lenders: In the event of bankruptcy, cash lenders can typically sell their collateral, rather than be
subject to an automatic stay as would be the case for a collateralized loan.
A repo or sec lending trade consists of six key variables: the size of the transaction, the
interest rate, the type of eligible collateral, the haircut, the maturity date, and the counterparties.
The haircut corresponds to the difference between the value of the cash and the value of the
collateral and is generally expressed as a percentage. For example, if $100 of securities
collateralizes a loan of $98, the haircut is 2 percent. The level of haircut will typically reflect the
quality of the collateral but may also vary by counterparty, reflecting the collateral provider’s
creditworthiness. The haircut can thus limit the counterparty credit risk exposure in secured
borrowing transactions.
Repo and sec lending trades are conducted in over-the-counter markets that intermediate
between borrowers and lenders, facilitating the exchange of securities and cash.5 Given that these
are collateralized money markets, each transaction features a collateral provider and a cash
lender. The motivation behind a specific repo or sec lending transaction can be either cash or
security driven. A cash-driven transaction is one where the collateral provider is seeking to
borrow cash, while a security-driven transaction is one where the cash lender is seeking to
borrow securities.
Among the financial intermediaries that participate in repo and sec lending markets, two
sets of institutions are crucial. First, clearing banks and custodial agents are primarily involved in
4 For a detailed comparison of repo and sec lending agreements from a legal perspective, see Ruchin
(2011). In practice, repos are used more often to finance fixed-income securities, while securities lending
is used more often to obtain equities.
5 Sec lending agreements can accommodate the exchange of securities for securities. In the United States,
however, most sec lending transactions exchange securities and cash. This article focuses on this more
common case.
2