NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
QUIET BUBBLES
Harrison Hong
David Sraer
Working Paper 18547
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18547
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012
Hong acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation through grant SES-0850404. Sraer
gratefully acknowledges support from the European Research Council (Grant No. FP7/2007-2013
- 249429) as well as the hospitality of the Toulouse School of Economics. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Harrison Hong and David Sraer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Quiet Bubbles
Harrison Hong and David Sraer
NBER Working Paper No. 18547
November 2012
JEL No. G02,G12
ABSTRACT
Commentaries on the credit bubble of 2003-2007 routinely equate it with earlier episodes like the Internet
boom. While credits were over-priced like Internet stocks a decade before, we show, using a model
based on disagreement and short-sales constraints, that this is where the similarity ends. Equity bubbles
are loud: price and volume go together as investors speculate on capital gains from reselling to more
optimistic investors. But this resale option is limited for debt since its upside payoff is bounded. Debt
bubbles then require an optimism bias among investors. But greater optimism leads to less speculative
trading as investors view the debt as safe and having limited upside. Debt bubbles are hence quiet—high
price comes with low volume. We find the predicted price-volume relationship of credits over the
2003-2007 credit boom.
Harrison Hong
Department of Economics
Princeton University
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
hhong@princeton.edu
David Sraer
Princeton University
Bendheim Center for Finance
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
dsraer@princeton.edu

1. Introduction
Many influential commentators point to a bubble in credit markets from 2003 to 2007,
particularly in the AAA and AA tranches of the subprime mortgage collateralized default
obligations (CDOs), as the culprit behind the Great Financial Crisis of 2008. These com-
mentaries routinely lump together credit and equity bubbles, such as the Internet boom of
the late nineties, as if they were one and the same. For instance, The Economist, in a number
of opinion editorials following the Financial Crisis of 2008, argues for thinking about these
bubble episodes over the past 40 years as the product of too lax monetary policy.1 One
reason perhaps is that the large literature on asset price bubbles often regards bubbles as
being synonymous with price being greater than risk-adjusted fundamental value.2 While
there is indeed compelling evidence that investment-grade or highly-rated credit securities,
especially in housing mortgage-back securities, were severely over-priced (see Coval, Jurek,
and Stafford (2009), Greenwood and Hanson (2011)) in the same way Internet stocks were
a decade earlier, we argue that this is where the similarity ends.
Classic equity bubbles are loud—high prices are accompanied by large trading volume as
investors purchase in anticipation of capital gains (see Hong and Stein (2007) for a review
of this evidence). For example, in the South Sea Bubble of 1720, transactions in the Bank
of England stock, one of the three bubble stocks, were three times larger than in the prior
three years (Carlos, Neal, and Wandschneider (2006)). Stock share turnover during the years
before the Crash of 1929 in the United States were abnormally high by historical standards.
In the dot-com bubble years of the late nineties, internet stocks accounted for nearly twenty
percent of the trading volume in the stock market (Ofek and Richardson (2003)). The
elevated trading volume, and in some of these instances elevated price volatility, associated
with these episodes no doubt prompted the classic economists from Adam Smith to John
1SeeforinstanceBubble HistoryintheirButtonwood’sFinancialMarketssectionpublishedonJune17th,
2010. This refrain is a common one in many other influential circles, going back to the works of Hyman
Minsky.
2For instance, the earliest rational expectations bubble models a la Blanchard and Watson (1983) have
no notion of trading volume.
1

MaynardKeynestoemphasizetheroleofspeculationonanticipatedcapitalgainsinbubbles.
Thissignatureofequitybubblesiscapturedparsimoniouslyinrecentassetpricingmodels
based on investor disagreement and short-sales constraints. The short-sales constraint im-
parts an upward bias in prices when there is sufficient disagreement among investors (Miller
(1977), Chen, Hong, and Stein (2002)). In a dynamic framework, investors anticipate the
potential to re-sell at a higher price to someone with a higher valuation due to binding
short-sales constraints (Harrison and Kreps (1978), Morris (1996), Scheinkman and Xiong
(2003) and Hong, Scheinkman, and Xiong (2006)).3 This framework generates a bubble or
overpricing in which the asset’s price is above fundamental value. Importantly, the potential
for disagreement tomorrow alone, as opposed to having to assume that all investors are op-
timistic today, is enough to get prices to be high today since price embeds this resale option.
A distinguishing feature of this model is that the resale option is also associated with high
share turnover, very much in line with anecdotes on classic equity bubbles.
Withinthisframework, weconsiderthepricingofadebtsecurity.4 Investorsdisagreeover
the underlying asset value. In the context of the subprime mortgage CDOs, the underlying
asset values are real estate prices. For corporate credits, the underlying asset values are the
assets of the companies. Whereas equity payoffs are linear in the investor beliefs regarding
underlying asset value, debt up-side payoffs are capped at some constant and hence are
concave in the investor beliefs about fundamental.
There is compelling evidence that short-sales constraints are at least as binding in debt
markets as in equity ones. The theory only requires that some (not all) investors be short-
salesconstrained. Indeed, manymutualfundsorinsurancecompaniesarerequiredbycharter
to be long-only: that is they must simply own investment-grade debt or stocks and are
prohibited by charter from shorting or trading derivatives (such as credit default swaps
3See Hong and Stein (2007) for a more extensive review of the disagreement approach to the modeling of
bubbles.
4Earlier work on heterogeneous beliefs and bond pricing such as in Xiong and Yan (2010) assume that
investors have disagreement about bond prices or interest rates and they do not model the nature of the
concavity of debt pay-offs as a function of underlying asset value disagreement.
2