NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FREE LUNCH(cid:4) ARBITRAGE OPPORTUNITIES IN THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE
MARKETS
Takatoshi Ito
Kenta Yamada
Misako Takayasu
Hideki Takayasu
Working Paper 18541
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18541
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012
Ito gratefully acknowledges research supports by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS)
Grants-in-aid for Scientific Research (A) No. 20243014; and Center for Advanced Research on Finance
(CARF) at University of Tokyo. Misako Takayasu acknowledges research supports by the Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) Grants-in-aid for Scientific Research No. 22656025. The paper
was presented in the Japan Economic Association Meeting in June, 2012. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Takatoshi Ito, Kenta Yamada, Misako Takayasu, and Hideki Takayasu. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Free Lunch(cid:4) Arbitrage Opportunities in the Foreign Exchange Markets
Takatoshi Ito, Kenta Yamada, Misako Takayasu, and Hideki Takayasu
NBER Working Paper No. 18541
November 2012
JEL No. F31,G12,G14,G15,G23,G24
ABSTRACT
Using the “firm” quotes obtained from the tick-by-tick EBS (electronic broking system that is a major
trading platform for foreign exchanges) data, it is found that risk-free arbitrage opportunities—free
lunch—do occur in the foreign exchange markets, but it typically last only a few seconds. “Free lunch”
is in the form of (a) negative spreads in a currency pair and (b) triangular arbitrage relationship involving
three currency pairs. The latter occur much more often than the former. Such arbitrage opportunities
tend to occur when the markets are active and volatile. Over the 12-year, tick-data samples, the number
of free lunch opportunities has dramatically declined and the probability of the opportunities disappearing
within one second has steadily increased. The size of expected profits is higher than transaction costs;
trades that simultaneously take place on both sides of ask and bid (or three currency trades in case
of triangular arbitrage) occur more often when free lunch appeared one second earlier than otherwise,
suggesting that free lunch opportunities are actively taken. The probability of its disappearance within
one second was less than 50% in 1999, but increased to about 90% by 2009. Less frequent occurrence
and quicker disappearance in recent years are attributable to changes in trading microstructure: an
introduction and proliferation of the Primary Customer system (weaker banks can use stronger banks’
credit lines) and of direct connection of traders’ programmed computers to the EBS computer.
Takatoshi Ito Misako Takayasu
Graduate School of Economics Tokyo Institute of Technology
University of Tokyo Department of Computational Intelligence
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku and System Sciences
Tokyo 113-0033 4259-G3-52 Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku
JAPAN Yokohama, 226-8502, Japan
and NBER takayasu@dis.titech.ac.jp
tito@e.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Hideki Takayasu
Kenta Yamada Sony Computer Science Laboratories
Waseda Institute for Advanced Study 3-14-13 Higashigotanda, Shinagawa-ku
1-6-1 Nishi Waseda, Shinjuku-ku Tokyo 141-0022, Japan
Tokyo, 169-8050, Japan takayasu@csl.sony.co.jp
yamada@aoni.waseda.jp

Takatoshi Ito, Kenta Yamada, Misako Takayasu, and Hideki Takayasu
“Free Lunch! Arbitrage Opportunities in the Foreign Exchange Markets”
Abstract:
Using the “firm” quotes obtained from the tick-by-tick EBS (electronic broking system
that is a major trading platform for foreign exchanges) data, it is found that risk-free
arbitrage opportunities—free lunch—do occur in the foreign exchange markets, but it
typically last only a few seconds. “Free lunch” is in the form of (a) negative spreads in a
currency pair and (b) triangular arbitrage relationship involving three currency pairs.
The latter occur much more often than the former. Such arbitrage opportunities tend to
occur when the markets are active and volatile. Over the 12-year, tick-data samples, the
number of free lunch opportunities has dramatically declined and the probability of the
opportunities disappearing within one second has steadily increased. The size of
expected profits is higher than transaction costs; trades that simultaneously take place
on both sides of ask and bid (or three currency trades in case of triangular arbitrage)
occur more often when free lunch appeared one second earlier than otherwise,
suggesting that free lunch opportunities are actively taken. The probability of its
disappearance within one second was less than 50% in 1999, but increased to about
90% by 2009. Less frequent occurrence and quicker disappearance in recent years are
attributable to changes in trading microstructure: an introduction and proliferation of the
Primary Customer system (weaker banks can use stronger banks’ credit lines) and of
direct connection of traders’ programmed computers to the EBS computer.
Keywords: Market microstructure, High frequency data, Arbitrage, Negative spread,
Triangular arbitrage, Free lunch, Electronic Broking System, Yen, US dollar, Euro,
Acknowledgment:
Ito gratefully acknowledges research supports by the Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS) Grants-in-aid for Scientific Research (A) No. 20243014; and Center for
Advanced Research on Finance (CARF) at University of Tokyo. Misako Takayasu
acknowledges research supports by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science
(JSPS) Grants-in-aid for Scientific Research No. 22656025. The paper was presented in
the Japan Economic Association Meeting in June, 2012.
JEL, F31, G12, G14, G15, G23, G24
2

1. Introduction
The foreign exchange market is one of the largest financial markets in terms of
volumes of transactions and the number of market participants, who reside all over the
world. The market is open 24 hours a day, (almost) seven days a week. The average
daily transaction volume is estimated at 4 trillion dollars a day (BIS (2010)).1 The
market, especially for major currency pairs, is considered to be deep and liquid for
virtually any hour of any business day.
As it is one of the most deep and liquid markets, the foreign exchange market
is often assumed to be “efficient” in both theoretical and empirical literature. In an
“efficient” market, all the risk-free arbitrage opportunities—free lunch—would not be
observed.2 “No free lunch” means that the bid (price of buyer’s limit order) should
always be lower than ask (price of seller’s limit order). Thus, the negative spread is one
form of free lunch. Among the three currency pairs, simultaneous transactions
exchanging the yen (JPY) into the US dollar (USD), from the US dollar to Euro (EUR),
and Euro back to the yen should not produce profits. Hence, bids and asks of the three
pairs, USD/JPY, EUR/USD, and EUR/JPY, should satisfy certain inequality relationship.
A theoretical model is commonly based on a “no free lunch” assumption and
observations that suggest free lunch in data are most regarded as outliers and discarded.
In the real world, however, any high-frequency currency trader would know
that the free lunch situation do occur rather frequently. Of course the magnitude of
profits is rather small and the duration of opportunities is short. In fact, the opportunity,
if it exists, is said to disappear in the matter of seconds. In fact, large financial
institutions invest heavily into a real-time trading system, which would not only spot
such arbitrage opportunities but also take long or short positions with a bet on the
1 According to the BIS Triennial Survey, the size of the global foreign exchange market in April
2010 was the turnover of 3.98 trillion US dollars a day, of which spot transactions accounted 1.49
trillion US dollars (37%). With respect to currency pairs, the USD/EUR accounted 28%; USD/JPY
14%; and EUR/JPY 3%.
2 There is a standard joke about the efficient market hypothesis believer: An efficient market
believer and his friend are walking on the sidewalk. The friend says, “Look, there is a $100 bill on
the sidewalk.” The believer says, “It should be a counterfeit bill. If it is a genuine bill, someone
should have picked it up already.” The evidence in this paper can be interpreted as follows. Time to
time, people do drop a $100 bill unknowingly. But, it does not take much time before someone finds
it and picks it up, because people do check out whether the bill is genuine or counterfeit. So most of
the time, you do not see $100 bill on the street.
3