NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
USING NEURAL DATA TO TEST A THEORY OF INVESTOR BEHAVIOR:
AN APPLICATION TO REALIZATION UTILITY
Cary Frydman
Nicholas Barberis
Colin Camerer
Peter Bossaerts
Antonio Rangel
Working Paper 18562
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18562
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012
We are grateful for comments from participants at Indiana University, Notre Dame University, Stanford
University, the University of California at Berkeley, the University of Southern California, the University
of Texas at Austin, Washington University, the Fall 2010 NBER Behavioral Finance meeting, the
2010 Society for Neuroeconomics meeting, the 2010 Miami Finance Conference, the 2011 BEAM
Conference, the 2011 WFA conference, and the 2012 NBER-Oxford Saïd-CFS-EIEF Conference on
Household Finance. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Science
Foundation (Camerer, Frydman, Rangel), the Betty and Gordon Moore Foundation (Camerer, Rangel),
and the Lipper Foundation (Rangel). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Cary Frydman, Nicholas Barberis, Colin Camerer, Peter Bossaerts, and Antonio Rangel.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Using Neural Data to Test a Theory of Investor Behavior: An Application to Realization Utility
Cary Frydman, Nicholas Barberis, Colin Camerer, Peter Bossaerts, and Antonio Rangel
NBER Working Paper No. 18562
November 2012
JEL No. G02,G11
ABSTRACT
We use measures of neural activity provided by functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to
test the "realization utility" theory of investor behavior, which posits that people derive utility directly
from the act of realizing gains and losses. Subjects traded stocks in an experimental market while we
measured their brain activity. We find that all subjects exhibit a strong disposition effect in their trading,
even though it is suboptimal. Consistent with the realization utility explanation for this behavior, we
find that activity in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex, an area known to encode the value of options
during choices, correlates with the capital gains of potential trades; that the neural measures of realization
utility correlate across subjects with their individual tendency to exhibit a disposition effect; and that
activity in the ventral striatum, an area known to encode information about changes in the present
value of experienced utility, exhibits a positive response when subjects realize capital gains. These
results provide support for the realization utility model and, more generally, demonstrate how neural
data can be helpful in testing models of investor behavior.
Cary Frydman Peter Bossaerts
University of Southern California Department of Economics
Marshall School of Business California Institute of Technology
3670 Trousdale Parkway, BRI 204G Pasadena, CA 91125
Los Angeles, CA 90089 pbs@rioja.caltech.edu
cfrydman@marshall.usc.edu
Antonio Rangel
Nicholas Barberis Department of Economics
Yale School of Management California Institute of Technology
135 Prospect Street Pasadena, CA 91125
P O Box 208200 rangel@hss.caltech.edu
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
nick.barberis@yale.edu
Colin Camerer
Department of Economics
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
camerer@hss.caltech.edu

Over the past twenty years, economists have accumulated a large amount of evidence on how
individual investors manage their financial portfolios over time. Some of this evidence is
puzzling, in the sense that it is hard to reconcile with the simplest models of rational trading
(Barberis and Thaler (2003); Campbell (2006)). Theorists have responded to this challenge by
constructing new models of investor behavior. Empiricists, in turn, have started testing these
newly-developed models.
Most of the empirical work that tests theories of investor behavior uses field data (Barber
and Odean (2000); Barber and Odean (2001); Choi et al. (2009); Grinblatt and Keloharju (2009)).
A smaller set of studies uses data from laboratory experiments. The advantage of experimental
data is that it gives researchers a large degree of control over the trading and information
environment, which can make it easier to tease theories apart (Plott and Sunder (1988); Camerer
and Weigelt (1991); Camerer and Weigelt (1993); Weber and Camerer (1998); Bossaerts and
Plott (2004); Bossaerts et al. (2007)).1
In this paper, we show how another kind of data, namely measures of neural activity
taken using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while subjects trade in an
experimental stock market, can also be very useful in testing theories of investor behavior. In
particular, we use neural data to test the validity of the “realization utility” theory of trading, a
theory that has been used to address several facts about investor trading behavior, including the
so-called disposition effect.
The disposition effect is the robust empirical fact that individual investors have a greater
propensity to sell stocks trading at a gain relative to purchase price, rather than stocks trading at a
loss2. This fact has attracted considerable attention because it has proven challenging to explain
1 While economic behavior in the laboratory may not be subject to all of the forces that apply in real
financial markets, the predictions of any economic theory should be just as applicable inside the lab as
outside it, especially because of the advantages of experimental control. As a result, experiments provide an
ideal setting in which to try to falsify theories of economic behavior.
2 See for example, Shefrin and Statman (1985); Odean (1998); Genesove and Mayer (2001); Grinblatt and
Keloharju (2001); Feng and Seasholes (2005); Frazzini (2006); Jin and Scherbina (2011).
2

using simple rational models of trading behavior. This impasse has motivated the development of
multiple competing alternative theories, both rational and behavioral (Shefrin and Statman
(1985); Odean (1998); Barberis and Xiong (2009); Kaustia (2010)). The realization utility model
(Shefrin and Statman (1985); Barberis and Xiong (2012)) is based on the assumption that, in
addition to deriving utility from consumption, investors also derive utility directly from realizing
gains and losses on the sale of risky assets that they own. For example, if an investor realizes a
gain (e.g., by buying a stock at $20 and selling it at $40), he receives a positive burst of utility
proportional to the capital gain. In contrast, if he realizes a loss (e.g., by buying a stock at $20 and
selling it at $10), he receives a negative burst of utility proportional to the size of the realized
loss. The presence of realization utility is important because, in combination with a sufficiently
high time discount rate, it leads investors to exhibit a disposition effect (Barberis and Xiong
(2012)).
Testing for the validity of a theory such as realization utility is difficult because it, and
other theories of investor trading, often make similar predictions about behavior (see Weber and
Camerer (1998) for an exception). Furthermore, it is extremely difficult, using data on behavior
alone, to carry out direct tests of the computations driving behavior (e.g., tests of whether
potentially realizable capital gains rather than net expected values are tracked when selling). On
the other hand, a combination of neural measurement and careful experimental design allows for
direct tests of the extent to which the computations made by the brain at the time of decision-
making are consistent with the mechanisms posited by different models.
In this paper, we describe the results of an fMRI experiment designed to test the
hypothesis that subjects experience realization utility while trading in an experimental stock
market, and that this is associated with trading patterns consistent with the disposition effect. The
3