NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
VULNERABLE BANKS
Robin Greenwood
Augustin Landier
David Thesmar
Working Paper 18537
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18537
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2012
We are grateful to Tobias Adrian, Laurent Clerc, Linda Goldberg, Sam Hanson, Anil Kashyap, Yueran
Ma, Jamie McAndrews, Thomas Philippon, Carmen Reinhart, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, Adi Sunderam,
and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Federal Reserve Board of Governors,
the European Central Bank, TSE-Banque de France conference in Paris, Harvard, Sciences-Po, Zûrich,
and the NBER IFM and Risks of Financial Institutions meetings for their input. Greenwood received
funding from the George F. Baker Foundation at the Harvard Business School. Landier aknowledges
financial support from the Scor Chair at Fondation Jean-Jacques Laffont at the Toulouse School of
Economics. Thesmar thanks the HEC foundation for funding. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Robin Greenwood, Augustin Landier, and David Thesmar. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Vulnerable Banks
Robin Greenwood, Augustin Landier, and David Thesmar
NBER Working Paper No. 18537
November 2012
JEL No. G01,G21,G38
ABSTRACT
When a bank experiences a negative shock to its equity, one way to return to target leverage is to sell
assets. If asset sales occur at depressed prices, then one bank’s sales may impact other banks with
common exposures, resulting in contagion. We propose a simple framework that accounts for how
this effect adds up across the banking sector. Our framework explains how the distribution of bank
leverage and risk exposures contributes to a form of systemic risk. We compute bank exposures to
system-wide deleveraging, as well as the spillover of a single bank’s deleveraging onto other banks.
We show how our model can be used to evaluate a variety of crisis interventions, such as mergers
of good and bad banks and equity injections. We apply the framework to European banks vulnerable
to sovereign risk in 2010 and 2011.
Robin Greenwood David Thesmar
Harvard Business School HEC Paris
Baker Library 267 1 rue de la libération
Soldiers Field 78351 Jouy-en-Josas cedex
Boston, MA 02163 France
and NBER thesmar@hec.fr
rgreenwood@hbs.edu
Augustin Landier
the Toulouse School of Economics
21 Allée de Brienne
31000 Toulouse, FRANCE
augustin.landier@tse-fr.eu

I. Introduction
Financial stress experienced by banks can contaminate other banks and spiral into a shock
that threatens the broader financial system: this is systemic risk. The measurement of systemic risk
has been high on financial regulators’ priority list since the 2008 collapse of Lehman Brothers,
which triggered widespread financial distress among large US financial institutions. The recent
sovereign debt crisis and corresponding concerns about the solvency of European banks system have
only made the need to measure system-wide stability more acute.
Recent literature emphasizes two main channels through which the linkages between
financial institutions can create contagion. The first relies on contractual dependencies: when two
banks write a financial contract such as a swap agreement, a negative shock to one bank can transmit
to the other party as soon as one of the banks is unable to honor the contract (e.g., Allen and Babus
2009, Gorton and Metrick 2010, Giglio, 2011). Bilateral links of this kind can propagate distress,
because the creditor bank may in turn lack the funds needed to deliver on its on its obligations to
third parties (Duffie 2010, Kallestrup et al., 2011, Diebold and Yilmaz, 2011).1
A second type of linkage comes from fire-sale spillovers: when a bank is forced to sell
illiquid assets, the sale may depress prices because of a lack of unconstrained buyers, which in turn
can prompt financial distress at other banks that hold the same assets. Liquidation spirals of this sort
have been explored in an extensive theoretical literature.2 In a financial system of greater complexity
and in which claims on households and firms are increasingly tradable (Schwarcz, 2008), such
spirals are widely believed to have become an important contributor to systemic risk.
1 See also Kalemli-Ozcan et al. (2011) who investigate the impact of inter-bank linkages on business cycle
synchronization.
2 See for instance Shleifer and Vishny (1992, 2010), Gromb and Vayanos (2007), Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009),
Allen, Babus, and Carletti (2011), Wagner (2011).
1

This paper puts forth a simple and easily calibratable model of fire-sales spillovers that can
be readily estimated using available data. The model takes as given (1) the asset holdings of each
financial institution, (2) an adjustment rule applied by institutions when they are hit by adverse
shocks and (3) the liquidity of these assets on the secondary market (i.e., the ability of banks to sell
these assets quickly with little price discount). Our main objective is to develop simple formulas of
how fire sale spillovers add up across the financial sector, and how susceptible individual banks are
to episodes of deleveraging by other banks.
An appealing feature of our approach is that we distinguish between a bank’s contribution to
financial sector fragility (which we call its “systemicness”), and a bank’s vulnerabilty to
deleveraging by other banks. Our model allows us to compute formulas for both. To see the
difference, consider a small but highly levered bank with a portfolio of risky assets. Such a bank
may be quite vulnerable to financial sector deleveraging, yet is unlikely to be systemic. This is
because asset sales triggered by its potential distress will be modest in size, thus not triggering much
in the way of spillovers.
The model has a number of intuitive properties concerning how the distribution of leverage
and risk exposures across banks determines systemic risk. For instance, consider a negative return
shock experienced by an asset that is held by relatively levered banks. This shock has a larger
aggregate impact than if the same asset was held by the less levered institutions. More generally, we
show that the banking system is less stable to shocks when asset classes that are large in dollar terms
are also held by the most levered banks. If the goal is to reduce fire sale spillovers, then assets that
are both volatile and illiquid should be dispersed across banks, since the same shocks generate less
price impact in a deleveraging cycle. In contrast, if illiquid assets have low price volatility, then it is
2