NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MARKET-BASED EMISSIONS REGULATION AND INDUSTRY DYNAMICS
Meredith Fowlie
Mar Reguant
Stephen P. Ryan
Working Paper 18645
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18645
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of NSF grant SES-0922401. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Meredith Fowlie, Mar Reguant, and Stephen P. Ryan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Market-Based Emissions Regulation and Industry Dynamics
Meredith Fowlie, Mar Reguant, and Stephen P. Ryan
NBER Working Paper No. 18645
December 2012
JEL No. L5,Q5
ABSTRACT
We assess the long-run dynamic implications of market-based regulation of carbon dioxide emissions
in the US Portland cement industry. We consider several alternative policy designs, including mechanisms
that use production subsidies to partially offset compliance costs and border tax adjustments to penalize
emissions associated with foreign imports. Our results highlight two general countervailing market
distortions. First, following Buchanan (1969), reductions in product market surplus and allocative
inefficiencies due to market power in the domestic cement market counteract the social benefits of
carbon abatement. Second, trade exposure to unregulated foreign competitors leads to emissions “leakage”
which offsets domestic emissions reductions. Taken together, these forces result in social welfare losses
under policy regimes that fully internalize the emissions externality. In contrast, market-based policies
that incorporate design features to mitigate the exercise of market power and emissions leakage can
deliver welfare gains.
Meredith Fowlie Stephen P. Ryan
Department of Agricultural & Resource Econom i c s Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley University of Texas at Austin
301 Giannini Hall BRB 3.134D
Berkeley, CA 94720-3310 2225 Speedway Stop C3100
and NBER Austin, TX 78712-1690
fowlie@berkeley.edu and NBER
sryan@utexas.edu
Mar Reguant
Knight Management Center
Stanford Graduate School of Business
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
mreguant@stanford.edu
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18645

Market-Based Emissions Regulation
and Industry Dynamics
Meredith Fowlie, Mar Reguant, and Stephen P. Ryan∗
December 12, 2012
Abstract
Weassessthelong-rundynamicimplicationsofmarket-basedregulationofcarbondioxide
emissionsintheUSPortlandcementindustry. Weconsiderseveralalternativepolicydesigns,
including mechanisms that use production subsidies to partially offset compliance costs and
border tax adjustments to penalize emissions associated with foreign imports. Our results
highlight two general countervailing market distortions. First, following Buchanan (1969),
reductions in product market surplus and allocative inefficiencies due to market power in the
domestic cement market counteract the social benefits of carbon abatement. Second, trade-
exposure to unregulated foreign competitors leads to emissions “leakage” which offsets do-
mesticemissionsreductions. Takentogether,theseforcesresultinsocialwelfarelossesunder
policy regimes that fully internalize the emissions externality. In contrast, market-based poli-
cies that incorporate design features to mitigate the exercise of market power and emissions
leakagecandeliverwelfaregains.
1 Introduction
In the absence of a coordinated global agreement to curtail greenhouse gas emissions, regional
market-based climate change policy initiatives are emerging. Examples include the Emissions
Trading Scheme (ETS) in the European Union and California’s greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
trading program. In these “cap-and-trade” (CAT) programs, regulators impose a cap on the total
∗UC Berkeley and NBER, Stanford GSB and NBER, and University of Texas at Austin and NBER. We thank
BrianCopeland, LarryGoulder, TomHolmes, RyanKellogg, AlbertoSalvo, JamesSchmitz, andnumerousseminar
participantsforveryusefulcomments. TheauthorsgratefullyacknowledgethesupportofNSFgrantSES-0922401.
1

quantity of emissions permitted and distribute a corresponding number of tradeable emissions
permits. Tomitigatepotentiallyadversecompetitivenessimpacts,andtoengenderpoliticalsupport
for the program, it has become standard to allocate some percentage (or all) of these emissions
permits for free to industrial stakeholders (Joskow and Schmalensee, 1998; Hahn and Stavins,
2010). In this paper, we explore both the static and dynamic implications of several different
permitallocationmechanisms.
A particularly appealing quality of the cap-and-trade approach to regulating industrial emis-
sions is that, provided a series of conditions are met, an emissions trading program designed to
equatemarginalabatementcostswithmarginaldamageswillachievethesociallyoptimaloutcome
(Coase, 1960; Dales, 1968; Montgomery, 1972).1 Unfortunately, policy makers do not work in
first-best settings where the conditions required for optimality are always satisfied. Real-world
policy settings are typically characterized by several pre-existing distortions that complicate the
designofefficientpolicy. Inthispaper,wefocusontwodistortionsinparticular.
First, many of the industries currently regulated under existing and planned emissions regula-
tions are highly concentrated.2 In a seminal paper, Buchanan (1969) argues that a first-best policy
designed to completely internalize external damages should be used only in “situations of compe-
tition,” as concentrated industries are already producing below the socially-optimal level, and the
loss of consumer and producer surplus induced by further restricting output can overwhelm the
gains from emissions mitigation. An important counterpoint is offered by Oates and Strassmann
(1984) who argue that, practically speaking, the welfare gains from a Pigouvian tax (or a first-
best cap-and-trade program) will likely dwarf the potential losses from non-competitive behavior.
There has been surprisingly little work done to empirically investigate this trade-off between in-
centivizing pollution abatement and exacerbating the pre-existing distortion associated with the
exerciseofmarketpowerinconcentratedindustriessubjecttoemissionsregulations.
Second, regional climate change policies are textbook examples of “incomplete” regulation.
Whenanemissionsregulationappliestoonlyasubsetofthesourcesthatcontributetotheenviron-
mentalproblem,regulatedsourcescanfinditmoredifficulttocompetewithproducersoperatingin
jurisdictions exempt from the regulation. Shifts in production and associated “emissions leakage”
can substantially offset, or paradoxically even reverse, the reductions in emissions achieved in the
1Conditionsincludezerotransactioncosts,fullinformation,perfectlycompetitivemarkets,andcostminimization
behavior.
2Emissionsfromrestructuredelectricitymarketsrepresentthemajorityofemissionscurrentlytargetedbyexisting
cap-and-tradeprogramsintheUnitedStatesandEurope.Numerousstudiesprovideempiricalevidenceoftheexercise
of market power in these industries, such as Borenstein et al. (2002); Joskow and Kahn (2002); Wolfram (1999);
Puller(2007);Sweeting(2007);Bushnelletal.(2008). Otheremissionsintensiveindustriesbeingtargetedbyregional
emissionstradingprograms,suchascementandrefining,arealsohighlyconcentrated.
2