NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MACROPRUDENTIAL REGULATION VERSUS MOPPING UP AFTER THE CRASH
Olivier Jeanne
Anton Korinek
Working Paper 18675
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18675
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2013
The authors would like to thank the Fondation Banque de France for financial support. We would
like to thank Philippe Bacchetta, Arnoud Boot, Allan Drazen, Emmanuel Farhi, Thomas Hintermaier,
Alberto Martin, Guillermo Ordoñez, Enrico Perotti, Alessandro Rebucci, Alp Simsek, Jeremy Stein,
Javier Suarez, Lars Svensson and Iván Werning as well as participants of the NBER Summer Institute,
the Banco de Portugal Conference on Financial Intermediation, the 2nd Conference of the ECB MaRs
Network, the 2nd INET Conference on Macroeconomic Externalities, the International Conference
on Macroeconomics and Monetary Policy at NES/HSE and of seminars˛at the Banque de France, Bocconi,
CEU and Konstanz for helpful comments and discussions. We acknowledge excellent research assistance
provided by Jonathan Kreamer, Chang Ma, and Elif Ture. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Olivier Jeanne and Anton Korinek. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Macroprudential Regulation Versus Mopping Up After the Crash
Olivier Jeanne and Anton Korinek
NBER Working Paper No. 18675
January 2013, Revised February 2016
JEL No. E44,G18,H23
ABSTRACT
We study the interplay of optimal ex-ante (macroprudential) and ex-post (monetary or fiscal stimulus)
measures to respond to systemic financial crises in a tractable model of fire sales. We find that it is
generally optimal to use both, rejecting the Greenspan doctrine to only intervene ex post. Optimal
macroprudential policy resolves the time consistency problems associated with stimulus measures.
However, if macroprudential policy is suboptimal, for example because of circumvention, only monetary
stimulus should be used, and it is desirable to commit to smaller stimulus. Furthermore, accumulating
macroprudential tax revenue in a bailout fund used for stimulus measures is undesirable.
Olivier Jeanne
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
454 Mergenthaler Hall
3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
ojeanne@jhu.edu
Anton Korinek
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
440 Mergenthaler Hall
3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
akorinek@jhu.edu

1 Introduction
Views about the appropriate policy interventions to respond to booms and busts in
credit and asset prices have changed with the 2008-09 global …nancial crisis. The
dominant view before the crisis was that the best time to intervene was ex post, at
the time of the crisis, rather than ex ante, when fragilities build up in the …nancial
system. This so-called “Greenspan doctrine”held that it was preferable to “mop
up”after a …nancial crisis had materialized, since ex-ante interventions tended to
be too blunt, unpredictable in their e¤ects or too costly.1 By contrast, there is
now wide agreement that policymakers should try to contain the buildup in risks ex
ante through macroprudential interventions. Ex-post crisis interventions have been
criticizedforbeingcounter-productiveinvariousways,inparticularforcreatingmoral
hazard and inducing excessive risk-taking ex ante. This shift in the policy debate is
re‡ected in the …nancial reforms that were implemented in response to the crisis.
For example, the Dodd-Frank reform gives the US Federal Reserve new powers in
designing prudential capital and liquidity requirements at the same time as it curtails
its ability to support individual institutions in a crisis.2 The pendulum has swung
away from ex-post interventions towards ex-ante interventions.
This policy debate has been accompanied, on the theoretical side, by a newstrand
of literature that analyzes the desirability of ex-ante macroprudential interventions.3
Another line of literature has focused on ex-post interventions.4 However there is
little work attempting to systematically study the interactions and the optimal bal-
ance between the two types (ex-ante and ex-post) of policy intervention. Our paper
attempts to …ll this gap.
Our model is generic in its representation of ex-ante and ex-post interventions.
It features a collateral constraint that depends on asset prices, which may lead to
…nancial ampli…cation and systemic risk ex post and to overborrowing ex ante, fol-
lowing the logic of …re-sale models (Shleifer and Vishny, 1992; Davila, 2014). In spite
1See Greenspan (2002, 2011) and Blinder and Reis (2005). Some economists, especially at the
BankforInternationalSettlements(BIS),wereearlydefendersoftheviewthatpolicymakersshould
intervene ex ante (see, e.g., Borio, 2003; Bordo and Jeanne, 2002).
2Before Dodd-Frank the Federal Reserve was allowed to lend to a wide range of entities "in
unusual and exigent circumstances" by Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act. This disposition
was limited in numerous ways by Dodd-Frank, including the fact that Fed loans can no longer be
targeted to individual …rms. This would have made many of the Fed’s interventions in the 2008-09
crisis impossible.
3See for example Gromb and Vayanos (2002), Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2003), Lorenzoni
(2008), Jeanne and Korinek (2010), Korinek (2010), Stein (2012) and Davila (2014) for papers
that motivate macroprudential intervention on the basis of pecuniary externalities, or Farhi and
Werning (2013) and Korinek and Simsek (2016) for a motivation on the basis of aggregate demand
externalities. There is also a related quantitative literature –see Korinek and Mendoza (2014) for
an overview.
4AcharyaandYorulmazer(2008)andPhilipponandSchnabl(2012)comparethee¢ ciencyofdif-
ferenttypesofex-postpolicymeasures. Benignoetal. (2012, 2014)showthatex-postinterventions
reduce the excessive borrowing that arises from pecuniary externalities.
2

of its simplicity the model lends itself to the analysis of a range of policies. The ex-
ante policies can take the form of a debt cap as in quantity-based regulation such as
maximum loan-to-value ratios, or a tax on borrowing which could be interpreted as
…nancial regulation or restrictive monetary policy. The ex-post policies can take the
formofasubsidyonthedebtaccumulatedexante, whichcanbeinterpretedas"…scal
bailouts", or of a subsidy on new borrowing, which can be interpreted as “monetary
stimulus”as in Farhi and Tirole (2012). One of our contributions is to show that
…scal bailouts and monetary stimulus are equivalent from an ex-post perspective but
di¤er in their ex-ante incentive e¤ects.
Our …rst result is that it is generally optimal to use both ex-ante and ex-post
interventions, contradicting the Greenspan doctrine that crisis management should
focus exclusively on ex-post interventions. Since ex-post policies generally impose
deadweight losses and may distort borrowing incentives, it is optimal to combine
their use with ex-ante policies. Conversely, ex-ante interventions do not obviate the
desirabilityofex-postinterventions–inaccordancewiththetheoryofthesecondbest,
the social planner uses all the available instruments. The Greenpan doctrine is only
valid in the knife-edge case where ex-post intervention takes the form of monetary
stimulus and such stimulus is completely undistortive.
Second, we show that there is no time consistency problem in the use of ex-
post interventions as long as ex-ante macroprudential policy is set optimally. This
result holds no matter if ex-post interventions take the form of monetary stimulus or
…scal bailouts. Optimal ex-ante interventions ensure that the borrowing incentives of
private agents are corrected given the anticipated ex-post intervention. As a result,
there is no bene…t to commitment, and it is optimal to exercise complete discretion
in the use of ex-post interventions. By contrast, if ex-ante interventions are not
at their optimal level –for example, because of legal restrictions or concerns about
circumvention–atimeconsistencyproblemarisesandthereisaroleforcommitment:
the planner can reduce the overborrowing of private agents by committing to conduct
less generous ex-post interventions. In other words, commitment is a second-best
substitute for macropudential regulation when macroprudential regulation cannot be
set to its optimal level.
Third, we clarify the interplay between ex-ante and ex-post interventions by in-
vestigating whether better capacity to implement one type of policy should reduce or
increase the use of the other type of policy. In particular, should greater capacity to
implement ex-ante macroprudential policy reduce the use of ex-post interventions?
We show that the answer depends on the social planner’s ability to commit. Under
discretion, better macroprudential instruments imply that less ex-post intervention is
used –because macroprudential instruments reduce the risk and severity of …nancial
crises. Conversely, better ex-post instruments imply that less macroprudential inter-
vention is needed –because the social cost of crises is reduced. However, commitment
introduces a force that works in the opposite direction: if macroprudential policy is
not at its optimumlevel, thenanimprovement inmacroprudential instruments allows
3