NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHEN IS THERE A STRONG TRANSFER RISK FROM THE SOVEREIGNS TO
THE CORPORATES? PROPERTY RIGHTS GAPS AND CDS SPREADS
Jennie Bai
Shang-Jin Wei
Working Paper 18600
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18600
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012
The project is funded by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Columbia Business School.
We thank Jian Gao, Joy Glazener, Steve Kang, and Nikhil Patel for excellent research assistance, and
participants at various seminars and conferences for helpful discussions. The authors can be contacted
via jennie.bai@ny.frb.org and shangjin.wei@columbia.edu. The views presented here are solely those
of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or
any other institutions with which the authors are affiliated. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Jennie Bai and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

When Is There a Strong Transfer Risk from the Sovereigns to the Corporates? Property Rights
Gaps and CDS Spreads
Jennie Bai and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 18600
December 2012
JEL No. F3,G1,G3,O43
ABSTRACT
When a sovereign faces the risk of debt default, it may be tempted to expropriate the private sector.
This may be one reason for why international investment in private companies has to take into account
the sovereign risk. But the likelihood of a transfer from the sovereign risk to corporate default risks
may be mitigated by legal institutions that provide strong property rights protection. Using a novel
credit default swaps (CDS) dataset covering both government and corporate entities across 30 countries,
this paper studies both the average strength of the transfer risks and the role of institutions in mitigating
such risks. We find that (1) sovereign risk on average has a statistically and economically significant
influence on corporate credit risks. All else equal, a 100 basis points increase in the sovereign CDS
spread leads to an increase in corporate CDS spreads by 71 basis points. (2) The sovereign-corporate
relation varies across corporations, with state-owned companies exhibiting a stronger relation. (3)
However, strong property rights institutions tend to weaken the connection. In contrast, contracting
institutions (protection of creditor rights or minority shareholder rights) do not appear to matter much
in this context
Jennie Bai
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Capital Market Function, Research Group
33 Liberty St.
New York, NY 10045
jennie.bai@ny.frb.org
Shang-Jin Wei
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall 619
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
shangjin.wei@columbia.edu

“Fears that Spain may suffer a similar debt crisis to Greece are raising funding costs
for companies... There’s a good reason to be concerned because as sovereign spreads
gowider,it’sraisingthecostoffundingforcorporates.”—Reuters,May7,2010
1. Introduction
The Greek fiscal difficulties during 2011-2012 have shined a spotlight not only on the risk of
sovereign debt default, but also on the potential spillovers to corporate defaults. As the spreads
on Greece’s sovereign credit default swaps (CDSs) soared, the yields on its corporate bonds also
surged. As indicated by the opening quote, it is tantalizing to think that there is a strong link
between the rising costs of insuring against corporate default and a deteriorating sovereign debt
environment. The objective of this paper is to study when such a link is strong and when it is
weak.
Although anecdotes suggest a high correlation of default risk between sovereigns and corpo-
rations, there is surprisingly little empirical work to investigate this relation. We note that there
exists no mechanical relationship between the two: if a government is not able to meet its debt
obligation, corporate fundamentals can still be strong enough with no increase in the probability
of default. One does not normally observe such a connection between government and corporate
credit risk in the developed economies, since there is essentially no sign of sovereign credit risk
in advanced countries in most recent decades (Reinhart and Rogoff (2009)). However, the lack of
connectionmaynotbethecaseintherecentglobalcrisis.
Using a novel data set on spreads of credit default swaps (CDS) for governments in 30 coun-
tries and 2745 corporations in these countries, we study in this paper possible ”transfers” from
sovereign to corporate default risks and possible roles of institutions in mitigating the risks. Our
use of the CDS data differs from the common methodology in the literature that typically studies
1

the determinants of sovereign risk in the government bond market (Bernoth, Hagen, Schuknecht
(2006), Hilscher and Nosbusch (2010), Longstaff, Pan, Pedersen, and Singleton (2008)), as well
as the determinants of corporate risk using corporate bond yields.2 Also using bond data, a small
numberofpapershavestudiedtheimpactofsovereignriskoncorporatecreditrisk,includingPeter
and Grandes (2005), Durbin and Ng (2005), and Dittmar and Yuan (2008). This line of research
islimitedtoemergingmarketcountries,anddoesnotexaminetheroleofinstitutionsinmitigating
thetransferrisks.
Our use of CDS spreads rather than bond yields has a number of advantages. First, sovereign
CDS spread often is a better proxy for sovereign credit risk. While government bonds are often
denominated in a local currency, sovereign CDS is usually traded in a foreign currency which
tends to protect the purchasers against inflation risk and foreign exchange risk. For example, the
United States sovereign CDS is denominated in the Euro, so that U.S. dollar inflation following a
credit event should not by itself erode the value of a CDS contract in a foreign currency.3 On the
contrary,governmentbonds,issuedbyanationalgovernmentandusuallydenominatedindomestic
currency,oftencontaininflationrisk(unlessitisindexedtoinflation,whichisnotcommon).
Second, sovereign CDS is an over-the-counter contract settled in the credit derivative market
and the market price cannot be easily manipulated by the government. The government cannot
buy or sell credit default swap protection on its own bonds given the obvious counterparty risk.
Hence sovereign CDS spread mainly indicates the credit quality perceived by market investors.
Governmentbondyields,however,canbemanipulatedthroughthetimingofissuanceorbuyback,
andthroughtheissuanceamount.
Third, the difference between sovereign CDS and corporate CDS is typically smaller than that
betweensovereignandcorporatebondyields. Itiswelldocumentedintheliteraturethatcorporate
2Thereisavastliteraturetoexplainthedeterminantsofcorporatebondcreditspread,includingHuangandHuang
(2003),Eom,Helwege,andHuang(2004),Collin-Dufresne,Goldstein,andMartin(2001).
3InadditiontotheUnitedStates,SwitzerlandsovereignCDSisalsodenominatedinEuros. Allothercountriesin
thedataset,thosefromEurope,Australia,andAsia,havetheirsovereignCDStradedinUSdollars.
2