NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ARE THE GAINS FROM FOREIGN DIVERSIFICATION DIMINISHING? ASSESSING
THE IMPACT WITH CROSS-LISTED STOCKS
Karen K. Lewis
Sandy Lai
Working Paper 18627
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18627
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012
We thank Choong Tze Chua, Magnus Dahlquist, Gangadhar Darbha, Bernard Dumas, Vihang Errunza,
Bob Hodrick, Andrew Karolyi, Craig MacKinlay, David Ng, Paolo Soderlind, Jessica Wachter, Frank
Warnock, Amir Yaron, and participants at the Darden Emerging Markets Conference, Duke University,
the International Monetary Fund, the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank, Singapore Management University,
the Society for Financial Econometrics Meetings, the Swedish Institute for Financial Research, and
the Wharton Finance and International Finance lunch seminars for useful comments and suggestions.
We acknowledge funding from the Wharton-SMU Research Center at Singapore Management University.
Of course, any errors are our responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Karen K. Lewis and Sandy Lai. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Are the Gains from Foreign Diversification Diminishing? Assessing the Impact with Cross-listed
Stocks
Karen K. Lewis and Sandy Lai
NBER Working Paper No. 18627
December 2012
JEL No. C32,F36,G15
ABSTRACT
How important is foreign diversification? In this paper, we re-examine this question motivated by
findings from the literature about foreign companies that are listed on US exchanges. Specifically,
domestic portfolios including cross-listed stocks can provide the same diversification as foreign market
returns without the need for US investors to go abroad. At the same time, the betas of these foreign
stock returns against the US market increase after cross-listing, suggesting diversification worsens
over time. In this paper, we assess the impact of these changes on foreign diversification for a US
investor. We test for and estimate breaks in the sensitivity of individual foreign stocks listed on US
exchanges. We find that roughly half of the changes in betas arise from greater integration between
the U.S. and the companies' home markets, not in the companies betas themselves. Moreover, the gains
from diversifying into these stocks has declined over time.
Karen K. Lewis
Department of Finance, Wharton School
2300 SHDH
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
lewisk@wharton.upenn.edu
Sandy Lai
School of Economics and Finance
Hong Kong University
Room 908. 9/F, K.K. Leung Building
Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong
sandy_lai@hku.hk

Over the past few decades an increasing number of companies have listed their equities across
international borders. The availability of these stocks on the exchanges of international markets
has put them at the nexus of academic and policy discussions about the degree of integration of
…nancialmarkets. Thesediscussionshavegeneratedsometimescon‡ictingdi¤erentthemes. Onthe
one hand, the domestic availability of foreign stocks may provide international diversi…cation for
domestic investors without these investors having to directly invest abroad. As such, these stocks
allow for a relatively low transaction cost way to acquire foreign assets.1 On the other hand, the
betas of these foreign company stock returns against the domestic market returns tend to increase
after cross-listing, mitigating the potential for diversi…cation.2 Moreover, the ability to cross-list in
another market is often taken as a sign of liberalization for emerging markets.3 Therefore, periods
when many stocks cross-list from a given country may coincide with changes in the comovement
between that country and the rest of the world. As such, higher betas after crosslisting from a
foreign stock and the U.S. market may simply re‡ect a change in betas from the company’s home
market due to liberalization.
Combining these observations leads to important questions. Since betas against the domestic
market increase after cross-listing, how much does this reduce the ability to use these stocks for
foreign diversi…cation without the need to invest abroad? And does this change in foreign com-
pany betas arise from a greater integration of the home country of that company, consistent with
liberalization notion?
To address these questions, we study the diversi…cation potential for foreign stocks before and
after they are listed in the US exchanges. We …rst analyze the local market behavior of foreign
1See Errunza, Hogan, and Hung (1999) as well as the discussion below.
2Onthechangesindomesticbetas,seeforexampleFoersterandKarolyi(1999)andthesurveybyKarolyi(2006).
3Indeed, some papers have used the earliest date when a domestic company could list abroad as a proxy for
liberalization while others have used the dates when domestic prices re‡ect world markets. For example, Bekaert,
Harvey,andLumsdaine(2002)andHenry(2000)usecross-listingdatesasoneoftheliberalizationdateproxies. Also,
Bekaert and Harvey (1995,1997) analyze the time series process when domestic equity prices switch from domestic
to international pricing.
1

stocks listed in the two major stock exchanges in the United States, the New York Stock Exchange
andNASDAQ.WethenexaminewhetherandhowtheirassetpricingsensitivitiestotheUSmarket
have changed over time. In order to allow for potential shifts in asset pricing characteristics at
any point in time, we do not want to impose a change at the cross-listing date unlike the existing
literature. Therefore,werequireanempiricalapproachthatallowsfor,butdoesnotrequire,changes
in asset pricing characteristics over time. We also need a framework considers discrete changes in
stock price behavior to be consistent with both the emerging market liberalization literature and
the event study approach used in the cross-listing literature. We therefore use the break-date
estimator of Bai and Perron (1998). For each stock price in local markets, we …rst test for the
number of breaks and estimate the break dates, if any are detected. We then use the parameter
estimates before and after these dates to provide a time series of asset pricing characteristics for
each stock. From this panel set of estimates we form portfolios of foreign stocks and consider how
much risk reduction would be provided to a U.S. investor from these portfolios.
Our analysis delivers three main results that address the questions above. First, a large pro-
portion of foreign cross-listed companies do show evidence of a shift in their betas against the U.S.
market, consistentwiththeliterature. Moreover, theevidencesuggeststhatforabout80%ofthese
companies there is only one break. Second, however, much of the shifts in company betas against
the U.S. market appear to be driven by changes at the country level. In particular, roughly half of
the foreign company returns do not show any further evidence of shifts in betas once conditioned
on the relationship between their home market and the U.S. market. This result suggests that the
apparent shifts in the company betas may simply re‡ect a broader market shift, consistent with the
liberalization literature. Third, the foreign betas against the U.S. markekt are generally increasing
over time, both for the cross-listed companies and their home markets.4 As a result, we …nd that
4Thistendencymayre‡ectagreaterincreaseininstitutionalinvestorownership. Bartram,Gri¢ n,andNg(2012)
…nd that cross-listed stocks become more highly correlated with the new owner’s other stock holdings after listing.
2