NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REVEALED PREFERENCES FOR JOURNALS:
EVIDENCE FROM PAGE LIMITS
David Card
Stefano DellaVigna
Working Paper 18663
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18663
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012
We are very grateful to Penny Goldberg, Robert Moffitt, Stephanie Raimander, Steve Stelling, and
Fabrizio Zilibotti for their assistance in this project. We also thank Laura Ristau for her outstanding
work in coding thousands of manuscripts in the AEA office, a team of undergraduates at Berkeley
(Noah Dreymann, Kaiji Gong, Sam Johnson, Ki Sung Kim, Wonsoon Kim, Sunny Lee, Seongjoo
Min, Zi Peng, Tim Semenov, Eileen Tipoe, Brian Wheaton, and Janice Zhou), as well as Alex He,
Xuan Li, and Jeff Sorenson for excellent research assistance. We thank Esther Duflo, Liran Einav,
Penny Goldberg, Hilary Hoynes, Larry Sameulson, Ivo Welch, Justin Wolfers, and audiences at the
2012 NBER Summer Institute (Labor Studies), at Harvard University, and at Mannheim University
for useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by David Card and Stefano DellaVigna. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Revealed Preferences for Journals: Evidence from Page Limits
David Card and Stefano DellaVigna
NBER Working Paper No. 18663
December 2012
JEL No. A1
ABSTRACT
Academic journals set a variety of policies that affect the supply of new manuscripts. We study the
impact of page limit policies adopted by the American Economic Review (AER) in 2008 and the Journal
of the European Economic Association (JEEA) in 2009 in response to a substantial increase in the
length of articles in economics. We focus the analysis on the decision by potential authors to either
shorten a longer manuscript in response to the page limit, or submit to another journal. For the AER
we find little indication of a loss of longer papers – instead, authors responded by shortening the text
and reformatting their papers. For JEEA, in contrast, we estimate that the page length policy led to
nearly complete loss of longer manuscripts. These findings provide a revealed-preference measure
of competition between journals and indicate that a top-5 journal has substantial monopoly power
over submissions, unlike a journal one notch below. At both journals we find that longer papers were
more likely to receive a revise and resubmit verdict prior to page limits, suggesting that the loss of
longer papers may have had a detrimental effect on quality at JEEA. Despite a modest impact of the
AER's policy on the average length of submissions (-5%), the policy had little or no effect on the length
of final accepted manuscripts. Our results highlight the importance of evaluating editorial policies.
David Card
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
card@econ.berkeley.edu
Stefano DellaVigna
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
sdellavi@econ.berkeley.edu

1 Introduction
Scholarlyjournalsplay avital role in the production anddi(cid:14)usion ofscienti(cid:15)cknowledge. Histori-
cally, these journalswere theprimarymodefor communicating new(cid:15)ndingsto awidely dispersed
research community.1 Although working papers, conferences, and other channels (cid:15)ll this function
today, journals still serve as critical arbiters of new research in most (cid:15)elds (McCabe and Snyder,
2005). Editors choose policies and select articles for publication: in so doing they in(cid:16)uence the
success or failure of competing research programs and help determine which ideas get ahead.
Despite long-standing interest by economists in knowledge production2, and the importance
of journals in this process, there is little evidence on the ways that journals set their editorial
policies, and the impacts of these choices.3 Evaluating these policies is important because they
a(cid:14)ect the types of papers that are published as well as the e(cid:17)ciency of the publication process.
In this paper, we take a step toward (cid:15)lling this gap by studying the impacts of a speci(cid:15)c
editorial policy — submission page limits. Disciplines di(cid:14)er in the typical length of published
articles. Many of the top journals in the hard sciences, including Science and Nature, impose
very short page limits. The top journals in economics used to publish relatively short articles, but
the length has grown substantially. Figure 1 plots the average length year-by-year of all articles
publishedfrom1970in5topjournals,theAmerican Economic Review,Econometrica,theJournal
of Political Economy, the Quarterly Journal of Economics, and the Review of Economic Studies.4
The page length nearly tripled from an average of 16 pages in the early 1970s to an average of
45 pages in 2011-12. The change is such that a paper in the 10th percentile of length in 2012
is longer than a paper in the 90th percentile of length in the 1970s. Furthermore, the change is
nearly identical in the (cid:15)ve journals. This evolution likely contributed to the decrease in the total
number of articles published in economics (DellaVigna and Card, 2013).
Inlightofthis,itisnaturaltowonderwhetherthesesharpdi(cid:14)erencesinpagelengthstandards
haveanyimpactontheproductionordi(cid:14)usionofknowledge. Whileeconomicjournalsareunlikely
to switch back to a model of publishing short papers, an individual journal can move some way
by restricting the length of submitted or published papers.
Indeed, in September of 2008 the AER introduced a 40-page limit for new submissions — the
(cid:15)rst (and still the only) top-5 economics journal to do so.5 The new limit was signi(cid:15)cant because
in the previous year 40% of submissions exceeded the limit.6 In March 2009 the Journal of the
European Economic Association (JEEA) adopted the same policy as the AER. Within a few
1The earliest scienti(cid:128)c journals were the Journal des s¸cavans, and the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society, both established in 1655. SeeMcClellan (1985).
2Perhapsthebestknowneconomicresearchonknowledgeproductionhasfocusedonthepatentingsystem: see
for example Mans(cid:128)eld (1986) and Griliches (1998). Waldinger (2012) studies the e(cid:103)ect of the Nazi expulsion of
Jewish faculty from German research universities,andthe subsequente(cid:103)ects on colleague productivity.
3There is an (interdisciplinary) body of research on two related issues: the conduct of peer review (e.g., Blank,
1991; Hamermesh, 1994; Je(cid:103)erson et al., 2007, Ellison, 2002b, 2011; Chetty, Saez, and Sandor, 2012; Welch, 2012)
and citation practices (e.g., Stigler andFriedland, 1975; Labandand Tollison, 2000).
4Themeasuresofpagelengtharestandardizedtotakeintoaccountthedi(cid:103)erentpagedensityinthe(cid:128)vejournals.
5Theactual limit was 40 pages for articles with1.5 line spacing, and 50 pages for articles with 2 linespacing.
6This percentage counts manuscripts over 50 pages if 2-spacedandover 40 pages if less than2-spaced.
1

months JEEA abandoned the policy, but it remains in e(cid:14)ect at the AER.
We use anonymized data on submissions to these two journals to evaluate the bene(cid:15)ts and
costs of the change, emphasizing the perspective of the journal. The envisioned bene(cid:15)ts are
shorter, more easily digested papers, and possibly a faster editorial process. As for the costs, a
simple model of author behavior suggests that the introduction of page limits will lead authors to
engage in triage: shortening manuscripts that fall below some threshold to meet the page limit,
and submitting longer papers to the next best alternative journal. The potential loss of longer
manuscripts may be a concern, particularly if these articles are of relatively high quality. Note
that an author who sends a paper elsewhere but is rejected may later decide to comply with the
page limits. Hence, we expect the loss of papers due to a newly-instituted page limit policy to be
larger in the short-run than in the medium-run.
In principle the fraction of longer papers that are shortened rather than diverted to other
journals can be estimated from the size of the spike in the distribution of manuscript lengths
under the page limit policy.7 In practice, implementation of this simple test is complicated by
variation in font size, line spacing, and margins, all of which can be manipulated to meet a given
page limit, and by the possibility of underlying trends in the rate of submission. We adopt a more
robust test based on a comparison of submission rates of shorter and longer papers. Assuming
that submission rates of both groups are a(cid:14)ected by similar trends, and that page limit policies
havenoe(cid:14)ectonthesubmissionratesofshorterpapers,asimpledi(cid:14)erence-in-di(cid:14)erencesidenti(cid:15)es
the net diversion of longer papers.
A second insight from the model is that authors will be more willing to shorten a manuscript
when the gap between the expected payo(cid:14) from submitting to the journal in question and the
next best alternative — the surplus from the match of paper and journal — is higher. In the
limiting case where authors are close to indi(cid:14)erent between outlets, a page limit policy will lead
to the loss of nearly all longer submissions. The rate of loss of longer papers therefore provides
revealed-preference evidence regarding the extent of competition between journals.
Hence,ouranalysisoftheimpositionofpagelimitsservestwomainpurposes. First,itprovides
evidence to evaluate the costs and bene(cid:15)ts of a signi(cid:15)cant editorial shift. Second, it allows us to
infer the degree of competition for papers between di(cid:14)erent journals, which is hard to measure
otherwisegiventhelackofdataonthechoiceofjournalsbyauthorsatsubmissionandthelimited
variation in other costs of submission.8
At the AER we (cid:15)nd that the introduction of page limits led to a rapid fall in the number of
longer submissions and the emergence of a spike in the distribution of page lengths around the
40-page limit. To implement our di(cid:14)erence-in-di(cid:14)erences estimator, we standardize the length of
7This idea is formally identical to the procedure suggested by Meyer and Wise (1983) for estimating the job
losses caused by the introduction of a minimum wage. See Card and Krueger (1995, pp. 223-236) for a discussion
of thelimitationsof this approach.
8Inprinciple,onecouldsimilarlyestimaterevealedpreferenceusingothershiftstothenetbene(cid:128)tsofsubmission
to a journal. However, such variation is hard to come by. For example, shifts in the speed of editorial decisions
usuallytakeplacequiteslow,withanevenslowerspreadoftheinformation. Changesinsubmissionfeesaresosmall
thattheyareunlikelytodetersubmissions. Incontrast,thepagelimitpolicywassudden,publiclyannounced,and
imposedreal timecosts.
2