NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SIZE-DEPENDENT REGULATIONS, FIRM SIZE DISTRIBUTION, AND REALLOCATION
François Gourio
Nicolas A. Roys
Working Paper 18657
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18657
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012
We thank Gadi Barlevy, Nick Bloom, Jeff Campbell, Russell Cooper, Dean Corbae, John Kennan,
Claire Lelarge, Theodore Papageorgiou, Marcelo Veracierto, Mark Wright, the two referees and the
editor, and conference and seminar participants for useful discussions and comments. We are grateful
to Claire Lelarge and Gregory Verriest from INSEE for their help in constructing our data. The views
expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago or the Federal Reserve System. A first version of this paper appeared in Chapter
4 of Nicolas Roys’ Ph.D. dissertation, submitted in December 2009 at the Paris School of Economics
- Paris 1. The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago or the Federal Reserve System or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.˛
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by François Gourio and Nicolas A. Roys. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Size-Dependent Regulations, Firm Size Distribution, and Reallocation
François Gourio and Nicolas A. Roys
NBER Working Paper No. 18657
December 2012, Revised October 2013
JEL No. E23,L11,L25,O1
ABSTRACT
In France, firms with 50 employees or more face substantially more regulation than firms with less
than 50. As a result, the size distribution of firms is visibly distorted: there are many firms with exactly
49 employees. We model the regulation as the combination of a sunk cost that must be paid the first
time the firm reaches 50 employees, and a payroll tax that is paid each period thereafter when the firm
operates with more than 50 employees. We estimate the model using indirect inference by fitting the
discontinuity of the size distribution. The key finding is that the regulation is equivalent to a combination
of a sunk cost approximately equal to about one year of an average employee salary, and a small payroll
tax of 0.04%. Our structural model fits well the discontinuity in the size distribution. Removing the
regulation improves labor allocation across firms, leading in steady-state to an increase in output per
worker slightly less than 0.3%, holding the number of firms fixed. However, if firm entry is elastic,
the steady-state gains are an order of magnitude smaller.
François Gourio
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
fgourio@bu.edu
Nicolas A. Roys
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Department of Economics
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison 53703 WI
nroys@ssc.wisc.edu

1 Introduction
In many countries, small firms face lighter regulation than large firms. Regulation, broadly defined, takes
many forms, from hygiene and safety rules, to mandatory elections of employee representatives, to larger
taxes. The rationale for exempting small firms from some regulations is that the compliance cost is too high
relativetotheirsales. Anecessaryconsequence,however,isthatregulationsarephasedinasthefirmgrows,
generating an implicit marginal tax. Because regulations are typically phased in at a few finite points, they
are sometimes referred to as “threshold effects”: for instance, in the case of France, an important set of
regulations applies to firms with more than 50 employees. As a result, the firm size distribution is distorted:
therearefewfirmswithexactly50employees,andalargenumberoffirmswith49employees. Figure1plots
the firm size distribution in our French data, illustrating this well-known pattern.
smriF
fo
rebmuN
000,03
000,02
000,01
0
20 40 60 80 100
Employment
Figure 1: Distribution of firm employment between 20 and 100 employees.
These distortions have attracted attention in public policy circles. The common wisdom, as reflected in
numerous reports drawn by blue-ribbon panels, is that these regulations are a significant impediment to the
growth of small firms, and should be suppressed or smoothed out. However, there is little work formally
modeling these policies to understand and evaluate their effects. In this paper, we evaluate this common
wisdombyproposingandestimatingastructuralmodeloffirmgrowththatexplicitlytakesintoaccountthe
2

phase-in of the regulation.
The model serves two purposes, positive and normative. On the positive side, a structural model is
needed to understand the exact sources of distortion. It is not obvious how the regulations should be
modeled, given their scope and complexity (which we discuss in section 2). Are regulations equivalent to
higherper-periodcosts,ortoasunkcost? Thepuzzlethatquicklyemergesis,whyarethereany firmsatall
with exactly 50 employees given the higher costs? Our intuition is that many of these regulations might be
better approximated as a sunk cost (i.e. a one-time investment), since a large fraction of the cost is learning
the regulation, adapting to it, and since some regulations might still apply in the future even if the firm
operates below 50 employees. The presence of the sunk cost also helps explain why there are some firms
that have exactly 50 employees: firms are reluctant to have more than 50 employees the first time that they
reach that limit, but the threshold is irrelevant in subsequent periods, since the cost is already paid. On the
normative side, what are the potential benefits of removing, or smoothing, the regulation thresholds? The
visiblydistortedfirmdistributionsuggeststhatproductivitycouldbeincreasediffirmsclosetothethreshold
grow, as labor would be reallocated towards more productive firms.
To address these questions, we estimate a model that incorporates both a sunk cost of complying with
the regulation (which captures the cost of learning the regulation for the manager, as well as consulting
with lawyers and accountants, and buying equipment required by the regulation, and the fact that some
regulations might be “sticky”) and a higher per-period cost (which captures the cost that the regulation
createsineveryperiodthereafter). Ourmodelcanbesolvedusingstandardstochasticdynamicoptimization
techniques(DixitandPindyck(1994),Stokey(2008)),andweobtainthecross-sectionaldistributioninclosed
form. This is useful when we turn to the estimation because simulating accurately the highly skewed cross-
sectional distribution of firms is challenging. We estimate the model using indirect inference, and match the
discontinuity in the firm size distribution, which is the key evidence that the regulation matters. We further
matchthefirmsizedistribution,conditionalonhavingoperatedabove55employeesinthepast. Thisallows
us to separately estimate the sunk cost and the per-period cost. In spite of its parsimony, our model is able
to match the distribution (and the conditional distribution) fairly well.
Our main result is that the regulation is equivalent to a combination of a sunk cost of about a year of
an average employee wage, and a small, but significant, additional payroll tax of 0.04%. We next use our
modelestimatestoinferthesocialcostoftheregulation. Holdingthenumberoffirmsandtotalemployment
constant, we find that output increases by 0.27% in steady-state if the regulation is removed. This number
captures the misallocation of labor across firms. However when we allow the number of firms to adjust, we
3