NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)ADAPTING TO CLIMATE CHANGE(cid:29)
(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) THE REMARKABLE DECLINE IN THE U.S. TEMPERATURE-MORTALITY
RELATIONSHIP OVER THE 20TH CENTURY
Alan Barreca
Karen Clay
Olivier Deschenes
Michael Greenstone
Joseph S. Shapiro
Working Paper 18692
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18692
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2013
Deschenes is the corresponding author and can be contacted at olivier@econ.ucsb.edu. We thank
Daron Acemoglu, Robin Burgess, our discussant Peter Nilsson, conference participants at the “Climate
and the Economy” Conference and seminar participants at the UC Energy Institute for their comments.
We thank Jonathan Petkun for outstanding research assistance. Barreca's research efforts were supported
by RAND's Postdoctoral Training Program in the Study of Aging. Shapiro gratefully acknowledges
support from an EPA STAR fellowship.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18692.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Alan Barreca, Karen Clay, Olivier Deschenes, Michael Greenstone, and Joseph S. Shapiro.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Adapting to Climate Change: The Remarkable Decline in the U.S. Temperature-Mortality
Relationship over the 20th Century
Alan Barreca, Karen Clay, Olivier Deschenes, Michael Greenstone, and Joseph S. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 18692
January 2013
JEL No. I10,I12,I18,Q54
ABSTRACT
Adaptation is the only strategy that is guaranteed to be part of the world's climate strategy. Using the
most comprehensive set of data files ever compiled on mortality and its determinants over the course
of the 20th century, this paper makes two primary discoveries. First, we find that the mortality effect
of an extremely hot day declined by about 80% between 1900-1959 and 1960-2004. As a consequence,
days with temperatures exceeding 90°F were responsible for about 600 premature fatalities annually
in the 1960-2004 period, compared to the approximately 3,600 premature fatalities that would have
occurred if the temperature-mortality relationship from before 1960 still prevailed. Second, the adoption
of residential air conditioning (AC) explains essentially the entire decline in the temperature-mortality
relationship. In contrast, increased access to electricity and health care seem not to affect mortality
on extremely hot days. Residential AC appears to be both the most promising technology to help poor
countries mitigate the temperature related mortality impacts of climate change and, because fossil
fuels are the least expensive source of energy, a technology whose proliferation will speed up the rate
of climate change.
Alan Barreca Michael Greenstone
206 Tilton Hall MIT Department of Economics
Tulane University 50 Memorial Drive, E52-359
New Orleans, LA Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
70118 and NBER
abarreca@tulane.edu mgreenst@mit.edu
Karen Clay Joseph S. Shapiro
Heinz College MIT Department of Economics
Carnegie Mellon University 50 Memorial Drive, E52-391
5000 Forbes Avenue Cambridge, MA 02142
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 WWW: http://economics.mit.edu/grad/shapiroj
and NBER shapiroj@mit.edu
kclay@andrew.cmu.edu
Olivier Deschenes
Department of Economics
2127 North Hall
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
olivier@econ.ucsb.edu

I. Introduction
The accumulation of greenhouse gases (GHGs) in the atmosphere threatens to fundamentally
alter our planet’s climate in a relatively short period of geological time. There are three possible
approaches to confronting this defining challenge. The first is mitigation, which involves a coordinated
reduction in emissions by countries around the globe. The prospects for such a policy do not look highly
likely in at least the next decade, due to the failure of the Copenhagen climate conference to produce
such action and the continued failures by the United States and several other large emitting countries to
institute programs of verified emissions reductions. The second is to undertake a program of geo-
engineering or climate engineering that involves the deliberate manipulation of the Earth’s climate to
counteract the greenhouse gas induced changes in the climate. These solutions remain scientifically
unproven and involve a host of international governance issues that appear at least as challenging as
reaching agreement on reducing emissions. For example, which country gets to set the global change in
temperature?
The third approach is adaptation, and, in light of the practical difficulties of the first two, it is the
only one guaranteed to be part of the world’s climate strategy. Adaptation, according to the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), is defined as "adjustment in natural or human
systems in response to actual or expected climatic stimuli or their effects, which moderates harm or
exploits beneficial opportunities" (IPCC 2007). Ultimately, climate change’s impacts will depend on the
sensitivity of our well-being to changes in climate and on the cost of adapting to climate change.
However, knowledge on the ability to adapt to large-scale climate or environmental changes and its
costs is poor for several reasons, not the least of which is an absence of real-world data. As such,
identifying strategies that can help reduce the human health costs of climate change through adaptation
is now recognized as a global research priority of the 21st century (WHO 2008; NIEHS 2010). This need is
especially great in developing countries where high temperatures can cause dramatic changes in life
expectancy (Burgess et al. 2011).
This paper provides the first large-scale empirical evidence on long-run adaptation strategies to
reduce the human health costs of the temperature increase associated with climate change. Specifically,
we relate monthly mortality rates to daily temperatures using historical data for the U.S. and study the
evolution of the temperature-mortality relationship over a century long time scale. The goal is to use
the U.S. historical experience to draw lessons for adaptation in current day developing countries. The
United States is particularly well suited for studying the relationship between temperature and
1

mortality, as it has both wide variation in average temperature and high quality data spanning the entire
20th century.
The empirical analysis is divided into two parts. The first uncovers a dramatic change in the
temperature-mortality relationship over the course of the 20th century. We document a greater than
80% reduction in the mortality effect of exposure to very high temperatures. For example, the estimates
suggest that during the 1960-2004 period days with an average temperature exceeding 90°F, relative to
a day in the 60-69°F range, lead to approximately 600 premature fatalities annually. However, if the
temperature-mortality relationship from before 1960 still prevailed, there would have been about 3,600
premature fatalities annually from days with an average temperature exceeding 90°F. At the same time,
the mortality effect of cold temperatures declined by a substantially smaller amount. In effect,
residents of the U.S. adapted in ways that leave them almost completely protected from extreme heat.
The second part of the analysis aims to uncover the sources of this change in the relationship
between high temperatures and mortality. We focus attention on the proliferation of three health-
related innovations in the 20th century United States. Specifically, we quantify the role of residential
electricity, increased access to health care, and the introduction of residential air conditioning (AC) in
muting the temperature-mortality relationship. There are good reasons to believe that these
innovations mitigated the health consequences of hot temperatures (in addition to providing other
benefits). Electrification enabled a wide variety of innovations including fans and later air conditioning.
Increased access to health care allowed both preventative treatment and emergency intervention (e.g.,
intravenous administration of fluids in response to dehydration) (Almond, Chay and Greenstone 2007).
Air conditioning made it possible to reduce the stress on people’s thermoregulatory systems during
periods of extreme heat. The salience of the results is underscored by the fact that a substantial fraction
of the world’s poor currently have limited access to these three modifiers.
The empirical results point to air conditioning as a central determinant in the reduction of the
mortality risk associated with high temperatures during the 20th century. We find that electrification
(represented by residential electrification) and access to health care (represented by doctors per capita)
are not statistically related to changes in the temperature mortality relationship. However, the diffusion
of residential air conditioning after 1960 is related to a statistically significant and economically
meaningful reduction in the temperature-mortality relationship at high temperatures. Indeed, the
adoption of residential air conditioning explains essentially the entire decline in the relationship
between mortality and days with an average temperature exceeding 90°F.
2