NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INFORMED TRADING AND EXPECTED RETURNS
James J. Choi
Li Jin
Hongjun Yan
Working Paper 18680
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18680
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2013
We thank Jennifer Carpenter, Jia Chen, Bryan Kelly, Alexander Ljunqvist, Roger Loh, Jialin Yu, and
audience members at ABFER, Brigham Young University, Brown, Cheung Kong GSB, CICF, EFA,
Hong Kong University, HKUST, INSEAD, NYU, the SEC, SUNY Binghamton, University of Rochester,
University of Toronto, and Yale for their insightful comments. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by James J. Choi, Li Jin, and Hongjun Yan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Informed Trading and Expected Returns
James J. Choi, Li Jin, and Hongjun Yan
NBER Working Paper No. 18680
January 2013, Revised August 2016
JEL No. G12,G15
ABSTRACT
Does information asymmetry affect the cross-section of expected stock returns? We explore this question
using representative portfolio holdings data from the Shanghai Stock Exchange. We show that institutional
investors have a strong information advantage, and that past aggressiveness of institutional trading
in a stock positively predicts institutions' future information advantage in this stock. Sorting stocks
on this predictor and controlling for other correlates of expected returns, we find that the top quintile's
average annualized return in the next month is 10.8% higher than the bottom quintile's, indicating
that information asymmetry increases expected returns.
James J. Choi Hongjun Yan
Yale School of Management Rutgers Business School
165 Whitney Avenue 100 Rockafeller Rd,
P.O. Box 208200 Piscataway Township, NJ 08854
New Haven, CT 06520-8200 hongjun.yan.2011@gmail.com
and NBER
james.choi@yale.edu
Li Jin
Department of Finance
Guanghua School of Management
Peking University
Beijing 100871
China
li.jin@sbs.ox.ac.uk

Does information asymmetry affect the cross-section of expected stock returns? The
theoretical literature has come to different conclusions. Easley and O’Hara (2004) argue that
stocks with more information asymmetry should have higher expected returns to compensate
uninformed investors for the losses they suffer from trading against informed investors. Their
model shows that, holding the total quantity of information constant, stocks with more private
information have a higher return premium. However, Hughes, Liu, and Liu (2007) argue that the
relationship between information asymmetry and expected returns disappears in large economies
because of diversification. Lambert, Leuz, and Verrecchia (2011) argue that, holding the average
precision of investors’ beliefs about a stock’s fundamental value constant, a positive relationship
between information asymmetry and expected returns arises only in financial markets where
investors are not price-takers. Models with only one risky asset provide intuitions that
information asymmetry might affect the cross-section of expected returns through its effects on
liquidity, the usefulness of an asset for risk-sharing, and the risk-bearing capacity available
through market makers, but the sign of the predicted relationship differs both within and across
models (Diamond and Verrecchia (1991), Gârleanu and Pedersen (2004), Vayanos and Wang
(2012)).
Empirical tests of the cross-sectional relationship between information asymmetry and
expected returns have to overcome the difficulty of identifying stock-level variation in
information asymmetry.1 In this paper, we identify stock-level information asymmetry using a
unique dataset that contains the daily stock holdings of a representative sample of all Shanghai
Stock Exchange investors. Our setup is appealing for several reasons. First, the high frequency
and representative nature of our sample allows us to more accurately measure the prevalence of
informed trading than in most other markets, where ownership data are either available only at
much lower frequencies or come from a non-representative investor sample. Second, due to the
less-developed state of Chinese legal institutions and regulations, there is likely to be greater
cross-sectional variation in how much private information is shared with selected investors than
in developed markets, where a stricter regulatory environment compresses the amount of
information asymmetry among active traders towards zero. This greater variation gives our
1 See Cornell and Sirri (1992), Neal and Wheatley (1998), Van Ness, Van Ness, and Warr (2001), and Collin-
Dufresne and Fos (2015) for evidence that measures of adverse selection derived from liquidity measures do a poor
job of measuring information asymmetry.
1

analysis more statistical power to detect information asymmetry effects on expected returns.
Finally, Chinese stock returns share many features of developed market stock returns—for
example, during our sample period, market capitalization, book-to-market ratios, and past-year
returns predict future returns in the Shanghai Stock Exchange—suggesting that return
phenomena in China offer insights into returns in other markets as well. Carpenter, Lu, and
Whitelaw (2015) conclude that “Chinese investors price risk and other stock characteristics
remarkably like investors in other large economies.”2 They also find that notwithstanding the
market’s reputation as a casino, “the average level of stock price informativeness [for future
corporate earnings] in China over the period [1996 to 2012] is similar to that in the US.”
We use the collective actions of one group of informed investors to create a proxy for the
general amount of information asymmetry in a stock. The investors we focus on are institutions,
which we demonstrate have a large information advantage in the Shanghai Stock Exchange. If
each week during our 1996 to 2007 sample period, one bought stocks whose log institutional
ownership percentage change in the prior week was in the top quintile and sold short stocks
whose log institutional ownership percentage change in the prior week was in the bottom
quintile, the resulting four-factor portfolio alpha was 144 basis points per month, or 17.3% per
year, and significant at the 0.1% level (t = 5.62).3
Stocks in which institutions collectively have a greater information advantage are stocks
that we classify as having more information asymmetry. In both the monopolistic setting of Kyle
(1985) and the competitive setting of Easley and O’Hara (2004), informed trader expected profits
are increasing in his/their information advantage. A naïve approach to estimating the effect of
information asymmetry on expected returns is to regress realized abnormal stock returns from
time t to t + 1 on the (eventually) realized profits of institutional trades initiated in the stock
during t. The problem with this approach is that realized profits are the sum of expected profits—
the variable whose effect we are interested in—and realized noise. Realized noise in profits may
2 Chen et al. (2010) test 18 variables that have been shown to predict the cross section of stock returns in the U.S.
market and find that in the 1995 to 2007 period, all 18 variables’ point estimates in univariate Fama-MacBeth (1973)
regressions have signs consistent with the U.S. evidence, and five are statistically significant, compared to eight
significant coefficients for the U.S. markets during this same period.
3 During our sample period, short sales were prohibited in China. The “long-short returns” should be interpreted as
return differences rather than trading profits.
2