NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RISK MANAGEMENT AND CLIMATE CHANGE
Howard Kunreuther
Geoffrey Heal
Myles Allen
Ottmar Edenhofer
Christopher B. Field
Gary Yohe
Working Paper 18607
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18607
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012
Thanks to Linus Mattauch for research assistance and to Malte Meinshausen for the data used in Figure
1. Simon Dietz, Kristie Ebi, Christian Gollier, Robin Gregory, Benjamin Horton, Elmar Kriegler, Katharine
Mach, Michael Mastrandrea, Anthony Millner, Michael Oppenheimer and Christian Träger provided
comments on earlier versions of the paper. Partial support for this research came from the Wharton
Risk Management and Decision Processes Center’s. Extreme Events project, the National Science
Foundation (SES-1062039 and 1048716), the Travelers Foundation, the Center for Climate and Energy
Decision Making (NSF Cooperative Agreement SES-0949710 with Carnegie Mellon University),
the Center for Research on Environmental Decisions (CRED; NSF Cooperative Agreement SES-0345840
to Columbia University) and CREATE at University of Southern California. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Howard Kunreuther, Geoffrey Heal, Myles Allen, Ottmar Edenhofer, Christopher B. Field,
and Gary Yohe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Risk Management and Climate Change
Howard Kunreuther, Geoffrey Heal, Myles Allen, Ottmar Edenhofer, Christopher B. Field,
and Gary Yohe
NBER Working Paper No. 18607
December 2012
JEL No. C02,Q54
ABSTRACT
The selection of climate policies should be an exercise in risk management reflecting the many relevant
sources of uncertainty. Studies of climate change and its impacts rarely yield consensus on the distribution
of exposure, vulnerability, or possible outcomes. Hence policy analysis cannot effectively evaluate
alternatives using standard approaches such as expected utility theory and benefit-cost analysis. This
Perspective highlights the value of robust decision-making tools designed for situations, such as evaluating
climate policies, where generally agreed-upon probability distributions are not available and stakeholders
differ in their degree of risk tolerance. This broader risk management approach enables one to examine
a range of possible outcomes and the uncertainty surrounding their likelihoods.
Howard Kunreuther Ottmar Edenhofer
Operations and Information Management Potsdam Institute for Climate
The Wharton School P.O. 60 12 03
University of Pennsylvania D-14412 Potsdam
3730 Walnut Street, 500 JMHH Ottmar.Edenhofer@pik-potsdam.de
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6366
and NBER Christopher B. Field
kunreuther@wharton.upenn.edu Carnegie Institution for Science
Department of Global Ecology
Geoffrey Heal 260 Panama Street
Graduate School of Business Stanford, CA 94305
616 Uris Hall cfield@ciw.edu
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027-6902 Gary Yohe
and NBER Department of Economics
gmh1@columbia.edu Wesleyan University
PAC 328
Myles Allen Middleton, CT 06459
School of Geography and the Environment gyohe@wesleyan.edu
South Parks Road
OX1 3QY
myles.allen@ouce.ox.ac.uk

Introduction
The scientific understanding of climate change and its impacts has increased dramatically in
recent years, but several interacting sources of uncertainty mean that future climate change and
its impacts will not be known with precision for the foreseeable future. Some uncertainties
involve the path of global socioeconomic development, the way it affects the commitment by
countries to use energy efficient technologies and how greenhouse gas emissions might respond
to specific climate-related policies. Other uncertainties involve internal variability and
incomplete understanding of the climate system and broader Earth-system feedbacks. Still other
uncertainties involve the way that changes in climate translate to impacts such as changes in
water availability, agricultural production, sea level rise, or heat waves in different parts of the
world. A final set involves the evolution of assets at risk (exposure) both in physical and in
monetary terms and the level of protection that can be undertaken to reduce their vulnerability to
potential losses (i.e., adaptation measures). The implication of these interacting sources of
uncertainty is that choosing among climate policies is intrinsically an exercise in risk
management.
A principal purpose of risk management is to evaluate strategies for responding to an uncertain
threat. To illustrate this point in the context of a simple example, consider a coastal community
in Florida deciding whether land 3 meters above sea level is a suitable location for construction
of a new residential development to be occupied for most of the current century. Suppose that the
best estimate of the maximum storm surge plus sea level rise over this period is 2 meters. In this
case, the project looks safe. But if there is a chance of a storm surge plus sea level rise that is
substantially greater, it is less attractive. So a forecast of 2 meters is very different from a
2

forecast of 1 to 4 meters with 2 meters as the most likely outcome. Key decision-makers in the
community need to know the range of possible outcomes so they can determine the robustness of
policy decisions. The final decision on whether to build the residential development, and the
maximum it is sensible to pay for the land, will be influenced by the characterization of the risk.
For decisions regarding climate policy, the central importance of uncertainty has long been
recognized. Schneider1 and colleagues were pioneers in posing policy questions in the context of
risk and in introducing conceptual frameworks for managing that risk. Recent research takes a
more formal approach, highlighting the importance of specifying uncertainty as a key policy
input. Worst-case scenarios -- the possibility of extremely costly outcomes with small but
positive probabilities -- can have massive impacts on the cost-benefit analysis of climate change
mitigation, and on the perspectives of key decision-makers. These low-probability high-
consequence events have motivated a focus on the tail of the distribution of outcomes2,3. For
example, a 5% chance of a truly unacceptable temperature increase may have a significant
impact when evaluating the expected benefits and costs of climate adaptation and mitigation
policies.
To date, much of the focus in assessments of climate change and its impacts has been on central
tendencies. Uncertainty in future climates is most often represented as the range of outcomes
generated by different climate models run for a range of scenarios. There are, however,
numerous physical grounds and some observational ones for suspecting that such ensembles of
opportunity may not account for all sources of uncertainty. Some of the open issues relate to the
3