NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DID THE COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT ACT (CRA) LEAD TO RISKY LENDING?
Sumit Agarwal
Efraim Benmelech
Nittai Bergman
Amit Seru
Working Paper 18609
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18609
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012
The authors thank Brent Ambrose, Gadi Barlevy, Charles Calomiris, Itzhak Ben-David, John Cochrane,
Doug Evanoff, Gene Fama, Erik Hurst, Benjamin Keys, Mitchell Petersen, Tomasz Piskorski, Raghuram
Rajan, Vikrant Vig, Luigi Zingales and seminar participants at Duke (Fuqua School of Business) and
the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago for useful discussions. Caitlin Kearns provided outstanding research
assistance. The analysis in this paper was conducted and finalized while Agarwal was a senior financial
economist at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. The views expressed in this paper are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Federal
Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Sumit Agarwal, Efraim Benmelech, Nittai Bergman, and Amit Seru. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Did the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) Lead to Risky Lending?
Sumit Agarwal, Efraim Benmelech, Nittai Bergman, and Amit Seru
NBER Working Paper No. 18609
December 2012
JEL No. G01,G21,G38,H24,H31
ABSTRACT
Yes, it did. We use exogenous variation in banks’ incentives to conform to the standards of the Community
Reinvestment Act (CRA) around regulatory exam dates to trace out the effect of the CRA on lending
activity. Our empirical strategy compares lending behavior of banks undergoing CRA exams within
a given census tract in a given month to the behavior of banks operating in the same census tract-month
that do not face these exams. We find that adherence to the act led to riskier lending by banks: in the
six quarters surrounding the CRA exams lending is elevated on average by about 5 percent every quarter
and loans in these quarters default by about 15 percent more often. These patterns are accentuated
in CRA-eligible census tracts and are concentrated among large banks. The effects are strongest during
the time period when the market for private securitization was booming.
Sumit Agarwal Nittai Bergman
Associate Professor of Finance and Real Estate MIT Sloan School of Management
NUS Business School 100 Main Street, E62-632
Mochtar Raidy Building, BIZ1 Cambridge, MA 02142
15 Kent Ridge Road and NBER
Singapore, 119245 nbergman@mit.edu
ushakri@yahoo.com
Amit Seru
Efraim Benmelech Booth School of Business
Kellogg School of Management University of Chicago
Northwestern University 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
2001 Sheridan Road Chicago, IL 60637
Evanston, IL 60208 and NBER
and NBER amit.seru@chicagobooth.edu
e-benmelech@kellogg.northwestern.edu

I. Introduction
The role of financial regulation in fueling the recent financial crisis is being hotly debated
by academics, politicians, and policymakers (Mayer, Morrison and Piskorski, 2009). A central
piece of this heated discussion relates to the role played by the Community Reinvestment Act
(CRA) in the buildup to the financial crisis and, in particular, its impact on pre-crisis mortgage
lending standards. Although regulators and community groups strongly defend the act,
economists remain divided in their views on the role of the CRA in lowering underwriting
standards. This debate is best illustrated by the stark views taken by economists Raghuram Rajan
and Paul Krugman. Rajan (2010) suggests that the CRA was the channel through which “a US
Congress, worried about growing income inequality, towards expanding low income housing,
joined with the flood of foreign capital inflows to remove any discipline on home loans.”1 In
contrast, Krugman (2010) argues that “the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 was irrelevant
to the subprime boom.”2
Most empirical studies find that the CRA had little or no effect when looking into a
battery of dependent variables (e.g., Dahl, Evanoff, and Spivey 2000 and Kroszner 2008). This
lack of results makes it hard to conclude whether the CRA truly had no impact on lending
standards or, alternatively, whether the empirical approaches used employed insufficient
variation to identify the causal effect of the act. In this paper we attempt to fill this gap. Using
exogenous variation in banks’ incentives to conform to CRA standards around regulatory exams,
we study whether the CRA led to riskier lending. By tracing out banks’ responses to CRA
evaluations in terms of both the quality and the quantity of mortgages originated, we show
clearly that the CRA did lead to riskier lending.3
The main econometric challenge of an evaluation of the CRA’s impact is the lack of
counterfactual lending behavior in the absence of the CRA. Our empirical design addresses this
issue by exploiting variation in banks’ incentive to conform to CRA standards around regulatory
exams. The Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 instructs federal financial supervisory
agencies to encourage their regulated financial institutions to help meet credit needs of the
communities in which they are chartered while also conforming to “safe and sound” lending
standards. To enforce the statute, federal regulatory agencies periodically examine banking
1 “Bankers Have Been Sold Short by Market Distortions.” Raghuram Rajan, Financial Times, June 2, 2010. See also
Calomiris 2008 and Calomiris 2011 for a similar view.
2 “Things Everyone in Chicago Knows.” Paul Krugman, krugman.blogs.nytimes.com, June 3, 2010.
3 For other studies on mortgage defaults see Mayer, Pence and Sherlund 2009 and Mayer, Morrison, Piskorski and
Gupta 2011 and cites therein.
1

institutions for CRA compliance. Regulators use this compliance information when approving
applications for new bank branches as well as for mergers and acquisitions. Banks may therefore
have a strong incentive to concentrate their CRA-compliant lending before an exam date to
ensure a satisfactory CRA evaluation while minimizing the likelihood that such lending would
fail the “safe and sound” criteria at the time of the exam.4 Moreover, since the exam itself is not
an instantaneous event, with a significant time gap between the exam initiation and the
submission of the final CRA report, banks also may choose to elevate their lending a few
quarters after the CRA exam.
Our empirical design exploits this intertemporal variation in incentives to comply with
CRA standards by comparing banks undergoing CRA exams (treatment group banks) to similar
banks operating in the same vicinity but not undergoing a CRA exam (control group banks). The
identifying assumption is that around the time of CRA exams, because of their increased
incentive to comply with CRA standards, banks will shift their lending behavior toward
borrowers that improve their CRA rating. By law, such borrowers include any applicant that is
located in CRA-target tracts – defined as census tracts with a median income less than 80 percent
of the median income at the Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) level – as well as low-income
and minority borrowers in non-CRA-target tracts. Importantly, in comparing lending behavior of
banks that underwent CRA exams to those that did not, our analysis always includes tract-by-
month fixed effects. This battery of fixed effects implies that our regressions are identified
through variation between treatment group and control group banks within a given tract in a
given month. As such, the fixed effects control for potentially important demand-side variables
affecting the lending behavior of all banks within a given tract-month. The empirical strategy we
use in the paper is related to the literature that examines the role of nonlinear incentives in
shaping economic decisions. Examples include the timing of sales (Oyer 1998), procurement
spending (Liebman and Mahoney 2012), and risk-taking in mutual funds (Chevalier and Ellison
1997).
Our identification strategy hinges on the assumption that the timing and frequency of the
CRA exams themselves are not driven by local credit and economic conditions affecting a given
bank’s lending behavior. This is a plausible assumption since in practice both the timing and the
frequency of CRA evaluations are driven by a fixed policy that is unrelated to local economic
conditions. In particular, the review cycle for smaller banks – those with less than $250 million
in assets – is five years, whereas for larger banks the review cycle is two years.
4 In particular, this may be the case as long as the adjustment costs to elevate lending are not too large and a loan
becomes delinquent over time with some hazard rate.
2