NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DISAGREEMENT AND ASSET PRICES
Bruce I. Carlin
Francis A. Longstaff
Kyle Matoba
Working Paper 18619
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18619
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012
We would like to thank Karen Chaltikian, Anna Cieslak, Andrea Eisfeldt, Mark Grinblatt, Chris Hrdlicka,
Terry Nercessian, Praveen Kumar, Hanno Lustig, Jeff Pontiff, Mike Rierson, Jules van Binsbergen,
and Jialin Yu, and seminar participants at the University of Houston for their helpful insights and suggestions.
All errors are our responsibility. All authors are from the Anderson School of Management at the University
of California, Los Angeles, 110 Westwood Plaza, Los Angeles, CA 90095. The corresponding authors
are Bruce Carlin (bruce.carlin@anderson.ucla.edu) and Francis Longstaff(francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu).
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.˛˛
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Bruce I. Carlin, Francis A. Longstaff, and Kyle Matoba. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Disagreement and Asset Prices
Bruce I. Carlin, Francis A. Longstaff, and Kyle Matoba
NBER Working Paper No. 18619
December 2012
JEL No. G12,G14
ABSTRACT
How do differences of opinion affect asset prices? Do investors earn a risk premium when disagreement
arises in the market? Despite their fundamental importance, these questions are among the most controversial
issues in finance. In this paper, we use a novel data set that allows us to directly measure the level
of disagreement among Wall Street mortgage dealers about prepayment speeds. We examine how
disagreement evolves over time and study its effects on expected returns, return volatility, and trading
volume in the mortgage-backed security market. We find that increased disagreement is associated
with higher expected returns, higher return volatility, and larger trading volume. These results imply
that there is a positive risk premium for disagreement in asset prices. We also show that volatility in
and of itself does not lead to higher trading volume. Rather, it is only when disagreement arises in
the market that higher uncertainty is associated with more trading. Finally, we are able to distinguish
empirically between two competing hypotheses regarding how information in markets gets incorporated
into asset prices. We find that sophisticated investors appear to update their beliefs through a rational
expectations mechanism when disagreement arises.
Bruce I. Carlin Kyle Matoba
Anderson Graduate School of Management 110 Westwood Plaza
UCLA Los Angeles CA 90095
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C413 kyle.matoba.2014@anderson.ucla.edu
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
bruce.carlin@anderson.ucla.edu
Francis A. Longstaff
UCLA
Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu

1 Introduction
Understanding how disagreement affects security prices in financial markets is one of the
most important issues in finance. When participants in a market disagree with each other,
an investor who goes out on a limb and takes a position based on his unique information
may face a greater risk of being wrong. Such trading risk or adverse-selection risk differs
fundamentally from the traditional types of market risks that are priced in asset values.
This means that investors who trade when there is disagreement may require additional
compensation for bearing this risk. Despite the fundamental nature of this issue, though,
therestillremainssignificantcontroversyintheliteratureabouthowdisagreementriskaffects
expected returns and asset prices.
On one hand, there is an extensive theoretical literature that implies that divergence in
beliefs or opinions should lead to a positive risk premium. For example, Varian (1985, 1989),
Abel (1989), David (2008), and many others argue that the equity premium puzzle may be
explained in terms of a risk premium for heterogeneous beliefs, differences of opinion, or
both. As such, it appears that investors should be compensated for bearing trading risk or
the risk due to adverse selection when disagreement arises.
On the other hand, Miller (1977) argues that differences of opinion in the market can
lead to lower expected returns (higher prices) when short-sale constraints are present. This
occurs because pessimists sit out of the market and asset prices reflect only the valuation
of optimists. Chen, Hong, and Stein (2002) and Diether, Malloy, and Scherbina (2002)
find compelling support for the Miller hypothesis in several markets in which there are
1

binding short-sale constraints. However, Boehme, Danielsen, Kumar, and Sorescu (2009)
and Avramov, Chordia, Jostova, and Philipov (2009) find evidence to the contrary. Either
way, thisstillleaves openthemorefundamental issueofhowdisagreement ispricedingeneral
markets without significant short-sale constraints, illiquidity, or other trading frictions.
To best resolve the controversy, we would ideally want to study a market with several
key characteristics. First, the market should be highly liquid and essentially free from short-
sale constraints. Second, the key drivers of the asset’s value should be easily defined and
common knowledge. Finally, disagreement about these key drivers among the institutions
that actually trade the assets should be directly observable. This latter condition bypasses
the measurement uncertainty that results when an indirect proxy for disagreement is used.
In this paper, we study how disagreement affects asset pricing in such a setting. Specif-
ically, we analyze a time series of prepayment speed (PSA) forecasts issued by major Wall
Street mortgage dealers and then analyze how disagreement affects expected returns, return
volatility, and trading volume in the agency mortgage-backed security market.1
This market provides several unique advantages. First, since the PSA forecasts are given
for various interest rate scenarios and the mortgage-backed securities are guaranteed by the
U.S. government, credit risk and interest rate risk do not affect the dealers’ PSA estimates.
Thus, theonlycashflowuncertaintyassociatedwithamortgage-backedsecurityisthetiming
of prepayments. In turn, the timing of cash flows is a key factor affecting how investors value
1Providers of PSA estimates included Barclays,Bank of America, Bear Stearns, Credit Suisse, Deutsche
Bank,Donaldson,Lufin,andJenrette,GoldmanSachs,HSBC,JPMorganChase,LehmanBrothers,Merrill
Lynch, Morgan Stanley, Nations Bank, Prudential, Greenwich Capital, Salomon Brothers, Smith Barney,
and UBS Warburg.
2