NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MULTI-PRODUCT FIRMS AND PRODUCT QUALITY
Kalina Manova
Zhiwei Zhang
Working Paper 18637
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18637
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012
We thank the editor and two anonymous referees for their constructive feedback. We also thank
Andrew Bernard, Meredith Crowley, Jonathan Eaton, Carsten Eckel, Doireann Fitzgerald, Penny
Goldberg, Elhanan Helpman, Beata Javorcik, Robert Johnson, Marc Melitz, Peter Neary, Stephen
Redding, Robert Staiger, Jim Tybout, and Eric Verhoogen for insightful conversations, and
conference participants at the 2012 AEA Annual Meeting, 2012 NBER ITI Spring Meeting, 2012
EIIT Conference, and 2011 IGC Trade Programme Meeting for their comments. Kalina Manova
acknowledges support from the International Growth Centre (LSE), the Freeman Spogli Institute
(Stanford), and the Institute for Research in the Social Sciences (Stanford). The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2012 by Kalina Manova and Zhiwei Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Quality
Kalina Manova and Zhiwei Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 18637
December 2012, Revised February 2017
JEL No. D22,F10,F12,F14,L10,L11,L15
ABSTRACT
We examine the global operations of multi-product firms. We present a flexible heterogeneous-
firm trade model with either limited or strong scope for quality differentiation. Using customs
data for China during 2002-2006, we empirically establish that firms allocate activity across
products in line with a product hierarchy based on quality. Firms vary output quality across their
products by using inputs of different quality levels. Their core competence is in varieties of
superior quality that command higher prices but nevertheless generate higher sales. In markets
where they offer fewer products, firms concentrate on their core varieties by dropping low-quality
peripheral goods on the extensive margin and by shifting sales towards top-quality products on
the intensive margin. The product quality ladder also governs firms ’ export dynamics, both in
general and in response to the exogenous removal of MFA quotas on textiles and apparel. Our
results inform the drivers and measurement of firm performance, the effects of trade reforms, and
the design of development policies.
Kalina Manova
Department of Economics
University of Oxford
Manor Road
Oxford OX1 3UQ
United Kingdom
kalina.manova@economics.ox.ac.uk
Zhiwei Zhang
Nomura Securities
Hong Kong
zhiweiz@hotmail.com

1 Introduction
How …rms organize production and sales across multiple product lines has important micro and
macro implications. At the micro level, bigger and more productive …rms sell more products,
with the majority of their sales, exports and pro…ts coming from a few core products (e.g.
Bernard et al 2009, Arkolakis-Muendler 2010). Moreover, reallocations across products improve
…rm productivity and performance in response to shocks such as trade reforms or exchange
rate movements (e.g. Bernard et al 2010, 2011, Gopinath-Neiman 2014, Chatterjee et al 2013).
At the macro level, multi-product …rms capture an overwhelming and disproportionately large
share of production, trade, and employment. Reallocations across heterogeneous …rms shape
aggregate productivity, the welfare gains from trade, and the aggregate impact of idiosyncratic
andsystemicshocks,especiallywithgranularitiesinthe…rmsizedistribution(e.g. Arkolakisetal
2012, Melitz-Redding2015, Pavcnik2002, Gabaix2011, diGiovannietal2014, Gaubert-Itskhoki
2016). Yet despite its implications for …rm performance, aggregate welfare and inequality, the
allocation of activity across products within multi-product …rms remains poorly understood.
PrimafacieevidenceforChinasuggeststhatproductqualitydi¤erentiationmaybeimportant
(Appendix Table 1). Firms that export products at higher average prices and …rms that vary
pricesmoreacrosstheirproductrangeattainhigherexports. Controllingforinitialtradeactivity,
such …rms also achieve faster export growth. Although output prices may not directly re‡ect
product quality, similar patterns hold when output quality is inferred from data on export prices
andquantities,orproxiedwiththepriceorinferredqualityofimportedinputs. Inaddition,…rms
withhigherproductivity, employment,skill-,capital-,advertisingandR&Dintensityhavehigher
averagepricesandquality, aswellasgreaterpriceandqualitydispersionacrossproducts.1 These
…ndings indicate that quality di¤erentiation across …rms and across products within …rms may
be key to understanding …rms’export performance and the di¤erential e¤ects of trade reforms
across the …rm size and worker skill distribution.
This paper examines the global operations of multi-product …rms in light of the motivating
facts. We present a ‡exible heterogeneous-…rm trade model that characterizes the behavior of
multi-product…rmswitheitherlimitedorstrongscopeforqualitydi¤erentiation. Usingrichcus-
tomsdataforChinaduring2002-2006, weempiricallyestablishthat…rmsallocateactivityacross
products in line with strong quality di¤erentiation. They observe a product hierarchy governed
by quality which determines how they participate in di¤erent markets and how they respond to
changes in economic conditions over time. First, multi-product …rms vary output quality across
their product range by using inputs of di¤erent quality levels. Second, …rms’core competence
is in varieties of superior quality that command higher prices but nevertheless generate higher
sales than cheaper goods of lower quality. Third, in markets where they o¤er fewer products,
1Inferring unobserved product quality is an important methodological contribution of our analysis that we
discuss below. We calculate the average and the standard deviation of observed prices and inferred quality across
products after …rst demeaning by product …xed e¤ects. We describe the data sample, variable de…nition, and
empirical speci…cations behind these conditional correlations in the notes to Appendix Table 1.
1

…rms concentrate activity in their core varieties by dropping low-quality peripheral goods on the
extensive margin and by shifting sales towards top-quality products on the intensive margin.
Finally, the systematic reallocation of activity across the product quality ladder guides …rms’
export dynamics, both in general and in response to the exogenous removal of MFA quotas on
textiles and apparel.
Ourtheoreticalframeworkillustrateshowthepossibilityforverticaldi¤erentiationa¤ectsthe
production and sales decisions of multi-product …rms, relative to a world with only horizontal
di¤erentiation. Werefertotheseeconomicenvironmentsasquality sorting ande¢ ciency sorting,
respectively. In the model, …rm-level ability and …rm-product-speci…c expertise draws create
exogenousvariationinproductione¢ ciencyacross…rmsandacrossproductswithin…rms. Under
quality sorting, …rms can choose to make products of higher quality at a higher marginal cost
by assembling more expensive inputs of higher quality. The exogenous variation in production
e¢ ciencyinducesendogenousvariationinqualityacross…rmsandproducts,aswellasinproduct
scope and sales pro…le across …rms. Abler companies o¤er higher quality of any given good,
sell more goods, enter more markets, and earn higher revenues. Within a …rm, more expensive
varietiesofhigherqualitygeneratehigherbilateralandworldwidesales. Firmsvarytheirproduct
scope across heterogeneous country markets, and expand their product range by progressively
addinggoodsindecreasingorderofpriceandquality. Undere¢ ciency sorting bycontrast, there
is no quality di¤erentiation in the market place, and higher productivity is associated with lower
marginal costs, lower prices, and higher sales. Firms now follow product hierarchies based on
production e¢ ciency, and all predictions for input and output prices are reversed.
Guidedbythisconceptualframework, weanalyzetheoperationsofmulti-product…rmsusing
…rm-leveldataforChinaontheuniverseofexportandimporttransactionsduring2002-2006. An
importantadvantageofthesedataisthatweobservethepriceandsalesforallofa…rm’sexports
bydestinationandproduct, aswellasthepriceofallofitsimportedintermediateinputs. Onthe
sales side, this allows us to examine the relationship between product scope and the distribution
of product prices and sales across the di¤erent markets in which the same …rm operates. On the
production side, we are able to implement a new methodology we develop for matching multiple
inputs (and their prices) to multiple output products (and their prices).
We perform four empirical exercises, and conclude that multi-product …rms organize oper-
ations in a manner consistent with quality sorting but not with e¢ ciency sorting. First, we
establish evidence for the most distinctive prediction of quality sorting: the price-sales pro…le
of multi-product …rms. We show that export prices are positively correlated with worldwide
exports across products within a …rm-year and with bilateral sales across products within …rm-
destination-years.Model-consistentestimatesofproductqualityarelikewisepositivelyassociated
with export revenues across a …rms’product range, where we infer unobserved quality from ob-
servedpriceandquantitydataasinKhandelwal(2008). Theseresultsdonotappeartobedriven
by variable mark-ups: They are robust to controlling for …rms’market power with their share of
the relevant (country-)product market. They are also stronger for di¤erentiated goods and for
2