NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WANNA GET AWAY? RD IDENTIFICATION AWAY FROM THE CUTOFF
Joshua Angrist
Miikka Rokkanen
Working Paper 18662
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18662
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012
Our thanks to Parag Pathak for many helpful discussions and comments, and to seminar participants
at Berkeley, CREST, and Stanford for helpful comments. Thanks also go to Peter Hull for expert research
assistance. Angrist gratefully acknowledges funding from the Institute for Education Sciences. The
views expressed here are those of the authors alone and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research or The Institute for Education Sciences.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Joshua Angrist and Miikka Rokkanen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Wanna Get Away? RD Identification Away from the Cutoff
Joshua Angrist and Miikka Rokkanen
NBER Working Paper No. 18662
December 2012
JEL No. C26,C31,C36,I21,I24,I28,J24
ABSTRACT
In the canonical regression discontinuity (RD) design for applicants who face an award or admissions
cutoff, causal effects are nonparametrically identified for those near the cutoff. The impact of treatment on
inframarginal applicants is also of interest, but identification of such effects requires stronger assumptions
than are required for identification at the cutoff. This paper discusses RD identification away from
the cutoff. Our identification strategy exploits the availability of dependent variable predictors other
than the running variable. Conditional on these predictors, the running variable is assumed to be ignorable.
This identification strategy is illustrated with data on applicants to Boston exam schools. Functional-form-based
extrapolation generates unsatisfying results in this context, either noisy or not very robust. By contrast,
identification based on RD-specific conditional independence assumptions produces reasonably precise
and surprisingly robust estimates of the effects of exam school attendance on inframarginal applicants.
These estimates suggest that the causal effects of exam school attendance for 9th grade applicants
with running variable values well away from admissions cutoffs differ little from those for applicants
with values that put them on the margin of acceptance. An extension to fuzzy designs is shown to identify
causal effects for compliers away from the cutoff.
Joshua Angrist
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-353
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
angrist@mit.edu
Miikka Rokkanen
Department of Economics
MIT(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:24)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:22)(cid:28)(cid:20)
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
rokkanen@mit.edu

Both the tie-breaking experiment and the regression-discontinuity analysis are partic-
ularly subject to the external validity limitation of selection-X interaction in that the
effect has been demonstrated only for a very narrow band of talent, i.e., only for those
at the cutting score... Broader generalizations involve the extrapolation of the below-X
fit across the entire range of X values, and at each greater degree of extrapolation, the
number of plausible rival hypotheses becomes greater.
–DonaldT.CampbellandJulianStanley(1963; ExperimentalandQuasi-Experimental
Designs for Research)
1 Introduction
In a regression discontinuity (RD) framework, treatment status changes discontinuously as a func-
tion of an underlying covariate, commonly known as the running variable. Provided conditional
mean functions for potential outcomes given the running variable are reasonably smooth, changes
in outcome distributions at the assignment cutoff must be driven by discontinuities in the likelihood
of treatment. RD identification comes from a kind of virtual random assignment, where small and
presumably serendipitous variation in the running variable across the point of discontinuity manip-
ulates treatment. On the other hand, because the running variable is typically related to outcomes,
claims for unconditional “as-if random assignment” are most credible for observations near the point
of discontinuity. RD methods need not identify causal effects for larger and perhaps more represen-
tative groups of subjects. Our epigraph suggests this point was no less apparent to RD’s inventors
than to today’s RD nonparametricians.
A recent study of causal effects at Boston’s selective public schools – known as “exam schools”
– highlights the possibly local and potentially limiting nature of RD findings. Boston exam schools
choose their students based on an index that combines admissions test scores with a student’s
grade point average (GPA). Abdulkadiroğlu, Angrist, and Pathak (2012) use parametric and non-
parametric RD estimators to capture the causal effects of exam school attendance for exam school
applications with index values in the neighborhood of admissions cutoffs. In this case, nonparamet-
ric RD compares students just to the left and just to the right of each cutoff. For most of these
marginal students, the resulting estimates suggest that exam school attendance does little to boost
achievement.1 But applicants who only barely manage to gain admission to, say, the highly selec-
tive Boston Latin School, might be unlikely to benefit from an advanced exam school curriculum.
1Dobbie and Fryer (2012) report similar results for applicants to New York exam schools.
1

Stronger applicants who qualify more easily may benefit more from an elite public school education.
Debates over affirmative action also focus attention on inframarginal applicants, including some
who stand to gain seats and some who stand to lose should affirmative action considerations be
introduced.
Motivated by the question of how exam school attendance affects achievement for inframarginal
applicants, this paper tackles the theoretical problem of how to identify causal effects in an RD
setting for applicants other than those in the immediate neighborhood of admissions cutoffs. Our
first tack extrapolates parametric models for conditional mean functions estimated to the left and
right of cutoffs. As noted by Angrist and Pischke (2009), in a parametric RD world, extrapolation
is easy. In a closely-related approach, inspired by an argument in Dong and Lewbel (2011), we
also use derivatives estimated at the cutoff to extrapolate treatment effects. Dong and Lewbel
exploit the fact that derivatives at the cutoff are non-parametrically identified, though, in practice,
our implementation of derivative-based extrapolation looks a lot like a parametric polynomial. We
therefore see parametric and derivative-based extrapolation as two versions of a common functional-
form-based approach.
As it turns out, functional-form-based estimation procedures fail to produce compelling results
for the empirical questions that motivate our theoretical inquiry. The resulting estimates of exam
school effects away from the cutoff are mostly imprecise and sensitive to the polynomial used for
extrapolation, with or without the implicit weighting induced by a nonparametric bandwidth. We
therefore turn to a conditional independence argument that exploits a key feature of most RD
assignmentmechanisms: RDtreatmentsareassignedasadeterministicfunctionofasingleobserved
covariate, the running variable. The association between running variable and outcome variables is
therefore the only source of omitted variables bias in RD estimates. If, for example, the running
variable were randomly assigned, or otherwise made independent of potential outcomes, we could
ignore it and analyze data from RD designs as if from a randomized trial.
This unique feature of RD assignment leads us to a conditional independence assumption (CIA)
that identifies causal effects by conditioning on covariates besides the running variable, with an eye
to eliminating the relationship between running variable and outcomes. It’s not always possible to
find such good controls, of course, but, as we show below, a straightforward statistical test isolates
promising candidates. As an empirical matter, we show that conditioning on baseline scores and
demographic variables largely eliminates the relationship between running variables and test score
outcomes for 9th grade applicants to Boston exam schools. This finding lays the foundation for a
matching strategy that identifies causal effects for inframarginal applicants.
2