NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WINNERS AND LOSERS:
CREATIVE DESTRUCTION AND THE STOCK MARKET
Leonid Kogan
Dimitris Papanikolaou
Noah Stoffman
Working Paper 18671
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18671
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2013, Revised October 2017
An earlier version of this paper circulated under the title “Technological Innovation: Winners and
Losers.”We thank Andrew Abel, Hengjie Ai, Federico Belo, Jaroslav Borovi ka, John
Campbell, Ian Dew-Becker, Bernard Dumas, Andrea Eisfeldt, Carola Frydman, Joao Gomes,
Lars Hansen, Boyan Jovanovic, Erik Loualiche, Deborah Lucas, Gregor Matvos, Stavros
Panageas, Jonathan Parker, Monika Piazzesi, Nick Roussanov, Martin Schneider, Amit Seru,
Costis Skiadas, and seminar participants at AEA, Baruch College, Boston University, Catolica,
Chicago Booth, CITE, Columbia GSB, Copenhagen Business School, CUHK, Emory, Erasmus
University, Georgetown University, Georgia Institute of Technology, HEC Paris, HKUST,
INSEAD, Jackson Hole Finance Conference, LBS, LSE, McGill University, Monash University,
MIT Sloan, NBER Asset Pricing meeting, New York Federal Reserve Bank, Northwestern
University, Rice University, Society of Economic Dynamics, Stockholm School of Economics,
Tinbergen Institute, UC Berkeley, UHK, Universidad de San Andres, University of Connecticut,
University of Geneva, University of Indiana, University of Lausanne, University of Lugano,
University of New South Wales, University of Rochester, University of Sydney, University of
Technology Sydney, University of Washington, USC, Washington University, WFA, and
Wharton for valuable discussions and comments. Dimitris Papanikolaou thanks Amazon (AWS
in Education Grant award), the Zell Center for Risk and the Jerome Kenney Fund for research
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2013 by Leonid Kogan, Dimitris Papanikolaou, and Noah Stoffman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Winners and Losers: Creative Destruction and the Stock Market
Leonid Kogan, Dimitris Papanikolaou, and Noah Stoffman
NBER Working Paper No. 18671
January 2013, Revised October 2017
JEL No. E20,E32,G10,G12
ABSTRACT
We develop a general equilibrium model of asset prices in which the benefits of technological
innovation are distributed asymmetrically. Financial market participants do not capture all the
economic rents resulting from innovative activity, even when they own shares in innovating
firms. Economic gains from innovation accrue partly to the innovators, who cannot sell claims on
the rents that their future ideas will generate. We show how the unequal distribution of gains from
innovation can give rise to a high risk premium on the aggregate stock market, return
comovement and average return differences among firms, and the failure of traditional
representative-agent asset pricing models to account for cross-sectional differences in risk premia.
Leonid Kogan Noah Stoffman
MIT Sloan School of Management Kelley School of Business, Indiana University
100 Main Street, E62-636 1309 E 10th Street
Cambridge, MA 02142 Bloomington, IN 47405
and NBER nstoffma@indiana.edu
lkogan@mit.edu
Dimitris Papanikolaou
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
d-papanikolaou@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Technologicalinnovationisarguablythemaindriverofeconomicgrowthinthelongrun. However,
the economic value generated by new ideas is usually not shared equally. The popular press is rife
with rags-to-riches stories of new entrepreneurs, whose net worth rose substantially as a result of
their innovative ideas during technological booms such as those experienced in the 1990s and the
2000s. In addition to the large wealth gains for successful innovators, technological progress can
also create losses through creative destruction, as new technologies render old capital and processes
obsolete.
We show that the asymmetric sharing of gains and losses from technological innovation can
give rise to well-known, prominent empirical patterns in asset price behavior, including a high risk
premium on the aggregate stock market, return comovement and average return differences among
growth and value firms. We build a tractable general equilibrium model in which the benefits
of technological progress are distributed unevenly across investors and firms. Our model allows
for two forms of technological progress. Some advances take the form of improvements in labor
productivity, and are complementary to existing investments, while others are embodied in new
vintages of capital. Throughout the paper we refer to the first type of technological progress as
disembodied, and the second type as embodied.1 The latter type of technological progress leads to
more creative destruction, since old and new capital vintages are substitutes.
A prominent feature of our model is that the market for new ideas is incomplete. Specifically,
shareholders cannot appropriate all the economic rents generated by new technologies, even when
they own equity in the firms that develop those technologies. Our motivation for this market
incompleteness is that ideas are a scarce resource, and the generation of ideas relies heavily on
human capital. As a result, innovators are able to capture a fraction of the economic rents that
their ideas generate. The key friction is that potential innovators cannot sell claims to these future
rents. This market incompleteness implies that technological progress has an asymmetric impact
on household wealth. Most of the financial benefits from innovation accrue to a small fraction
of the population, while the rest bear the cost of creative destruction. This reallocative effect of
technological progress is particularly strong when innovations are embodied in new capital goods.
By exposing households to idiosyncratic randomness in innovation outcomes, improvements in
technology can thus reduce households’ indirect utility. This displacive effect on indirect utility is
amplified when households also care about their consumption relative to the economy-wide average,
since households dislike being ‘left behind’.
Displacement risk contributes to the equity risk premium and also leads to cross-sectional
differences in asset returns. Owning shares in growth firms helps offset potential utility losses
1Berndt (1990) gives the following definitions for these two types of technology shocks: “Embodied technical
progressreferstoengineeringdesignandperformanceadvancesthatcanonlybeembodiedinnewplantorequipment;
older equipment cannot be made to function as economically as the new, unless a costly remodelling or retrofitting of
equipment occurs,” and “by contrast, disembodied technical progress refers to advances in knowledge that make more
effective use of all inputs, including capital of each surviving vintage (not just the most recent vintage). In its pure
form, disembodied technical progress proceeds independently of the vintage structure of the capital stock. The most
common example of disembodied technical progress is perhaps the notion of learning curves, in which it has been
found that for a wide variety of production processes and products, as cumulative experience and production increase,
learning occurs which results in ever decreasing unit costs.”
1

brought on by technological improvements. In our model, firms differ in their ability to acquire
projectsthatimplementnewtechnologies. Thisdifferenceinfuturegrowthopportunitiesimpliesthat
technological progress has a heterogeneous impact on the cross-section of asset returns. Firms with
few existing projects, but many potential new investment opportunities, benefit from technological
advances. By contrast, profits of firms that are heavily invested in old technologies and have
few growth opportunities decline due to increased competitive pressure. In equilibrium, investors
hold growth firms, despite their lower expected returns, as a hedge against the potential wealth
reallocation that may result from future technological innovation. Aggregate consumption does not
accurately reflect all the risks that households face as a result of technological progress, implying
the failure of traditional representative-agent asset pricing models to account for cross-sectional
differences in risk premia.
We estimate the parameters of the model using indirect inference. The baseline model performs
well at replicating the joint properties of aggregate consumption, investment, and asset returns that
we target. In particular, the model generates an aggregate consumption process with moderate
low-frequency fluctuations; volatile equity returns; a high equity premium; a low and stable risk-free
rate; and the observed differences in average returns between value and growth stocks (the value
premium). Jointly replicating these patterns has proven challenging in existing representative-agent
general equilibrium models. These results depend on three key features of our model: technology
advances that are embodied in new capital goods, incomplete market for ideas, and preferences
over relative consumption. Restricted versions of the model that eliminate any one of these three
features have difficulty replicating the empirical properties of asset returns, and especially the
cross-sectional differences in stock returns between value and growth firms. In sum, these three
features are responsible for generating sufficient displacement risk in the model, and ensuring that
households care sufficiently about displacement to endure that the embodied shock carries a negative
risk price.
In addition to the features of the data that we target, we evaluate the model’s other implications
for asset returns. The model generates realistic predictions about income and wealth inequality,
especially at the top of the distribution. Importantly, the model replicates the observed patterns of
comovement between value and growth stocks (the value factor) and the failure of the Capital Asset
Pricing Model (CAPM) and the Consumption CAPM to explain the value premium.2 In addition,
2The value ‘puzzle’ consists of two robust empirical patterns. First, firms with higher than average valuations–
growthfirms–experiencelowerthanaveragefuturereturns. Thesedifferencesinaveragereturnsareeconomicallylarge
andcomparableinmagnitudetotheequitypremium. Thisfindinghasproventobepuzzlingbecausegrowthfirmsare
typicallyconsideredtoberiskierandthereforeshouldcommandhigheraveragereturns. Existingassetpricingmodels,
such as the CAPM and the CCAPM, largely fail to price the cross-section of value and growth firms. Second, stock
returns of firms with similar valuation ratios exhibit comovement, even across industries. These common movements
aretypicallyunrelatedtothefirms’exposurestofluctuationsintheoverallmarketvalue. See FamaandFrench(1992,
1993) for more details. Similar patterns to the returns of high market to book firms have been documented for firms
with high past investment (Titman, Wei, and Xie, 2004), price-earnings ratios (Rosenberg, Reid, and Lanstein, 1985),
laborhiring(Belo,Lin,andBazdresch,2014),newshareissuance(LoughranandRitter,1995). Thestrongpatternsof
return comovement among firms with similar characteristics have motivated the use of empirical factor models (Fama
and French, 1993). However, the economic origins of these empirical return factors are yet to be fully understood.
Our work can thus be viewed as providing a micro-foundation for including the value factor in reduced-form asset
pricing models.
2