NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THREE BRANCHES OF THEORIES OF FINANCIAL CRISES
Itay Goldstein
Assaf Razin
Working Paper 18670
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18670
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2013
Previously circulate as "Review of Theories of Financial Crises". The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Itay Goldstein and Assaf Razin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Three Branches of Theories of Financial Crises
Itay Goldstein and Assaf Razin
NBER Working Paper No. 18670
January 2013, Revised September 2013
JEL No. E61,F3,F33,G01,G1
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we review three branches of theoretical literature on financial crises. The first one deals
with banking crises originating from coordination failures among bank creditors. The second one deals
with frictions in credit and interbank markets due to problems of moral hazard and adverse selection.
The third one deals with currency crises. We discuss the evolutions of these branches of the literature
and how they have been integrated recently to explain the turmoil in the world economy around the
East Asian Crises and in the last few years. We discuss the relation of the models to the empirical
evidence and their ability to guide policies to avoid or mitigate future crises.
Itay Goldstein
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
itayg@wharton.upenn.edu
Assaf Razin
Department of Economics
Cornell University
Uris 422
Ithaca, NY 14853
and Cornell University
and also NBER
ar256@cornell.edu

1. Introduction
Financial and monetary systems are designed to improve the efficiency of real
activity and resource allocation. A large empirical literature in financial economics
provides evidence connecting financial development to economic growth and efficiency;
see, for example, Levine (1997) and Rajan and Zingales (1998). In theory, financial
institutions and markets enable the efficient transmission of resources from savers to the
best investment opportunities. In addition, they also provide risk sharing possibilities, so
that investors can take more risk and advance the economy. Finally, they enable
aggregation of information that provides guidance for more efficient investment
decisions. Relatedly, monetary arrangements, such as the European Monetary Union
(EMU) and many others in the past, are created to facilitate free trade and financial
transactions among countries, thereby improving real efficiency.
A financial crisis – marked by the failure of banks, and/or the sharp decrease in
credit and trade, and/or the collapse of an exchange rate regime, etc. – generates extreme
disruption of these normal functions of financial and monetary systems, thereby hurting
the efficiency of the economy. Unfortunately, financial crises have happened frequently
throughout history and, despite constant attempts to eliminate them, it seems unlikely that
they will not repeat in the future. Clearly, the last few years have been characterized by
great turmoil in the world’s financial systems, which even today, more than five years
after its onset, does not seem to have a clear solution. Between the meltdown of leading
financial institutions in the US and Europe, the sharp decrease in lending and trading
activities, and the ongoing challenge to the European Monetary Union, these events
2

exhibit ingredients from several types of financial crises in recent history: banking crises,
credit and market freezes, and currency crises.3
Over the years, many theories have been developed to explain financial crises and
guide policymakers in trying to prevent and mitigate them. In this article, we review
models from three different branches of literature that have been developed more or less
in parallel: banking crises and panics, credit frictions and market freezes, and currency
crises. At a later stage, mainly following the East Asian crisis in the late 1990s, these
literatures have become more integrated, as the events in the real world proved that the
different types of crises can occur together and amplify each other in different ways. Our
article is not meant to be a comprehensive survey of the financial-crises literature. The
literature is too big to be meaningfully covered in full in one survey. In fact, there is not
even consensus on what this literature includes, as different people have different views
on what constitutes a financial crisis. Instead, we attempt to present basic frameworks
linked to the broad topic of financial crises and describe some of the directions in which
they influenced the literature and the way they relate to recent events. We also address
some of the policy challenges and shed light on them using the analytical tools at hand.
We hope that this survey will be helpful in highlighting the basic underlying forces that
have been studied in the literature for over three decades in a simple and transparent way,
and will be an easy and accessible source to the many economists who are now interested
in exploring the topic of financial crises following the events of the last few years.
In Section 2, we review the literature on banking crises and panics. This literature is
perhaps most directly linked to the concept of crises. For example, Gorton (2013) writes
3 Many authors provide detailed descriptions of the events of the last few years. For example, see
Brunnermeier (2009) and Gorton (2010).
3