NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IT PAYS TO SET THE MENU:
MUTUAL FUND INVESTMENT OPTIONS IN 401(K) PLANS
Veronika K. Pool
Clemens Sialm
Irina Stefanescu
Working Paper 18764
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18764
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013
We thank Pierluigi Balduzzi, Keith Brown, Lauren Cohen, Van Harlow, Frank de Jong, Olivia Mitchell,
Jonathan Reuter, Paul Schultz, Laura Starks, Steve Utkus, Marno Verbeek, Scott Yonker, and seminar
participants at the American Economic Association Meeting in San Diego, DePaul University, Indiana
University, INSEAD, the IU-Notre Dame-Purdue Summer Symposium, the NETSPAR spring workshop,
the Nova Finance Conference on Pensions and Retirement, and the Second MSUFCU Conference
on Financial Institutions and Investments at Michigan State University for helpful comments, and
NETSPAR, Indiana University, and the University of Texas at Austin for financial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Veronika K. Pool, Clemens Sialm, and Irina Stefanescu. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

It Pays to Set the Menu: Mutual Fund Investment Options in 401(k) Plans
Veronika K. Pool, Clemens Sialm, and Irina Stefanescu
NBER Working Paper No. 18764
February 2013
JEL No. G02,G11,G23,H55
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates whether mutual fund families acting as trustees of 401(k) plans display favoritism
toward their own funds. Using a hand-collected dataset on retirement investment options, we show
that poorly-performing funds are less likely to be removed from and more likely to be added to a 401(k)
menu if they are affiliated with the plan trustee. We find no evidence that plan participants undo this
affiliation bias through their investment choices. Finally, the subsequent performance of poorly-performing
affiliated funds indicates that these trustee decisions are not information driven and are costly to retirement
savers.
Veronika K. Pool Irina Stefanescu
Kelley School of Business Kelley School of Business
Indiana University Indiana University
1309 E 10th Street 1309 E. Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 Bloomington, IN 47405
vkpool@indiana.edu stefanei@indiana.edu
Clemens Sialm
University of Texas at Austin
McCombs School of Business
1 University Station; B6600
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
clemens.sialm@mccombs.utexas.edu

1 Introduction
Employer-sponsored 401(k) accounts have gained significant importance around the world.
In the United States, the value of 401(k) assets reached $3.5 trillion at the end of the third
quarter of 2012.1 Their growth represents important business opportunities for mutual funds
as they manage approximately half of the 401(k) investment pool. Moreover, mutual fund
families often serve as trustees of these defined contribution (DC) plans and play an active
role in creating the menu of investment options for the plans’ participants.2
While the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) requires trustees to
beprudentinselectingasuitablesetofinvestmentchoicesfortheir401(k)clients, mutualfund
trustees have a competing interest to maximize investments in their own proprietary funds.
Surprisingly, little is known about whether and how these conflicting incentives influence the
menu of options in 401(k) plans. This is concerning given that DC accounts are a main
source of retirement income for many of the beneficiaries. Since retirement savings compound
over long horizons, any inefficiency or trustee bias in this setting can significantly affect the
employees’ wealth at retirement and thus have important welfare consequences for society in
general.
Inthispaper,weprovidethefirststudyoftheconflictingincentivesofmutualfundtrustees.
Focusing on fund entry and exit, we hypothesize that if the trustees’ decisions are driven by
their own financial interests, mutual fund trustees may be more inclined to include their own
funds in the fund lineup – even when more suitable options are available from other fund
families – and subsequently more reluctant to remove them. Moreover, they may also be less
1Federal Reserve Statistical Releases and Investment Company Institute (ICI).
2Thetrusteeistheentitywhoholdstheassetsoftheplanintrust. Trusteesaretypicallyappointedbythe
employer who sponsors the plan and have a fiduciary responsibility to administer the plan for the exclusive
benefit of plan members. They must act in accordance with reasonable standards of prudence and offer a
diversified set of options to participants and sponsors. Cohen and Schmidt (2009) describe in detail the role
of the trustee in the decision process.
1

sensitive to the performance of these affiliated funds when making menu altering decisions.
To investigate this favoritism hypothesis, we hand collect information on the menu of
mutual fund options offered in a large sample of defined contribution plans for the period 1998
to 2009 from annual filings of Form 11-K with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC). Our sample includes plans that are trusteed by a mutual fund family as well as plans
with non-mutual fund trustees. Most 401(k) plans in our sample that have a mutual fund
trusteeadoptanopen architecture wherebyinvestmentoptionsincludenotonlyfundsfromthe
trustee’s family but from other mutual fund families as well. Therefore, an interesting feature
of our dataset is that a given fund often contemporaneously appears on several 401(k) menus
thatareadministeredbydifferenttrustees. Thismeansthatopenarchitectureallowsthesame
fund to be an affiliated fund (“trustee fund”) on some menus and an unaffiliated fund (“non-
trustee fund”) on others. This data feature provides us with a unique identification strategy
and allows us to contrast how the very same fund is viewed across two different menus: one
on which it is a trustee fund and another on which it is not.
We find that despite their fiduciary responsibilities, trustees have a strong preference for
their own funds. Trustee funds are less likely to be removed from the plan across the board.
Moreover, the biggest difference between how trustee and non-trustee funds are treated on
the menu occurs for the worst performing funds, which have been shown to exhibit significant
performance persistence (Carhart, 1997). For example, mutual funds ranked in the lowest
decile based on past performance (among the universe of funds in the same style category
over the prior 36 months), are approximately two and a half times more likely to be deleted
from those menus on which they are unaffiliated with the trustee than from those where they
are affiliated with the trustee.
Similarly, we find that trustees are substantially more likely to add their own funds to
the menu across all performance deciles. Furthermore, trustee fund additions exhibit lower
2