NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GAMING IN AIR POLLUTION DATA? LESSONS FROM CHINA
Yuyu Chen
Ginger Zhe Jin
Naresh Kumar
Guang Shi
Working Paper 18729
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18729
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2013
This paper is published in The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, Advances, Volume 13,
Issue 3, 2012. We thank Editor Eric Zitzewitz, two anonymous referees, Douglas Almond, Hanming
Fang, Erica Li, and the participants at the 2011 NBER China Group meeting, the 2012 International
Industrial Organization Conference, and the 2012 NBER conference on public finance issues in China
for constructive comments. Financial support from Peking University is gratefully acknowledged.
All errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Yuyu Chen, Ginger Zhe Jin, Naresh Kumar, and Guang Shi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Gaming in Air Pollution Data? Lessons from China
Yuyu Chen, Ginger Zhe Jin, Naresh Kumar, and Guang Shi
NBER Working Paper No. 18729
January 2013, Revised January 2013
JEL No. D8,H7,I18,L3,L5
ABSTRACT
Protecting the environment during economic growth is a challenge facing every country. This paper
focuses on two regulatory measures that China has adopted to incentivize air quality improvement:
publishing a daily air pollution index (API) for major cities since 2000 and linking the API to performance
evaluations of local governments. In particular, China defines a day with an API at or below 100 as
a blue sky day. Starting in 2003, a city with at least 80% blue sky days in a calendar year (among other
criteria) qualified for the “national environmental protection model city” award. This cutoff was increased
to 85% in 2007.
Using officially reported API data from 37 large cities during 2000-2009, we find a significant discontinuity
at the threshold of 100 and this discontinuity is of a greater magnitude after 2003. Moreover, we find
that the model cities were less likely to report API right above 100 when they were close to the targeted
blue sky days in the fourth quarter of the year when or before they won the model city award. That
being said, we also find significant correlation of API with two alternative measures of air pollution
– namely visibility as reported by the China Meteorological Administration (CMA) and Aerosol Optical
Depth (AOD), corrected for meteorological conditions, from NASA satellites. The discontinuity around
100 suggests that count of blue sky days could have been subject to data manipulation; nevertheless,
API does contain useful information about air pollution.
Yuyu Chen Naresh Kumar
Applied Economics Department Department of Epidemiology and Public Health
Guanghua School of Management Miller School of Medicine
Peking University University of Miami
Beijing, 100871 naresh-kumar@uiowa.edu
Chenyuyu@gsm.pku.edu.cn
Guang Shi
Ginger Zhe Jin Rm 219
University of Maryland Development Research Center
Department of Economics of the State Council of China
3115F Tydings Hall Chaonei Street, Dongcheng District
College Park, MD 20742-7211 Beijing, China, 100010
and NBER shiguangpku@gmail.com
jin@econ.umd.edu

1. Introduction
Protecting the environment during economic growth is a challenge facing
every country. Because private sectors may not fully internalize the environmental
consequences of their activity, environmental protectionists have called for
government regulation. Existing research has examined the effect of
environmental regulations on firm behavior1, environmental measures2, and health
outcomes3, but few studies look at the policies that motivate local governments to
reduce pollution.4 Nevertheless, a great number of international treaties have
been established, with the assumption that each targeted government, facing the
incentives specified in an international treaty, can effectively reduce pollution in
or near its territory. Unfortunately, any policy that motivates local governments to
reduce pollution can also motivate them to report better outcomes on paper,
especially if it is more costly to make actual improvements, if gaming is difficult
to detect, and if enforcement relies on self-reporting due to a lack of
disaggregated objective data.
China provides a unique opportunity to study local government incentives
in environmental protection. While China has enjoyed steady GDP growth for the
past 30 years, 16 of the world’s top 20 most polluted cities were located in China
as of 2007.5 Given the regional decentralized authoritarian (RDA) regime in
China, Xu (2011) argues that local government officials have an incentive to
sacrifice environmental protection in order to boost local GDP growth. This is
because local government leaders are appointed by the central government based
on local performance, and GDP growth is easier to measure than environmental
conditions. To be fair, the central government is aware of the problem and has
1 Among others, Henderson (1996), Becker and Henderson (2000), Greenstone (2002), and List et
al. (2003) examine the effects of environmental regulations on firm entry, exit, and size change in
the US. A number of other studies focus on the effect of environmental regulations on trade flow,
capital flow, and international pollution havens, for example, Dean, Lovely and Wang (2009),
Ederington, Levinson and Minier (2005), Keller and Levinson (2002), Wheeler (2004), and Zeng
and Zhao (2009).
2 For example, Greenstone (2004) studies the impact of the US Clean Air Act on sulfur dioxide,
Davis (2008) studies the effect of driving restrictions on air quality in Mexico City, and Chen et al.
(2011) study the effect of environmental measures adopted in the name of the 2008 Olympic
Games on Beijing’s air quality.
3 For example, Chay and Greenstone (2003), Currie and Neidell (2005), and Currie, Neidell and
Schmieder (2009) study the impact of air pollution on infant health and mortality; Chay, Dobkin
and Greenstone (2003) examine the effect of the 1970 Clean Air Act on adult mortality.
4At the country level, Congleton (1992) and Murdoch and Sandler (1997) show that democratic
countries are more likely to support and enforce chlorofluorocarbon emissions control under the
Montreal Protocol. See Oats and Portney (2003) for a review of the political economy of
environmental policy.
5http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2007/06/06/eveningnews/main2895653.shtml, citing the World
Bank's "The Little Green Data Book" (May 2007, ISBN 0-8213-6967-9).
3

incorporated some environmental measures into the performance evaluation
criteria. Lessons learned from these environmental incentives are likely to have
important implications for crafting other domestic and international policies that
target local governments for environmental protection.
This paper focuses on two regulatory measures that China has adopted to
incentivize local governments to improve air quality: one is publishing daily air
pollution index (API) for 86 cities since 2000; the other is linking the API to
performance evaluation of local governments. In particular, China defines a day
with an API at or below 100 as a blue sky day. Starting in 2003, a city with at
least 80% blue sky days in a calendar year (among other criteria) qualified for the
“national environmental protection model city” award. This API cutoff for a
model city increased further to 85% in 2007. While these incentive policies were
adopted to reduce air pollution, they also provided incentives to game the API
data, as the API data are reported by local governments and misreporting is less
costly than actual improvement of air quality.
Using the officially reported API data from 37 large cities during 2000-
2009, we show that there is a significant discontinuity at the threshold of 100,
despite the fact that API is calculated as a city-day average for multiple pollutants
across multiple monitoring stations. This discontinuity is of a greater magnitude
after 2003, and model cities are less likely to report API right above 100 when
they face more pressure to reach the cutoff by the end of the year in which and the
year before they won the award. That being said, we also find significant and
stable correlation between the API with two alternative measures of air pollution:
visibility (reported by the China Meteorological Administration, CMA) and
Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD) derived from the NASA satellites. These findings
suggest that the count of blue sky days may be subject to data manipulation, but
the reported API does contain useful information about air pollution.
We also show that, controlling for weather, day fixed effects, and city-
specific factors, there is no statistically significant improvement in the API,
visibility, or the AOD immediately before or after a city won the model city
award. This implies that model city status is not awarded to acknowledge
significant air quality improvement within a city, which could be explained by
either the model city policy providing little incentive to improve air quality or the
policy encouraging every city to improve on similar scales regardless of model
city award status. Both are consistent with the fact that air quality is only a small
part of model city award evaluation and the model city award is only one of many
incentive tools facing local governments.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes data and
policies on blue sky days and model city evaluation. Section 3 reviews the
literature. Section 4 presents evidence of the discontinuity of the API, the
particulate matter inferred from the API (PM ), visibility, and the AOD. Section 5
10
4