NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COMPETITION AMONG THE EXCHANGES BEFORE THE SEC:
WAS THE NYSE A NATURAL HEGEMON?
Eugene N. White
Working Paper 18712
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18712
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2013
I wish to thank the participants of the 2009 Utrecht World Economic History Congress session on
“Stock Exchange Microstructure and Regulation” and two anonymous referees for their helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Eugene N. White. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Competition Among the Exchanges before the SEC: Was the NYSE a Natural Hegemon?
Eugene N. White
NBER Working Paper No. 18712
January 2013
JEL No. G18,N21,N22
ABSTRACT
Improved information technology and higher volume should drive orders to be concentrated in one
market, lowering the costs of transactions. However, the opposite occurred during the bull market
of the 1920s when rapid technological change spawned a flood of new issues. This paper employs
newly recovered data for 1900-1933 on the volume and seat prices of regional exchanges to examine
how these rivals successfully competed with the NYSE, leading to its relative decline at the zenith
of the market. The history of U.S. exchanges reveals that the tendency towards concentration of trading
is periodically reversed when new industries, whose technologies are risky and unfamiliar, are more
easily accommodated by existing or new rivals to the dominant exchange
Eugene N. White
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
and NBER
white@economics.rutgers.edu

Why isn’t there one market for trading securities? Should the markets of the
European Union be merged into one? Who will win the struggle for hegemony if not
monopoly in the United States, the NYSE or Nasdaq? The complicated contemporary
regulation of markets and the apparent endogeneity of key elements in microstructure
make identification of an optimal architecture difficult. In this paper, I look back to the
largely unregulated pre-Securities Exchange Commission era in the United States. I
focus on the years between 1900 and 1933, when there was vigorous competition among
exchanges during a period of rapid technological change, both in production technologies
and the information technologies used by the financial markets. Surprisingly, instead of
leading to a concentration of trading in the largest market, there was fragmentation. The
NYSE was largest and most transparent market, but it struggled with other established
markets and new rivals who attracted volume by their willingness to list new issues and
quickly adjust their microstructure.
This development followed a pattern that had emerged in the nineteenth century
when new industries, whose technologies were risky or difficult to evaluate, were not
quickly accommodated by the dominant exchange. The more lenient listing and
disclosure requirements of existing rival exchanges and new entrants provided these
firms with easier access to the capital markets, while the dominant exchange lost market
share and scrambled to catch up
This paper begins with a survey of the theoretical determinants of the choice of
trading venue in Section I, which serves to highlight the factors that contributed to the
continuing strength of rivals to the dominant exchange. Section II describes newly
recovered seat prices for most early twentieth century U.S. stock exchanges. This data
2

permit the construction of a measure of the aggregate value of the exchanges (the price of
a seat times the number of seats) and their market shares. While measures of trading
volume can provide a measure of an exchange’s market share over a specific span of
time, the aggregate value of an exchange is a forward looking measure, reflecting the
present discounted value of brokers’ access to the floor of the exchange, and hence
expectations of the exchange’s future competitiveness. Section III provides a narrative of
the evolution of competing exchanges from the early nineteenth century to World War I,
where there is less comparable data but a pattern for trading among the exchanges of
concentration-dispersal-concentration was already evident. Finally, Section IV examines
the struggle among the exchanges in the boom years of the 1920s. It details the
difficulties that the dominant NYSE faced during a period of rapid economic growth and
technological change. This evidence suggests that while there are strong forces that
concentrate orders on one exchange, as theory suggests, there is no reason to assume that
other exchanges are unnecessary and do not provide vital services to the most dynamic
sectors of the economy. Section V concludes with how the Securities Exchange
Commission (SEC) ended competition between the exchanges.
I. Determinants of the Trading Venue
In the simplest model, trading should be concentrated in one market because of a
network externality (Madhavan, 2000).1 If a security is traded in two markets and order
processing costs are a decreasing function of volume, higher volumes will produce
shorter holding periods and lower inventory costs in a quote-driven market (with market
1 There is a long tradition of treating the NYSE as a monopoly or quasi-monopoly. See Stigler (1964) and
Doede (1967).
3