NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE SUPPLY AND DEMAND FOR SAFE ASSETS
Gary B. Gorton
Guillermo Ordoñez
Working Paper 18732
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18732
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2013
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Gary B. Gorton and Guillermo Ordoñez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Supply and Demand for Safe Assets
Gary B. Gorton and Guillermo Ordoñez
NBER Working Paper No. 18732
January 2013, Revised April 2020
JEL No. E0,E02,E2,E3,E32,E4,E41,G01,G12,G2
ABSTRACT
Safe assets are demanded to smooth consumption across states (both intertemporally and in cross-section).
Some of these assets are supplied publicly (government bonds) and some are created and supplied
privately (such as mortgagebacked securities and asset-backed securities). Private assets are created
endogenously when the supply of government bonds is low. Private assets are used as collateral and
come in heterogeneous quality. Financial fragility is the probability that a large amount of private
assets are examined, some are found to be of low quality and then some firms cannot get loans. We
characterize the government’s optimal supply of government bonds when considering their effects
on the creation of private assets and on economy-wide fragility. We show that monetary and macroprudential
policies cannot be run in isolation. When there are too many private assets the government should
operate a Bond Exchange Facility that exchanges private assets for public safe assets.
Gary B. Gorton
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu
Guillermo Ordoñez
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Economics
428 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
ordonez@econ.upenn.edu

1 Introduction
Safe assets play an essential role in the economy. A safe asset is an asset whose real
value does not fluctuate in response to different shocks. In other words, the level
of consumption that holding a safe asset allows is insulated from potential shocks.
In this paper we explore the reasons that safe assets are demanded and we explore
the central bank’s role in their provision. We show that monetary policy cannot be
separatedfrommacroprudentialpolicy.
The demand for safe assets comes from two needs: agents wanting to smooth con-
sumption: over time, inter-temporal consumption smoothing and in cross-section across
states of nature. For instance, lenders want to equalize consumption over different
realizations of productivity, and so a safe asset is demanded as collateral. The supply
of safe assets comes from two sources: public and private. Public safe assets are gov-
ernment bonds, promises that the government can make by relying on its taxation
power. Private safe assets (such as real estate, mortgage-backed securities, etc) take
the form of promises that private agents can make by transforming non-pledgeable
and perishable goods into non-perishable and pledgeable assets. As private safe as-
sets may be of heterogeneous quality, their safety (the stability of their real value)
depends on information about such quality not being revealed. Thus, private assets
aresafeaslongastheyareinformation-insensitive.
Issues surrounding safe assets have become increasingly pressing since the trans-
formation of the financial system from a retail-based banking system to a wholesale
bankingsystem,startinginthelate1970s. Gorton,Lewellen,andMetrick(2010)show
that as a percentage of the total privately-produced safe debt, demand deposits have
fallenfromabout80%inthe1950’sto31%now. Incontrast,short-termmoneymarket
instruments rose from 11% to 21% and AAA asset-backed and mortgage-backed se-
curitiesrose from zeroto 18%. More generally,the “shadowbanking system,”which
is the sum of mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities and money-like debt in-
struments,grewfrom11%to38%,gettinglargerinlevelsthandemanddeposits. This
transformationseemstobepermanent.
In this new financial landscape, U.S. Treasuries are more important than previously.
Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012 and 2015) show that Treasuries have a
convenience yield, arising from their safety property. Gorton, Lewellen, and Metrick
(2010), Xie (2012), and Sunderam (2015) show that the private sector produces more
1

private safe assets when the supply of Treasuries declines. Private safe assets, how-
ever,arenotperfectsubstitutesforpublicsafeassetsintermsofsafety,asinformation
about their heterogeneous quality can be produced, increasing the likelihood of a fi-
nancial crisis. This creates a challenge for policies that affect the supply of Treasuries
without considering their effect on financial stability. This is clearly the case for the
central bank, which uses open market operations to exchange one kind of money,
Treasuries, for another kind of money, cash (numeraire in our setting). As we do not
addressfiscalpolicyinthispaper,weusetheterms”centralbank”and”government”
interchangeably.
Thecentralbankfacesaproblemwhen,byimplementingamonetarypolicy,itwants
to reduce the supply of Treasuries but does not want to trigger information acqui-
sition about the quality of private collateral, that may trigger a financial crisis as
information-insensitivecollateralbecomesinformation-sensitive(asinDang,Gorton,
and Holmstro¨m (2013)). In this setting, macroprudential policy cannot be separated
from monetary policy, contrary to the existing literature, e.g., see Svensson (2018)
andBernanke(2018). Thecentralbankneedsanothertool. Itneedstobeabletoswap
Treasuriesforprivatesafeassetsinordertocopewithtwogoals.
To build these ideas and identify the role of each element, we proceed in steps. We
first explore the roles for safe assets assuming that only the government supplies
thembyissuinggovernmentbonds. Weshowthatthegovernmentmayfaceatrade-
off: providingbondstoserveascollateralinagivenperiodmaydistortconsumption
smoothing across periods. We solve the constrained planner’s problem and charac-
terize the optimal amount of bonds that the government should provide to optimize
this trade-off. We show that, if the market for bonds is competitive, the optimum is
implemented when the return on bonds is zero. This implies that the convenience
yield (here, the departure from zero returns) is a good signal that the government
canexploittoguidepotentialmistakesinthesupplyofbonds. Intuitively,returnson
bondsarepositivewhenthereisanabundanceofbonds(thenthegovernmentneeds
to compensate agents to hold those bonds) and reducing the supply would improve
intertemporalconsumptionsmoothing. Incontrast,ifreturnsarenegative(apositive
convenienceyield)whenthereisscarcityofbonds. Inthiscase,increasingthesupply
wouldoptimallyprovidemorecollateral.
We then introduce the possibility that agents create private safe assets. At a cost,
agentscantransformnon-pledgeableandperishablegoodsintopledgeableandnon-
2