NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THESE ARE THE GOOD OLD DAYS:
FOREIGN ENTRY AND THE MEXICAN BANKING SYSTEM
Stephen H. Haber
Aldo Musacchio
Working Paper 18713
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18713
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2013
Research for this project was supported by the Hoover Institution’s Task Force on Property Rights.
Research assistance was ably provided by Karma Galay, Andrew Hall, Andre Martinez Fritscher, and
Glen Weyl. Charlie Calomiris, Latika Chaudhary, Robert Cull, Arturo J. Galindo, José Luis González
Anaya, Noel Maurer, Victor Menaldo, Armando Razo, Liliana Rojas Suarez and the Economia Panel
(LACEA) made helpful suggestions to an earlier draft of this work. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Stephen H. Haber and Aldo Musacchio. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

These Are the Good Old Days: Foreign Entry and the Mexican Banking System
Stephen H. Haber and Aldo Musacchio
NBER Working Paper No. 18713
January 2013
JEL No. G18,G21,N26,N46
ABSTRACT
In 1997, the Mexican government reversed long-standing policies and allowed foreign banks to purchase
Mexico’s largest commercial banks and relaxed restrictions on the founding of new, foreign-owned
banks. The result has been a dramatic shift in the ownership structure of Mexico’s banks. For instance,
while in 1991 only one percent of bank assets in Mexico were foreign owned, today they control 74
percent of assets. In no other country in the world has the penetration of foreign banks been as rapid
or as far-reaching as in Mexico. In this work we examine some of the important implications of foreign
bank entry for social welfare in Mexico. Did liberalization lead to an increase (or decrease) in the supply
of credit? Did liberalization lead to an increase (or decrease) in the cost of credit? Did liberalization
lead to an increase (or decrease) in the stability of the banking system?
In order to answer these questions, we must first ask, "increase (or decrease), measured on what basis?"
There are, in fact, two distinct conceptual frameworks through which one can assess the impact of
foreign bank entry. One is concerned with measuring the short-run impacts of foreign entry on credit
abundance, pricing, and observable stability using reduced form regressions. The other is an institutional
economics conception of how to measure performance. It is focused on understanding whether foreign
entry gave rise to difficult-to-reverse changes in the political economy of bank regulation, which will
affect competition and stability in the long term, outside the period that may be observed empirically.
We employ both conceptions in this paper.
Stephen H. Haber
Dept of Political Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6044
haber@leland.stanford.edu
Aldo Musacchio
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 279
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
amusacchio@hbs.edu

SUMMARY
THESE ARE THE GOOD OLD DAYS:
FOREIGN ENTRY AND THE MEXICAN BANKING SYSTEM
In 1997, the Mexican government reversed long-standing policies and allowed foreign
banks to purchase Mexico’s largest commercial banks and relaxed restrictions on the
founding of new, foreign-owned banks. The result has been a dramatic shift in the ownership
structure of Mexico’s banks. For instance, while in 1991 only one percent of bank assets in
Mexico were foreign owned, today they control 74 percent of assets. In no other country in
the world has the penetration of foreign banks been as rapid or as far-reaching as in Mexico.
In this work we examine some of the important implications of foreign bank entry for social
welfare in Mexico. Did liberalization lead to an increase (or decrease) in the supply of credit?
Did liberalization lead to an increase (or decrease) in the cost of credit? Did liberalization
lead to an increase (or decrease) in the stability of the banking system?
In order to answer these questions, we must first ask, “increase (or decrease),
measured on what basis?” There are, in fact, two distinct conceptual frameworks through
which one can assess the impact of foreign bank entry. One is concerned with measuring the
short-run impacts of foreign entry on credit abundance, pricing, and observable stability using
reduced form regressions. The other is an institutional economics conception of how to
measure performance. It is focused on understanding whether foreign entry gave rise to
difficult-to-reverse changes in the political economy of bank regulation, which will affect
competition and stability in the long term, outside the period that may be observed
empirically. We employ both conceptions in this paper.
2

When we look at the impact of foreign entry using econometrics, the evidence
strongly indicates that Mexico’s banking system is now much more stable. The ratio of non-
performing loans has declined dramatically, while equity ratios have increased. System
stability does not appear to have come at the cost of a decrease in the availability of credit. In
fact, credit to firms and households has increased in real terms. System stability also does not
appear to have come at the cost of higher priced credit. In fact, the evidence suggests that
foreign banks charge lower interest spreads than domestically-owned banks.
When we take a broader, political economy view of the impact of foreign bank entry
in Mexico, the evidence indicates that there if there ever was a “good old days” of Mexican
banking, in which credit was abundant and the system was stable, we are in it. From the
1920s through the 1960s the Mexican banking system was stable, but it provided very modest
amounts of credit to firms and households. Moreover, the stability of the system may have
been an artifact of the ability of commercial banks to shift risk to government-owned
development banks, which is to say that risk was quietly shifted to taxpayers. The banking
system that existed in Mexico from the 1970s until 1997 was characterized by periods of rapid
credit growth, followed by devastating busts, the aftermaths of which were characterized by
very low levels of credit provision. Indeed, the Mexican banking system during this period
was, by the standards of the rest of the world, extraordinarily unstable.
In order to understand the reasons why the Mexican government changed its long-
standing policies against foreign ownership in the late 1990s, we examine the terms of play
between banks and the state in Mexico using the so-called “game of bank bargains” of
Calomiris and Haber (forthcoming), which sees the banking system as a partnership between
3