NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MEASURING MARGIN
Robert L. McDonald
Working Paper 18724
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18724
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2013
Prepared for the NBER Initiative on Systemic Risk and MacroModeling. I am grateful to Markus Brunnermeier,
Arvind Krishnamurthy, Richard Heckinger, John McPartland, and Robert Steigerwald for helpful discussions
and comments, but of course errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
The author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research. Further information
is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18724.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Robert L. McDonald. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Measuring Margin
Robert L. McDonald
NBER Working Paper No. 18724
January 2013
JEL No. G18,G32
ABSTRACT
Policy makers and market participants alike wish to understand the amount, economic significance,
and concentration of derivatives trading activity. This paper suggests that systematic measuring and
reporting of margin by market participants, disaggregated by asset class, would provide more meaningful
insights into derivatives activity. Where margin is not required, it could nevertheless be imputed and
reported. The Dodd-Frank financial reform bill, by contrast, moves away from transparency by granting
non-financial firms an end-user exemption from posting initial margin on their trades. This is economically
equivalent to a borrowing from the counterparty and effectively permits these firms to issue off-balance-sheet
debt.
Robert L. McDonald
Department of Finance Jacobs Center
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Rd.
Evanston, IL 60208-2006
r-mcdonald@northwestern.edu

Measuring Margin
∗
Robert L. McDonald†
April 4, 2012
Abstract
Policy makers and market participants alike wish to understand
the amount, economic significance, and concentration of derivatives
trading activity. This paper suggests that systematic measuring and
reporting of margin by market participants, disaggregated by asset
class,wouldprovidemoremeaningfulinsightsintoderivativesactivity.
Wheremarginisnotrequired,itcouldneverthelessbeimputedandre-
ported. TheDodd-Frankfinancialreformbill,bycontrast,movesaway
from transparency by granting non-financial firms an end-user exemp-
tion from posting initial margin on their trades. This is economically
equivalent to a borrowing from the counterparty and effectively per-
mits these firms to issue off-balance-sheet debt.
1 Introduction
In discussions related to derivatives and regulatory policy, three questions
often arise:
How great is the exposure to derivatives in the aggregate?
•
How is this exposure split across different asset classes?
•
How sensitive is the magnitude of exposure to economic shocks?
•
∗PreparedfortheNBERInitiativeonSystemicRiskandMacroModeling. Iamgrateful
to Markus Brunnermeier, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Richard Heckinger, John McPartland,
andRobertSteigerwaldforhelpfuldiscussionsandcomments,butofcourseerrorsaremy
own.
†ErwinP.NemmersProfessorofFinance,KelloggSchoolofManagement,Northwestern
University. Phone: 847-491-8344, e-mail: r-mcdonald@northwestern.edu
1

Margin—collateral that protects the counterparty against losses from fail-
ure to pay—is an economic measure of exposure that differs by asset and
by the topology of risk. In this paper I discuss the idea that reporting of
margin, disaggregated by product class and by entity, would provide a stan-
dardized measure of the specific net risks being borne with derivatives, and
provide information about entity vulnerabilities to specific market shocks,
along with sector concentrations in particular derivative asset classes.1 The
future configuration of contracts, institutions, trading, and market prac-
tices is difficult to forecast. As markets evolve, routine margin reporting
would provide information about risks potentially helpful to policy makers,
analysts, and market participants.
The Bank of International Settlements (BIS) estimates that at year-end
2010, the outstanding notional amount of over-the-counter (OTC) deriva-
tives was $601 trillion (BIS, 2011). According to the BIS, the vast majority
(77%) of these contracts are interest rate derivatives (with over 10% of this
amount as options), with foreign exchange derivatives second at 9.6% and
credit default swaps (CDS) third at about 5%. Equity contracts represent
about1%andcommoditycontractsabout0.5%. TheBISobtainedthisesti-
mate by surveying market participants and eliminating the double-counting
that results from both A and B reporting the same derivative contract be-
tween A and B.
The BIS estimate is difficult to interpret for several reasons.2 First,
by definition the count includes positions that are effectively offsets. For
example,iftwodealersintheordinarycourseofbusinessenterintoaseriesof
1Acharya (2011) suggests even more detailed reporting on derivatives. Whereas I em-
phasize reporting of existing margins, Acharya (2011) emphasizes reporting of what he
calls “potential exposure”, including additional margin calls due to credit downgrades.
2ISDA (2011) makes two additional adjustments to the BIS number. First, it elimi-
natesforeignexchangeswaps. Second, it reducestheBISestimatefordouble-countingof
interestrateswapsclearedatLCHClearnet. Regardingthetreatmentofforeignexchange
swaps, ISDA subtracts the value of FX swaps on the grounds that these are short-term
and, bizarrely, that they are “older products”. Duffie (2011), in a comment on the Trea-
sury proposal to exempt FX swaps from clearing requirements, expresses skepticism that
foreignexchangeswapsshouldbetreateddifferentlythanotherderivatives. Regardingthe
treatment of cleared swaps, the adjustment for double-counting arises from the observa-
tionthatasingleswappresentedtoaclearinghousebecomestwoswaps,oneeachbetween
the original counterparties and the clearinghouse. Clearing therefore leads to an increase
in the measured notional value of swaps. This is correct, but it is also true that the use
of a clearinghouse does create new counterparty relationships for a given contract. Both
the FX and clearing adjustments illustrate the limited usefulness of aggregate numbers.
Disaggregated statistics permit the statistical consumer to make whatever adjustments
seem appropriate for the analysis at hand.
2