NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
NUMERICAL SOLUTION OF DYNAMIC PORTFOLIO OPTIMIZATION WITH
TRANSACTION COSTS
Yongyang Cai
Kenneth L. Judd
Rong Xu
Working Paper 18709
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18709
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2013
Cai and Judd gratefully acknowledge NSF support (SES-0951576) We thank Walter Murray, Michael
Saunders, Sunil Kumar, Benjamin Van Roy and Gerd Infanger for comments on earlier versions of
this work. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Yongyang Cai, Kenneth L. Judd, and Rong Xu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Numerical Solution of Dynamic Portfolio Optimization with Transaction Costs
Yongyang Cai, Kenneth L. Judd, and Rong Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 18709
January 2013
JEL No. C61,C63,G11
ABSTRACT
We apply numerical dynamic programming to multi-asset dynamic portfolio optimization problems
with proportional transaction costs. Examples include problems with one safe asset plus two to six
risky stocks, and seven to 360 trading periods in a finite horizon problem. These examples show that
it is now tractable to solve such problems.
Yongyang Cai Rong Xu
Hoover Institution Department of Management Science and Engineering
Stanford University Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305 Stanford, CA 94305, USA
yycai@stanford.edu rongxu06@gmail.com
Kenneth L. Judd
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
kennethjudd@mac.com

1 Introduction
Dynamic management of portfolios is a critical part of any investment strat-
egy by individuals and firms. Standard theory assumes that there is no cost
to rebalancing a portfolio but transaction costs are not negligible in real
markets. Not only are there transaction fees such as brokerage expenses
but the presence of a bid-ask spread creates a transaction cost to a trader.
These costs may be small, but the frequency of rebalancing is, theoretically,
high. Therefore, any examination of real-world dynamic portfolio manage-
ment needs to consider these frictions.
Multi-stage portfolio optimization problems with transaction costs as-
sume that there are k risky assets (“stocks”) and/or a riskless asset (“bank
account” paying a fixed interest rate r) traded during the period [0,T]. In
our discrete-time analysis, portfolio adjustments are made at N fixed times
in [0,T], 0 = t < t < ··· < t < t = T. Trades are made to maximize
0 1 N−1 N
the investor’s expected utility over terminal wealth (T is the terminal time)
and/or consumption during [0,T]. We will examine only the case of propor-
tional transaction costs. If the major transaction cost is the bid-ask spread,
then proportional transaction costs are the correct case to study.
Multi-stage portfolio optimization problems with transaction costs have
been studied in many papers. The problem with one risky asset has been
well studied; see Zabel (1973), Constantinides (1976, 1986), Gennotte and
Jung (1994), and Boyle and Lin (1997). The key insight is that transaction
costs create a “no-trade region” (NTR); that is, no trading is done if the
current portfolio is inside the no-trade region, and otherwise the investor
trades to some point on the boundary of the no-trade region. Kamin (1975)
considered the case with only two risky assets. Constantinides (1979) and
Abrams and Karmarkar (1980) established some properties of the NTR for
multiple assets, but present only numerical examples with one safe and one
risky asset. Brown and Smith (2011) evaluated some heuristic strategies and
their bounds based on simulation, but their method cannot give the optimal
portfolios.
Inthecontinuous-timeversion,therearemanypapersabouttheportfolio
2

optimization problem with transaction costs with one or two risky assets;
see Davis and Norman (1990), Duffie and Sun (1990), Akian et al. (1996),
Janecek and Shreve (2004), Liu (2004), and Goodman and Ostrov (2010).
Muthuraman and Kumar (2006, 2008) gave numerical examples at most
three risky assets. Muthuraman and Zha (2008) provided a computational
scheme that combines simulation with the boundary update procedure, and
presented some computational results with k ≥ 3. However, the presence of
simulation implies that the boundary of the NTR is not precisely computed.
To the best of our knowledge, when the number of correlated risky assets
is bigger than three and T ≥ 6, our DP method is the first one to explic-
itly give good numerical solutions with transaction costs and general utility
functions.
2 Portfolio Models
Assumethattherearekriskyassets("stocks")andonerisklessasset("bond")
available for investment. The investor’s objective is to maximize the ex-
pected utility at the terminal time T. In [0,T], there are N + 1 stages,
0 = t < t < ··· < t < t = T. At each stage t (for i = 0,...,N −1),
0 1 N−1 N i
the investor has an opportunity to reallocate the portfolio, which will incur
transaction costs. For simplicity, we assume these stages are equally sepa-
rated with a unit length of time, and then we use t = i as the i-th stage in
this paper.
Let R = (R ,...,R )(cid:62) be the random one-period return vector of the
1 k
stocks, and R be the return of the bond. The portfolio fraction for asset
f
i at the beginning of period t right before reallocation is denoted x , and
ti
let x = (x ,...,x )(cid:62). Let W be the total wealth at the beginning of
t t,1 t,k t
period t right before reallocation. The difference between the total wealth
and the wealth invested in stocks is invested in the bond. Let δ W denote
t,i t
the amount of dollars for buying or selling part of the i-th stock at stage t,
expressed as a fraction of wealth, while δ > 0 means buying, and δ < 0
t,i t,i
means selling. We assume that f(δ W ) = τ|δ W | with a constant τ > 0
t,i t t,i t
is the transaction cost function for buying or selling part of the i-th stock
3