NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EMPIRICAL DETERMINANTS OF INTERTEMPORAL CHOICE
Jeffrey R. Brown
Zoran Ivković(cid:0)
Scott Weisbenner
Working Paper 18755
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18755
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013
We thank Malcolm Baker, Victor Borgy, Stephen Brown, Joshua Coval, Steve Dimmock, Luigi Guiso,
Ravi Jagannathan, David Laibson, Lubos Pastor, Jeffrey Pontiff, Andrew Samwick, Clemens Sialm,
Chester Spatt, and Peter Tufano for helpful discussions. We also thank seminar participants at Boğaziçi
University, KAIST, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore Management University, UCLA,
University of Illinois at Chicago, University of Melbourne, University of New South Wales, and University
of Sydney for their feedback. Finally, we thank participants at the 2011 EFA Annual Meeting, the
2012 NBER Summer Institute Social Security Workshop, and the 2012 Financial Research Association
Meeting for their insights. This research was supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration
through grant #10-M-98363-1-02 to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the SSA
Retirement Research Consortium. The findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the author(s)
and do not represent the views of the SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. Institutional Review Board (IRB) permission was granted to conduct
this research at both Michigan State University and the University of Illinois.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Jeffrey R. Brown, Zoran Ivković(cid:0), and Scott Weisbenner. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Empirical Determinants of Intertemporal Choice
Jeffrey R. Brown, Zoran Ivković(cid:0), and Scott Weisbenner
NBER Working Paper No. 18755
February 2013
JEL No. D12,D91,H31,H55
ABSTRACT
We study the empirical determinants of intertemporal choice by analyzing a unique decision Croatian
retirees made recently about whether to accept an immediate pension payment or a larger stream of
delayed payments. Individual decisions are correlated in sensible ways with income, liquidity constraints,
longevity expectations, and other covariates. Attitudes toward government also matter: those less confident
that the government will honor its commitments are more likely to take the immediate stream of payments.
Those who believe it is important to receive “the full amount due, no matter how long it takes” are
substantially more likely to take the delayed payments.
Jeffrey R. Brown Scott Weisbenner
Department of Finance University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Department of Finance
515 East Gregory Drive 340 Wohlers Hall, MC-706
Champaign, IL 61820 1206 South Sixth Street
and NBER Champaign, IL 61820
brownjr@illinois.edu and NBER
weisbenn@illinois.edu
Zoran Ivkovi(cid:0)ć
Department of Finance
Michigan State University
315 Eppley Center
East Lansing, MI 48824
ivkovich@bus.msu.edu

The canonical consumption-based model, dating back to at least Samuelson
(1937), captures the determinants of intertemporal decisions primarily through a single
parameter—the discount rate. Discount rates are not directly observable, and many
studies have attempted to measure implicit discount rates, with widely varying results.
For example, whereas several efforts to measure discount rates from surveys and
experiments have found evidence of very low (and even negative) discount rates,1
several econometric studies of actual behavior have estimated discount rates that are
extremely large.2 Barsky et al. (1997) note that “one possible explanation of the finding
of high subjective discount rates in the econometric work is the difficulty of controlling
for features of the economic environment facing agents, such as liquidity constraints
and the need for precautionary savings.” A closely related focus of this literature is to
examine how discount rates vary with various demographic characteristics such as
income, education, and race.3 Many of these studies, however, have been hampered by
methodological concerns, ranging from sample selection, the hypothetical nature of the
choice (in the case of some surveys and experiments), and a host of omitted variables.
In this paper, we provide new evidence on the empirical determinants of inter-
temporal decisions and how they vary across the population. We examine an
exogenously imposed and economically large intertemporal decision made by a large
1 See, for example, Barsky et al. (1997), Loewenstein (1987), Loewenstein and Prelec (1991, 1992), and
Loewenstein and Thaler (1989).
2 Warner & Pleeter (2001) find discount rates from 0 to more than 30 percent. See also Hausman (1979)
and Lawrence (1991). Sawmick (1998) estimates the distribution of rates of time preference from wealth
data and finds wide dispersion, ranging from negative to more than 20 percent.
3 Studies that have examined how discount rates vary across the population include Gilman (1976), Black
(1984), and Lawrance (1991). These studies find that discount rates decline with income, education, and
age, and that blacks have higher discount rates than whites do. Samwick (1998) shows that the
distribution of rates varies with age and income. Warner and Pleeter (2001) find that military officers
exhibit lower discount rates than enlisted personnel do, that blacks exhibit a higher discount rate than
whites do, and that discount rates decline with education.
1

fraction of the entire retired population of Croatia. As the result of a 1998 ruling by the
Constitutional Court of Croatia, the government was ordered to make substantial
payments to retirees, and thereby compensate them for an unconstitutional benefit cut
that had occurred during, and immediately after, the war in the former Yugoslavia in
the early- to mid-1990s. In late 2005, eligible retirees were offered a one-time,
irrevocable choice (described in more detail below) between a more immediate and a
more deferred payment stream. Although the deferred payment option offered a
nominal internal rate-of-return in excess of 26 percent relative to the more immediate
payment option, approximately 70 percent of retirees chose the latter.
We empirically examine the determinants of this choice using micro data from a
nationally representative survey that we designed and fielded for this purpose in the
period from late 2008 to early 2009. This setting has several advantages over the prior
literature. First, like Warner and Pleeter (2001), who examine the separation choices
made by about 65,000 U.S. military personnel in the early 1990s, we are able to examine
actual choices over an amount of money large enough to be quite meaningful to the
typical retiree (on average, the monetary value of the settlements was roughly
equivalent to a year of household income for the average Croatian retiree). Thus, our
study does not suffer from the bias that may arise when studying hypothetical decisions
over small stakes, an issue that plagues many experimental studies.
Second, because the policy decision about the size of this repayment and the
population to receive it was determined by a Constitutional Court decision and a
subsequently passed law, we have a fairly clean experimental setting that is not
contaminated by concerns about self-selection. This is in contrast to Warner and Pleeter
2