NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK REGULATION AND SUPERVISION IN 180 COUNTRIES FROM 1999 TO
2011
James R. Barth
Gerard Caprio, Jr.
Ross Levine
Working Paper 18733
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18733
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2013
James R. Barth is Lowder Eminent Scholar in Finance at Auburn University, Senior Finance Fellow
at the Milken Institute, and Fellow at the Wharton Financial Institutions Center. Gerard Caprio, Jr.
is the William Brough Professor of Economics and Chair of the Center for Development Economics
at Williams College. Ross Levine is the Willis H. Booth Chair in Banking and Finance at Haas School
of Business, University of California at Berkeley, Senior Fellow at the Milken Institute and Research
Associate at the NBER. The authors gratefully acknowledge the painstakingly thorough assistance
provided by Nan (Annie) Zhang, Research Assistant at the Milken Institute. This paper benefited from
the support of the Milken Institute and the World Bank. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by James R. Barth, Gerard Caprio, Jr., and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bank Regulation and Supervision in 180 Countries from 1999 to 2011
James R. Barth, Gerard Caprio, Jr., and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 18733
January 2013
JEL No. G21,G28,O5
ABSTRACT
In this paper and the associated online database, we provide new data and measures of bank regulatory
and supervisory policies in 180 countries from 1999 to 2011. The data include and the measures are
based upon responses to hundreds of questions, including information on permissible bank activities,
capital requirements, the powers of official supervisory agencies, information disclosure requirements,
external governance mechanisms, deposit insurance, barriers to entry, and loan provisioning. The dataset
also provides information on the organization of regulatory agencies and the size, structure, and performance
of banking systems. Since the underlying surveys are large and complex, we construct summary indices
of key bank regulatory and supervisory policies to facilitate cross-country comparisons and analyses
of changes in banking policies over time.
James R. Barth Ross Levine
Auburn University Haas School of Business
393 Lauder Business Building University of California at Berkeley
Auburn, Alabama 36849 545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685)
barthjr@auburn.edu Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
Gerard Caprio, Jr. Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu
Department of Economics
Williams College
Williamstown, MA 01267
gerard.caprio@Williams.edu

1
I. Introduction
Motivating an investigation of bank regulation and supervision is easy. One can point to
the global banking crisis of 2007-2009, the banking problems still plaguing many European
countries in 2013, and the more than 100 systemic banking crises that have devastated
economies around the world since 1970. All these crises reflect, at least partially, defects in bank
regulation and supervision.1 One can also point to research showing that banks matter for human
welfare beyond periodic crises. Banks influence economic growth, poverty, entrepreneurship,
labor market conditions, and the economic opportunities available to people.2 Thus, examining
the type and impact of bank regulatory and supervisory policies in countries is a critical area of
inquiry.
The problem, however, is that measuring bank regulation and supervision around the
world is hard. Hundreds of laws and regulations, emanating from different parts of national and
local governments, define policies regarding bank capital standards, the entry requirements of
new domestic and foreign banks, bank ownership restrictions, and loan provisioning guidelines.
Numerous pages of regulations in most countries delineate the permitted activities of banks and
provide shape and substance to deposit insurance schemes and the nature and timing of the
information that banks must disclose to regulators and the public. And, extensive statutes define
the powers of regulatory and supervisory officials over banks — and the limits of those powers.
There are daunting challenges associated with acquiring data on all of the laws, regulations, and
practices that apply to banks in countries and then aggregating this information into useful
statistics that capture different and important aspects of regulatory regimes. This helps explain
why the systematic collection of data on bank regulatory and supervisory policies is only in its
1 On documenting systemic crises, see Laeven and Valencia (2008). On the linkages between recent banking stresses
and policy defects, see Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2012).
2 The literature on finance, growth, poverty, and the distribution of economic opportunities is quite large, and is
reviewed by Levine (2006) and Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (2010).

2
nascent stages. Yet, without sound measures of banking policies across countries and over time,
researchers will be correspondingly constrained in assessing which policies work best to promote
well-functioning banking systems, and in proposing socially beneficial reforms to banking
policies in need of improvement.
In this paper, we offer a new database on bank regulation and supervision for more than
180 countries, covering the period from 1999 through 2011. Although we do not assess the
impact of banking sector policies on banks or the broader economy, we do seek to contribute to
research on the design and implementation of policies by providing useful measures of bank
regulation and supervision. As reportedly argued by the great scientist Lord Kelvin in the 19th
century, “[I]f you cannot measure it, you cannot improve it.”3
Our database builds on four surveys sponsored by the World Bank. About sixteen years
ago, the World Bank asked us to assemble the first cross-country database on bank regulation
and supervision. With guidance and help from bank supervisors, financial economists, and
World Bank staff, we developed and implemented an extensive survey.4 We had bank
regulatory officials complete the survey—and often had several officials from the same
country complete the survey in order to verify the consistency of responses. Survey I
covered 118 countries, included over 300 questions, and was mostly completed in
1999.5 For the second survey, we extended and revised the questionnaire based on input
from World Bank staff, country officials, and academics. The World Bank released
Survey II in 2003, which provides information on bank regulatory and supervisory
policies in 2002. Survey II includes information from 151 counties covering over 400
questions. Survey III was posted on the World Bank’s website in the summer of 2007,
3 Available at http://zapatopi.net/kelvin/quotes/
4 We sometimes use the term “regulation” to describe a wide-array of banking policies and compliance mechanisms.
5 The responses to the survey were received in 1998 through 2000, but the majority of the answers refer to policies
in the year 1999.