NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MEASURING SOVEREIGN CONTAGION IN EUROPE
Massimiliano Caporin
Loriana Pelizzon
Francesco Ravazzolo
Roberto Rigobon
Working Paper 18741
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18741
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2013
We thank Alessandro Fontana, David Lando, Marco Lippi, Andrew Lo, Steve Schaefer and seminar
and conference participants at CREDIT 2012, Goethe University, Einaudi Institute for Economics
and Finance, MAF 2012, MIT workshop of the Research Consortium for Systemic Risk, Norges Bank,
Sixth CEPS Finance high-level roundtable on macro prudential policy in the EU, University of Geneva,
Workshop on Sovereign Risk, Fiscal Solvency and Monetary Policy: Where Do We Stand?, for helpful
comments. The views expressed in this paper are our own and do not necessarily reflect those of Norges
Bank. The views expressed here in are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18741.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Massimiliano Caporin, Loriana Pelizzon, Francesco Ravazzolo, and Roberto Rigobon.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Measuring Sovereign Contagion in Europe
Massimiliano Caporin, Loriana Pelizzon, Francesco Ravazzolo, and Roberto Rigobon
NBER Working Paper No. 18741
January 2013
JEL No. E58,F34,F36,G12,G15
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the sovereign risk contagion using credit default swaps (CDS) and bond premiums
for the major eurozone countries. By emphasizing several econometric approaches (nonlinear regression,
quantile regression and Bayesian quantile regression with heteroskedasticity) we show that propagation
of shocks in Europe's CDS has been remarkably constant for the period 2008-2011 even though a significant
part of the sample periphery countries have been extremely affected by their sovereign debt and fiscal
situations. Thus, the integration among the different eurozone countries is stable, and the risk spillover
among these countries is not affected by the size of the shock, implying that so far contagion has remained
subdue. Results for the CDS sample are confirmed by examining bond spreads. However, the analysis
of bond data shows that there is a change in the intensity of the propagation of shocks in the 2003-2006
pre-crisis period and the 2008-2011 post-Lehman one, but the coefficients actually go down, not up!
All the increases in correlation we have witnessed over the last years come from larger shocks and
the heteroskedasticity in the data, not from similar shocks propagated with higher intensity across
Europe. This is the fi˝rst paper, to our knowledge, where a Bayesian quantile regression approach
is used to measure contagion. This methodology is particularly well-suited to deal with nonlinear and
unstable transmission mechanisms.
Massimiliano Caporin Francesco Ravazzolo
Department of Economics and Management Norges Bank
Via del Santo 33 Francesco.ravazzolo@norges-bank.no
Padova, Italy
massimiliano.caporin@unipd.it Roberto Rigobon
MIT Sloan School of Management
Loriana Pelizzon 100 Main Street, E62-516
University of Venice Cambridge, MA 02142
Department of Economics and NBER
Cannareggio 873 rigobon@mit.edu
Venice, 30100 ITALY
pelizzon@unive.it

1 Introduction
The sovereign debt crisis in Europe that began in late 2009 has reignited the literature on con-
tagion. How much contagion to countries in the European Monetary Union could be expected
as a result of a possible credit event in Greece, Italy or Spain?
How much are France and Germany going to be affected? How about countries outside the
European Union? Through which channel is the shock going to be transmitted? Clearly these
are some of the important questions for economists, policymakers, and practitioners. However,
addressing these questions requires surmounting some extraordinary empirical challenges.1
The first challenge is definitional. What exactly is contagion? Is it the “normal” or “usual”
propagation of shocks, or is it the transmission of shocks that takes place under unusual cir-
cumstances?2
Someliteraturetendstodefinecontagionastheco-movementthattakesplaceunderextreme
conditions — or tail events3— while another sizeable proportion of the literature compares how
shocks propagate differently during normal and rare events. The first definition concentrates
on measuring the transmission after a bad shock occurs, while the second definition investigates
how different the propagation mechanism is after a negative shock appears. It is impossible
to solve this definitional problem in this paper; rather our objective is to present convincing
evidence of the amount of contagion that takes place according to the second definition. In
other words, we are interested in understanding how much potential contagion exists within the
European sovereign debt market, where contagion is defined as how different the propagation is
after a large negative realization has taken place compared to the propagation after an average
realization.
The second challenge is an empirical one. Contagion is an unobservable shock and there-
1Rigobon (2001).
2See Forbes and Rigobon (2002), as well as Dungey and Zhumabekova (2001).
3As it has been defined by the copula approach to measure contagion (Rodriguez, 2007)
2

fore most empirical techniques have problems dealing with omitted variables and simultaneous
equations. The problem is even more complicated because the data suffers from heteroskedas-
ticity — which implies that if the conditional volatility moves in the sample it might result
in econometric biases. In other words, if the correlation between two variables is different in
normal and in crisis times, how can we be sure that this difference is due to the outcome of
a shift in the propagation mechanism and not the result of the fact that correlations are not
neutral to shifts in volatility? Crisis periods are usually associated with higher volatility and
simple correlations are unable to deal with this problem.4 Moreover, if a linear regression has
been estimated across different regimes, how can the researcher be sure that the coefficients
are different because the underlying parameters are shifting, as opposed to the fact that the
omitted variables and simultaneous equation biases are not neutral to changes in the volatility?
Finally, the third challenge is that the channel of contagion is rarely understood before the
crisis occurs. For example, very few would have ever predicted that the transmission channel
of the 1998 Russian crisis was going to be Long Term Capital Management. Furthermore,
even though several economists anticipated the 2008 U.S. crisis, none could foretell that the
transmission would be from the subprime mortgage market to insurance companies, to AIG,
and then to the rest of the world. The economics profession is extremely good at describing the
channels through which shocks are transmitted internationally immediately after the contagion
has taken place. This puts a significant constraint on structural estimations of contagion the
problem being that the channel has to be specified ex-ante. Reduced-form estimations, on the
other hand, have the advantage that they are channel-free and therefore might capture the
presence of contagion that was not fully accounted for prior to the shock’s occurrence.
In this paper we first evaluate the extent of contagion in the eurozone credit default swaps
(CDS) by using a reduced-form approach based on quantile regressions. The main advantage of
usingthequantileregressionsisthatthisisaverynaturalandpowerfulwaytodealwithpossible
4See Forbes and Rigobon (2002).
3