NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES “SKIN IN THE GAME” REDUCE RISK TAKING? LEVERAGE, LIABILITY
AND THE LONG-RUN CONSEQUENCES OF NEW DEAL BANKING REFORMS
Kris James Mitchener
Gary Richardson
Working Paper 18895
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18895
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2013
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18895.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Kris James Mitchener and Gary Richardson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Does “Skin in the Game” Reduce Risk Taking? Leverage, Liability and the Long-Run Consequences
of New Deal Banking Reforms
Kris James Mitchener and Gary Richardson
NBER Working Paper No. 18895
March 2013
JEL No. E44,G28,G33,N22
ABSTRACT
This essay examines how the Banking Acts of the 1933 and 1935 and related New Deal legislation
influenced risk taking in the financial sector of the U.S. economy. The analysis focuses on contingent
liability of bank owners for losses incurred by their firms and how the elimination of this liability influenced
leverage and lending by commercial banks. Using a new panel data set, we find contingent liability
reduced risk taking. In states with contingent liability, banks used less leverage and converted each
dollar of capital into fewer loans, and thus could survive larger loan losses (as a fraction of their portfolio)
than banks in limited liability states. In states with limited liability, banks took on more leverage and
risk, particularly in states that required banks with limited liability to join the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation. In the long run, the New Deal replaced a regime of contingent liability with deposit insurance,
stricter balance sheet regulation, and increased capital requirements, shifting the onus of risk management
from bankers to state and federal regulators.
Kris James Mitchener
Department of Economics
Leavey School of Business
Santa Clara University
Santa Clara, CA 95053
and NBER
kmitchener@scu.edu
Gary Richardson
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3155 Social Sciences Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
garyr@uci.edu

Does “Skin in the Game” Reduce Risk Taking? Leverage, Liability, and the
Long-run Consequences of the New Deal Banking Legislation
I. Introduction
A defining characteristic of the recent financial crisis was the rise in leverage of
financial institutions, a feature that fueled the size of the eventual calamity. Since the
crisis, policy makers, pundits, and scholars have asked whether requiring financiers to
risk more of their own funds along with their firms, i.e. “keeping more skin in the game,”
would limit risk taking by financial institutions. We address this question by examining
commercial banking from 1910 through 1955, and by focusing our attention on key
regulatory changes related to risk taking that arose as part of the New Deal of the 1930s.
Prior to the Banking Acts of 1933 and 1935, most commercial bankers were personally
liable for losses in the event that their bank failed. This contingent liability applied to the
directors, chief executive officers, chief financial officers, and stockholders of all national
and most state chartered banks. During the New Deal, legislative reforms eliminated
contingent liability for most national and state banks.
The New Deal banking reforms had long-lasting consequences that may have
contributed to the leveraging and risk taking that fueled the credit boom of the 2000s. We
focus on how New Deal banking legislation from the mid-1930s altered incentives for
financial firms to manage their risk, shifted oversight of commercial banks to new federal
agencies, and left the oversight of risk in investment banks to themselves or to regulatory
agencies with little existing experience or authority to manage it.
Our estimation strategy exploits variation in liability laws across states and
variation in changes in these laws over time to identify the influence of contingent
liability on risk taking by banks. Using a new panel data set, we find contingent liability
reduced risk taking. In states with contingent liability, banks used less leverage and
converted each dollar of capital into fewer loans, and thus could sustain larger loan losses
(as a fraction of their portfolio) than banks in limited liability states. In states with limited
liability, banks had more leverage and risk, particularly in states that required banks with
limited liability to join the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The New Deal
replaced a regime of contingent liability with stricter balance sheet regulation and
2

increased capital requirements, shifting the onus of risk management from banks to state
and federal regulators.
Our analysis begins with an examination of the different liability regimes that
applied to commercial banks, the reforms of the New Deal, and theoretical reasons why
liability laws influenced risk-taking by banks. Section III describes the new data set that
we use to estimate the effects of contingent liability, including detailed information on
the liability laws commercial bankers faced in each state. We track changes in regulatory
regimes at the state and national level from 1910 through 1955. We combine this
regulatory information with state-level aggregates on the balance sheets of banks. Section
IV uses the panel data to analyze the effects of bank liability laws and finds that, when
contingent liability existed, it deterred risk taking. Section V concludes by discussing the
long-run consequences of the financial reforms of the 1930s for the U.S. financial system.
II. Contingent Liability
A. Background
In an effort to reform the present structure of financial regulation, policymakers
have looked back at the pivotal legislation of the 1930s for guidance. Some
commentators have argued that the Banking Acts of 1933 and 1935 set the U.S. financial
system on a trajectory of safety and stability that promoted long-run growth in the
economy; it is argued that the virtues of Depression-era regulation were stripped away
when banking reform began in the 1990s.1 Others have cast the 1930s legislation as a
misdiagnosis of the underlying problems of the 1930s (Kroszner, 1998), and a
continuance of practices (i.e., unit banking, and the Real Bills Doctrine) or extension of
them (deposit insurance) that undermine financial stability (Barth, Caprio, and Levine
2006; Demirguc-Kunt, Kane, and Laeven 2009; Calomiris 2008a, 2011). In this paper,
we revisit the Banking Acts of 1933 and 1935 to shine new light on changes that affected
the incentives and risk taking of financial firms.
By the 1830s, most states had passed laws limiting the liability of non-banking
corporations (Oesterle, 1992). Until the 1930s, however, limited liability was the
1 See, for example, Kuttner (2007) and Stiglitz (2009).
3