NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOUSE PRICES, COLLATERAL AND SELF-EMPLOYMENT
Manuel Adelino
Antoinette Schoar
Felipe Severino
Working Paper 18868
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18868
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2013
We thank Leonid Kogan, Gregor Matvos, Holger Mueller, Ben Pugsley, David Robinson, and seminar
participants at Duke, Jackson Hole Finance Conference, MIT, NBER Entrepreneurship Meeting, Princeton,
UNC, and Stanford for thoughtful comments The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Manuel Adelino, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

House Prices, Collateral and Self-Employment
Manuel Adelino, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino
NBER Working Paper No. 18868
March 2013
JEL No. E24,G01,G30
ABSTRACT
This paper documents the role of the collateral lending channel to facilitate small business starts and
self-employment in the period before the financial crisis of 2008. We document that between 2002
and 2007 areas with a bigger run up in house prices experienced a strong increase in employment in
small businesses compared to employment in large firms in the same industries. This increase in small
business employment was particularly pronounced in (1) industries that need little startup capital and
can thus more easily be financed out of increases in housing as collateral; (2) manufacturing industries
where goods are shipped over long distances, which rules out that local demand is driving the expansion.
We show that this effect is separate from an aggregate demand channel that relies on home equity
based borrowing leading to increased demand and employment creation.
Manuel Adelino Felipe Severino
Duke University MIT Sloan School of Management
Fuqua School of Business 100 Main Street, E62-678
100 Fuqua Drive Cambridge, MA 02142
Durham, NC 27708-0120 fseverin@mit.edu
manuel.adelino@gmail.com
Antoinette Schoar
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-638
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
aschoar@mit.edu

1. Introduction
The recession that followed the financial crisis of 2008 was marked by high and very persistent
unemployment rates, which has drawn renewed interest to understanding the forces that affect labor
market dynamics over the business cycle. The ensuing debate has focused on two primary
explanations for the persistent unemployment. On the one side are researchers who argue that the
recession was propagated by a dramatic decline in consumer demand, which was exacerbated by
significant deleveraging at the household level and resulted in increased firm closures and
unemployment.2 See, for example, Romer (2011) or Mian and Sufi (2011a).
On the other side are proponents of the idea that structural mismatches in the skill composition of
parts of the work force explain the persistent unemployment, see for example Kocherlakota (2010).
Similarly, Charles, Hurst and Notowidigdo (2012) argue that these structural problems in the labor
market were already present pre-2008, but were masked by the increase in house prices and the
ensuing rise in labor demand in the construction industry. Others, most prominently Mulligan
(2011), put forward that structural factors in labor market institutions, such as counter cyclical
unemployment insurance, reduce the incentives of unemployed workers to reenter the labor market.
Our paper documents an alternative channel that has received much less attention but significantly
affects the dynamics of employment creation over the business cycle: The impact of the collateral
lending channel, especially mortgage lending, on self-employment and small business starts. Going
back at least to the seminal papers by Bernanke and Gertler (1989) or Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) a
number of theories have suggested that improvements in collateral values ease credit constraints for
borrowers and can have multiplier effects on economic growth. This collateral lending channel
builds on the idea that information asymmetries between banks and firms can be more easily
alleviated when collateral values are high and therefore firms can have higher leverage (Rampini and
Viswanathan, 2010) and that these problems are especially acute for small, more opaque, firms
(Gertler and Gilchrist, 1994 or Kashyap, Stein and Wilcox, 1993). However, empirically it has been
very difficult to cleanly identify the causal direction of the collateral effect. The challenge is that
increased collateral values facilitate lending but in the reverse direction higher collateral values can
also be the result of improvements in economic conditions (e.g., Iacovello, 2005).
2 On average, households reduced their debt to income ratios by more than 20% following the house price bust.
1

In this paper we take a different approach and look directly at shocks to the value of collateral, in
particular the value of homes. In order to identify the causal effect of higher house prices we
instrument for the growth in prices between 2002 and 2007 using the elasticity measure developed
by Saiz (2010), which uses exogenous geographical and regulatory constraints to housing supply.
The measure therefore differentiates areas where an increase in housing demand either translates
into higher house prices and collateral value (low elasticity areas) or into higher volume of houses
built (high elasticity). By relying on exogenous restrictions on the expansion of housing volumes, we
separate out the effect of high collateral values on the creation of small businesses. This
identification strategy is similar to the study by Chaney, Sraer and Thesmar (2012), which looks at
corporate investment decisions or Mian and Sufi (2011b) who look at increases in consumption
from household leverage.
We show that leading up to the recession of 2008, areas with rising house prices (and increased
leverage) experienced a significantly bigger increase in small business starts and a rise in the number
of people who are employed in establishments with fewer than 10 employees compared to areas that
did not see an increase in house prices. The same increase in employment cannot be found for large
establishments in these same areas. In fact, the effect of house prices on job creation monotonically
decreases with the size of the firms. This asymmetric effect on small versus large only holds for
instrumented house prices, which suggests that the non-instrumented part of the variation (which is
the one that captures endogenous demand) mostly impacts employment at larger firms. This
asymmetry points to the interpretation of the collateral lending channel as an important driver of
employment creation in small firms, since large firms have access to other forms of financing and
thus should not be affected by this type of collateral channel.
While the result above supports the importance of the collateral channel for small business creation,
there are two alternative hypotheses that must be ruled out as explaining our results. First, increasing
house prices can drive local demand for goods (Campbell and Cocco, 2007) and, consequently,
employment at non-tradable industries (Mian and Sufi, 2011a). To the extent that small firms may be
more sensitive to changes in demand (Kashyap and Stein, 1994), the asymmetry in the results could
reflect this increased demand rather than the collateral channel. The second alternative hypothesis
comes from the fact that, by using housing and zoning restrictions for obtaining identification, we
rely on cross sectional differences between high and low elasticity areas. This means that these areas
could also vary along other dimensions, such as the level of economic vitality. For example, areas
2