NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ASSET QUALITY MISREPRESENTATION BY FINANCIAL INTERMEDIARIES:
EVIDENCE FROM RMBS MARKET
Tomasz Piskorski
Amit Seru
James Witkin
Working Paper 18843
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18843
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013
We are grateful to Equifax and BlackBox Logic for their data which were invaluable for the analysis
in this paper. We thank Charlie Calomiris, John Cochrane, Gene Fama, Chris Mayer, Lasse Pedersen,
Amir Sufi, and Luigi Zingales as well as seminar participants at Columbia Business School for valuable
comments. We thank Ing-Haw Cheng and Andrew Ellul for graciously sharing their data on incentive
compensation and the risk management index. All errors are our own. Piskorski thanks the Paul Milstein
Center for Real Estate at Columbia Business School for financial support. Seru thanks the Initiative
on Global Markets at Booth for financial support. Contact Authors: Tomasz Piskorski (tp2252@columbia.edu)
and Amit Seru (amit.seru@chicagobooth.edu) The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Tomasz Piskorski, Amit Seru, and James Witkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Asset Quality Misrepresentation by Financial Intermediaries: Evidence from RMBS Market
Tomasz Piskorski, Amit Seru, and James Witkin
NBER Working Paper No. 18843
February 2013
JEL No. G14,G21,G24,G28,K22
ABSTRACT
We contend that buyers received false information about the true quality of assets in contractual disclosures
by intermediaries during the sale of mortgages in the $2 trillion non-agency market. We construct
two measures of misrepresentation of asset quality – misreported occupancy status of borrower and
misreported second liens – by comparing the characteristics of mortgages disclosed to the investors
at the time of sale with actual characteristics of these loans at that time that are available in a dataset
matched by a credit bureau. About one out of every ten loans has one of these misrepresentations.
These misrepresentations are not likely to be an artifact of matching error between datasets that contain
actual characteristics and those that are reported to investors. At least part of this misrepresentation
likely occurs within the boundaries of the financial industry (i.e., not by borrowers). The propensity
of intermediaries to sell misrepresented loans increased as the housing market boomed. These
misrepresentations(cid:3)are costly for investors, as ex post delinquencies of such loans are more than 60%
higher when compared(cid:3)with otherwise similar loans. Lenders seem to be partly aware of this risk,
charging a higher interest(cid:3)rate on misrepresented loans relative to otherwise similar loans, but the
interest rate markup on misrepresented(cid:3)loans does not fully reflect their higher default risk. Using
measures of pricing used in the literature,(cid:3)we find no evidence that these misrepresentations were
priced in the securities at their issuance. A(cid:3)significant degree of misrepresentation exists across all
reputable intermediaries involved in sale of(cid:3)mortgages. The propensity to misrepresent seems to be
largely unrelated to measures of incentives(cid:3)for top management, to quality of risk management inside
these firms or to regulatory environment(cid:3)in a region. Misrepresentations on just two relatively easy-to-
quantify dimensions of asset quality could result in forced repurchases of mortgages by intermediaries
up to $160 billion.
Tomasz Piskorski James Witkin
Columbia Business School Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 810 jlw2188@columbia.edu
New York, NY 10027
tp2252@columbia.edu
Amit Seru
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
amit.seru@chicagobooth.edu

Section I: Introduction
Market rules and regulations that require disclosure of information and prohibit misleading
statements on the financial products being manufactured by intermediaries play an important role
in the functioning of capital markets (Akerlof, 1970). However, the nature of intermediation has
changed dramatically over the past decade–with the introduction of more agents in the supply
chain of credit (Loutskina and Strahan, 2009; Keys et al. forthcoming; Nadauld and Sherlund,
2013) --- potentially weakening the ability of existing market arrangements and regulatory
oversight in ensuring truthful disclosure of asset quality. This concern has gained momentum in
the aftermath of the crisis, with a precipitous decline in the value of supposedly safe securities as
well as large investor losses (Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez, forthcoming).1 This paper adds to
this debate, and more generally to one on the design of market rules and future financial
regulation, by quantifying the extent to which buyers may have received false information about
the true quality of these assets by sellers of these securities and by exploring factors that may
have moderated such behavior by financial intermediaries.
Our study focuses on misrepresentation of asset-quality that consist of securities collateralized by
residential mortgages that are originated without government guarantees (non-agency RMBS) --
representing a $2 trillion market in 2007.2 These misrepresentations are not instances of the usual
asymmetric information problem in which the buyers know less than the seller. Rather, we
contend that they are instances where, in the process of contractual disclosure by the sellers,
buyers received false information on the characteristics of assets.3We identify misrepresentations
by comparing the characteristics of mortgages in the pool that were disclosed to the investors at
the time of sale with actual characteristics of these loans at the same time and show that such
misrepresentations constitute a significant proportion of the loans. We investigate if lenders and
investors were aware of such behavior and assess characteristics of intermediaries involved in
the sale of assets, such as incentives for managers, that could have moderated this behavior. In
doing so we demonstrate the limits of existing market and regulatory arrangements in preventing
such behavior in the capital market.
The RMBS securitization process involves aggregating mortgages into loan trusts, either through
direct origination or indirect acquisition, and using their underlying cash flows to issue securities.
The sale of these securities is organized by underwriters who, as part of this process, must collect
and verify information regarding the quality of the underlying collateral backing these securities.
1 Critics of imposing more regulation argue that reputational concerns of large, well-established financial
intermediaries would prevent such violations of investors’ rights. In contrast, proponents of increased regulation
argue that intermediaries were able to exploit investors despite their reputation (and existing regulation).
2 See Agarwal and Ho (2007), and Keys et al. (2012), and the Federal Reserve Board March 2009 Statistical Release
(http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/releases/mortoutstand/mortoutstand20090331.htm)
3 Akerlof (1970) also considers settings where quality of goods can be potentially misrepresented by sellers.
1

The underwriters in this market are large, reputable financial intermediaries who are considered
to be more sophisticated than the buyers in this market, which are typically institutional investors
such as pension funds, mutual funds, and insurance companies. Thus, given the lighter regulatory
oversight relative to public capital markets that are open to retail investors, this market serves as
a good laboratory to study whether existing market mechanisms based on implicit and explicit
contracting are sufficient to safeguard investors’ rights.
In general, several factors make it difficult to perform a systematic study of the nature and
determinants of asset misrepresentation. For instance, most studies of corporate fraud define
fraud as events in which the rights of the shareholders of a firm are violated by its managers.
However, such violations of investors’ rights involve firms with varied production technologies
and in different time periods, making such comparisons difficult. Moreover, most of these
studies focus only on the cases where fraudulent behavior was ex-post discovered. We focus on
the RMBS market and study the disclosure activity related to sale of assets by intermediaries,
which circumvents some of these challenges. Since residential mortgages are fairly standardized
and have a simple structure, comparisons of disclosure activity are relatively easier. In addition,
detailed histories of such activity by financial institutions involved in sale of RMBS are available,
allowing us to study asset misrepresentation by these firms over time as well as in the cross-
section. Finally, our methodology will identify asset misrepresentation regardless of whether or
not it is ex-post discovered by the investors.
We start our analysis by combining two sources of data, loan-level data on mortgages from
BlackBox with data on consumer credit files from Equifax, to construct two measures of
misrepresentation regarding the quality of mortgages backing the RMBS pools. The mortgage-
level data include characteristics of loans that were disclosed to the investors at the time of asset
sale. The consumer credit data, which were not available to investors at the asset sale date,
contains the actual characteristics of loans at the same time. The matching between the two
datasets is done by the credit bureau.
Using the combined dataset we identify two, relatively easy-to-quantify, dimensions of asset
quality misrepresentation by intermediaries during the sale of mortgages. The first
misrepresentation concerns loans that are reported as being collateralized by owner-occupied
properties when in fact these properties were owned by borrowers with a different primary
residence (e.g., a property acquired as an investment or as a second home). The second form of
misrepresentation concerns loans that are reported as having no other lien when in fact the
properties backing the first (senior) mortgage were also financed with a simultaneously
originated closed-end second (junior) mortgage. The advantage of looking at this second type of
misrepresentation is that it clearly indicates that the distortion of information occurred within the
boundaries of the financial industry, as some institutions (e.g., a lender financing a second lien
loan) had to be aware of the presence of such higher liens. Our hope in both instances is to
2