NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNEMLOYMENT AND UNOBSERVED CREDIT RISK IN THE FHA SINGLE FAMILY
MORTGAGE INSURANCE FUND
Joseph Gyourko
Joseph Tracy
Working Paper 18880
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18880
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2013
These views represent those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. John Grigsby
provided excellent research assistance. We thank Andrew Haughwout and Wilbert van der Klaauw
for their helpful comments. Gyourko thanks the Research Sponsor Program of the Zell/Lurie Real
Estate Center at Wharton for financial support.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18880.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Joseph Gyourko and Joseph Tracy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Unemloyment and Unobserved Credit Risk in the FHA Single Family Mortgage Insurance
Fund
Joseph Gyourko and Joseph Tracy
NBER Working Paper No. 18880
March 2013
JEL No. G17,R48
ABSTRACT
Empirical models of mortgage default typically find that the influence of unemployment is negligible
compared to other well known risk factors such as high borrower leverage or low borrower FICO scores.
This is at odds with theory, which assigns a critical role to unemployment status in the decision to
stop payment on a mortgage. We help reconcile this divergence by employing a novel empirical strategy
involving simulated unemployment histories to measure the severity of attenuation bias in loan-level
estimations of default risk due to a borrower becoming unemployed. Attenuation bias results because
individual data on unemployment status is unobserved, requiring that a market-wide unemployment
rate be used as a proxy. Attenuation is extreme, with our results suggesting that the use of an aggregate
unemployment rate in lieu of actual borrower unemployment status results in default risk from a borrower
becoming unemployed being underestimated by a factor of 100 or more. Correcting for this indicates
unemployment is more powerful than other well-known factors such as extremely high leverage or
extremely low FICO scores in predicting individual borrower default. Our simulated data indicate
that adding the unemployment rate as a proxy for the missing borrower-specific unemployment indicator
does not improve the accuracy of the estimated model over the specification without the proxy variable
included.
Joseph Gyourko
University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School of Business
3620 Locust Walk
1480 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
gyourko@wharton.upenn.edu
Joseph Tracy
Executive Vice President
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
joseph.tracy@ny.frb.org

I. Introduction
The recent announcement of a negative estimated economic value of the Federal Housing
Administration’s (FHA) single-family mortgage insurance portfolio, which measures the
difference between expected fund revenues and costs, has increased interest in the financial
viability of what is now over a $1 trillion guarantee program that amounts to about 7% of annual
national output.1 Each of us in prior research has argued that unobserved credit risk in the FHA
guarantee portfolio is high (Caplin, et. al. (2010, 2012); Gyourko (2011)), with FHA’s persistent
overestimation of the value of each new book of insured loans indicating that over the past
several years something systematic in terms of uncontrolled-for risk is being missed by program
evaluators. In this paper, we focus on unemployment as a key uncontrolled for risk factor.
From 2008 until the most recent annual evaluation, FHA’s outside actuarial reviewer
made no attempt to control for unemployment, having discontinued use of a metropolitan area-
wide unemployment rate in its default models. The explanation provided was that controlling for
unemployment did not help in explaining default.2 This decision was at odds with theories of
default, which hypothesize that unemployment risk plays a key role in any decision to stop
paying on a mortgage.3 The most recent annual review of the FHA insurance program reversed
this decision and included aggregate unemployment rates as controls in their underlying default
(and prepayment) models. Consistent with other recent empirical evidence (e.g., Elul, et. al.
1 The report, entitled Actuarial Review of the Federal Housing Administration Mutual Mortgage Insurance Fund
Forward Loans for Fiscal Year 2012 (IFE (2012), indicated the fund had an economic value of -$13.478 billion. It
can be accessed at http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program_offices/housing/rmra/oe/rpts/actr/actrmenu.
2 The actuarial review for 2008 specifically noted the following: “The unemployment rate variables did not perform
well in any of the preliminary models that were estimated, and have not been included in the final model
specifications. No consistent pattern was observed between mortgage claims and increases in local unemployment
rates.”[IFE 2008, page A-13]
3 As is discussed more fully in the literature review in the next section, the so-called ‘double trigger’ hypothesis
suggests that it is a combination of an adverse income shock and the borrower being in negative equity that results in
a default. See Gerardi, et. al. (2007), Foote, et. al. (2008), Foote, et. al. (2010), and the discussion in Section II for
more on the double trigger hypothesis, as well as additional evidence on the correlation between unemployment and
default.
1

(2010)), the 2012 actuarial review reports evidence of a positive correlation between an
aggregate unemployment rate and the propensity of individual borrowers in the market to
default.
However, the estimated economic influence of unemployment rates on default is very
small empirically compared to other known risk factors such as borrower credit quality as
reflected in FICO scores and loan-to-value (LTV) ratios. One possible reason investigated in
this paper is attenuation bias. This is a potentially serious problem because the default decision
is observed at the micro-household level, but the unemployment status of the borrower is not.
Hence, a market-level unemployment rate is used as a proxy for the unobserved unemployment
status of the borrower in empirical models of individual default, and it well could be a very noisy
proxy.4 For example, even in a market with a high unemployment rate of 10%, the vast majority
of borrowers still are employed, and rises in that rate obviously do not mean that most borrowers
lose their jobs and become income constrained.
We bring new empirical analysis to bear on this issue, using results from a simulation
exercise involving transitions into and out of unemployment, to help gauge the true impact of
unemployment on default. The analysis strongly suggests that borrower unemployment status is
very important in determining default behavior, with the likely impact at least as large as that
found for other well known risk factors such as FICO score and loan-to-value ratio. Hence, we
are able to account for the discrepancy between the prominent role that unemployment risk is
accorded in conceptual models of default and the very limited impact estimated in recent
empirical work.
The plan of the paper is as follows. The next section begins by briefly reviewing the
literature on the linkage between mortgage default and unemployment risk. This is followed
4 This point was raised by Haughwout, et. al. (2010), page 17 footnote 22.
2