NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
'THOSE WHO KNOW MOST':
INSIDER TRADING IN 18TH C. AMSTERDAM
Peter Koudijs
Working Paper 18845
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18845
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013
This paper is based on the second chapter of my dissertation. Thanks to Hans-Joachim Voth (advisor),
Fernando Broner and Jaume Ventura (PhD committee) for advice and guidance. I thank Monika Piazzesi
(the editor) and three anonymous referees for their insightful comments and suggestions. I am grateful
to seminar participants at UCLA, UC Berkeley, Chicago, Columbia, Gerzensee, Harvard, Northwestern,
NYU, UPF, Stanford, UCSD, Tilburg, Warwick, UPenn and Jonathan Berk, Jos van Bommel, Bradyn
Breon-Drish, Harry Garretsen, Vincent van Kervel (discussant), Floor Koudijs, Thijs Knaap, Larry
Neal, Christine Parlour (discussant), Paul P‡eiderer, Giacomo Ponzetto, Juan Carlos Rodriguez (discussant),
Christina Romer, David Romer, Dick Roll, Jonathan Rose, Subra Subrahmanyam (discussant), and
Jan de Vries for their comments and suggestions. Many thanks to Daphne Acoca, Bobak Moallemi,
Dmitry Orlov, Sophia Paliza and Hannah Rusk for excellent research assistance. Any errors are my
own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Peter Koudijs. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

'Those Who Know Most': Insider Trading in 18th c. Amsterdam
Peter Koudijs
NBER Working Paper No. 18845
February 2013, Revised October 2015
JEL No. G14,N2
ABSTRACT
This paper studies how private information is incorporated into prices, using a unique setting from
the 18th century that, in many dimensions, is simpler and closer to stylized models of price discovery
than modern-day markets. Specifically, the paper looks at a number of English securities that were
traded in both London and Amsterdam. Relevant information about these securities originated in London
and was sent to Amsterdam on board of official mail packet boats. Anecdotal evidence suggests that
these ships carried both public news and private information. They sailed only twice a week, and in
adverse weather could not sail at all. The paper exploits periods of exogenous market segmentation
to identify the impact of private information. The evidence is consistent with a Kyle (1985) model
in which informed agents trade strategically. Most importantly, the speed of information revelation
in Amsterdam depended on how long insiders expected it would take for the private signal to become
public. As a result of this strategic behavior, private information was only slowly revealed to the market
as a whole. This price discovery was economically important: private signals had almost as much impact
on prices as public information shocks.
Peter Koudijs
Stanford Graduate School of Business
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
koudijs@stanford.edu
A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18845

Private information is central to our understanding of …nancial markets, and, according to the
available evidence, has a signi…cant impact on asset prices. However, it is not fully understood
how private information is incorporated into prices. One of the most in‡uential approaches to
study this question is the Kyle (1985) model. In this framework, informed agents are strategic
and take the price impact of their trades into account. They internalize that their pro…ts fall
as prices become more informative. This constrains their behavior. Trades are spread out over
time and this prolongs price discovery. As a result, asymmetric information is persistent.1 This
approach continues to spur a large literature that analyzes how the strategic behavior of informed
agents a¤ects price discovery (this includes Admati and P‡eiderer 1988; Subrahmanyam 1991;
Back 1992; Holden and Subrahmanyam 1992, 1994; Foster and Viswanathan 1994, 1996; Chau
and Vayanos 2008; and Caldentey and Stacchetti 2010). Despite the breadth of this theoretical
literature, the empirical evidence is limited. Private information is by de…nition unobserved: it is
not clear how informed agents trade on their information and by what process their private signals
are revealed to the market as a whole.
This paper studies the process of price discovery using a unique setting from the 18th century,
and tests how well the Kyle model’s predictions hold up in the data. The analysis is based on
a number of English securities that were traded in both London and Amsterdam. Most relevant
information about these securities originated in London, or reached London …rst, and later arrived
in Amsterdam. Anecdotal evidence suggests that a signi…cant fraction of this information was
private in nature and held by insiders (Sutherland 1952). The paper compares the price dynamics
in the two markets to identify how this private information was incorporated into prices.
The identi…cation strategy relies on the communication technology of the time. In the 18th
century people relied on sailing ships to transmit news across the North Sea (Neal 1990; Koudijs
2012). There was an o¢ cial mail packet boat service that carried both public newspapers and
private letters. Figure 1 shows the route of this news service. For all practical purposes this was
theonlywayinwhichpublicandprivateinformationwastransmittedfromLondontoAmsterdam.
The same packet boat service also brought Amsterdam news back to London. These sailing boats
sailed twice a week. Under favorable conditions, it took them three days to transmit the news,
but this arrival rate varied considerably due to adverse winds at sea. As a result, Amsterdam was
frequently cut o¤from London.
[FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE]
Thepaperusestheseperiodsofexogenousmarketsegmentationtostudypricediscovery. Under
thenullhypothesisallinformationispublicor, duetothecompetitivebehaviorofinformedagents,
1In the classical Kyle model there is a single insider. Foster and Viswanathan (1996) show that the main
predictions of the model are robust to the introduction of multiple insiders, as long as agents’private signals are
(su¢ ciently) heterogeneous.
3

private signals are immediately incorporated into prices.2 Under this null, Amsterdam prices
respond immediately to new information arriving on a packet boat. Any other price movements
in Amsterdam between the arrivals of two boats are unrelated to information. The empirical tests
reject this null: after the arrival of a boat, prices in Amsterdamtend to move in the same direction
as London after the departure of that boat. In other words, price changes in Amsterdam are
correlated with contemporaneous, but as of yet unreported, returns in London. This co-movement
is consistent with the strategic behavior of privately informed traders as in Kyle (1985). Suppose
thataninsiderinLondonobservesacertainpieceofinformationrightbeforethedepartureofboat.
Further, suppose that the insider sends this signal to a business partner in Amsterdam. If both
agents spread their trades strategically over time, prices will only slowly reveal the underlying
information. London and Amsterdam will tend to move in the same direction, even though
information about these price changes is not (yet) communicated across markets.
It is unlikely that these co-movement patterns are the result of news slipping through other
channels. There is no qualitative evidence that market participants relied on sources other than
the o¢ cial mail service. For example, Hope & Co, the most important Anglo-Dutch bank of
the period, solely relied on the packet boats for their business. In addition, robustness tests
suggest that carrier pigeons, the sailing of other boats (including smugglers) or news travelling via
Dover-Calais cannot account for the empirical …ndings.
To determine whether co-movement was truly the result of strategic insider trading, I run a
number of additional tests. To begin with, the optimal strategy of the informed agent in Ams-
terdam should have depended on when he thought the next boat would sail in. Boats arriving
in Amsterdam relayed important information from London, including security prices. This (par-
tially) revealed the private signal. If the informed agent expected the next boat to arrive in short
order, he would have less time to bene…t from his informational advantage, making it optimal to
trade more aggressively early on (Caldentey and Stacchetti 2010). The empirical evidence sup-
ports this prediction. The initial co-movement of Amsterdam and London prices was stronger
when weather conditions suggested that the next boat would arrive shortly. Furthermore, if the
discovery of private information was important, we would anticipate feedback e¤ects in London
(ChowdryandNanda1990; Boulatovetal. 2011). Ifaprivatesignalwasnotyetfullyincorporated
into prices, the London market could learn something from Amsterdam. This too is con…rmed
by the data. Conditional on its own price discovery, the London market updated its beliefs based
on price changes in Amsterdam. If, due to weather conditions, it took longer for a private signal
to “bounce back”from Amsterdam, the London market responded less. By that time, the pri-
2If these agents are risk neutral, private information is immediately incorporated into prices (Grossman 1976;
Holden and Subrahmanyam 1992, 1994). If they are risk averse, competition does not necessarily lead to full
revelation (Grossman and Stiglitz 1980). However, Vives (1995) shows that in a dynamic setting insiders trade
only once. There is no price discovery in subsequent periods.
4