NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FIRM SIZE DISTORTIONS AND THE PRODUCTIVITY DISTRIBUTION:
EVIDENCE FROM FRANCE
Luis Garicano
Claire LeLarge
John Van Reenen
Working Paper 18841
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18841
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013
The research was funded by the UK Economic and Social Research Council The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18841.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Luis Garicano, Claire LeLarge, and John Van Reenen. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Firm Size Distortions and the Productivity Distribution: Evidence from France
Luis Garicano, Claire LeLarge, and John Van Reenen
NBER Working Paper No. 18841
February 2013
JEL No. J08,L11,L25,L51
ABSTRACT
We show how size-contingent laws can be used to identify the equilibrium and welfare effects of labor
regulation. Our framework incorporates such regulations into the Lucas (1978) model and applies
this to France where many labor laws start to bind on firms with exactly 50 or more employees. Using
data on the population of firms between 2002 and 2007 period, we structurally estimate the key parameters
of our model to construct counterfactual size, productivity and welfare distributions. With flexible
wages, the deadweight loss of the regulation is below 1% of GDP, but when wages are downwardly
rigid welfare losses exceed 5%. We also show, regardless of wage flexibility, that the main losers from
the regulation are workers (and to a lesser extent large firms) and the main winners are small firms.
Luis Garicano John Van Reenen
Departments of Management and Economics and Department of Economics
Centre for Economic Performance London School of Economics
London School of Economics Centre for Economic Performance
Houghton Street Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom UNITED KINGDOM
and CEPR and NBER
garicano@lse.ac.uk j.vanreenen@lse.ac.uk
Claire LeLarge
National Institute of Statistics
and Economic Studies
Direction des Études et
Synthèses Économiques
15 Boulevard Gabriel Peri
92244 Malakoff Cedex, France
and CREST
claire.lelarge@gmail.com

1 Introduction
A recent literature has documented empirically how distortions can affect aggregate productivity through misalloca-
tions of resources away from more productive firms and towards less productive firms. As Restuccia and Rogerson
(2008) have argued1 these distortions mean that more efficient firms produce too little and employ too few workers.
HsiehandKlenow(2009)showthatthesemisallocationsaccountforasignificantproportionofthedifferenceinaggre-
gate productivity between the US, China and India.2An issue with these approaches is that the causes of the random
distortions are a bit of a “black box”. In this paper, we focus on understanding the impact of one specific distortion
on the French firm size distribution: regulations that increase labor costs when firms reach 50 workers. This is very
relevanttomanydebatesaroundtheworld. Forexample, undertheUSAffordableCareAct, firmswithmorethan50
employees will suffer penalties from not offering health care insurance to their employees whereas those with smaller
firms will not suffer such penalties.3 Hence, critics of “Obamacare” have claimed that this will reduce the incentives
for efficient firms to grow large whereas supporters are skeptical about the magnitude of any such effect.
Theideathatmisallocationsofresourcesliebehindaggregateproductivitygapsisattractiveinunderstandingsome
differencesineconomicperformancebetweentheUSandEurope.4 AccordingtotheEuropeanCommission(1996)the
average production unit in the EU employed 23% less workers than in the US. Consistent with this, Figure 1 shows
that there appear to be far fewer large French firms compared with the US firms. In particular there is a large bulge
in thenumber offirms with employment just below50workers in France, butnotintheUS. This isalsoillustrated in
Figure 2 which shows the exact number of French manufacturing firms by number of workers. There is a sharp fall in
thenumberoffirmswhohaveexactly50employees(160firms)comparedtothosewhohave49employees(416firms).
TheburdenofFrenchlaborlegislationsubstantiallyincreaseswhenfirmsemploy50ormoreworkers. Asweexplain
indetailbelow,firmsof50workersormoremustcreateaworkscouncil(“comitéd’entreprise”)withaminimumbudget
of 0.3% of total payroll, establish a health and safety committee, appoint a union representative and so on. What are
the implications for firm size, firm productivity and aggregate productivity from those laws? Intuitively, some more
productive firms that would have been larger without the regulation choose to remain below the legal threshold to
avoid these costs. In this paper we show how these changes in the firm size distribution can be exploited to infer the
1See also Parente and Prescott(2000),Bloom and Van Reenen (2007)and Petrin and Sivadasan (2010).
2In development economics many scholars have pointed to the “missing middle”, i.e. a preponderance of very small firms in poorer
countries compared to richer countries (see Banerjee and Duflo, 2005,or Jones, 2011). For example, in the late 1980s in India large firms
were banned from producing about 800 product groups (Little et al, 1987). Many explanations have been put forward for the missing
middle such as financial development, taxes, human capital, lack of competition in product markets, and social capital. Consistent with
our approach, Besley and Burgess (2004) suggest that heavy labor regulation is a reason why the formal manufacturing sector is much
smallerin some Indian statescompared to others.
3To be precise, from 2013 there will be penalties for firms with more than 50 full-time employees who (i) do not offer health cov-
erage and (ii) pay workers too little to buy coverage on their own without using federal subsidies. The penalty is $2,000 for each
employee (except for the first 30 employees). If the firm has more than 50 full-time employees and offers some of them coverage
but others have to apply for federal subsidies to buy coverage themselves, the firm must pay the lesser of $3,000 for each employee
receiving insurance subsidies or $2,000 for each full-time employee (again excluding the first 30 employees). For more details see:
http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2012/11/19/cheer-up-papa-johns-obamacare-gave-you-a-good-deal/
4Bartelsman,HaltiwangerandScarpetta(2013)examinemisallocationusingmicro-dataacrosseightOECDcountries. Theyarguethat
consumptionismorethan10%belowUSlevelsinsomeEuropeannationsbecauseofmisalloaction. Inparticular,theyfindthatthe“Olley
Pakes”(1996)covariancetermbetweensizeandproductivityismuchsmallerinFrance(0.24intheirTable1)andotherEuropeancountries
compared to the US (0.51 in their Table 1). Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2012) also report a more efficient allocation of employment
to bettermanaged firmsin the US than in Europe and developing countries.
2

level and distribution of the welfare cost of such regulations.
Therehasbeenextensivediscussionoftheimportanceoflaborlawsforunemploymentandproductivity(e.g. Layard
and Nickell, 1999). The OECD, World Bank and other agencies have developed various indices of the importance of
these regulations, based on examination of laws and (sometimes) surveys of managers. It is very hard, however, to
see how these can be rigorously quantified as “adding up” the regulatory provisions has a large arbitrary component.
A contribution of our paper is to offer a methodology for quantifying the tax equivalent of a regulation, albeit in the
context of a specific model. Moreover, the calculation is extremely transparent, economically intuitive and can be
applied in many other contexts.
There are different views on the underlying sources of heterogeneity in firm productivity. We follow Lucas (1978)
in taking the stand that managerial talent is the primitive, and that the economy-wide observed resource distribution
is, as Manne (1965) felicitously put it, “a solution to the problem: allocate productive factors over managers of
different ability so as to maximize output.” Managers make decisions or solve problems (Garicano, 2000). Making
better decisions, or solving problems that others cannot solve, raises everyone’s marginal product. This means that,
in equilibrium, better managers must be allocated more resources. In fact, absent decreasing returns to managerial
talent, the best manager must be allocated all resources. Given limits to managerial time or attention, the better
managersareallocatedmoreworkersandmorecapitaltomanage.Thisresultsina“scale-of-operations”effectwhereby
differencesintalentareamplifiedbytheresourcesallocated.5 Lucas(1978)firstexploredtheseeffectsinanequilibrium
setting.6
When managers are confronted with legislation that introduces a cost of acquiring a size that is beyond a certain
threshold, they may choose to stay below the threshold and remain at an inefficiently small size. By studying the
productivity of these marginal managers, we are able to estimate the cost of the legislation, the distortions in them,
and thus the welfare cost of the legislation for the entire firm size distribution.7
We start by setting up a simple model of the allocation of a single factor of production, labor, to firms in a world
where there are decreasing returns to managerial talent. We use it to study the effect of a step change in labor costs
after a particular size and show that there are four main effects:
1. Equilibrium wages fall as a result of the reduction in the demand for workers (i.e. some of the tax incidence of
regulation falls on workers)
2. Firm size increases for all firms below the threshold as a result of the general equilibrium effect on wages
3. Firmsizereducestopreciselytheregulatorythresholdforasetoffirmsthatarenotproductiveenoughtojustify
5In a model of this kind, the source of decreasing returns are on the production size, and are linked to limits to managerial time. For
ourpurposeshere,asHsiehandKlenow (2009)show,thissourceofdecreasingreturnsisequivalenttohavingthedecreasingreturnscome
from thedemand/utility side (asis more common in the recentliterature following Melitz,2003).
6SuchascaleofoperationseffectsisattheheartofRosen’s(1982)theoryofhierarchies,whereefficiencyunitsoflaborcontrolled(and
notjustnumberofbodies)matter,andalsoinGaricanoandRossi-Hansberg(2006)wherethereislimitedquantity-qualitysubstitutability
so that matching between workers and managers takes place. Empirically, this technology has been used to explain a wide-range of
phenomena,forexampletheimpactofscale ofoperations effects on CEO wages (Gabaix and Landier,2008).
7Manyempiricalpapershaveshownthatderegulation(e.g. OlleyandPakes,1996),highercompetition(e.g. Syverson,2004)andtrade
liberalization (e.g. Pavcnik,2002)have tended to improve reallocation by increasing thecorrelation betweenfirm sizeand productivity.
3