NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ARE STICKY PRICES COSTLY? EVIDENCE FROM THE STOCK MARKET
Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Michael Weber
Working Paper 18860
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18860
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013
This research was conducted with restricted access to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) data. The
views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the BLS. We
thank our project coordinator at the BLS, Ryan Ogden, for help with the data and Emi Nakamura and
Jon Steinsson for making their data available to us. We thank Francesco D'Acunto, Nicolae Garleanu,
Hanno Lustig, Martin Lettau, Matteo Maggiori, Adair Morse, Marcus Opp and especially Olivier Coibion
for valuable comments. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Coleman Fung Risk
Management Research Center at UC Berkeley. Gorodnichenko also thanks NSF for financial support.
Weber also thanks the Minder Cheng fellowship and the UC Berkeley Institute for Business and Economic
Research for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Michael Weber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Are Sticky Prices Costly? Evidence From The Stock Market
Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Michael Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 18860
February 2013
JEL No. E2,E3,E4,E5,G1
ABSTRACT
We propose a simple framework to assess the costs of nominal price adjustment using stock market
returns. We document that, after monetary policy announcements, the conditional volatility rises more
for firms with stickier prices than for firms with more flexible prices. This differential reaction is economically
large as well as strikingly robust to a broad array of checks. These results suggest that menu costs---broadly
defined to include physical costs of price adjustment, informational frictions, etc.---are an important
factor for nominal price rigidity. We also show that our empirical results qualitatively and, under
plausible calibrations, quantitatively consistent with New Keynesian macroeconomic models where
firms have heterogeneous price stickiness. Since our approach is valid for a wide variety of theoretical
models and frictions preventing firms from price adjustment, we provide ``model-free'' evidence that
sticky prices are indeed costly.
Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics
530 Evans Hall #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu
Michael Weber
Haas School of Business
545 Student Services Bldg. #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
michael_weber@haas.berkeley.edu

I Introduction
In principle, fixed costs of changing prices can be observed and measured. In practice, such
costs take disparate forms in different firms, and we have no data on their magnitude. So
the theory can be tested at best indirectly, at worst not at all. Alan Blinder (1991)
Are sticky prices costly? This simple question stirs an unusually heated debate in
macroeconomics. While there seems to be a growing consensus that prices at the
micro-level are fixed in the short run,1 it is still unclear why firms have rigid prices.
A central tenet of New Keynesian macroeconomics is that firms face fixed “menu” costs
of nominal price adjustment which can rationalize why firms may forgo an increase in
profits by keeping existing prices unchanged after real or nominal shocks. However, the
observed price rigidity does not necessarily entail that nominal shocks have real effects
or that the inability of firms to adjust prices burdens firms. For example, Head et al.
(2012) present a theoretical model where sticky prices arise endogenously even if firms
are free to change prices at any time without any cost. This alternative theory has vastly
different implications for business cycles and policy. How can one distinguish between
opposing motives for price stickiness? The key insight of this paper is that in New
Keynesian models, sticky prices are costly to firms, whereas in other models they are
not. While the sources and types of “menu” costs are likely to vary tremendously across
firms thus making the construction of an integral measure of the cost of sticky prices
extremely challenging, looking at market valuations of firms can provide a natural metric
to determine whether price stickiness is indeed costly. In this paper, we exploit stock
market information to quantify these costs and—to the extent that firms equalize costs
and benefits of nominal price adjustment—“menu” costs. The evidence unambiguously
supports the New Keynesian interpretation of price stickiness.
Specifically, we merge confidential micro-level data underlying the producer price
index(PPI)fromtheBureauofLaborStatistics(BLS)withstockpricedataforindividual
firmsfromNYSETradeandQuote(taq). Asafirstpass,wesortfirmsintoportfoliosbased
onthefrequencyofpriceadjustmentandthencomparereturnsacrossportfoliostoprovide
1Bils and Klenow (2004), Nakamura and Steinsson (2008).
2

a metric of the costs over a broad spectrum of shocks and amplification/propagation
mechanisms. We find that the premium for holding the portfolio populated by firms with
the stickiest prices relative to the portfolio populated by firms with the most flexible
prices is up to 4% per year even after controlling for standard risk factors. This premium
is equivalent to at least 0.3% - 0.8% loss in revenue.
While this summary statistic provides a simple metric, it does not explain how
nominal rigidities affect firms at the micro level. To identify a causal effect of price
rigidity on stock returns, we use rich cross-sectional heterogeneity of firm characteristics
and high frequency stock market data. Our source of variation are monetary shocks
identified as the difference between futures on the fed funds rates—the main policy
instrument of the Fed—in a narrow time window around press releases of the Federal
Open Market Committee (FOMC). We calculate the response of returns for firms with
different frequencies of price adjustment over the same window.
To guide our empirical analyses, we show in a basic New Keynesian model that firms
with stickier prices should experience a greater increase in the volatility of returns than
firms with more flexible prices after a nominal shock. Intuitively, firms with larger costs of
price adjustment tolerate larger departures from the optimal reset price. Thus, the range
in which the discounted present value of cash flows can fluctuate is wider. The menu cost
in this theoretical exercise is generic and, hence, our framework covers a broad range of
models with inflexible prices.
Consistent with this logic, we find that returns for firms with stickier prices exhibit
greater volatility after monetary shocks than returns of firms with more flexible prices,
with the magnitudes being broadly in line with the estimates from a calibrated New
Keynesian model with heterogeneous firms: a hypothetical monetary policy surprise of 25
basis points (bps) leads to an increase in squared returns of 8% for the firms with stickiest
prices. This sensitivity is reduced by a factor of three for firms with the most flexible
prices in our sample. Our results are robust to a large battery of specification checks,
subsample analyses, placebo tests, and alternative estimation methods.
Our work contributes to a large literature aimed at quantifying the costs of price
adjustment. Zbaracki et al. (2004) and others measure menu costs directly by keeping
3