NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO ACQUISITIONS RELIEVE TARGET FIRMS’ FINANCIAL CONSTRAINTS?
Isil Erel
Yeejin Jang
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 18840
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18840
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013
Isil Erel and Michael Weisbach are Fellows of the National Center for the Middle Market at the Fisher
College of Business, Ohio State University, and acknowledge the Center’s support for this research.
We would like to thank Heitor Almeida, Bo Becker, Murillo Campello, Serdar Dinc, Mara Faccio,
Joan Farre-Mensa, Antonio Galvao, Cam Harvey, Jerry Hoberg, Byoung-Hyoun Hwang, Andrew
Karolyi, Berk Sensoy, René Stulz, Tracy Wang, Jun Yang, two referees, as well as seminar participants
at Amsterdam, Boston College, Brandeis, Cornell, Michigan, Minnesota, Northeastern, Ohio State,
Purdue, and UBC Winter Finance Conference for helpful suggestions. We received excellent research
assistance from Jongsik Park. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Isil Erel, Yeejin Jang, and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Acquisitions Relieve Target Firms’ Financial Constraints?
Isil Erel, Yeejin Jang, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 18840
February 2013
JEL No. G32,G34
ABSTRACT
Managers often claim that an important source of value in acquisitions is the acquiring firm’s ability
to finance investments for the target firm. This claim implies that targets are financially constrained
prior to being acquired and that these constraints are eased following the acquisition. We evaluate
these predictions on a sample of 5,187 European acquisitions occurring between 2001 and 2008, for
which we can observe the target’s financial policies both before and after the acquisition. We examine
whether target firms’ post-acquisition financial policies reflect improved access to capital. We find
that the level of cash target firms hold, the sensitivity of cash to cash flow, and the sensitivity of investment
to cash flow all decline significantly, while investment significantly increases following the acquisition.
These effects are stronger in deals that are more likely to be associated with financing improvements.
These findings are consistent with the view that acquisitions ease financial frictions in target firms.
Isil Erel Michael S. Weisbach
Department of Finance Department of Finance
Ohio State University Fisher College of Business
832 Fisher Hall Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue 2100 Neil Ave.
Columbus, OH 43210 Columbus, OH 43210
erel@fisher.osu.edu and NBER
weisbach.2@osu.edu
Yeejin Jang
Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
810 Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
Jang_122@fisher.osu.edu

1. Introduction
In a world with imperfect capital markets, firms will sometimes face financial constraints and
have to forego valuable investment opportunities. In this situation, an acquisition can potentially mitigate
these constraints if an acquirer’s access to capital enables the target to undertake an increased number of
positive net present value investments. Being part of a larger organization subsequent to an acquisition
can improve financing both through better direct access to capital markets, and also by the possibility of
reallocations of capital across divisions (see e.g., Stein (2003)). Practitioners often justify acquisitions by
this logic, claiming that they can better expand the target’s operations because of the acquirer’s internally
generated cash flow and ability to raise capital externally.1 Yet, despite the enormous literature on
mergers and acquisitions, the extent to which acquisitions lower financial constraints in practice is
unknown.
Perhaps the reason why financial constraints in target firms have not been evaluated empirically
is that the implications of such constraints concern the financial policies of the target firm and the way in
which they change following the firm’s acquisition. Evaluating these predictions requires financial data
on target firms both before and after the acquisition. For the U.S., such data are not publicly available.
However, most European countries require disclosure of financial data for subsidiaries, so it is possible to
observe the financial statements of targets both before and after they are acquired, as long as the target
remains an independent subsidiary following the acquisition.
Because of this disclosure requirement, we are able to construct a sample of 5,187 European
acquisitions occurring from 2001 to 2008, each of which became a wholly owned subsidiary subsequent
to the acquisition. This sample contains both domestic (63%) and cross-border (37%) deals, and
acquisitions by both public (36%) and private (64%) firms. Most of the targets (97.4%) are private firms;
71.6% are independent firms while the remaining targets are subsidiaries of other firms prior to the
1 For example, the Financial Times reported that AstraZeneca and Glaxo SmithKline were looking to acquire
smaller biotech companies during the Financial Crisis because they were better able to fund those companies’
investments than potential targets could do on their own. (Financial Times, September 25, 2009)
1

acquisition. We measure the target firms’ cash and investment policies both before and after the
acquisition, and evaluate the extent to which the acquisition led to improved access to capital.
To assess whether financial constraints are mitigated by acquisitions requires one to measure
constraints in a particular target firm both before and after being acquired. While there are many ways to
measure financial constraints, particularly useful ones come from observation of managers’ own actions
to address their financial position. When access to capital markets is imperfect, value maximization will
lead managers to adopt financial policies that ensure that the most important investments will continue to
be financed. One such policy is to hold more cash on the balance sheet, so cash holdings should be higher
when managers believe they face financial constraints.2 In addition, when faced with financial constraints,
the literature has argued that the effect of a firm’s incremental cash flow on investment and also on cash
holdings should be higher (see Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen (1988) and Almeida, Campello and
Weisbach (2004)).3 Therefore, a decline in the target’s cash holdings, investment-cash flow sensitivities,
and cash-cash flow sensitivities following an acquisition would suggest that the target’s financial
constraints are reduced when a target is acquired.
We use these measures to evaluate the extent to which target firms are financially constrained
prior to being acquired, and that these constraints are reduced subsequent to the acquisitions. The results
suggest that target firms are indeed constrained prior to the acquisition, and that the constraints are
lessened after the firms are acquired. In particular, we find that cash holdings, normalized by assets,
decline by approximately 1.5% for an average target firm following being acquired. The sensitivity of
cash to cash flow declines significantly from a positive 10.4% to close to zero, which implies that the
target firm goes from being constrained to unconstrained (see Almeida, Campello and Weisbach (2004)).
Finally, there is a statistically significant decline in the sensitivity of investment to cash flow, with the
2 This argument dates to Keynes (1936) and has been developed and confirmed empirically in a recent literature
beginning with Opler, Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (1999). For a practitioner’s take on this argument see
Passov (2003), who argues that precautionary considerations are relevant even for companies like Pfizer, which at
the time this article was written, had a AAA bond rating.
3 The issue of measuring financial constraints is controversial and each measure has limitations, which are discussed
below in Section 2.5. Our approach is to use alternative measures in the hope that any concerns about one measure
are alleviated by the fact that using other measures leads to similar results.
2