NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CREDIT LINES AS MONITORED LIQUIDITY INSURANCE:
THEORY AND EVIDENCE
Viral V. Acharya
Heitor Almeida
Filippo Ippolito
Ander Perez
Working Paper 18892
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18892
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2013
We are grateful to Igor Cunha and Ping Liu for excellent research assistance and for comments and
suggestions from an anonymous referee, Francois DeGeorge (discussant) and seminar participants
at the European Finance Association (EFA) Meetings, 2012, the European Central Bank, Universidade
Nova de Lisboa, University of Technology Sydney, University of New South Wales, University of
Kentucky, Georgia State University, Norwegian School of Economics at Bergen, Universidad Carlos
III, and the Boston Federal Reserve Bank. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Viral V. Acharya, Heitor Almeida, Filippo Ippolito, and Ander Perez. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Credit Lines as Monitored Liquidity Insurance: Theory and Evidence
Viral V. Acharya, Heitor Almeida, Filippo Ippolito, and Ander Perez
NBER Working Paper No. 18892
March 2013
JEL No. E22,E5,G21,G31,G32
ABSTRACT
We propose and test a theory of corporate liquidity management in which credit lines provided by
banks to firms are a form of monitored liquidity insurance. Bank monitoring and resulting credit line
revocations help control illiquidity-seeking behavior by firms. Firms with high liquidity risk are likely
to use cash rather than credit lines for liquidity management because the cost of monitored liquidity
insurance increases with liquidity risk. We exploit a quasi-experiment around the downgrade of General
Motors (GM) and Ford in 2005 and find that firms that experienced an exogenous increase in liquidity
risk (specifically, firms that relied on bonds for financing in the pre-downgrade period) moved out
of credit lines and into cash holdings in the aftermath of the downgrade. We observe a similar effect
for firms whose ability to raise equity financing is compromised by pricing pressure caused by mutual
fund redemptions. Finally, we find support for the model’s other novel empirical implication that firms
with low hedging needs (high correlation between cash flows and investment opportunities) are more
likely to use credit lines relative to cash, and are also less likely to face covenants and revocations
when using credit lines.
Viral V. Acharya Filippo Ippolito
Stern School of Business Department of Economics and Business
New York University Universitat Pompeu Fabra
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-84 Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
New York, NY 10012 08005 Barcelona, Spain
and CEPR filippo.ippolito@upf.edu
and also NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu Ander Perez
Departament d'Economia i Empresa
Heitor Almeida Universitat Pompeu Fabra
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
515 East Gregory Drive, 4037 BIF 08005 Barcelona (Spain)
Champaign, IL, 61820 ander.perez@upf.edu
and NBER
halmeida@illinois.edu

1 Introduction
Theory suggests that the main difference between a credit line and standard debt is that a
credit line allows the firm to access pre-committed debt capacity (e.g., Holmstrom and Tirole
(1997, 1998) and Shockley and Thakor (1997)). This pre-commitment creates value for credit
lines as a corporate liquidity management tool, in that they help insulate the corporation
from negative shocks that may hinder access to capital markets. In particular, credit lines
canbeaneffective,andlikelycheapersubstituteforcorporatecashholdings. Nevertheless,the
results in Sufi (2009) challenge the notion that credit lines have perfect commitment. Access
to credit lines is often restricted precisely when the firm needs it most, that is, following
negative profitability shocks that cause contractual covenant violations. In addition, the
survey evidence in Lins, Servaes and Tufano (2010) suggests that corporate CFOs do not
always use credit lines as precautionary savings against negative profitability shocks, but also
to help fund future growth opportunities.
We propose and test a theory of corporate liquidity management that bridges the gap
between existing theory and empirical evidence on credit lines. This theory explains how
credit line revocation following negative profitability shocks can be optimal, and it shows
when the presence of future growth opportunities may induce firms to use credit lines in their
liquidity management. The theory generates empirical predictions that we test using a novel
dataset on credit lines, and a new identification strategy.
Inthemodel,afullycommittedcreditline(thatis,fullandirrevocableliquidityinsurance)
creates the following problem. While it protects firms from value-destroying profitability
shocks, once full insurance is in place firms may gain incentives to engage in risky investments
that increase the risk of liquidity shocks (“illiquidity transformation”). Bank-provided credit
lines can help eliminate the firm’s incentive to engage in illiquidity transformation, because
the bank retains the right (through credit line covenants, for example) to revoke access to the
credit line if it obtains a signal that the firm may have engaged in illiquidity transformation.
Crucially, bankmonitoringandlinerevocationtendtohappeninthesamestatesinwhichthe
firm needs the credit line the most (liquidity-shock states). This coincidence arises because
credit line drawdowns are negative NPV loans for the bank. Thus, the bank’s incentive
to monitor is strongest precisely when the firm attempts to draw on the credit line. And,
in this way, credit line revocation provides incentives both for the firm to avoid illiquidity
transformation, and for the bank to pay monitoring costs.
In this framework, the cost of credit line-provided liquidity insurance arises not only from
direct monitoring costs, but also because credit line revocations cause the firm to pass on
1

valuable investments. In equilibrium, firms may then choose to switch to cash holdings if the
cost of credit lines is too high. In particular, the model points to an important determinant
of the choice between cash and credit lines - the firm’s total liquidity risk. Firms with greater
liquidity risk are monitored more often, causing direct and indirect monitoring costs (i.e.,
expected costs of credit line revocation) to increase, and as a result are particularly likely to
forego monitored liquidity insurance and to switch to self-insurance (cash holdings).
We extend the model to allow firms to demand liquidity not only to absorb negative prof-
itability shocks, but also to pursue additional investment opportunities. The financing of
future investments interacts with liquidity shock insurance through two channels. First, the
cost of credit line revocation increases because credit line revocation both limits the contin-
uation of existing projects, and stops the firm from undertaking new investments. Second,
future growth opportunities may provide incentives for firms to avoid illiquidity transforma-
tion independently of monitoring. The first channel is particularly relevant for firms that
tend to have investment opportunities in states with low cash flows (in which credit lines are
likely to be revoked). The second channel is particularly relevant for firms that tend to have
investment opportunities in high cash flow states (whose probability decreases with illiquid-
ity transformation). This set up implies that firms with low hedging needs (high correlation
between cash flows and investment opportunities) are less likely to use cash relative to credit
lines, and are also less likely to require credit line covenants and revocation when using credit
lines for liquidity insurance.
Overall, our model provides two sets of empirically testable predictions, one set dealing
withtherelationshipbetweenliquidityriskandliquiditymanagement,andanothersetdealing
with the relationship between hedging needs, liquidity management, and credit line covenants
and revocations. We test these predictions using a novel dataset on credit lines from Capital
IQ (CIQ). The data cover a large sample of firms in the United States for the period of 2002
to 2011. CIQ compiles detailed information on capital structure and debt structure by going
through financial footnotes contained in firms’ 10-K Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC) filings. In particular, CIQ contains detailed information on the drawn and undrawn
portions of lines of credit.
We test the implication that an increase in liquidity risk decreases reliance on credit lines
using two different identification strategies. We first exploit the downgrade of General Motors
(GM) and Ford in 2005 as a quasi-natural experiment. The downgrade came as an exogenous
and unexpected shock, especially for firms not in the auto sector. Acharya, Schaefer and
Zhang (2008) examine the GM-Ford downgrade in detail, and show that it led to a market-
widesell-offofthecorporatebondsissuedbythesetwofirms. Thedowngradehadasignificant
2