NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SEEKING ALPHA: EXCESS RISK TAKING AND COMPETITION FOR MANAGERIAL
TALENT
Viral V. Acharya
Marco Pagano
Paolo Volpin
Working Paper 18891
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18891
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2013
We are grateful to Ulf Axelson, Marco Battaglini, Philip Bond, Mike Burkart, Adolfo de Motta, David
Dicks, Michael Fishman, Hendrik Hakesen, Hugo Hopenhayn, Giancarlo Spagnolo and participants
in the 2010 AEA Meetings, 2012 AFA Meetings, the Third Conference on Financial Integration and
Stability in Mannheim, 2010 EFA Meetings, 2010 Mitsui Conference at University of Michigan, the
2011 WFA Meetings, the 2011 ESSET in Gerzensee, the 2012 CSEFIGIER Symposium on Economics
and Institutions, the 2013 Econometric Society Meetings in San Diego, and in seminars at Arizona
State University, Bocconi University, Boston College, INSEAD, New York University for helpful
comments and discussions. We acknowledge financial support from the Fondation Banque de France,
ERC (FINLAB project no. 295709), Europlace Institute of Finance, Inquire Europe, and BNP Paribas
Hedge Fund Center (HEC Paris). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Viral V. Acharya, Marco Pagano, and Paolo Volpin. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Seeking Alpha: Excess Risk Taking and Competition for Managerial Talent
Viral V. Acharya, Marco Pagano, and Paolo Volpin
NBER Working Paper No. 18891
March 2013
JEL No. D62,G01,G2,G32,G38,J38
ABSTRACT
We present a model in which managers are risk-averse and firms compete for scarce managerial talent
(“alpha”). When managers are not mobile across firms, firms provide efficient compensation, which
allows for learning about managerial talent and for insurance of low-quality managers. When instead
managers can move across firms, firms cannot offer co-insurance among employees. In anticipation,
risk-averse managers may churn across firms or undertake aggregate risks in order to delay the revelation
of their true quality. The result is excessive risk-taking with pay for short-term performance and an
accumulation of long-term risks. We conclude with a discussion of policies to address the inefficiency
in compensation.
Viral V. Acharya Paolo Volpin
Stern School of Business Finance Department
New York University London Business School
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-84 Regent's Park, London NW1 4SA, UK
New York, NY 10012 pvolpin@london.edu
and CEPR
and also NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu
Marco Pagano
Department of Economics
University of Naples Federico II
Via Cintia, Monte S. Angelo
80126 Napoli, ITALY
mrpagano@tin.it

“The dirty secret of bank bonuses is that these practices have arisen not merely due to a
culture of arrogance; the more pernicious problem is a sense of insecurity. Banks operate
in a world where their star talent is apt to jump between different groups, whenever a bigger
pay-packet appears, with scant regard for corporate loyalty or employment contracts. The
result is that the compensation committees of many banks feel utterly trapped. ... Against
that background, what the members of some compensation committees are quietly starting
to conclude is that the only real solution is to start clamping down on the whole “transfer”
game. “If Fifa can stop clubs poaching other players and ripping up contracts, then why
can’t the banks do the same?” asks one... It is time, in other words, for bankers and
regulators to take a leaf out of football’s book and start debating not just the issue of pay,
but also the poaching culture that is at the root of those huge bonusfi gures.” — Tett (2009)
“Should any investor be prepared to bet on [Mexico’s] next 100 years - or that of any
country?... Cynics suggest no one buys a century bond thinking further away than their
next job move since it won’t be their problem when it does come due.” — Hughes (2010)
1 Introduction
Excessive risk-taking by financial institutions and overly generous executive pay are widely
regarded as key factors in the 2007-09 crisis.1 In particular, it has become commonplace
to blame banks and securities companies for compensation packages that reward managers
(and more generally, other risk-takers such as traders and salesmen) generously for making
investments with high returns in the short run but large “tail risks” that emerge only in
the long run. As governments have been forced to rescue failing financial institutions,
politicians and the media have stressed the need to cut executive pay packages and rein
in incentives based on options and bonuses, making them more dependent on long-term
performance and in extreme cases eliminating them outright.2 It is natural to ask whether
this is the right policy response to the problem. It is crucial to ask what is the root of the
1See, for example, Rajan (2005, 2008) and Richardson and Walter (2009), although there is less than
perfect agreement on the effect of managerial compensation on risk-taking (see Section 2).
2For instance, the 2008 German bailout plan required banks accepting state aid to cap annual salaries
of their executives at 500,000, and to forgo bonuses and dividend payments. Similarly, in early 2009 the
U.S. government capped the pay of top executives at companies receiving significant federal assistance at
$500,000. The British, Swedish, and Swiss governments also set limits on financiers’ compensation in their
efforts to rescue their banking systems.
— 1 —

problem — that is, precisely what market failure produced excessive rewards for short-term
performance at the expense of a build-up of tail risks.
The thesis of this paper is that the root of the problem is the difficulty of rewarding
managerial talent when projects can have long-term or tail risk and the market allows
executives to move from firm to firm before that risk materializes. For instance, a trader
in a financial firm may set up a “carry trade” and then leave the firm before it is known
whether it can be determined whether the carry was an actual arbitrage opportunity or
simply the reward for risk (so that the trade may eventually “blow up”). In this situation
managers who take tail risks while moving rapidly between firms raise their short-term
performance and pay, while reducing their accountability for failures. When such job
churningispossible, competitionformanagerialtalentinducesanegativeexternality, every
firm offering an “escape route” to the others’ employees. But if the market for managerial
talent is not very competitive, managers are more likely to be stuck with their initial
employer and so be held responsible for project failures. The contrast between these two
executive labor market regimes recalls that between the current high-mobility scene and
that prevailing around the middle of last century. As Frydman (2007) shows for a balanced
panel of U.S. firms from 1936 to 2003, top executives who worked throughout their careers
for the same company accounted for 30 percent of the total in 1990-2003, down from 70
percent in 1940-67.
More specifically, we consider a setting in which managers are risk-averse while risk-
neutralfirmscompeteforscarcemanagerialtalent. Wemodelmanagerialtalentas“alpha”,
the ability to generate high returns without incurring high risks: lacking such talent, man-
agers can generate high returns only by taking correspondingly high risks. But risk only
materializes in the long run, so managerial talent can be identified only if the managers
— 2 —