NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SMOKESCREEN: HOW MANAGERS BEHAVE WHEN THEY HAVE SOMETHING
TO HIDE
Tanja Artiga González
Markus Schmid
David Yermack
Working Paper 18886
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18886
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2013
We are grateful to Martin Bugeja, Mike Burkhart, Ettore Croci, Daniel Ferreira, Paul Gilgen, Robert
Guerrero, Simi Kedia, Peter Limbach, Daniel Metzger, Shiva Rajgopal, Daniel Sokol, and seminar
participants at Catholic University of Milan, Cyprus University of Technology, University of Melbourne,
New York University, University of Queensland, University of Technology Sydney, Warwick Business
School, University of Western Australia, and the German Finance Association Annual Meeting in
Wuppertal for helpful comments and suggestions. We thank John Connor for generously providing
his extensive dataset of worldwide cartels, Jongsub Lee for generously providing his dataset of political
contributions, and Ronald Masulis for generously providing his dataset of foreign independent directors.
Part of this research was completed when David Yermack was a visiting professor at Erasmus University
Rotterdam and Tanja Artiga González was a visiting researcher at NYU Stern School of Business.
Financial support from the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) and the German Academic
Exchange Service (DAAD) is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Tanja Artiga González, Markus Schmid, and David Yermack. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Smokescreen: How Managers Behave When They Have Something To Hide
Tanja Artiga González, Markus Schmid, and David Yermack
NBER Working Paper No. 18886
March 2013, Revised December 2013
JEL No. D43,G34,L40
ABSTRACT
We study financial reporting and corporate governance in 218 companies accused of price fixing. These
firms engage in evasive financial reporting strategies, including earnings smoothing, segment reclassification,
and restatements. In corporate governance, cartel firms favor outside directors likely to monitor inattentively
due to low attendance, other board seats, and overseas residence. When directors resign, they are often
not replaced, and auditors are rarely switched. Cartel firms have unusually low CEO turnover and
rely on internal management promotions. Their managers exercise stock options faster than managers
of other firms. Cartel firms are large donors to political candidates. While our results are based only
upon firms engaged in price fixing, we expect that they should apply generally to all companies in
which managers seek to conceal poor performance or wrongdoing.
Tanja Artiga González David Yermack
Swiss Institute of Banking and Finance Stern School of Business
Rosenbergstrasse 52 New York University
CH-9000 St. Gallen, Switzerland 44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-160
tanja.artigagonzalez@unisg.ch New York, NY 10012
and NBER
Markus Schmid dyermack@stern.nyu.edu
Swiss Institute of Banking and Finance
Rosenbergstrasse 52
CH-9000 St. Gallen, Switzerland
markus.schmid@unisg.ch

Smokescreen:
How managers behave when
they have something to hide
1. Introduction
In most financial frauds, a company tries to make its performance appear better
than it really is, hoping to achieve a valuation that wouldn’t be supported by its true cash
flows. This paper looks at the opposite case. We investigate the disclosure and
governance practices of more than 200 U.S. companies accused by government
authorities of participating in price-fixing cartels. These firms earn strong cash flows,
and continuation of their schemes requires obfuscation of the windfalls from regulators,
analysts, customers, and at times, even their own boards of directors.
Connor and Helmers (2007) define a cartel as “an association of legally
independent firms that aims to raise their joint profits through explicit agreements. Hard-
core cartels aim to control prices or restrict supply (or both).” Decisions to join cartels
are typically taken by a firm’s very top managers and then implemented by the
intermediate management (Harrington, 2006). The role of top management suggests that
corporate governance may affect formation and continuation of a cartel. For example,
cartels may occur more readily in firms with a high concentration of power at the top
level, a weak or inattentive board of directors, or strong pay-for-performance incentives
2

(Spagnolo, 2005).1 In addition, financial reporting strategies that cause signal-jamming,
such as earnings smoothing and suspicious accrual patterns, might be expected to occur
frequently with cartels. Cartelists have an ongoing need to deter both cheating and the
entry into the industry of new firms (Levenstein and Suslow, 2006). If a cartel member
deviates from a collusive agreement, its sudden jump in earnings might be detected by
co-conspirators, who could start a price war that could destroy the cartel. Therefore, we
would expect cartels to use financial reporting strategies that obscure year-to-year swings
in profitability.
This paper investigates how cartel firms attempt to cover up their conspiracies.
We use an empirical framework similar to that of Kedia and Philippon (2009), who
investigate cover-up actions by firms involved in fraudulent accounting. We study a
sample of 1,569 firm-years from 218 U.S. companies participating in hard-core cartels
between 1986 and 2010. We define a cartel firm-year as year in which the given cartelist
has been involved in price fixing. The starting point and duration of the cartels in our
sample are identified by enforcement actions brought by government antitrust authorities.
We compare these cartel firm-year observations to observations from a set of control
firms matched on size and industry. As in other empirical studies on cartels, our sample
is subject to a selection bias as we are only able to consider discovered and indicted
1 Theoretical research shows that cartel formation may be motivated not only by the potential profits from
price-fixing, but also by management incentives (e.g., Levenstein and Suslow, 2006). Spagnolo (2005)
adds managerial incentives schemes to a supergame-theoretic model of dynamic competition and shows
that when managers have a preference for smooth time paths, collusion with other firms becomes more
likely. This could be caused by management bonus contracts that have capped incentive provisions. His
model shows that even though income smoothing is costly, shareholders tolerate the cost in return for the
higher collusive profits. Buccirossi and Spagnolo (2008) show in a classical model of repeated oligopoly
that the stability of tacit collusive agreements is positively correlated with performance-based incentives
provided to top management.
3