NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOUSEHOLD LEVERAGING AND DELEVERAGING
Alejandro Justiniano
Giorgio E. Primiceri
Andrea Tambalotti
Working Paper 18941
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18941
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2013
We are grateful for comments and suggestions from Florin Bilbiie, Jeff Campbell, Giovanni Favara,
Andrea Ferrero, Aurel Hizmo, Matteo Iacoviello, and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Board,
2012 Annual Meeting of the SED, North American Summer Meeting of the Econometric Society,
Princeton Conference in Honor of Chris Sims and Chicago Fed HUML Conference. Giorgio Primiceri
thanks the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation for research support, and Andrea Tambalotti thanks NYU Abu
Dhabi for its hospitality while conducting part of this research. The views expressed in this paper are
those of the authors and are not necessarily reflective of views at the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago,
New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18941.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Alejandro Justiniano, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Household Leveraging and Deleveraging
Alejandro Justiniano, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti
NBER Working Paper No. 18941
April 2013
JEL No. E21,E44
ABSTRACT
U.S. households' debt skyrocketed between 2000 and 2007, and has been falling since. This leveraging
(and deleveraging) cycle cannot be accounted for by the liberalization, and subsequent tightening,
of credit standards in mortgage markets observed during the same period. We base this conclusion
on a quantitative dynamic general equilibrium model calibrated using macroeconomic aggregates and
microeconomic data from the Survey of Consumer Finances. From the perspective of the model, the
credit cycle is more likely due to factors that impacted house prices more directly, thus affecting the
availability of credit through a collateral channel. In either case, the macroeconomic consequences
of leveraging and deleveraging are relatively minor, because the responses of borrowers and lenders
roughly wash out in the aggregate.
Alejandro Justiniano Andrea Tambalotti
Economic Research Department Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 33 Liberty Street, 3rd Floor
230 S. LaSalle Street New York, NY 10045
Chicago, IL 60604 a.tambalotti@gmail.com
ajustiniano@frbchi.org
Giorgio E. Primiceri
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
318 Andersen Hall
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER
g-primiceri@northwestern.edu

HOUSEHOLD LEVERAGING AND DELEVERAGING
ALEJANDRO JUSTINIANO, GIORGIO E. PRIMICERI, AND ANDREA TAMBALOTTI
Abstract. U.S. households’ debt skyrocketed between 2000 and 2007, and has been
fallingsince. Thisleveraging(anddeleveraging)cyclecannotbeaccountedforbythelib-
eralization,andsubsequenttightening,ofcreditstandardsinmortgagemarketsobserved
duringthesameperiod. Webasethisconclusiononaquantitativedynamicgeneralequi-
librium model calibrated using macroeconomic aggregates and microeconomic data from
the Survey of Consumer Finances. From the perspective of the model, the credit cycle
is more likely due to factors that impacted house prices more directly, thus affecting the
availabilityofcreditthroughacollateralchannel. Ineithercase,themacroeconomiccon-
sequences of leveraging and deleveraging are relatively minor, because the responses of
borrowers and lenders roughly wash out in the aggregate.
1. introduction
The evolution of U.S. households’ debt since the turn of the XXI century has been
remarkable. As shown in figure 1.1, the ratio of mortgage debt to GDP rose by about 30
percentage points between 2000 and the beginning of the financial crisis, three times more
than in the previous episode of credit expansion in the 1980s. Since then, this ratio has
fallen by about 10 percentage points, orders of magnitudes more than at any time since the
Great Depression. Here, and in the rest of the paper, we focus on mortgage debt because
it represents about 70 percent of total household liabilities in the United States, but the
picturewouldlookverysimilarifweusedamorecomprehensivemeasureofhouseholddebt.
This unprecedented leveraging cycle has attracted a great deal of attention, contributing
to bring the connection between household debt and the macroeconomy front and center
Date: February 2013. First version: October 2012.
WearegratefulforcommentsandsuggestionsfromFlorinBilbiie,JeffCampbell,GiovanniFavara,Andrea
Ferrero, Aurel Hizmo, Matteo Iacoviello, and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Board, 2012
Annual Meeting of the SED, North American Summer Meeting of the Econometric Society, Princeton
Conference in Honor of Chris Sims and Chicago Fed HUML Conference. Giorgio Primiceri thanks the
Alfred P. Sloan Foundation for research support, and Andrea Tambalotti thanks NYU Abu Dhabi for its
hospitalitywhileconductingpartofthisresearch. Theviewsexpressedinthispaperarethoseoftheauthors
andarenotnecessarilyreflectiveofviewsattheFederalReserveBanksofChicago,NewYorkortheFederal
Reserve System.
1

HOUSEHOLD LEVERAGING AND DELEVERAGING 2
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
Figure 1.1. Mortgages-to-GDP ratio. Mortgages are defined as home
mortgages from the balance sheet of U.S. households and nonprofit
organizations (Flow of Funds, Table B.100, line 33, unique identifier
Z1/Z1/FL153165105.Q). They include loans made under home equity lines
of credit and home equity loans secured by junior liens.
in the public and academic debates (e.g. Eggertsson and Krugman, 2012, Guerrieri and
Lorenzoni, 2012, Midrigan and Philippon, 2011, Mian and Sufi , 2009 and 2011, Mian, Rao
andSufi, 2012, IMF,2012, andMcKinseyGlobalInstitute, 2012). Inparticular, Eggertsson
and Krugman (2012, EK hereafter) and Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2012, GL hereafter) have
modeled the idea that a negative shock to consumers’ ability to borrow pushed the U.S.
economy against the zero lower bound, exacerbating the Great Recession and delaying the
recovery from it. This paper adds to this debate a quantitative perspective on the causes
and consequences of the exceptional leveraging cycle documented in figure 1.1. It does so
in the context of a general equilibrium model consistent with many empirical features of
the U.S. economy.
The model has three key ingredients. First, heterogeneity in households’ desire to save
generates borrowing and lending, and hence a role for debt. Since household debt in the
U.S. is held primarily in the form of mortgages, the second key feature of the model is