NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHO SHOULD PAY FOR CREDIT RATINGS AND HOW?
Anil K Kashyap
Natalia Kovrijnykh
Working Paper 18923
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18923
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2013
We have benefited from suggestions and comments from the editor, two anonymous referees, Bo Becker,
Hector Chade, Simon Gilchrist, Ben Lester, Robert Lucas, Rodolfo Manuelli, Marcus Opp, Chris Phelan,
Francesco Sangiorgi, Joel Shapiro, Robert Shimer, Nancy Stokey, and Joel Watson. We are also grateful
for comments by seminar participants at ASU, Atlanta Fed, Philadelphia Fed, Purdue University, NYU
Stern, University of Arizona, University of Chicago, University of Iowa, University of Oxford, USC,
University of Wisconsin{Madison, Washington University in St. Louis, and conference participants
of the LAEF Accounting for Accounting in Economics Conference in 2013, Fall 2012 NBER Corporate
Finance Meeting, 2013 NBER Summer Institute, 2013 SED Meetings, and 2015 SAET Conference.
Kashyap thanks the National Science Foundation, as well as the Initiative on Global Markets and the
Center for Research on Security Prices at Chicago Booth for research support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research. For information on Kashyap's outside compensated activities see http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/anil.kashyap/.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Anil K Kashyap and Natalia Kovrijnykh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Who Should Pay for Credit Ratings and How?
Anil K Kashyap and Natalia Kovrijnykh
NBER Working Paper No. 18923
March 2013, Revised August 2015
JEL No. D82,D83,D86,G24
ABSTRACT
We analyze a model where investors use a credit rating to decide whether to finance a firm. The rating
quality depends on unobservable effort exerted by a credit rating agency (CRA). We study optimal
compensation schemes for the CRA when a planner, the firm, or investors order the rating. Rating
errors are larger when the firm orders it than when investors do (and both produce larger errors than
is socially optimal). Investors overuse ratings relative to the firm or planner. A trade-off in providing
time-consistent incentives embedded in the optimal compensation structure makes the CRA slow to
acknowledge mistakes.
Anil K Kashyap
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
anil.kashyap@chicagobooth.edu
Natalia Kovrijnykh
Department of Economics
W. P. Carey School of Business
Arizona State University
P.O. Box 873806
Tempe, AZ 85287-3806
Natalia.Kovrijnykh@asu.edu

1 Introduction
Virtually every government inquiry into the 2008−2009 financial crisis has assigned some
blame to credit rating agencies. For example, the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission
(2011, p. xxv) concludes that “this crisis could not have happened without the rating
agencies”. Likewise, the United States Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations
(2011, p. 6) states that “inaccurate AAA credit ratings introduced risk into the U.S.
financial system and constituted a key cause of the financial crisis”. In announcing its
lawsuit against S&P, the U.S. government claimed that “S&P played an important role in
helping to bring our economy to the brink of collapse”. But the details of the indictments
differ slightly across the analyses. For instance, the Senate report points to inadequate
staffing as a critical factor, the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission highlights the business
model that had firms seeking to issue securities pay for ratings as a major contributor,
while the U.S. Department of Justice lawsuit identifies the desire for increased revenue and
market share as a critical factor.1 In this paper we explore the role that these and other
factors might play in creating inaccurate ratings.
We study a one-period environment where a firm is seeking funding for a project from
investors. The project’s quality is unknown, and a credit rating agency can be hired to
evaluate the project. So, the rating agency creates value by generating information that
can lead to more efficient financing decisions. The CRA must exert costly effort to acquire
a signal about the quality of the project, and the higher the effort, the more informative the
signal about the project’s quality. The key friction is that the CRA’s effort is unobservable,
so a compensation scheme must be designed to provide incentives to the CRA to exert it.
We consider three settings, where we vary who orders a rating — a planner, the firm, or
potential investors.
This simple framework makes it possible to directly address the claims made in the
government reports. In particular, we can ask: how do you compensate the CRA to avoid
1The United States Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations (2011) reported that “factors
responsible for the inaccurate ratings include rating models that failed to include relevant mortgage per-
formance data, unclear and subjective criteria used to produce ratings, a failure to apply updated rating
models to existing rated transactions, and a failure to provide adequate staffing to perform rating and
surveillance services, despite record revenues”. Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (2011) concluded
that“the business model under which firms issuing securities paid for their ratings seriously undermined
thequalityandintegrityofthoseratings; theratingagenciesplacedmarketshareandprofitconsiderations
above the quality and integrity of their ratings”. The United States Department of Justice Complaint
(2013) states that because of “the desire to increase market share and profits, S&P issued inflated ratings
on hundreds of billions of dollars’ worth of CDOs”.
1

shirking? Does the issuer-pays model generate more shirking than when the investors pay
for ratings? In addition, in natural extensions of the basic model we can see whether a
battle for market share would be expected to reduce ratings quality, or whether different
types of securities create different incentives to shirk.
Our model explains five observations about the ratings business that are documented
in the next section, in a unified fashion. The first is that rating mistakes are in part due to
insufficienteffortbyratingagencies. Thesecondisthatoutcomesandaccuracyofratingsdo
differ depending on which party pays for a rating. Third, increases in competition between
rating agencies are accompanied by a reduction in the accuracy of ratings. Fourth, ratings
mistakes are more common for newer securities with shorter histories than exist for more
established types of securities. Finally, revisions to ratings are slow.
We begin our analysis by characterizing the optimal compensation arrangement for the
CRA. The need to provide incentives for effort requires setting the fees that are contingent
onoutcomes—theissuedratingandtheproject’sperformance—, whichcanbeinterpreted
as rewarding the CRA for establishing a reputation for accuracy.2 Moreover, as is often
the case in this kind of models, the problem of effort under-provision argues for giving the
surplus from the investment project to the rating agency, so that the higher the CRA’s
profits, the higher the effort it exerts.
WeproceedbycomparingtheCRA’seffortandthetotalsurplusinthismodeldepending
on who orders a rating. Generically, under the issuer-pays model, the rating is acquired
less often and is less informative (i.e., the CRA exerts less effort) than in the investor-pays
model (or in the second best, where the planner asks for a rating). However, the total
surplus in the issuer-pays model may be higher or lower than in the investor-pays model,
depending on the agents’ prior beliefs about the quality of the project. The ambiguity
about the total surplus arises because even though investors induce the CRA to exert more
effort, they will ask for a rating even when the social planner would not. So the extra
accuracy achieved by having investors pay is potentially dissipated by an excessive reliance
on ratings.
We also extend the basic setup in four ways. The first extension explores the impli-
cations of allowing rating agencies to compete for business. An immediate implication of
competition is a tendency to reduce fees in order to win business. But with lower fees
comes lower effort in evaluating projects. Hence, this framework predicts that competition
tends to lead to less accurate ratings.
2We discuss this interpretation of outcome-contingent fees in more detail in Section 4.2.
2