NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LARGE BLOCK SHAREHOLDERS, INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS, BOARDS
OF DIRECTORS AND BANK VALUE IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY
Howard Bodenhorn
Working Paper 18955
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18955
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2013
I thank Henry Hansmann and Mariana Parglender for sharing an early draft of their 2012 working
paper. Eric Hilt and Danielle Zanzalari offered helpful comments on an earlier draft. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Howard Bodenhorn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Large Block Shareholders, Institutional Investors, Boards of Directors and Bank Value in
the Nineteenth Century
Howard Bodenhorn
NBER Working Paper No. 18955
April 2013
JEL No. G3,N21
ABSTRACT
Share prices of modern corporations are influenced by the size and structure of boards of directors,
large individual and institutional investors, and shareholder voting rights, among other governance
features. It is not clear whether the same features mattered historically, given recent research suggesting
that the principal concern in the nineteenth century was neither managerial self-dealing nor majority
shareholder expropriation that might reduce the returns to common shareholders. Rather, at many
nineteenth-century corporations, common shareholders were also customers and shareholding offered
preferential access to the firms’ goods and services. Using modern empirical tools in a study of banks,
this study finds evidence supporting the shareholder-as-customer model. Bank values responded positively
to the presence of large-block individual shareholders (those more concerned with access to loans)
and negatively to large-block institutional investors (those more concerned with dividend returns than
access). Moreover, firm value declined as directors consumed larger fractions of a bank’s loans, which
reduced the bank’s ability to extend credit to other shareholders.
Howard Bodenhorn
John E. Walker Department of Economics
College of Business and Behavioral Science
201-B Sirrine Hall
Clemson University
Clemson, SC 29634
and NBER
bodenhorn@gmail.com

Large Block Shareholders, Institutional Investors, Boards of Directors and
Bank Value in the Nineteenth Century
1. Introduction
Which governance characteristics of a firm influences its value? The modern finance literature
identifies board size and composition, large institutional investors, large block indivdual shareholders,
CEO power and share voting rights, among others, as governance features that influence firm value.
Although the literature provides insights into contemporary connections between corporate
governance practices, firm policies and market value, our understanding of the history of corporate
governance remains rudimentary. It is not yet clear that historical corporate governance operated like
its modern counterpart. It is also not yet clear whether historical market actors assessed and reacted
to governance features like their modern counterparts. Conceptions of the corporation as political and
economic organizations have evolved over the past two centuries, so it is likely that governance policies
have evolved as well.
This study contributes to an incipient literature that investigates how applicable modern
approaches to corporate governance are to the early days of the corporation.1 Using newly constructed
data on the governance features at early US banks, I find some parallels between historical and
contemporary corporate governance and its effects on bank performance. One historical feature – the
number of members of the board of directors – has comparable historical and modern effects. Larger
1
Principal contributors to the literature include Freeman, Pearson and Taylor (2012),
Guinnane et al (2007), Harris (2009), Hilt (2008), Hansmann and Parglender (2012), Lamoreaux
(2009) and Musacchio (2009).
-2-

boards are associated with lower nineteenth-century bank value (measured by Tobin’s Q). Firm size and
free cash flow influence bank value in predictable ways. Any parallel between the historical and modern
firm breaks down, however, when considering the influence of large block individual and institutional
shareholders. Nineteenth-century bank value is predicted to increase when an individual holds at least
a 5% stake in the firm, a finding consistent with the Shleifer and Vishny (1986) contention that large
block shareholders monitor and discipline management. But historical bank value declines in the
presence of a 5% block institutional shareholder. That the effects of large individual and institutional
shareholdings influence bank value in opposite ways suggest that the historical connection between
large shareholdings and firm value do not have straight-forward modern parallels.
Freeman, Pearson and Taylor (2012) and Hansmann and Parglender (2012) contend that the
nineteenth-century bank was less profit-oriented firm concerned primarily with maximizing shareholder
wealth and more of a loan club or mutual organization. Shareholders owned shares in anticipation of
dividends or capital gains, of course, but the principal motivation behind owning bank shares was that
ownership conferred preferential access to credit. Share prices moved with changes in the benefits of
access. Issues of endogeneity inevitable arise and several estimation techniques are used to address
endogeneity and identify causal effects. Estimates are robust to the inclusion of additional controls and
to the endogenizing of some variables treated as exogenous in the baseline results. The results are
consistent with the contention that historical corporate governance features influenced bank value, but
not necessarily in the same way that they influence outcomes in the modern world.
The data used in this study are from mid-nineteenth century Massachusetts so questions of
representativeness inevitably arise. The institutional milieu in which Massachusetts’ banks operated
make them a suitable and useful laboratory for exploring the connection between bank governance
structures, portfolio choices, dividend policies, and firm value in the nineteenth century. Massachusetts
-3-