NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INDIRECT INCENTIVES OF HEDGE FUND MANAGERS
Jongha Lim
Berk A. Sensoy
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 18903
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18903
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2013
We would like to thank Niki Boyson for particularly helpful comments on an earlier draft. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Jongha Lim, Berk A. Sensoy, and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Indirect Incentives of Hedge Fund Managers
Jongha Lim, Berk A. Sensoy, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 18903
March 2013
JEL No. G23,G3,J3
ABSTRACT
Indirect incentives exist in the money management industry when good current performance increases
future inflows of new capital, leading to higher future fees. We quantify the magnitude of indirect
performance incentives for hedge fund managers. Flows respond quickly and strongly to performance;
lagged performance has a monotonically decreasing impact on flows as lags increase up to two years.
Conservative estimates indicate that indirect incentives for the average fund are four times as large
as direct incentives from incentive fees and returns to managers’ own investment in the fund. For new
funds, indirect incentives are seven times as large as direct incentives. Combining direct and indirect
incentives, for each dollar generated for their investors in a given year, managers receive close to another
dollar in direct performance fees plus the present value of future fees over the expected life of the
fund. Older and capacity constrained funds have considerably weaker relations between future flows
and performance, leading to weaker indirect incentives. There is no evidence that direct contractual
incentives are stronger when market-based indirect incentives are weaker.
Jongha Lim Michael S. Weisbach
Department of Finance Department of Finance
Trulaske College of Business School Fisher College of Business
University of Missouri Ohio State University
Columbia, MO 65211 2100 Neil Ave.
limjong@missouri.edu Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
Berk A. Sensoy weisbach.2@osu.edu
Ohio State University
2100 Neil Ave.
Columbus, OH 43210
sensoy_4@fisher.osu.edu

1. Introduction
Hedge fund managers are among the most highly paid individuals today. According to Kaplan
and Rauh (2010), the top five hedge fund managers likely earned more than all 500 CEOs of S&P 500
firms in 2007 (p. 1006). Therefore, the payoff to becoming a top hedge fund manager is enormous. The
logic of Holmström (1999), Berk and Green (2004) and Chung et al. (2012) provides a framework for
understanding hedge fund manager’s careers: Investors allocate capital to funds based on their perception
of the managers’ abilities, which is a function of the performance of the fund. Good performance,
especially early in one’s career, increases a manager’s lifetime income not only through incentive fees
earned at the time of the performance but also by increasing future flows of new investment to the fund,
thereby increasing future fees.
The extremely high level of pay for the top hedge fund managers suggests that the effect of
current performance on lifetime income through future flows is likely to be important. However, there are
no estimates of its magnitude. For an incremental percentage point of returns to investors, how much
additional capital does the market allocate to that particular hedge fund? How much of this additional
capital do hedge fund managers end up receiving as compensation in expectation? How does this
“expected future pay for today’s performance” compare in magnitude with the direct fees from incentive
fees that they earn from an incremental return? How do these effects differ across types of funds, and
over time for a particular fund? To what extent are these results consistent with theories of optimal capital
allocation, and also of optimal compensation?
In this paper, we evaluate the way in which hedge fund investors allocate their capital, the extent
that it depends on performance, and the way that this relation affects long-term incentives of hedge fund
managers. In a sample of 2,687 hedge funds from 1995 to 2010, we first estimate the relation between
hedge fund performance and inflows to the fund. As predicted by learning models of fund allocation and
consistent with prior work on mutual funds and private equity funds, this relation is substantially stronger
for newer funds, whose managers’ abilities the market knows with less certainty. For an average fund, the
estimates imply that a 10 percentage point incremental return in a given year leads to a 22 percent
1

increase in the fund’s assets under management from inflows of new investment over the next two years.
For a new fund the effect is much larger: every 10 percentage points of return in a fund’s first year leads
to a 41 percent increase in assets under management over the next two years.
The estimates suggest that investors respond remarkably quickly to performance. Estimated using
annual data, about half of the increase in assets under management occurs in the year of the abnormal
performance. Using quarterly or even monthly data, the estimated impact on inflows is strongest for
performance in the immediately preceding quarter or month and declines monotonically so that inflows in
a particular period are much more affected by recent performance one to two years prior. In addition,
performance has a greater impact on flows for funds engaged in more “scalable” strategies. These results
are consistent with the view that investors are continually updating their assessment of managers and
adjust their portfolios based on these updated assessments relatively quickly.
The way in which the inflow-performance relation affects managers’ compensation depends on
the fee structure in hedge funds. Typically, hedge fund managers receive a management fee equal to 2
percent of assets under management, together with incentive fees equal to 20 percent of profits above a
high water mark. As Goetzmann et al. (2003) emphasize, the incentive fee portion of the fee structure is a
call option on the fund’s return, with the high water mark as the exercise price. These authors provide an
analytical formula for calculating the fraction of an incremental dollar invested in the fund that, in
expectation, will be received by the fund’s managers as compensation over the life of the fund. We use
this formula, parameters estimated from our data or suggested by Goetzmann et al. (2003), and our
estimates of the impact of fund performance on inflows to estimate the magnitude of indirect
performance-based compensation. In other words, for an incremental percentage point of current return,
we calculate the additional lifetime income the fund’s managers receive in expectation due to future
inflows of new investment.
As a benchmark for assessing the importance of this effect, we calculate its magnitude relative to
the direct performance pay managers receive from incentive fees and changes in the value of their own
investment in the fund. We use the Agarwal et al. (2009) contingent-claims framework to estimate the
2