NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE MARKET FOR OTC DERIVATIVES
Andrew G. Atkeson
Andrea L. Eisfeldt
Pierre-Olivier Weill
Working Paper 18912
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18912
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2013
We'd like to thank, for fruitful discussions and suggestions, Gara Afonso, Saki Bigio, Briana Chang,
Darrell Duffie, Ben Lester, Gustavo Manso, Tyler Muir, Martin Oehmke, Ionid Rosu, Tano Santos,
Daniel Sanches, Martin Schneider, Shouyong Shi, Randy Wright, Pierre Yared, and seminar participants
at UC Davis, UT Austin, Carnegie-Mellon University, OSU, Kellogg, UCLA, LSE, LBS, the Society
for Economic Dynamics, Paris School of Economics, NBER Summer Institute, Minnesota Workshop
in Macroeconomic Theory, the Chicago Fed Summer Workshop on Money, Banking, Payments and
Finance, the AMSE Marseille Macroeconomic Meeting, the Saint Louis Fed Policy Conference, the
Wisconsin School of Business in Madison, the American Economic Association, Cal Tech, Banque
de France, and Columbia. Patrick Kiefer, Omair Syed, and Alfredo Reyes provided expert research
assistance. We thank the Bank of France, the Fink Center for Finance and Investments, and the Ziman
Center for Real Estate, for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18912.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Andrew G. Atkeson, Andrea L. Eisfeldt, and Pierre-Olivier Weill. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Market for OTC Derivatives
Andrew G. Atkeson, Andrea L. Eisfeldt, and Pierre-Olivier Weill
NBER Working Paper No. 18912
March 2013
JEL No. D83,G0
ABSTRACT
We develop a model of equilibrium entry, trade, and price formation in over-the- counter (OTC) markets.
Banks trade derivatives to share an aggregate risk subject to two trading frictions: they must pay a
fixed entry cost, and they must limit the size of the positions taken by their traders because of risk-management
concerns. Although all banks in our model are endowed with access to the same trading technology,
some large banks endogenously arise as “dealers,” trading mainly to provide intermediation services,
while medium sized banks endogenously participate as “customers” mainly to share risks. We use
the model to address positive questions regarding the growth in OTC markets as trading frictions decline,
and normative questions of how regulation of entry impacts welfare.
Andrew G. Atkeson Pierre-Olivier Weill
Bunche Hall 9381 Department of Economics
Department of Economics University of California, Los Angeles
UCLA Bunche Hall 8283
Box 951477 Los Angeles, CA 90095
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477 and NBER
and NBER poweill@econ.ucla.edu
andy@atkeson.net
Andrea L. Eisfeldt
Anderson School of Management
Andrea.eisfeldt@Anderson.ucla.edu
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18912

1 Introduction
Several stylized observations regarding trading patterns in over-the-counter (OTC) mar-
kets for derivatives have recently received considerable attention from policy makers and
the public alike. First, the large volume of bilateral trades at varied prices creates an
intricate liability structure between participating banks. Second, for the banks partici-
pating in these markets, the gross volume of trade greatly exceeds the net volume. This
difference between gross and net volume is particularly striking for a few large banks, who
have very large gross positions but very small net positions. Because these large banks
hold nearly offsetting long and short positions, they can be viewed as intermediaries or
“dealers.” In contrast, medium sized banks act as “customers”: they trade mostly in one
direction, either long or short, so their gross and net volume are close to each other.
Lastly, these OTC markets are segmented: most smaller banks do not participate at all.
Clearly, these trading patterns differ from the Walrasian market benchmark, in which all
agents participate, gross and net positions always coincide, and trade occurs at a common
price.
In this paper, we offer a parsimonious equilibrium model of entry, trade, and price
formation in an OTC market. Trade in our model is subject to two key trading frictions.
First, a fixed entry cost must be paid by participating banks; second, traders within each
bank face limits on the position they can take with any counterparty. The first friction
is motivated by the observation that trade in OTC derivatives markets requires special-
ized capital and expertise. The second friction is motivated by the observation that,
within banks, a standard risk management practice is to put limits on traders’ positions.
We show that, based on these two trading frictions alone, our model can rationalize the
observed market patterns: namely, the intricate liability structure, the discrepancies be-
tween gross and net positions, the dispersion of prices, and banks’ participation patterns.
In particular, although all banks in our model have access to the same trading technology,
some large banks endogenously participate as “dealers,” trading to provide intermediation
services, mainly to profit from price dispersion, while medium-sized banks endogenously
participate as “customers,” mainly to share risks. Lastly, because of the fixed cost, small
banks do not participate. We use the model to address positive questions regarding the
growth in OTC markets as trading frictions decline, and normative questions of how
regulation of entry impacts welfare.
We consider a theoretical financial system composed of a continuum of financial insti-
tutions we call banks. A bank is viewed as a coalition of many risk-averse agents, called
traders. Banks’ coalitions have heterogenous sizes and heterogenous endowments of a
2

non-tradable risky loan portfolio, creating heterogenous exposures to an aggregate risk
factor. Since traders in banks are risk averse, they will attempt to equalize these expo-
sures. While, in our model, banks cannot alter their exposure directly by trading their
loan endowment, they can do it synthetically by trading derivatives “swap” contracts.
Specifically, conditional on their size and initial exposure to aggregate risk, banks first
choose whether to pay a fixed cost in order to enter into an OTC market for swaps. Next,
traders from participating banks trade swaps bilaterally, subject to a trade size limit.
Finally, banks consolidate their positions internally, and loans and swap contracts pay
off. We first characterize the equilibrium bilateral and aggregate trade volumes, as well
as pricing, conditional on entry patterns. After this analysis, we study entry.
Consider first the market equilibrium after entry. Conditional on banks’ entry deci-
sions, the traders in each participating bank establish bilateral trading relationships al-
most surely with traders from every other bank. When the traders from two banks match,
they bargain over the terms of a swap contract: the direction, the size, and the price.
Gains from trade are determined by the expected post-trade risk exposures of the traders’
respective banks. The direction of the contract which each trader executes depends on
whether their counterparty’s bank expects a larger or smaller post-trade exposure to the
aggregate risk factor than their own bank. The size of the contract is constrained by
a trade size limit. Lastly, the price is set to split the gains from trade equally between
the two traders. Thus, within a bank, some traders execute long contracts, and some
enter short contracts, at dispersed prices that depend on the post-trade exposures of their
different counterparties. At the end of the period, the swap portfolio of a participating
bank is made up of the swap contracts of all its traders. In equilibrium, traders thus share
risk within their banks, and banks share aggregate risk amongst each other through the
OTC derivatives market.
All the bilateral relationships between traders of different banks are constrained by
a trade size limit: a trader cannot sign more than a given amount of swap contracts
with her counterparty, either long or short. We assume that these trading limits are
allocated to the traders in a bank before information about the risk exposure of each
trader’s counterparty is revealed. The restriction that banks cannot reallocate trading
limits across traders once trade has begun is what effectively limits risk sharing.
Next, consider entry. Banks’ decisions to enter the market are driven by two moti-
vations, the strength of which are determined by their sizes and initial risk exposures.
One motivation to enter is to share aggregate risk. This motivation is strong when a
bank’s initial risk exposure is significantly higher or lower than the market-wide aver-
age. A second motivation for a bank to enter is to capture the trading profits due to
3