NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PATENT TRADING FLOWS OF SMALL AND LARGE FIRMS
Nicolas Figueroa
Carlos J. Serrano
Working Paper 18982
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18982
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2013
We thank Victor Aguirregabiria, Amitay Alter, Flor Gragera de León, Anna Lejpras, Anna Levine,
Glenn Macdonald, and Matt Mitchell. We also thank conference and participants at University of Toronto,
University of Alberta, Washington University in St. Louis - Olin School of Business, University of
Chile, and IIOC Conference, CEA Meetings, SEA Meetings, and EARIE meetings. Nicolás Figueroa
is an Assistant Professor of Economics at the Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile. Carlos J. Serrano
is an Assistant Professor of Economics and Business at the Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Research Associate
at the Rotman School of Management - University of Toronto, and a Faculty Research Fellow at the
NBER. Corresponding author: Carlos J. Serrano, carlos.serrano@upf.edu. We are grateful for financial
support from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Nicolas Figueroa and Carlos J. Serrano. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Patent Trading Flows of Small and Large Firms
Nicolas Figueroa and Carlos J. Serrano
NBER Working Paper No. 18982
April 2013
JEL No. L22,L24,O32,O34
ABSTRACT
This article presents the results of an analysis of the patent trading flows of small and large firms and
the determinants of these firm's patent sale and acquisition decisions. We also examine whether these
transactions lead to an excessive concentration of patent rights. We show that small firms disproportionately
sell and acquire more patents than large firms, and find no evidence that patent trading brings about
a significant concentration of patent rights in the hands of large firms. We find that the match between
new patented innovations and the original inventor's patent portfolio plays an important role in how
successful firms are at generating value from their patents, and in the decision to sell a patent. And
among the traded patents, we show that patent acquisitions respond to complementarities between
the acquired patented innovation and the buyer's technological capabilities to adopt it. Our empirical
analysis uses a new, comprehensive data set that matches information on patent trades and the identity
of patent owners over a patent's lifetime.
Nicolas Figueroa
Instituto de Economía
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile
Casilla 76
Correo 17, Santiago de Chile
CHILE
nicolasf@uc.cl
Carlos J. Serrano
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and Universitat Pompeu Fabra
and also NBER
carlos.serrano@utoronto.ca

1 Introduction
What is the extent to which small firms specialize in the creation of patented innovations that
are sold to large firms? Do these transactions lead to an excessive concentration of patent rights?
Does the match between new innovations and the original inventor’s complementary assets play a
roleinhowsuccessfulfirmsareatgeneratingvaluefromtheirpatents; orpossiblythesaletoother
firms? And among traded patents, do patent acquisitions respond to complementarities between
the acquired patented innovation and the buyer’s technological capabilities? This paper presents
theresultsof ananalysisof the patenttrading flowsof small and largefirmsandthedeterminants
of these firms’ patent sale and acquisition decisions. We use a new, comprehensive data set that
matches information on patent trades (Serrano, 2010) and the identity of patent owners over a
patent’s lifetime, involving patents initially owned by businesses in the United States during the
period 1988-2001.
An influential literature in economics and management has contributed to the understanding
of the market for innovations. This literature, which has primarily focused on the licensing of
patents, shows that small firms are both more likely to license the use of their technology than
large firms (see e.g., Anand and Khanna (2000) and Arora, Fosfuri, and Gambardella (2001)) and
toperformalargershareoftheR&Dactivitiesinastrategicalliance(LernerandMerges,1998). It
also shows that the lack of specialized complementary assets (e.g., manufacturing or technological
capabilities)increasesafirm’spropensitytolicenseapatentedinnovation(Teece, 1986; Aroraand
Ceccagnoli, 2006), and that conditional on technology licensing, external knowledge acquisition
and internal R&D activities are complements (Arora and Gambardella, 1994; Cassiman and
Veugelers, 2006).
At the same time, the findings about the licensing of patents do not necessarily expand to the
tradingofpatentrights. First,theacquisitionofapatentdoesnotonlyconveytherightofuseover
thepatented technology(asthelicensingtransactiondoes), butalsothecontrol rightstoletother
firms use the technology, the right to enforce the patent against infringers, as well as the option
to transfer all these rights, including the patent ownership, to any other firm. Second, there is an
increasing concern in academic andpolicy circles thatfirms acquirepatents nottousetechnology,
but to block competitors and stifle follow-on innovation. This can occur if patent sales lead to
an excessive concentration of patent rights (Hahn, 1984), or if buyers have the incentive and the
ability to hold up rivals (Lemley and Shapiro, 2005; FTC, 2012). Third, the legal requirement
that all patent assignments1 have to be filed with the USPTO in order to be legally binding
1Patent assignments acknowledge the transfer by a party of the rights, title, and interest in a patent or bundle
of patents.
1

(DykemanandKopko, 2004)2 canfacilitate the systematic studyof transactionsin themarketfor
innovation.3 Put together, the distinctive features of patent sales indicate that their analysis can
have important implications for understanding the role that the market for innovation plays as a
source of incentives to invest in R&D, and how transactions in patent rights shape the nature of
competition between small and large firms (Gans, Hsu, and Stern, 2002). Moreover, it is common
for patents to be sold, about 13.5 percent of all granted patents are sold, and this rate is even
higher for small firms or weighted by patent "value" (Serrano, 2010). Therefore it makes sense to
devote some effort to the study of patent sales, especially the patent trading flows of small and
large firms.
In this paper we study the patent trading flows of small and large firms, and assess the de-
terminants of the firm’s patent selling and acquisition decisions. The main focus of our analysis
is to study empirically the extent to which small firms specialize in the creation of patented in-
novations, that are then sold to other, maybe large, firms. We also examine whether this patent
trading leads to an excessive concentration of patent rights in the hands of large firms. Moreover,
we analyze the role that the match between new patented innovations and the original patentee’s
patent portfolio (patentee fit) plays in the sale of patents, and study whether patent acquisitions
respond to complementarities between a patented innovation and the buyer’s technological capa-
bilities to adopt it (technology linkages). To do so, we construct a comprehensive data set that
matchesinformationonpatenttradesandnewdatawehaveobtainedabouttheidentityofpatent
ownersoverapatent’slifetime, involvingallpatentsinitiallyappliedforandgrantedtobusinesses
in the United States during the period 1988-2001.
The empirical challenge is to identify the firms’ size on both sides of the transactions. Patent
assignmentdataprovidesdetailedinformationonthetimingof changeinpatentownership, butit
lacks standardized information on the identity of the patent’s buyer, an issue that has limited the
scope of analysis of previous studies (see e.g., Serrano, 2006, 2010). To link this assignment data
with size of buyers and sellers, this paper exploits a provision in U.S. patent law that allows us to
useinformationregardingthepaymentofmaintenance(renewal)feestoidentifywhetherapatent
owner is either a small or large firm. Under Section 41 of the U.S. Patent Act, small entities enjoy
a 50% reduction over what large entities pay for application and renewal fee amounts. Among
2Inthecontextofapatenttrade,onlytransactionsofpatentsrecordedattheUSPTOactasevidenceofabona
fide purchase in courts (Dykeman and Kopko, 2004).
3Instead, most existing studies on the licensing of patents use data from licensing and strategic alliances activ-
ities reported to the U.S. Security and Exchange Commission (SEC). These transactions are not systematic, they
typically involve transactions that are significant in value, in which at least one party is a publicly traded firm
(i.e., larger firms). At the same time, the transaction provide rich information about the terms of the contractual
relationship between the licensor and licensee.
2