NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAPITAL FLOWS AND THE RISK-TAKING CHANNEL OF MONETARY POLICY
Valentina Bruno
Hyun Song Shin
Working Paper 18942
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18942
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2013
We are grateful to Christopher Sims, John Taylor, Jean-Pierre Landau, Guillaume Plantin, Lars Svensson
and Tarek Hassan for their comments on an earlier version of this paper. We also thank participants
at the 2012 BIS Annual Conference, Bank of Canada Annual Research Conference, 2013 AEA meetings
and presentations at the Monetary Authority of Singapore, Bank of Korea and at the Central Bank
of the Republic of Turkey. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Valentina Bruno and Hyun Song Shin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Capital Flows and the Risk-Taking Channel of Monetary Policy
Valentina Bruno and Hyun Song Shin
NBER Working Paper No. 18942
April 2013
JEL No. E5,F32,F33,F34,G21
ABSTRACT
We study the dynamics linking monetary policy with bank leverage and show that adjustments in leverage
act as the linchpin in the monetary transmission mechanism that works through fluctuations in risk-taking.
Motivated by the evidence, we formulate a model of the "risk-taking channel" of monetary policy
in the international context that rests on the feedback loop between increased leverage of global banks
and capital flows amid currency appreciation for capital recipient economies.
Valentina Bruno
American University
Kogod School of Business
4400 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20016
bruno@american.edu
Hyun Song Shin
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
hsshin@princeton.edu
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18942

1 Introduction
Low interest rates maintained by advanced economy central banks have led to a lively debate
on the nature of global liquidity and its transmission across borders. A popular narrative in
the financial press has been that low interest rates in advanced economies act as a driver of
cross-border capital flows, resulting in overheating and excessive credit growth in the recipient
economies.1 However, the precise economic mechanism behind such a narrative has been more
difficult to pin down.
One way to shed light on the debate is to start with the empirical evidence onthe cyclical na-
ture of leverage and financial conditions. Gourinchas and Obstfeld (2012) conduct an empirical
study using data from 1973 to 2010 for both advanced and emerging economies on the deter-
minants of financial crises. They find that two factors emerge consistently as the most robust
and significant predictors of financial crises, namely a rapid increase in leverage and a sharp real
appreciation of the currency. Their finding holds both for emerging and advanced economies,
and holds throughout the sample period. Shularick and Taylor (2012) similarly highlight the
role of leverage in financial vulnerability, especially that associated with the banking sector.
Thus, one way to frame the debate on the role of monetary policy in the transmission of global
liquidity is to ask how monetary policy influences leverage and real exchange rates.2
Banks are intermediaries whose financing costs are closely tied to the policy rate chosen by
the central bank, so that monetary policy may act directly on the economy through greater
risk-taking by the banking sector. Borio and Zhu (2012) coined the term “risk-taking channel
of monetary policy”, and Adrian and Shin (2008, 2011) and Adrian, Estrella and Shin (2009)
have explored the workings of the risk-taking channel for the United States. In this paper,
we explore the workings of the risk-taking channel both domestically and in an international
setting.
1See, for instance, the full page feature in the Financial Times entitled “Carried Away”, April 30th, 2010.
2See also the IMF working paper by Lund-Jensen (2012) that presents similar evidence. Our question is
related to the debate on whether monetary policy was “too loose” in the run-up to the crisis with respect to
the Taylor Rule (Taylor (2007), Bernanke (2010)). However, our focus is narrower in that we examine the
risk-taking channel more explicitly.
1

Ourfirstcontributionistodrawtogethertwostrandsintheempiricalliteratureandhighlight
the importance of leverage as the common thread that ties the two. Bekaert, Hoerova and Lo
Duca (2012) conduct a VAR study of the relationship between the policy rate chosen by the
Federal Reserve (the target Fed Funds rate) and measured risks given by the VIX index of
implied volatility on US equity options, and show that there is a close interaction between
the two variables. In particular, they show that a cut in the Fed Funds rate is followed
by a dampening of the VIX index. Meanwhile, Eichenbaum and Evans (1995) find that a
contractionary shock to US monetary policy leads to persistent appreciation in the US dollar
both in nominal and real terms.
Our contribution is to show that these two sets of results may be seen as two sides of the
same coin. We highlight bank leverage as the linchpin in the risk-taking channel of monetary
policy that translates lower measures of risk into greater risk-taking, and then to other real and
financial variables. Among the variables impacted by a shock to leverage are capital flows and
exchange rates. We verify in our VAR analysis that a decrease in the Fed Fund rate leads to
depreciationsintheUSdollarafterabout14quarters, whileanincreaseinleverageisfollowedby
adepreciationof the USdollar from 3quarters but which persists for 20quarters ormore. These
results are consistent with the so-called delayed overshooting puzzle found in Eichenbaum and
Evans (1995) who find that a contractionary shock to US monetary policy leads to persistent
appreciation in nominal and real US exchange rates, with a maximum impact that does not
occur contemporaneously but at least 24 months after the shock. Our complementary finding
is that the impact on exchange rates works through leverage and the VIX. In addition, we
document an additional international dimension of the transmission of monetary policy through
capital flows whereby a contractionary shock to US monetary policy leads to a decrease in the
cross-border capital flows in the banking sector.
Recent papers have documented micro evidence in support of the risk-taking channel of
monetary policy, showing how credit standards are influenced by the central bank policy rate.
For instance, Jim´enez, Ongena, Peydr´o and Saurina (2012) using data from Europe find that
a low policy rate induces thinly capitalized banks to grant more loans to ex ante riskier firms.
2