NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WOMEN'S EMANCIPATION THROUGH EDUCATION:
A MACROECONOMIC ANALYSIS
Fatih Guvenen
Michelle Rendall
Working Paper 18979
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18979
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2013
For helpful discussions and comments, we thank seminar participants at European University Institute,
Goethe University Frankfurt, Toulouse School of Economics, Universite Catholique de Louvain, University
of Zurich, NBER's Aggregate Implications of Microeconomic Consumption Behavior in Cambridge,
and the SED conference. For financial support, Guvenen thanks the National Science Foundation (Grant
No 0814030) and Rendall thanks the European Research Council (ERC Advanced Grant IPCDP-229883).
The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Fatih Guvenen and Michelle Rendall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Women's Emancipation Through Education: A Macroeconomic Analysis
Fatih Guvenen and Michelle Rendall
NBER Working Paper No. 18979
April 2013
JEL No. D13,E24,J12
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we study the role of education as insurance against a bad marriage. Historically, due
to disparities in earning power and education across genders, married women often found themselves
in an economically vulnerable position, and had to suffer one of two fates in a bad marriage: either
they get divorced (assuming it is available) and struggle as low-income single mothers, or they remain
trapped in the marriage. In both cases, education can provide a route to emancipation for women. To
investigate this idea, we build and estimate an equilibrium search model with education, marriage/
divorce/remarriage, and household labor supply decisions. A key feature of the model is that women
bear a larger share of the divorce burden, mainly because they are more closely tied to their children
relative to men. Our focus on education is motivated by the fact that divorce laws typically allow spouses
to keep the future returns from their human capital upon divorce (unlike their physical assets), making
education a good insurance against divorce risk. However, as women further their education, the earnings
gap between spouses shrinks, leading to more unstable marriages and, in turn, further increasing demand
for education. The framework generates powerful amplification mechanisms, which lead to a large
rise in divorce rates and a decline in marriage rates (similar to those observed in the US data) from
relatively modest exogenous driving forces. Further, in the model, women overtake men in college
attainment during the 1990s, a feature of the data that has proved challenging to explain. Our counterfactual
experiments indicate that the divorce law reform of the 1970s played an important role in all of these
trends, explaining more than one-quarter of college attainment rate of women post-1970s and one-half
of the rise in labor supply for married women.
Fatih Guvenen
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
4-151 Hanson Hall
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN, 55455
and NBER
guvenen@umn.edu
Michelle Rendall
University of Zurich
Muehlebachstr. 86
8008 Zurich
Switzerland
michelle.rendall@econ.uzh.ch

1 Introduction
In this paper, we study the role of education as insurance against a bad marriage.
Historically, disparities in earning power and education across genders have contributed to
creating a vulnerable economic position for married women. Women in bad marriages are
faced with suffering one of two fates: either they get divorced (assuming it is available) and
struggle as low-income single mothers, or they remain trapped in the marriage. To establish
these ideas, the following two examples are instructive.
First, writer Ilka Perez recounts her own experience as an uneducated divorced mother:
Stress and struggle came with independence. When my daughter was young, I worked
two jobs and still did not have enough money. Every month, I paid my rent extremely
late. I had to go to food pantries or to my mother’s house for food.... I shed so many
tears that I tried my best not to let my children see. I just kept telling myself, “I will
do well by my children by first doing well by me.” 1
The second excerpt describes being trapped in a bad marriage as an uneducated woman:
Fraidy was 19 when her family arranged for her to marry a man who turned out to
be violent. But with no education and no job, and a family that refused to help her,
she felt stuck. Still stuck at age 27, Fraidy defied her husband and relatives to become
the first person in her family to go to college. She graduated from Rutgers University
at age 32 as valedictorian.... Fraidy went on to a career as an investigator at Kroll,
the world’s largest investigations firm, and then at a private firm in New York. At the
same time, Fraidy managed to get divorced, win full custody of her children and get
a final restraining order against her ex-husband. 2
Examples similar to these are abundant and are familiar to all. In both of these cases
described above, education can provide a route to emancipation for women. The goal of
this paper is to quantify this insurance demand for education and to better understand its
interaction with some dramatic changes in the socio-economic status of American women
since the 1950s:
I. Changes in marriage/divorce rates: The marriage rate fell by almost half between
1950 and 2000, and the divorce rate doubled during the same time (Figure 1).
1Ilka Perez, “What’s Worse Than Being a Single Mother?” Motherlode: Adventures in Parenting, New
York Times, May 22, 2012.
2Biographical sketch of Fraidy Reiss, founder/executive director of Unchained at Last, accessed
April 8, 2013, http:www.unchainedatlast.org/.
2

II. Reversal of the college-gender gap: The fraction of women with a college degree rose
substantially: during the 1950s, for every college-educated woman, there were about
two college-educated men; today, the college-gender gap is reversed, with more women
than men graduating from college (Figure 2).
III. Changes in female labor force participation: Married women started joining the labor
market in droves, causing the average hours worked by this group to increase fourfold
since 1950, an increase that far exceeds the change in any other demographic group.
This paper builds an overlapping generations search model—with marriage/divorce/remar-
riage, education, and household labor supply decisions—in which these three sets of trends
are intimately related to each other. The main focus of the paper is on two types of
asymmetries between men and women—gender-specific wage paths and, more importantly,
different shares of divorce burden borne by each spouse—and on how these asymmetries
are amplified by the equilibrium interactions to generate powerful socio-economic changes.
The story we investigate is a simple and, we believe, plausible one. Our point of de-
parture is that, when it comes to caring for children, women shoulder a larger share of the
burden relative to men. Therefore, any disturbance in a mother’s life that makes it harder
for her to care for her children is extremely costly (in utility terms), which makes her de-
mand insurance against such disturbances, such as divorce (more so than men). In this
context, education provides a valuable insurance for at least two reasons. First, without
the higher wages associated with higher education, a divorced mother would have to rely
on her ex-husband and face added uncertainty about whether her ex-husband would take
care of their children (via alimony or child support).3 Second, divorce laws typically allow
spouses to keep the full future returns from their human wealth upon divorce unlike their
physical assets (see, e.g., Bahr (1983)), making education a good insurance against divorce
risk. Put differently, educated women, being better able to survive divorce, are less likely
to be trapped in a bad marriage.
In the model, marital bliss (i.e., love in marriage) fluctuates over time, which causes
each spouse to reevaluate individual marital options. Upon divorce, an individual faces
two types of cost. One, any subsequent household formed by a divorced individual has a
lower economies of scale parameter (i.e., is less efficient), due to the difficulties of running
separate households and, upon remarriage, dealing with a stepparent and stepchildren.
3In 1986, only 42% of individuals who were eligible for alimony (overwhelmingly women) were able to
receiveitonaregularbasis;31%neverreceivedit,andtherestreceivedonlyoccasionally. (Source: General
Social Survey 1986, available at NORC at University of Chicago, http://www3.norc.org/GSS+Website/.)
3