NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SHAPING LIQUIDITY:
ON THE CAUSAL EFFECTS OF VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE
Karthik Balakrishnan
Mary B. Billings
Bryan T. Kelly
Alexander Ljungqvist
Working Paper 18984
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18984
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2013
We thank Yakov Amihud, Douglas Diamond, Joseph Gerakos, Lawrence Glosten (our Five Star discussant),
Charles Jones (our WFA discussant), Christian Leuz (our Utah discussant), Amir Sufi, Margarita Tsoutsoura,
Ro Verrecchia, and various seminar audiences for helpful suggestions. We are grateful to Ruslan Goyenko
for sharing his code to generate the effective tick measure from Goyenko et al. (2009) and to Stephen
Brown for sharing his PIN data. Balakrishnan gratefully acknowledges funding from the Dean’s Research
Fund at Wharton. Ljungqvist gratefully acknowledges the generous hospitality of the European Central
Bank while working on this project. The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect those
of the ECB, the Eurosystem, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Karthik Balakrishnan, Mary B. Billings, Bryan T. Kelly, and Alexander Ljungqvist. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Shaping Liquidity: On the Causal Effects of Voluntary Disclosure
Karthik Balakrishnan, Mary B. Billings, Bryan T. Kelly, and Alexander Ljungqvist
NBER Working Paper No. 18984
April 2013
JEL No. G12,G24,M41
ABSTRACT
Can managers influence the liquidity of their firms’ shares? We use plausibly exogenous variation
in the supply of public information to show that firms seek to actively shape their information environments
by voluntarily disclosing more information than is mandated by market regulations and that such efforts
have a sizeable and beneficial effect on liquidity. Firms respond to an exogenous loss of public information
by providing more timely and informative earnings guidance. Responses appear motivated by a desire
to reduce information asymmetries between retail and institutional investors. Liquidity improves as
a result of voluntary disclosure and in turn increases firm value. This suggests that managers can causally
influence their cost of capital via voluntary disclosure.
Karthik Balakrishnan Bryan T. Kelly
The Wharton School of the University of Pennsy l v a n ia University of Chicago
1318 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall Booth School of Business
3620 Locust Walk 5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6365 Chicago, IL 60637
kbalakri@wharton.upenn.edu and NBER
bryan.kelly@chicagobooth.edu
Mary B. Billings
New York University Alexander Ljungqvist
Stern School of Business Stern School of Business
44 West Fourth Street, Suite 10-94 New York University
New York, NY 10012 44 West Fourth Street, #9-160
mbilling@stern.nyu.edu New York, NY 10012
and NBER
aljungqv@stern.nyu.edu

Improved liquidity raises a firm’s market value by lowering its discount rate (see Amihud and
Mendelson (1986, 1989), Brennan and Subrahmanyam (1996), and Amihud (2002)). While
liquidity is often viewed as resulting from market makers’ and investors’ actions in an
exogenously specified information environment, we examine if corporate managers can actively
influence the liquidity of their firms’ shares. An important channel through which they might do
so is voluntary disclosure. Theoretical models such as Diamond (1985) and Diamond and
Verrecchia (1991) show that managers may commit to disclose more information than is mandated
by market regulations in order to reduce information asymmetry among their investors. Consistent
with this, recent survey evidence suggests that managers provide voluntary disclosure to “reduce
the information risk that investors assign to our stock” (Graham, Harvey, and Rajgopal (2005)).
Whether managers can indeed affect their information environments, and thereby
their liquidity and cost of capital, remains an open question. The main empirical challenge is
that voluntary disclosure is voluntary: managers choose to disclose more information for reasons
that could well affect liquidity directly. For example, evidence indicates that firms disclose more
when earnings are easier to predict (Chen, Matsumoto, and Rajgopal (2011)); but lower earnings
uncertainty would reduce information asymmetry, and so increase liquidity, independently
of disclosure. Thus, showing that disclosure affects liquidity causally, and by how much, has
proved challenging. Healy and Palepu (2001) highlight this endogeneity problem in their survey,
noting that “disclosure changes are unlikely to be random events” and concluding that “it is
difficult to draw strong conclusions about the direction of causality.”
We use plausibly exogenous variation in the supply of public information to show that firms
seek to shape their information environments through voluntary disclosure and that such efforts
improve their liquidity. The former result confirms the central assumption made in theoretical
models of disclosure. The latter result contributes to our understanding of liquidity in financial
markets, by showing that managers can actively influence the liquidity of their shares and,
1

ultimately, firm value.
Our tests exploit a natural experiment first explored in Kelly and Ljungqvist (2012, henceforth
KL). In 2000-2008, 43 brokers closed their research operations as a result of adverse changes in
the economics of sell-side research. The closures led to over 4,000 coverage terminations for U.S.
firms.1 KL demonstrate that the closures are unrelated to individual firms’ future prospects and so
are plausibly exogenous at the level of the affected stocks. They then show that when a stock loses
(some) analyst coverage in the wake of a closure, information asymmetry among investors
increases, the firm’s share price falls by 1.12% to 2.61%, and retail investors sell the stock. These
patterns are most pronounced when the firm loses coverage by an analyst serving retail investors.
We use this experiment not only to investigate how managers respond to exogenous shocks to
their information environments but also to establish the causal effects of their responses. To do so,
we identify firms in KL’s sample with a history of providing voluntary disclosure in the form of
guidance regarding their quarterly EPS numbers, the most prominent performance measure that a
firm supplies to investors.2 We then match each ‘treated’ firm to an observably similar ‘control’
firm that did not experience an exogenous coverage shock at the same time and estimate
difference-in-difference tests and treatment regressions.
After replicating KL’s finding that coverage shocks have a first-order adverse effect on
liquidity (as measured by Amihud’s (2002) illiquidity measure, AIM), we investigate the dynamics
of liquidity. Extending KL’s analysis, we show that the contemporaneous liquidity hit partially
reverses one quarter later. To establish whether this reversal is the result of an increase in
voluntary disclosure, we need to rule out other channels through which liquidity might recover.
1 A small subset of 564 of these stocks simultaneously lost a market-maker. As we will show, our results are not
driven by changes in market-making. An even smaller subset of 63 stocks also lost an underwriting relationship.
2 Alternative measures of disclosure are the external AIMR ratings of disclosure policy (Lang and Lundholm (1993,
1996), Botosan and Plumlee (2002)); the frequency of 8-K filings (Leuz and Schrand (2009)); or the length of 10-K
filings (Leuz and Schrand (2009)). These measures would likely have lower power in our setting because it is unclear
how much immediate discretion managers have over their financial statements. We focus on earnings guidance
because it allows us to examine a discretionary disclosure action that is immediately available to managers (assuming
that their firm has a guiding history) and that is both observable to the econometrician and easily measurable. This, in
turn, enables us to identify the causal effects of voluntary disclosure on liquidity.
2