NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FUNDAMENTALS AND SOVEREIGN RISK OF EMERGING MARKETS
Joshua Aizenman
Yothin Jinjarak
Donghyun Park
Working Paper 18963
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18963
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2013
Joshua Aizenman and Yothin Jinjarak acknowledge funding from the Asian Development Bank (ADB).
The views herein are entirely those of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of
the ADB, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Joshua Aizenman, Yothin Jinjarak, and Donghyun Park. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Fundamentals and Sovereign Risk of Emerging Markets
Joshua Aizenman, Yothin Jinjarak, and Donghyun Park
NBER Working Paper No. 18963
April 2013
JEL No. F34,F41,F65
ABSTRACT
We empirically assess the relative importance of various economic fundamentals in accounting for
the sovereign credit default swap (CDS) spreads of emerging markets during 2004-2012, which encompasses
the global financial crisis of 2008-2009. Inflation, state fragility, external debt, and commodity terms
of trade volatility were positively associated, while trade openness and more favourable fiscal balance/GDP
ratio were negatively associated with sovereign CDS spreads. Yet the relative importance of economic
fundamentals in the pricing of sovereign risk varies over time. The key factors are trade openness and
state fragility in the pre-crisis period, external debt/GDP ratio and inflation in the crisis period, and
inflation and public debt/GDP ratio in the post- crisis period. Asian countries enjoy lower sovereign
spreads than Latin American countries, and this gap widened during and after the crisis. Trade openness
was the biggest factor behind Asia’s lower sovereign spreads before the crisis, and inflation during
and after the crisis. The results imply that external factors were paramount in pricing sovereign risk
prior to the crisis, but internal factors associated with the capacity to adjust to adverse shocks gained
prominence during and after the crisis.
Joshua Aizenman Donghyun Park
Economics and SIR Economics and Research Department
USC Asian Development Bank
University Park Manila, Philippines
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043 dpark@adb.org
and NBER
aizenman@usc.edu
Yothin Jinjarak
University of London
DeFiMS SOAS
534 College Buildings
London, UK WC1H 0XG
yj5@soas.ac.uk

1 Introduction
Emerging markets showed remarkable resilience during and after the global
financial and economic crisis of 2008-9. Their resilience is all the more remarkable in
light of the advanced-country origins of the global crisis and the subsequent eurozone
sovereign debt crisis. Advanced countries still account for a hefty share of global output
and remain key exports markets for emerging markets. Emerging markets were not
entirely immune from the effects of the global crisis, as evident in the collapse of their
exports and growth in the 4th quarter of 2008 and 1st quarter of 2009. However, by and
large, their financial systems did not suffer the paralysis inflicted upon their US and
European counterparts, largely due to the marginal exposure of emerging-market banks
to US subprime assets. Just as significantly, emerging country governments unleashed
massive fiscal and monetary stimulus programs to support aggregate demand. As a result,
emerging markets weathered the storm of the global crisis far better than expected.
In striking contrast to the advanced economies, which still remain mired in
stagnation and uncertainty, emerging markets are growing at a healthy pace once again
although they remain exposed to a possible growth deceleration due to the persistent
weaknesses of the former. The much talked about two-speed world economy refers to
the visibly faster and stronger momentum of recovery and growth in the emerging
markets compared to the advanced economies since the global crisis. The healthy growth
of the emerging markets provides welcome relief for a world economy weighed down by
the post-crisis sluggishness of the advanced economies. The two-speed world economy
prompted debate about the possible decoupling of emerging markets from advanced
2

economies. While decoupling is at first sight a plausible interpretation, more rigorous
analysis highlights the need for caution in interpreting the two-speed world economy as
definitive evidence of the decoupling hypothesis.1 For one, it is not at all clear whether
even the most dynamic emerging markets had decoupled themselves from the business
cycle of the advanced economies.2 Even high-flying China reeled from the impact of the
advanced economies’ extended slump and grew by less than 8% in 2012.3
Regardless of the validity of the decoupling hypothesis, what is beyond dispute is
that emerging markets have fared much better than expected during and after the global
crisis than widely expected. That is, when the US or EU sneezes, China or Thailand or
Brazil no longer catch a cold. The key question then becomes “What explains the
apparent resilience of emerging markets?” One leading candidate is relatively strong
fundamentals or sound policies throughout emerging markets. Asian countries have long
had strong fundamentals such as healthy fiscal positions and these help explain their
superior performance during the past few decades. More recently, emerging markets
outside Asia, most notably Latin America, have also raised their game. According to IMF
(2012), good policies indeed play a major role, explaining about three fifths of the
improved macroeconomic performance of emerging markets. Luck, in the form of less
frequent external and internal shocks, accounts for the rest.
1 In this context, IMF (2012) warns that it may be premature to jump to hasty conclusions about the
resilience of emerging markets in the post-global crisis period.
2 Didier et al. (2012) concluded that “Contrary to popular perceptions, emerging economies suffered growth
collapses relative to the pre-crisis levels comparable to those experienced by developed economies, even
when they continued growing. Afterwards, most economies returned to their pre-crisis growth rates.
Although emerging economies were not able to avoid the collapse originated in the US and then transmitted
across countries, they were more resilient during the global crisis than during past crises. Moreover,
breaking with the past, emerging economies did not fall more than developed economies during the global
crisis and were able to conduct countercyclical policies, thus becoming more similar to developed
economies.”
3 To be sure, there are other reasons for China’s deceleration, including tightening of macroeconomic
policy to prevent asset price bubbles. However, the prolonged weakness of the advanced economies, which
still absorb a large share of China’s exports, is likely to have had a major impact.
3