NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ENDOGENOUS SOURCES OF VOLATILITY IN HOUSING MARKETS:
THE JOINT BUYER-SELLER PROBLEM
Elliot Anenberg
Patrick Bayer
Working Paper 18980
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18980
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2013
The analysis and conclusions set forth are those of the authors and do not indicate concurrence by
other members of the research staff or the Board of Governors. We thank Steven Laufer, Plamen Nenov,
and seminar and conference participants at AEA Meetings, Econometric Society Meetings, Bank of
Canada, UC Berkeley (Haas), CEMMAP Housing Conference, Federal Reserve Board of Governors,
NY Fed, Wharton and Wisconsin for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Elliot Anenberg and Patrick Bayer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Endogenous Sources of Volatility in Housing Markets: The Joint Buyer-Seller Problem
Elliot Anenberg and Patrick Bayer
NBER Working Paper No. 18980
April 2013, Revised February 2015
JEL No. E32,R0,R21,R3,R31
ABSTRACT
This paper presents new empirical evidence that internal movement - selling one home and buying
another - by existing homeowners within a metropolitan housing market is especially volatile and
the main driver of fluctuations in transaction volume over the housing market cycle. We develop a
dynamic search equilibrium model that shows that the strong pro-cyclicality of internal movement
is driven by the cost of simultaneously holding two homes, which varies endogenously over the cycle.
We estimate the model using data on prices, volume, time-on-market, and internal moves drawn from
Los Angeles from 1988-2008 and use the fitted model to show that frictions related to the joint buyer-
seller problem: (i) substantially amplify booms and busts in the housing market, (ii) create counter-
cyclical build-ups of mismatch of existing owners with their homes, and (iii) generate externalities
that induce significant welfare loss and excess price volatility.
Elliot Anenberg
Federal Reserve, Board of Governors
Washington, DC
elliot.anenberg@frb.gov
Patrick Bayer
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Sciences
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
patrick.bayer@duke.edu

1 Introduction
The major boom and bust over the 2000s has drawn attention to the volatility of the US
housing market and its implications for the broader economy. While the national scope
of this most recent cycle was unusual, metropolitan and regional housing markets, as well
thoseofsmallercountries,exhibitcyclicalbehavioronaveryregularbasis.1 Boomsandbusts
generally occur over protracted periods of time and are characterized by large fluctuations
in price, transaction volume, and time-to-sell.
Whilethesefactsabouthousingcyclesarewell-established, explanationsfortheirsizeand
durationarenotasobvious. Severalstudieshaveshownthatmovementsinfundamentalslike
income, wages, and rents are not large enough to explain the observed fluctuations in house
prices (see Head et al. [2014] and Case and Shiller [1989]). Excess housing price volatility is
perhapsevenmorepuzzlingwhenoneconsidersthatalargefractionoftransactionsconsistof
homeownersmovingwithinametroarea. Evenifaggregatevolatilityisdrivenbyfluctuations
in external demand – from new migrants or first-time home buyers – one might expect the
supply and demand for housing by “internal movers” selling one house and buying another
at about the same time to be less sensitive to the price level and, therefore, a stabilizing
force on the local market. Yet, in this paper, we will argue that the timing of the buying and
selling decisions of these internal movers has exactly the opposite e↵ect, greatly amplifying
price fluctuations over the cycle rather than smoothing them.
We begin the paper by using detailed records on the universe of transactions in the Los
Angeles metropolitan area from 1992-2008 to establish a series of new empirical facts about
the nature of housing transactions over the cycle. Following homeowners as they buy and sell
houses, we first show that internal transaction volume is incredibly volatile and indeed much
more pro-cyclical than external volume.2 In particular, internal transaction volume at the
peak of the boom in 2003-2005 is three times greater than in the preceding trough in 1993
and four times greater than in the subsequent trough in 2008, while external transaction
volume varies in a much more narrow band. As a result, the fraction of homes sold by
1See Burnside et al. [2011] for empirical evidence.
2An internal transaction is defined as one in which the seller buys another property within the metro
area. An external transaction is defined as one in which the seller does not.
2

internal movers is highly pro-cyclical, ranging from a low of 20 percent in the trough years
to over 40 percent in the peak years. We demonstrate that similar patterns hold for internal
transaction volume in various volatile housing markets across the country3 and that the
substantial volatility of internal movement over the cycle holds for households with both low
and high loan-to-value ratios.4
To gauge the economic and welfare implications of the volatility of internal movement,
we develop and estimate a dynamic equilibrium search model in which the complementarity
of internal movers’ buying and selling decisions has the potential to amplify fundamental
cyclical forces. Our framework is a simple search model in the spirit of Mortensen and Pis-
sarides [1994] and Pissarides [2000], in which some agents in the economy (internal movers)
are actively searching on both sides of the market as buyers and sellers simultaneously.5 The
novel features of our model are (i) that the decision of internal movers to buy before sell-
ing, or vice versa, is endogenous and (ii) that the consumption value of holding two homes
simultaneously is less than the sum of the values of residing in each property individually
(e.g., a household gets little consumption value from holding a second house empty while
awaiting a suitable buyer). In the model, an exogenous mismatch shock provides the im-
petus for homeowners to move or exit the metropolitan area. The fundamental source of
equilibrium volatility is the exogenous fluctuation in external demand to purchase a home
in the metropolitan area housing market.
Weestimatethemodelusingdataonprices,volume,time-on-market(TOM),andinternal
moves drawn from our Los Angeles sample. The estimated model fits the equilibrium co-
movements of these variables, the level of price volatility, and the new empirical facts that
we document related to internal movement over the cycle very well.
In the estimated model, the attractiveness of buying-before-selling varies endogenously
3We show internal movement patterns for MSAs outside Los Angeles using the FRBNY/Equifax Con-
sumer Credit Panel data.
4As we discuss in more detail in Section 2, volatility in the internal movement of households with high
LTVs may also be related to lock-in e↵ects of equity constraints, while such considerations should not play
a role for households with substantial equity remaining in their homes (low LTVs).
5Other classic search markets, such as labor or retail markets, are characterized by the presence of a
distinct set of agents on each side of the market.
3