NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ADVERTISING EXPENSIVE MORTGAGES
Umit G. Gurun
Gregor Matvos
Amit Seru
Working Paper 18910
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18910
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2013
We thank Geoff Booth, Ali Hortacsu, Devin Pope, Kelly Shue, Chad Syverson, Rob Vishny, Richard
Thaler, Luigi Zingales and the seminar participants at Chicago Booth for helpful suggestions. Xu Cheng,
Laura Harris, Will Powley, Tricia Sun, and Adithya Surampudi provided outstanding research assistance.
The authors are from a: University of Texas at Dallas and b: Booth School of Business, University
of Chicago, and NBER. Seru and Matvos thank Initiative on Global Markets for funding. All errors
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Umit G. Gurun, Gregor Matvos, and Amit Seru. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Advertising Expensive Mortgages
Umit G. Gurun, Gregor Matvos, and Amit Seru
NBER Working Paper No. 18910
March 2013
JEL No. E65,G18,G21,L85
ABSTRACT
We use a unique dataset that combines information on advertising by subprime lenders and mortgages
originated by them from 2002 to 2007 to study the relationship between advertising and the nature
of mortgages obtained by consumers. We exploit the richness of our data and measure the relative
expensiveness of a given mortgage as the excess rate of a mortgage after accounting for a broad set
of borrower, contract, and regional characteristics associated with a given mortgage--less expensive
mortgages, all else equal, are better products from the perspective of the consumer. We find a strong
positive relationship between the intensity of local advertising and the expensiveness of mortgages
extended by lenders within a given region, with the relationship strongest for advertising through newspapers,
the most heavily used channel for local advertising of mortgages. This pattern survives even after conditioning
for a rich set of borrower, loan and region characteristics and exploiting differences in advertising
within a given lender. Advertisers lend to consumers who, all else equal, default less, making it unlikely
that our results are driven by unobservable borrower quality. We also exploit variation in mortgage
advertising induced by the entry of Craigslist across different regions to demonstrate that the relation
between advertising and expensiveness of mortgages is not likely to be spurious. We corroborate that
advertising is most effective when targeted at groups that might be less informed about mortgages,
such as the poor, the less educated and minorities. These findings are inconsistent with the “informative
view” under which advertising allows consumers to find cheaper products, and instead support the
“persuasive view” that advertising in the subprime mortgage market was used to steer consumers into
expensive choices.
Umit G. Gurun Amit Seru
University of Texas at Dallas Booth School of Business
School of Management University of Chicago
800 W Campbell Rd. SM41 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Richardson, TX 75080 Chicago, IL 60637
umit.gurun@utdallas.edu and NBER
amit.seru@chicagobooth.edu
Gregor Matvos
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
gmatvos@chicagobooth.edu

I. Introduction
The aftermath of the housing crisis has led to extensive new regulation in the mortgage market,
such as the genesis of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau and the sections of the Dodd-
Frank Act concerning lending practices. The perception guiding several of these policy changes
centers around the claim that naïve consumers were duped by advertising to enter expensive
mortgages. This sentiment is directly reflected in the actions of regulators. The Federal Reserve
(Fed), the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and the Federal Trade Commission
(FTC) each argued that advertising confused potential borrowers by steering them into expensive
adjustable rate mortgages (ARMs). In response they have penalized lenders for deceptive
practices1 and implemented explicit regulation of mortgage advertising.2 The New York Times
summarized this prevailing view: “One of the most important lessons of the mortgage collapse is
that potential borrowers need clear explanations of exactly what kind of commitment they are
making” (October 1, 2010). While several anecdotes have been used to justify claims of
deceptive advertising—which have driven these regulatory changes—there is no empirical study
that has investigated these claims systematically. In this paper we hope to provide such evidence.
Our unique dataset combines local advertising by subprime lenders with the contract, region, and
borrower characteristics of mortgages originated by them over the period from 2002 to 2007.
Using this data we provide facts relating advertising to the nature of mortgages obtained by
consumers. We find a strong positive relationship between the intensity of local advertising and
the expensiveness of mortgages extended by lenders within a given region. This pattern survives
even after conditioning for a rich set of borrower and loan characteristics and exploiting
differences in advertising within a given lender. The relationship is strongest for mortgages
issued to less educated, minority and poor consumers whom the previous literature has identified
as less informed about mortgages. Advertising is most effective through newspapers, the most
heavily used channel for local advertising of mortgages. Advertisers lend to consumers who, all
else equal, default less, making it unlikely that our results are driven by unobservable borrower
quality. We exploit variation in mortgage advertising induced by the entry of Craigslist across
different regions to further demonstrate that the relationship between advertising and
expensiveness of mortgages is not likely to be spurious.
The starting point of our analysis is the recent literature that shows the importance of search in
the mortgage market (Hall and Woodward 2012). Consumers do not frequently transact in this
1 The Fed fined Wells Fargo $85 million for steering consumers into expensive mortgages. Ten thousand borrowers
could potentially receive compensation ranging from $1,000 to $20,000. Furthermore, on July 12, 2012, the
Department of Justice reached a $175 million settlement with Wells Fargo to resolve fair lending claims
(http://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/2012/July/12-dag-869.html) [accessed on Feb 29, 2013].
2 The FDIC implemented Regulation Z in 2008 and the FTC passed the Mortgage Acts and Practices Advertising
rule in 2011, both of which directly regulate advertising of mortgages.
1

market. They do not observe all prices, but instead have to find the best-priced mortgage through
search. Moreover, some important characteristics of mortgages, such as the reset rates in ARMs,
are not very salient and thus require consumers to have specific knowledge. Even though
mortgages are relatively homogenous products, these search frictions create a demand for
information about mortgages that lenders can cater to. There are two broad views on how lenders
use advertising to supply this information to consumers. On the one hand, the “informative view”
says that advertising decreases search costs and allows consumers to find better products (Nelson
1974). On the other hand, the “persuasive view” suggests that advertising is used to steer
consumers into bad choices (Braithwaite 1928; Thaler and Sunstein 2008).
The obvious difficulty in separating these views is that one needs to identify “better” and
“worse” mortgages, and then relate the choices of consumers, who may not be otherwise
identical, to lender advertising. We measure whether mortgages are relatively better or worse for
the consumer by computing the extent to which identical consumers pay different prices for
otherwise similar mortgages: we contend that cheaper mortgages, all else equal, are better
products from the perspective of the consumer.
We focus on ARM reset rates, which are less salient and have been at the center of lawsuits and
regulatory scrutiny that contend that advertising focused consumers’ attention on the
introductory interest rate giving them the impression that the rate would be permanent, rather
than reset after the first few years.3 We exploit the richness of our data and measure the relative
“expensiveness” of a given mortgage as the excess reset rate of a mortgage after accounting for a
broad set of borrower, contract, and regional characteristics associated with a given mortgage,
including the initial interest rate. The essence of the relative expensiveness measure is that if
identical consumers obtain the same mortgage with different reset rates, then the difference in
the reset rates measures how much worse the choice of the consumer with the higher reset rate
was.
Our results show large dispersion in mortgage expensiveness within geographic regions
(designated market areas or DMAs). On average, the difference in reset rates between the 95th
and 5th percentile mortgages in a given region after conditioning on the initial interest rate and
borrower, loan, and regional characteristics is 3.1 percentage points. This represents substantial
dispersion in ARM reset rates obtained by borrowers with the same observable characteristics. In
the raw data, without adjusting for characteristics, this difference is 5.8 percentage points. Such
3 In Appendix B we present several examples of ARM advertising showing that they all prominently state the
introductory interest rate making it the focal, salient part of the advertisement. None mentioned the reset rate or the
index that will be used at the time of reset. The new regulation following the crisis tries to address this issue. For
example, Regulation Z implemented by the FDIC creates new restrictions on mortgage advertising and prohibits the
unqualified use of the word “fixed” in ads for variable rate mortgages or mortgages with increasing payments,
unless the mortgagee prominently displays the duration under which the rate is invariable.
2