NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CONGRESSIONAL INFLUENCE AS A DETERMINANT OF SUBPRIME LENDING
Stuart A. Gabriel
Matthew E. Kahn
Ryan K. Vaughn
Working Paper 18965
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18965
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2013
The authors are grateful to the UCLA Ziman Center for Real Estate for financial support and to Joe
Nichols and participants at the 2012 AEA Meetings in Chicago for helpful comments. We thank Owen
Hearey for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Stuart A. Gabriel, Matthew E. Kahn, and Ryan K. Vaughn. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Congressional Influence as a Determinant of Subprime Lending
Stuart A. Gabriel, Matthew E. Kahn, and Ryan K. Vaughn
NBER Working Paper No. 18965
April 2013
JEL No. G21,R21
ABSTRACT
We apply unique loan level data from New Century Financial Corporation, a major subprime lender,
to assess whether attributes of Congressional Representatives were associated with access to and pricing
of subprime mortgage credit. Research findings indicate higher likelihoods of subprime loan origination
and lower mortgage pricing among borrowers represented by the Republican and Democratic leadership
of Congress. Black borrowers also benefitted from significantly larger loan amounts in those same
districts. Also, borrowers received mortgage interest rate discounts in districts where New Century
donated to the Congressional Representative. Findings provide new insights into the political geography
of the subprime crisis and suggest gains to trade between New Century Financial Corporation and
targeted Congressional Representatives in the extension, pricing and sizing of subprime mortgage
credit.
Stuart A. Gabriel Ryan K. Vaughn
Anderson School of Management UCLA
UCLA Ziman Center for Real Estate
110 Westwood Plaza Suite C413 110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481 Gold Hall, Suite B100
sgabriel@anderson.ucla.edu Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
rkvaughn@gmail.com
Matthew E. Kahn
UCLA Institute of the Environment
Department of Economics
Department of Public Policy
Anderson School of Management
UCLA Law School, Box 951496
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1496
and NBER
mkahn@ioe.ucla.edu

Introduction
Implosion in housing markets figured prominently in the 2007 meltdown in capital
markets and the downturn in the global economy.1 Neither analysts on Wall St. nor regulators in
Washington, D.C. anticipated the depth of the crisis, its geographic and asset class contagion, or
its adverse effects on household balance sheets. Emblematic to the crisis was the pervasive
failure of subprime mortgages. Those loans provided substantially eased credit qualification and
homeownership opportunity to low credit-quality borrowers. As shown in Demyanyk and Van
Hemert (2007), the quality of originated subprime mortgages began to deteriorate even prior to
the housing bust. By 2008, in the wake of downward spiral in house prices, a full 45 percent of
subprime borrowers were underwater. Two years later, a similar share of outstanding subprime
mortgages were in default.
Early on and prior to the deterioration in subprime loan performance, lenders appeared to
understand the controversial nature of their product and the related importance of Congressional
support. To that end, lenders may have sought to direct campaign contributions to elected
Representatives to generate support for subprime loan products and to assist in easing regulatory
oversight. As documented by Mian, Sufi, and Trebbi (forthcoming), lenders became politically
sophisticated in making campaign contributions to elected Representatives in the years leading
up to the 2000s crisis.
A second potentially complementary strategy for capturing political support was for
lenders to offer more credit and at better terms to borrowers in Districts represented by targeted
Congressional Representatives. As further suggested by Mian, Sufi, and Trebbi (forthcoming),
1 As reported in Shiller (http://www.econ.yale.edu/shiller/data.htm)), US national house prices recorded a decline of
31 percent over the 2006 - 2010 period, about on par with the peak-to-trough contraction during the Great
Depression.

such strategic interactions and related side-payments could be important in a world in which
explicit “quid pro quo” was not politically feasible. To the extent that interests aligned, both
direct campaign contributions as well as District-level direction and pricing of mortgage credit
could serve the political economic interests of both the lender and the elected official. District-
level expansion of mortgage and housing opportunity could be viewed as a political return to
Representatives in exchange for expanded subprime lending opportunities.
This study uses the universe of first-time homebuyer residential home loans issued by a
major subprime lender to study the role of Congressional political influence in the access to and
pricing of subprime mortgage credit. It provides a political economy explanation for the
geography of subprime lending. By merging several data sets, we seek to implement the
following thought experiment. Consider two identical marginal borrowers called “A” and “B”
who live in the same local labor market at the same point in time. Assume that the two borrowers
live in comparable but different residential communities. If “A’s” Congressional Representative
is liberal, is a member of the Finance Committee, is a leader of the House of Representatives, or
if this Representative receives direct campaign contributions from the subprime lending
institution, do these Congressional attributes influence the probability that the institution makes a
loan to A versus B? Further, are these same attributes associated with higher or lower loan
amounts or loan pricing to A versus B?
The loan level data in our study come from the servicing database of the now defunct
New Century Financial Corporation (New Century) and the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act
(HMDA). Like other studies, we control for the borrower, loan, or locational attributes that
influence the allocation and risk-based pricing of mortgage credit. Unlike other studies, those
controls are not the focus of this study. Instead, while controlling for a rich set of household