NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAPITAL FLOWS, CROSS-BORDER BANKING AND GLOBAL LIQUIDITY
Valentina Bruno
Hyun Song Shin
Working Paper 19038
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19038
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2013
We thank Maurice Obstfeld for his comments as discussant at the 2012 NBER Summer Institute.
We also thank Franklin Allen, Tam Bayoumi, Rodrigo Cifuentes, Stijn Claessens, Marcel Fratzscher,
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Refet Gurkaynak, Karen Lewis, Loretta Mester, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti,
Francesco Spadafora, Greg Nini, Amir Yaron and workshop participants at Berkeley, BIS/ECB global
liquidity conference, Princeton, Stanford, Wharton, IMF, 2013 San Diego AFA meeting and the Central
Bank of Chile for comments on an earlier draft. We thank Daniel Lewis and Linda Zhao for research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Valentina Bruno and Hyun Song Shin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Capital Flows, Cross-Border Banking and Global Liquidity
Valentina Bruno and Hyun Song Shin
NBER Working Paper No. 19038
May 2013
JEL No. F32,F34,F36,G21
ABSTRACT
We investigate global factors associated with cross-border capital flows. We formulate a model of
gross capital flows through the international banking system and derive a closed form solution that
highlights the leverage cycle of global banks as being a prime determinant of the transmission of financial
conditions across borders. We then test the predictions of our model in a panel study of 46 countries
and find that global factors dominate local factors as determinants of banking sector capital flows.
Valentina Bruno
American University
Kogod School of Business
4400 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20016
bruno@american.edu
Hyun Song Shin
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
hsshin@princeton.edu

1 Introduction
It is a cliché that the world has become more connected, but the …nancial crisis and the boom
that preceded it have renewed attention on the global factors that drive …nancial conditions
worldwide. Calvo, Leiderman and Reinhart (1993, 1996) famously distinguished the global
“push”factors for capital ‡ows from the country-speci…c “pull”factors, and emphasized the
importance of external push factors in explaining capital ‡ows to emerging economies in the
1990s. More recently, researchers and policy makers have drawn attention to the notion of
“globalliquidity”wherebypermissivecreditconditionsin…nancialcentersaretransmittedacross
borders to other parts of the world (see BIS (2011) and Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2013)).
The objective of our paper is to formulate a framework for global liquidity and to shed light
on the possible mechanisms behind its operation. We make two contributions.
Our …rst contribution is to construct a model of global liquidity built around the operation
of international banks, where one party’s obligation is another party’s asset. When global
banks apply more lenient conditions on local banks in supplying wholesale funding, the local
banks transmit the more lenient conditions to their borrowers through greater availability of
local credit. In this way, global liquidity is transmitted across borders through the interactions
of global and local banks.
Ourmodel buildsonrecentadvancesinunderstandingtheprocyclical natureof banklending
and leverage in which leverage builds up in booms and falls in busts (Adrian and Shin (2012)).
Procyclicality of leverage is the mirror image of increased collateral requirements (increased
“haircuts”)duringdownturns,andGeanakoplos(2010)andFostelandGeanakoplos(2008,2012)
have examined how the risk bearing capacity of the …nancial system can be severely diminished
when leverage falls through an increase in collateral requirements. Similarly, Gorton (2009,
2010) and Gorton and Metrick (2012) have explored the analogy between classical bank runs
and the modern run in capital markets driven by increased collateral requirements and hence
the reduced capacity to borrow.
Our model of global banking combines these earlier insights with the institutional features
2

underpinningtheinternational bankingsystemsuchasthecentralizedfundingandcreditalloca-
tion decisions of international banks, as documented by Cetorelli and Goldberg (2012a, 2012b).
We construct a “double-decker”model of international banking where regional banks borrow
from global banks, who in turn borrow from money market funds in …nancial centers. Regional
banks can diversify away idiosyncratic credit risk of regional borrowers, but cannot diversify
away region-wide shocks. Global banks in turn can diversify away region-speci…c shocks, but
cannot diversify away global shocks. In such a setting, we show that the leverage of the global
banks are pinned down uniquely from the funding constraint applied by creditors in the whole-
sale funding market, while the leverage of the local banks are uniquely determined from their
own funding constraint combined with the lending by the global banks. The borrowing rate
for the local banks (which is the lending rate for the global banks) is determined by market
clearing. By combining the leverage limits that arise from each layer, we show that total credit
and cross-border claims can be solved uniquely and in closed form.
Our second contribution is empirical. We investigate how closely the theoretical predictions
are borne out empirically. Thanks to the closed-form solution given by our model, we can draw
on a number of clear-cut hypotheses on the determinants of cross-border capital ‡ows.
A sharp prediction of our model is that both the level of bank leverage (which determines
the rate at which one dollar’s increase in bank capital is turned into lending) and the change in
the leverage (which determines the lending based on existing, or infra-marginal bank capital)
should enter as “supply push”determinants of capital ‡ows. The model also predicts that the
book equity of global banks should enter as an additional “supply push”factor. Finally, the
model gives an analogous set of predictions concerning local “demand pull”factors that drive
cross-border capital ‡ows. We …nd strong support for these predictions in our panel regression
study of 46 countries thereby verifying that the factors driving capital ‡ows can be found in the
determinants of the balance sheet capacity of banks. In particular, we …nd that global “supply
push”factors play the dominant role relative to local “demand pull”in determining banking
sector capital ‡ows.
We further show how the VIX index of implied volatility of S&P 500 equity index options
3