NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STATE-RUN BANKS, MONEY GROWTH, AND THE REAL ECONOMY
Randall Morck
M. Deniz Yavuz
Bernard Yeung
Working Paper 19004
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19004
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2013, Revised February 2018
Previously circulated as "State-controlled Banks and the Effectiveness of Monetary Policy." We
are very grateful for helpful comments from the associate editor and two anonymous referees,
seminar participants at Asian Bureau of Finance and Economics Research, Bank of Canada, the
Canadian Economic Association, “Bank of Canada Lecture” in Vancouver, George Washington
University, Hebrew University, Monetary Authority of Hong Kong, Monetary Authority of
Singapore, National University of Singapore, NBER-EASE in Tokyo, the NBER Summer
Institute Capital Markets and the Economy program, Renmin University, Singapore Management
University, University of Alberta, Stanford University, University of Oregon, University of
Southern California, University of Washington, and for specific comments from Paul Beaudry,
Marianne Bertrand, Bernard Black, Robert M. Bushman, Murillo Campello, Zhi Da, Mara
Faccio, Ben Friedman, Ross Levine, Greg Mankiw, John Matsusaka, Morten Nielsen, Ali
Ozdagli, Amiyatosh Purnanandam, Andrew Rose, Stefano Rossi, Lawrence Schembri, Etsuro
Shioji, Andrei Shleifer, Krishnamurthy Subramanian, Chalongphob Sussangkarn, and Jin Xu. We
thank William L. Megginson for sharing his privatization data. We thank Timothy Trombley for
superb research assistance. Morck gratefully acknowledge funding from the SSHRC and the
Bank of Canada. Yavuz gratefully acknowledges support from a CIBER Research Grant. These
are the views of the authors and may not reflect those of the Bank of Canada. These are the views
of the authors and may not reflect those of the Bank of Canada or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2013 by Randall Morck, M. Deniz Yavuz, and Bernard Yeung. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

State-run Banks, Money Growth, and the Real Economy
Randall Morck, M. Deniz Yavuz, and Bernard Yeung
NBER Working Paper No. 19004
April 2013, Revised February 2018
JEL No. E5,G1,G21,G28,G3,O16,P5
ABSTRACT
Within countries, state-run banks’ lending correlates with prior money growth; otherwise similar
private-sector banks’ lending does not. Aggregate credit and investment growth correlate with
prior money growth more where banking systems are more state-run. Size and liquidity
differences between state-run and private-sector banks do not drive these results; further tests
discount broad classes of alternative explanations. Tests exploiting heterogeneity in likely
political pressure on state-run banks associated with privatizations and elections suggest a
command-and-control pseudo-monetary policy channel: changes in money growth, perhaps
reflecting political pressure on the central bank, change banks’ lending constraints; political
pressure actually changes state-run banks’ lending.
Randall Morck Bernard Yeung
Faculty of Business National University of Singapore
University of Alberta Mochtar Riady Building
Edmonton, AB T6G 2R6 15 Kent Ridge Drive
CANADA BIZ 1, Level 6, #6-19
and NBER Singapore 119245
randall.morck@ualberta.ca bizdean@nus.edu.sg
M.Deniz Yavuz
Krannert Graduate School of Management
Purdue University
403 W. State Street
West Lafayette, IN 47907-2056
myavuz@purdue.edu

1. Introduction
Until recently, macroeconomics impugned money growth as a policy variable for stimulating
economic growth, as opposed to targeting inflation (Goodfriend 2007; Mishkin 2011).
Nonetheless, policy-makers often countered economic downturns by increasing monetary growth
hoping to spur real growth, at least in the short-run, in part by encouraging more bank lending
and hence more capital spending, both before (Rasche and Williams 2007) and especially after
the 2008 crisis (Mishkin 2009, 2011; Caballero 2010; Claessens et al. 2010; Bernanke 2012).
Outcomes are mixed. Bouis et al. (2013) conclude that “monetary policy stimulus did not show
up in stronger growth” in OECD economies. In contrast, China’s 2008 monetary expansion
coincides neatly with lending and investment upturns. Deng et al. (2011) show that China’s state-
run commercial banks increased lending in response to a monetary stimulus because their top
managers were ordered to, rather than via any conventional monetary policy transmission
channel. We follow that study in terming this command-and-control channel for transmitting
increased money growth to the real economy pseudo-monetary policy and show that it appears to
be operating in many countries.
State-run commercial banks are important in many countries (La Porta et al. 2002), so
pseudo-monetary policy might work elsewhere. Prior work shows state-run bank lending to be
driven by political pressure, not profit maximization, in many economies (La Porta et al. 2002,
2003; Sapienza 2004; Berger et al. 2005; Dinc 2005; Carvalho 2014; Coleman and Feler 2015).
Consistent with pseudo-monetary policy occurring elsewhere, prior work also shows state-run
bank lending to be less procyclical than lending by private-sector commercial banks, and even
countercyclical in some cases (Brei and Schclarek 2013; Bertay et al. 2015; Coleman and Feler
2015). This cross-country study links these two strands of work to present evidence suggesting
2

pseudo-monetary policy might have economically important effects in many economies.
Briefly summarized, our baseline economy-level panel (2001 to 2010 spanning 40
economies) regressions link increased money growth to no subsequent change in bank lending or
investment growth in economies whose commercial banking sector contain no large state-run
banks, but to statistically and economically significantly larger increases in lending and
investment in economies whose commercial banking sectors are more comprised of state-run
banks. Our baseline bank-level panel (the largest commercial banks in the same 40 economies
from 2001 to 2010) regressions show individual state-run banks significantly boosting lending
after increased money growth, but otherwise similar private-sector banks in the same economies
at the same time not doing so. These baseline findings are consistent with a pseudo-monetary
policy transmission channel: monetary expansion letting state-run banks lend more by providing
liquidity and political pressure making them do so.
Numerous robustness and identification tests support this interpretation and weigh against
alternative causality scenarios. Simple macroeconomic reverse causality scenarios (e.g. credit
demand shifts causing money growth and bank lending) are refuted unless somehow altered to
explain why only state-run bank lending responds. Size, liquidity, and other balance sheet
differences between state-run and private-sector banks do not explain these findings. Fixed-
effects subsume all time-invariant bank-level (e.g. banks historical characteristics) and economy-
level (e.g. legal origin) latent factors. Economy-year fixed effects subsume all time-varying
economy-level latent factors (e.g. the general importance of state-owned enterprises in each
economy each year) and their interactions with money growth (these interactions are also time-
varying economy-level variables). The baseline results are present in periods of monetary
expansion and contraction, in developed and developing economies, and survive a broad range of
3