NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CEO PAY AND FIRM SIZE:
AN UPDATE AFTER THE CRISIS
Xavier Gabaix
Augustin Landier
Julien Sauvagnat
Working Paper 19078
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19078
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2013
Prepared for the Economic Journal's Features issue on executive pay. We thank the editor, the referee
and Alex Edmans for very useful comments. Landier acknowledges support from Chaire Scor at Fondation
Jean-Jacques Laffont and the European Research Council under the European Community’s Seventh
Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) Grant Agreement no. 312503 - SolSys. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Xavier Gabaix, Augustin Landier, and Julien Sauvagnat. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

CEO Pay and Firm Size: an Update after the Crisis
Xavier Gabaix, Augustin Landier, and Julien Sauvagnat
NBER Working Paper No. 19078
May 2013
JEL No. G3,J2
ABSTRACT
In the "size of stakes" view quantitatively formalized in Gabaix and Landier (2008), CEO compensation
is determined in a competitive talent market, and reflects the size of firms affected by talent. This paper
offers an empirical update on this view. The years 2004-2011, which include the recent crisis, were
not part of the initial study and offer a laboratory to examine the theory as they include new positive
and negative shocks to the size of large firms. Executive compensation at the top (ex ante) did closely
track the evolution of average firm value during those years. During the crisis (2007 - 2009), average
total firm value decreased by 17%, and CEO pay decreased by 28%. During 2009-2011, we observe
a rebound of firm value by 19% and of CEO pay increased by 22%. These fairly proportional changes
provide a validity check in favor of the "size of stakes" view.
Xavier Gabaix Julien Sauvagnat
New York University CREST
Finance Department Timbre 120 – 3, avenue Pierre Larousse
Stern School of Business 92245 Malakoff, FRANCE
44 West 4th Street, 9th floor julien.sauvagnat@gmail.com
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
xgabaix@stern.nyu.edu
Augustin Landier
the Toulouse School of Economics
21 Allée de Brienne
31000 Toulouse, FRANCE
augustin.landier@tse-fr.eu

1. Introduction
Executive compensation remains very much at the center-stage of academic and policy debates.
A relative lack of consensus seems to prevail regarding the origins of the large rise of executive
compensation observed in the US since the 70s. According to some scholars (see e.g. Bebchuck and
Fried (2004) for a summary of this view), rising compensation is due to a higher ability of CEOs to
extract rents from shareholders, e.g. by capturing their board (Shivdasani and Yermack (1999)) or
appointing compensation consultants that cater to their interests (Murphy and Sandino (2008)).
Hermalin (2005) argues instead that the rise in CEO pay reflects tighter corporate governance:
pay increases to compensate CEOs for the greater risk of being fired. Others argue that the very
function of CEOs has changed over time: they are now more often poached from outside firms
than before (Murphy and Zabojnik (2004) and Frydman (2005)); shareholders have become more
convinced of the importance of financial incentives (Jensen et al. (2004)). By contrast, Gabaix and
Landier (2008, henceforth GL) argue that the bulk of variations in CEO compensation across time
and across companies can be explained as the result of competitive market forces. They show that
under fairly general assumptions, in a market where the impact of CEO talent is scaled linearly
by firm size, and where matching CEOs with firms is frictionless (as in Sattinger 1993 and Tervio
2008), one should expect the compensation of CEOs to follow the following formula:
w(n) = DS(n )β/αS(n)1−β/α (1)
∗
where w(n) is the dollar compensation of the CEO of the nth biggest firm by decreasing size, n
∗
denotes the index of the reference firm (e.g. the 250th largest firm); α is given by the distribution
of firm size at the top: S(n) = An−α ; and β depends on the distribution of talent at the top. GL
calibrate β/α (cid:39) 2/3. In particular, this formula predicts that if all firm sizes rise (resp. decline)
over time by a factor x, compensation should rise (resp. decline) by that same factor. We call
the theory of managerial pay proposed by GL the “size of stakes”view, because it implies that as
the size of large firms has increased over time, executive compensation has increased by a similar
factor, as all firms have a higher willingness to pay for talent. GL, using data from 1970-2003,
provide evidence consistent with the size of stakes view.
In this paper, we examine whether the size of stakes view of executive compensation, proposed
2

by GL, passes the test of time.1 The years 2004-2011, which include the great recession, were
not part of the initial study and provide the opportunity to run an informative “out-of-sample”
assessment of the theory. During the financial crisis, the market capitalization of large companies
was strongly negatively impacted. Between 2007 and 2009, the average firm market total value
of the largest 500 US firms decreased by 17.4%, which represents the largest two-year drop over
the last forty years. This offers an exceptional laboratory to potentially reject the size of stakes
view, which predicts that changes in average CEO compensation in the largest firms should follow
the changes in the average size of these firms. In line with the theory, we do find that executive
compensation at the top did closely track the evolution of average firm value during those years.
TherecentdatathustendtobesupportiveoftheequilibriummodeldevelopedinGL;theestimates
that we find for β/α are very close to those of our original study and we confirm the constant linear
scaling of talent impact with size. Note that what is particularly non-trivial is the one-to-one
relationship between firm size and CEO pay.
Our focus on the years 2004-2011 is also motivated by a number of recent developments that
affected CEO pay practices, potentially “distorting” the economic link between CEO pay and firm
size identified in GL.2 In 2004, the end of “free” accounting for stock options has been followed by
a shift toward restricted stock and then, toward the use of performance-based vesting conditions
in equity grants (see Bizjak et al. 2013). In 2006, the SEC promulgated new executive pay disclo-
sure rules. Those rules required the disclosure of compensation consultants, which has potentially
affected the incentives of a key player in the pay-setting process (Murphy and Sandino, 2010; Cad-
man et al. 2010). They also required the disclosure of peers used for benchmarking compensation,
another key driver of pay levels (Faulkender and Yang 2012, Albuquerque et al. forth and Bizjak,
Lemmon and Nguyen 2011). Moreover, after the Enron-type scandals and the burst of the dotcom
bubble,therehasbeena“changeinsentiment”overtheusefulnessofoption-basedpay–alsorelated
to the option backdating scandal – and an increase in compensation-related shareholder activism
through shareholder proposals and vote-no campaigns against compensation committee members
(Ertimur, Ferri and Muslu 2011). As a result of the above activism, the mandatory adoption of
“say on pay” in 2011 leads firms to change their pay practices both before and after the vote, in
1Of course, any short time sample does not allow to accept or reject a theory. It simply updates a Bayesian
estimate of its predictive power.
2Special thanks to the referee for suggesting to us these arguments.
3