NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HIGH SCHOOL GRADUATION IN THE CONTEXT OF CHANGING ELEMENTARY
(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)AND SECONDARY EDUCATION POLICY AND INCOME INEQUALITY:
THE LAST HALF CENTURY
Nora E. Gordon
Working Paper 19049
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19049
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2013
This paper was prepared for the Human Capital and History Conference, held in Cambridge in honor
of Claudia Goldin on December 7 and 8, 2012. The author thanks the conference and editorial team
of Leah Boustan, Carola Frydman and Bob Margo for their thoughtful suggestions and guidance. Thanks
to Richard Murnane and Sarah Reber for helpful discussions, and to Elizabeth Cascio and Sarah Reber
for education spending data. Maria Joy and Meredith Zackey provided excellent research assistance.
I am indebted to Claudia Goldin for her sage and kind mentorship. She sparked my interest in the historical
evolution of educational institutions and human capital, and innumerable other topics, economic and
otherwise. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Nora E. Gordon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

High School Graduation in the Context of Changing Elementary and Secondary Education
Policy and Income Inequality: The Last Half Century
Nora E. Gordon
NBER Working Paper No. 19049
May 2013
JEL No. I2,I20,I24,I28
ABSTRACT
Goldin and Katz (2008) document the key role that the educational attainment of native-born workers
in the U.S. has played in determining changing returns to skill and income distribution in the twentieth
century, emphasizing the need to understand the forces driving the supply of educated workers. This
paper examines stagnation in high school graduation rates from about 1970 to 2000, alongside dramatic
changes in elementary and secondary educational institutions and income inequality over those years.
I review the policy history of major changes in educational institutions, including but not limited to
the massive increase in school spending, and related literature. I then present descriptive analysis of
the relationships between income inequality and both graduation and school spending from 1963 to
2007. Results suggest that inequality at the top of the income distribution, which was negatively correlated
with the establishment of public secondary schooling earlier in the twentieth century, was positively
correlated not only with education spending levels but also with aggregate high school graduation
rates at the state level in this later period.
Nora E. Gordon
Georgetown Public Policy Institute
306 Old North
37th and O Streets NW
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
neg24@georgetown.edu

I. INTRODUC T T h IO e N R ace between Education and Technology
In (2008), Goldin and Katz comprehensively
examine the forces behind changes in returns to skill in the U.S. over the twentieth century. Their
title summarizes key forces influencing the supply of and demand for skilled labor. They write, “Our
central conclusion is that when it comes to changes in the wage structure and returns to skill,
supply changes have been critical, and changes in the educational attainment of the native-born
have driven the supply side.” This paper examines part of the puzzle remaining at their conclusion:
why did high school graduation rates stop improving in the latter portion of the twendteimetahn cde ntury?
Labor economists study this pattern in the context of increasing returns to skill and for
education; though returns to a high school diploma itself have diminished, it continues to serve as a
sguaptepwlya y to college and its associated increasing labor market rewards. In this paper, I focus on the
of education. I describe changes in elementary and secondary educational institutions over
the time of stagnating graduation rates, and explore the extent to which increasing income
inequality may have affected both educational inputs and outcomes. For an excellent
comprehensive discussion of the many other factors affecting high school graduation, I refer the
reader to Murnane (2013).
I first review major changes in education policy over the past half century, including a
massive aggregate increase in school spending, the decline in the inequality of resources across
local school districts, the civil rights focus on various groups of students historically less likely to
graduate, and the rise of the General Equivalency Degree (GED) program. I then describe, at the
state level, how income inequality relates to graduation rates and, separately, school spending. The
direction of the correlation between inequality and spending on public programs is theoretically
ambiguous, and empirical literature examining education spending has mixed findings: Goldin and
Katz (2008) find that income inequality slowed the establishment of public high schools from 1910
to 1938, while Boustan et al. (2012) and Corcoran and Evans (2010) show that more recent

increases in income inequality at the local level, from 1970 to 2000, increased locally-generated
elementary and secondary school revenue. Of course, measures of inequality also directly reflect
returns to education and could affect graduation rates by changing demand for schooling
independent of school spending or quality.
Becker’s model of human capital provides a useful starting point for considering potential
determinants of high school graduation and educational attainment more generally. Individuals
optimize their investments in human capital by considering the expected costs of acquiring it and
the stream of returns they anticipate earning from it. School quality, as determined by inputs and
technologies, can affect both costs and benefits. Much of the education literature implicitly assumes
that improvements in school quality reduce psychic costs of human capital acquisition by making
the school experience more enjoyable or effective, and thus considers graduation to be an indicator
1
of school quality, holding the demand for skilled labor constant. If the skill level of the entire
workforce is increasing—whether due to the increasing returns to skill we see over this period or
improvements in school quality—excess supply of skilled labor could depress returns (as in
Freeman, 1976) to the point that individuals anticipating this response would lower their
investments in human capital. I confine my discussion to the potential impact of changes in the
supply of education, rather than labor market-induced changes in its demand, though both forces
2
are affected by inequality and both shape individual decisions about attainment.
High school graduation rates are a relevant outcome for several reasons. As a measure of
human capital, they have implications for productivity and economic growth. Research points to the
importance of achievement levels in earlier grades in determining persistence in high school (see
1 conditional on constant enrollment
Intended improvements in schools could well make schooling more costly, however. Changes in educational
production could improve achievement but discourage enrollment and
ultimately attainment, potentially to the point that the net effect is negative: consider high school exit exams,
longer school days and years, or longer commutes to non-neighborhood schools due to desegregation or
choice policies.
2
For the evolving return to high school graduation and postsecondary education over this period, see Autor,
Katz, and Kearney (2008).
1