NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO FIRST IMPRESSIONS MATTER? IMPROVEMENT IN EARLY CAREER TEACHER
EFFECTIVENESS
Allison Atteberry
Susanna Loeb
James Wyckoff
Working Paper 19096
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19096
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2013
We appreciate helpful comments from Matt Kraft, Eric Taylor, and Tim Sass on previous versions
of the paper. We are grateful to the New York City Department of Education and the New York State
Education Department for the data employed in this paper. We appreciate financial support from the
National Center for the Analysis of Longitudinal Data in Education Research (CALDER). CALDER
is supported by IES Grant R305A060018. Support has also been provided by IES Grant R305B100009
to the University of Virginia and by a grant from the National Science Foundation. The views expressed
in the paper are solely those of the authors and may not reflect those of the funders or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. Any errors are attributable to the authors.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Allison Atteberry, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do First Impressions Matter? Improvement in Early Career Teacher Effectiveness
Allison Atteberry, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff
NBER Working Paper No. 19096
June 2013
JEL No. I21
ABSTRACT
Educational policymakers struggle to find ways to improve the quality of the teacher workforce. The
early career period represents a unique opportunity to identify struggling teachers, examine the likelihood
of future improvement, and make strategic pre-tenure investments in improvement as well as dismissals
to increase teaching quality. To date, only a little is known about the dynamics of teacher performance
in the first five years. This paper asks how much teachers vary in performance improvement during
their first five years of teaching and to what extent initial job performance predicts later performance.
We find that, on average, initial performance is quite predictive of future performance, far more so
than typically measured teacher characteristics. Predictions are particularly powerful at the extremes.
We employ these predictions to explore the likelihood of personnel actions that inappropriately distinguish
performance when such predictions are mistaken as well as the much less discussed costs of failure
to distinguish performance when meaningful differences exist. The results have important consequences
for improving the quality of the teacher workforce.
Allison Atteberry James Wyckoff
Curry School of Education Curry School of Education
University of Virginia University of Virginia
P.O. Box 400277 P.O. Box 400277
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4277 Charlottesville, VA 22904-4277
acma@virginia.edu wyckoff@virginia.edu
Susanna Loeb
524 CERAS, 520 Galvez Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
sloeb@stanford.edu

Introduction
Teachers vary widely in their ability to improve student achievement, and the difference
between effective and ineffective teachers has substantial effects on standardized test outcomes
(Rivkin et al., 2005; Rockoff, 2004) as well as later life outcomes (Chetty, Friedman, & Rockoff,
2011). Given the research on the differential impact of teachers and the vast expansion of student
achievement testing, policy-makers are increasingly interested in how measures of teacher
effectiveness, such as value-added, might be useful for improving the overall quality of the
teacher workforce. Some of these efforts focus on identifying high-quality teachers for rewards,
to take on more challenging assignments, or as models of expert practice (see for example,
teacher effectiveness policies in the District of Columbia Public Schools). Others attempt to
identify struggling teachers in need of mentoring or professional development to improve skills
(Taylor & Tyler, 2011; Yoon, 2007). Finally, because some teachers may never become
effective, some researchers and policymakers are exploring meaningful increases in dismissals of
ineffective teaches as a mechanism for improving the overall quality of teachers. One common
feature of all of these efforts is the need to establish a system to identify teachers’ effectiveness
as early as possible in a way that accurately predicts how well these inexperienced teachers
might serve students in the long run.
To date, only a little is known about the dynamics of teacher performance in the first five
years. As in other occupations, the early career period represents a unique opportunity to identify
struggling teachers, examine the likelihood of future improvement, and make strategic pre-tenure
investments in improvement as well as dismissals to increase teaching quality. While there are
several possible measures of teacher performance, this paper examines value-added estimates in
particular. Value-added scores are illustrative of teacher performance more broadly, and their use
1

herein is not intended to suggest that value-added scores should be used in isolation, without
regard to classroom practice, or in place of a principal’s judgment. The research community
acknowledges the limitations of value-added scores as measures of teacher quality, though
existing research also suggests that these measures capture something meaningful about how
teachers influence student’s math and reading skills, as well as longer term outcomes. This
paper relies on value-added measures only due to the lack of an alternative measure of teacher
effectiveness that covers the first five years of teachers’ careers. Similar analyses could use
alternative measures as they become available.
This paper explores how teacher performance in the first two years as measured by value-
added predicts future teacher performance. In service of this larger goal, we lay out a set of
questions designed to provide policy makers with concrete insight into how well teacher value-
added scores from the first two years of a teacher’s career would perform as an early signal of
how that teacher would develop over the next five years. The analyses are based on panel data
from the New York City Department of Education that follows all new teachers who began
teaching between the 1999-00 and 2006-07 school years through 2011-12 to pursue the
following research questions:
 How much do teachers vary in performance improvement during their first five years of
teaching?
 To what extent does initial job performance relate to later performance improvement?
 How accurately do measures of initial performance predict future performance?
 Extending the third question, we ask: When predictions are not accurate, what are the
tradeoffs associated with making errors?
The following section provides background for the relevance of the research questions, as
well as a review of existing literature that helps frame the issue. We then describe the data from
2