NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SUSTAINABLE SHADOW BANKING
Guillermo Ordonez
Working Paper 19022
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19022
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2013
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Guillermo Ordonez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Sustainable Shadow Banking
Guillermo Ordonez
NBER Working Paper No. 19022
May 2013
JEL No. D82,E44,G01,G18,G21
ABSTRACT
Commercial banks are subject to regulation that restricts their investments. When banks are concerned
for their reputation, however, they could self-regulate and invest more efficiently. Hence, a shadow
banking that arises to avoid regulation has the potential to improve welfare. Still, reputation concerns
depend on future economic prospects and may suddenly disappear, generating a collapse of shadow
banking and a return to traditional banking, with a decline in welfare. I discuss how a combination
of traditional regulation and cross reputation subsidization may enhance shadow banking and make
it more sustainable.
Guillermo Ordonez
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Economics
428 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
ordonez@econ.upenn.edu

1 Introduction
Banks’activitiesareusuallyregulatedtopreventexcessiverisk-takingandtoprovide
a safety net to investors and depositors. One of those regulations involves capital re-
quirements, which are expressed as a capital adequacy ratio of safe assets that banks
havetoholdasafractionoftheirloans. Thistypeofregulationrestrictsbanks’invest-
ments, potentially forcing them to give up superior and relatively safe opportunities
thatgovernmentscannotidentifyex-anteassuch.
In the years leading to the 2007-09 financial crisis in the United States, banks increas-
inglydevisedinstrumentstogetaroundcapitalrequirements,movingawayfromtra-
ditionalbankingintosocalledshadowbanking–intermediationusuallyassociatedwith
traditional banking, but that runs in the “shadow” of regulators. As documented by
Poznaretal.(2012),“Attheeveofthefinancialcrisis,thevolumeofcreditintermedi-
ated by the shadow banking system was close to $20 trillion, or nearly twice as large
as the volume of credit intermediated by the traditional banking system at roughly
$11trillion. Today,thecomparablefiguresare$16and$13trillion,respectively.”
Acharya,Schnabl,andSuarez(2012),forinstance,studyassetbackedcommercialpa-
per (ABCP) conduits, one of the most representative financial instruments used in
shadow banking. These are special purpose vehicles (SPV) sponsored by commer-
cial banks to purchase long term assets issuing short term commercial paper. Since
SPV are off-balance sheet, they are not subject to capital requirements, becoming the
mostimportantmechanismusedbybankstogoaroundregulations. Theyalsoshow
that ABCP “grew from $ 650 billion in January 2004 to $ 1.3 trillion in July 2007. At
that time, ABCP was the largest money market instrument in the United States. For
comparison,thesecondlargestinstrumentwasTreasuryBillswithabout$940billion
outstanding.”
This large increase came to a sudden halt on August 9, 2007, when BNP Paribas sus-
pended withdrawals from three funds invested in mortgage backed securities. “The
interest rate spread of overnight ABCP over the Federal Funds rate increased from
10basispointsto150basispointswithinonedayoftheBNPParibasannouncement.
Subsequently,...ABCPoutstandingdroppedfrom$1.3trillioninJuly2007to$833bil-
lion in December 2007.” Yet, the surprising growth and posterior collapse of shadow
banking is not unprecedent. In the absence of regulations during the late 19th cen-
2

tury and early 20th century, banking experienced parallel events to the recent one.
In particular, investors at some point became concerned about the credit quality and
liquidation values of the collateral used to back financial assets, and coordinated on
largebankruns.
To compensate investors for participating in shadow banking without the safety net
that regulations provide, banks offered explicit guarantees to repay maturing ABCP
at par. Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez (2012) show that the banks that used ABCP
more intensively before the recent crisis were also the banks that were more heavily
constrained by regulation, hence arguing that these conduits were effectively used
toavoidregulatorypressuresandtoreducecapitalrequirements.1 Theseguarantees,
however,wereconstructedtocoverliquidityrisks,notcreditrisksandexcessiverisk-
taking,whicharethemaintargetsofcapitalrequirements.
Why do investors agree on participating in shadow banking if they understand that
banks are trying to avoid regulation that provides a safety net against excessive risk-
taking? A potential answer is that indeed regulation and capital requirements are
useless. However, if this were true, why would investors run from shadow to tradi-
tionalbankingwhentheybecomeconcernedaboutthequalityofcollateral?
I argue that reputation concerns lie at the heart of both the growth and the fragility
of shadow banking. Shadow banking spurs as long as outside investors believe that
capital requirements are not critical to guarantee the quality of banks’ assets, since
reputationconcernsself-disciplinebanks’behavior. Whenbadnewsaboutthefuture
arise, reputation concerns collapse because reputation becomes less valuable, and
investors stop believing in the self-discipline of banks, moving their funds to a less
efficient,butsafer,traditionalbanking.
In the model, banks have capital and also borrow from outside investors. Banks can
invest these funds in safe assets or risky assets. Safe assets pay a moderate return in
case of success but a high probability of success. There are two types of risky assets,
observable by banks but not by governments: Inferior risky assets pay a high return
in case of success but have a low probability of success. Superior risky assets also
pay a high return in case of success, but have the same high probability of success as
1Interestingly, Acharya and Schnabl (2010) noted that Spain and Portugal are the only european
countries that impose the same regulatory capital requirement for both assets on balance sheet and
assetsonABCPconduits. Consistentlywiththeregulatoryarbitragemotive,banksinthesecountries
donotsponsorABCPconduits.
3