NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE “GREATEST” CARRY TRADE EVER? UNDERSTANDING EUROZONE
BANK RISKS
Viral V. Acharya
Sascha Steffen
Working Paper 19039
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19039
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2013
We thank Martin Brown, Paul Glasserman, Ruediger Fahlenbrach, Martin Hellwig, Bryan Kelly, Jan-Pieter
Krahnen, David Lesmond, Christian Leuz, Marco Pagano, Hélène Rey, Phil Strahan and participants
in the 12th annual FDIC / JFSR conference, 2012 C.R.E.D.I.T., 2nd Mofir Ancona and seminar participants
at Darden, Deutsche Bundesbank, Goethe University, Indiana, Lancaster, Leeds, Mainz, NYU Stern,
Osnabrueck and Tulane for valuable comments and suggestions. We are grateful to Matteo Crosignani
for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Viral V. Acharya and Sascha Steffen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The “Greatest” Carry Trade Ever? Understanding Eurozone Bank Risks
Viral V. Acharya and Sascha Steffen
NBER Working Paper No. 19039
May 2013
JEL No. F3,G01,G14,G15,G21,G28
ABSTRACT
We show that Eurozone bank risks during 2007-2012 can be understood as a “carry trade” behavior.
Bank equity returns load positively on peripheral (Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain and Italy, or GIPSI)
bond returns and negatively on German government bond returns, a position that generated “carry”
until the deteriorating GIPSI bond returns inflicted losses on banks. The positive GIPSI loadings correlate
with banks’ holdings of GIPSI bonds; and, the negative German loading with banks’ short-term debt
exposures. Consistent with moral hazard in the form of risk-taking by large, under-capitalized banks
to exploit government guarantees, arbitrage regulatory risk weights, and access central-bank funding,
we find that this carry-trade behavior is stronger for large banks, and banks with low Tier 1 ratios and
high risk-weighted assets, in both GIPSI and non-GIPSI countries’ banks, but not so for similar banks
in other Western economies or for non-bank firms.
Viral V. Acharya
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-84
New York, NY 10012
and CEPR
and also NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu
Sascha Steffen
European School of Management and Technology
Schlossplatz 1
10178 Berlin
Germany
steffen@esmt.org

“And of course, the deterioration of the Euro zone situation and particularly the sovereign crisis
in the peripheral economies hit very badly the group. And that’s of course not a surprise for a
group that still had very important short-term funding needs that was mainly present in strong
exposures in peripheral countries. [...] Before 2008, it was the group’s high rating granting easy
access to wholesale funding that led to the situation of October 2008 with short-term funding
need of €260 billion outstanding in October 2008, i.e. 43% of total balance sheet. [...] with very
significant acceleration and buildup of the bond portfolio was amounting at €203 billion at the
end of 2008. Mostly carry trades with marginal improvement of customer access [...] that led to a
very significant gearing ratio because the portfolio size was, at that time, 25 times the group
equity.” - Pierre Mariani, Chairman of the Management Board and CEO, Dexia SA, Earnings
Call, February 23rd, 2012
1. Introduction
The ongoing sovereign debt crisis in Europe has cast doubt on the solvency of European
banks that incurred substantial mark-to-market losses and impairments on their peripheral
(Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain and Italy, or GIPSI) sovereign bond holdings. Since mid-2008,
government bond yield spreads between pairs of European countries, for example, between
German bunds and GIPSI bonds, have widened considerably, mirroring the economic divergence
between these countries (Figure 1).1 This divergence has challenged even the survival of the
Eurozone as a whole. Since then, banks have on average lost 70% of their market value and shed
billions of euros of assets in an effort to increase regulatory capital ratios.
[Figure 1]
We show in this paper that banks’ risks during this period can be understood as
reflecting a “carry trade” behavior. With access to short-term unsecured funding in wholesale
markets, banks appear to have undertaken long peripheral sovereign bond positions. On the
upside, the trade would pocket the “carry”, the spread between the long-term peripheral sovereign
bonds and banks’ short-term funding costs. On the downside, which has materialized, the spreads
between two legs of the trade diverged even further resulting in significant losses for banks and
1 For almost a decade prior to this, the ten-year sovereign bond yields for these countries hovered around the four
percent benchmark with a small yield spread difference between core and peripheral European countries.
1

leading to questions in funding markets about their solvency and liquidity. In essence, this carry
trade reflects a bet that Eurozone countries would converge economically resulting in a
convergence of the spread between its two legs.
Dexia SA (Dexia), a Belgian financial group and one of the largest lenders to public
sector entities, provides a quintessential example of such behavior as it invested heavily in these
carry trades (see the introductory quote). Dexia built up a risky bond portfolio of almost a third of
the bank’s total balance sheet which was financed almost 50% with short-term funding. As the
quality of the bond portfolio worsened, Dexia was unable to roll over the financing of its assets
and was bailed out in October 2011. Dexia is not an isolated case. Bank of Cyprus more than
quadrupled its investments in Greek government bonds in 2010 as Greek bonds were among the
highest yielding sovereign bonds and financed its investment with short-term funds obtained
from the ECB in 2009.
We document that this behavior has in fact been pervasive among Eurozone banks. We
investigate the causes of the European banking crisis and argue that banks’ substantial share price
decline can in part be explained by banks placing a bet on the survival of the Eurozone, choosing
to hold peripheral sovereign bonds and financing their investments in short-term wholesale
markets. While correlations between bond yields of Germany (or France) and peripheral
sovereign bond yields were above 95% in 2005, these correlations became negative in 2010 when
markets became more reluctant to finance banks’ investments in risky sovereign debt resulting in
a flight into longer-term core European (particularly German) government bonds. In other words,
the banks lost on both sides of the carry trade.
At the core of our analysis are the publicly listed banks that took part in five consecutive
stress tests conducted by the European Banking Authority (EBA) starting in 2010 and ending in
June 2012. March 2010 is the first reporting date as of which detailed information about
2