NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO DEPOSITORS MONITOR BANKS?
Rajkamal Iyer
Manju Puri
Nicholas Ryan
Working Paper 19050
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19050
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2013
We are grateful to Mr. Gokul Parikh and the staff of the bank for all their help. We thank Nittai Bergman,
Doug Diamond, Xavier Giroud, P.Iyer, Antoinette Schoar and Andrei Shleifer for their comments.
We thank seminar, conference participants and discussants at ASSA meetings, San Diego, Corporate
Finance Conference, Bristol, Duke University, European Central Bank, Indiana University, Riksbank,
Tel Aviv Conference, Minnesota Conference, MIT and World Bank. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Rajkamal Iyer, Manju Puri, and Nicholas Ryan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Depositors Monitor Banks?
Rajkamal Iyer, Manju Puri, and Nicholas Ryan
NBER Working Paper No. 19050
May 2013
JEL No. G01,G2,G21
ABSTRACT
We use unique micro-level depositor data for a bank that faced a run due to a shock to its solvency
to study whether depositors monitor banks. Specifically, we examine depositor withdrawal patterns
in response to a timeline of private and public signals of the bank’s financial health. In response to
a public announcement of the bank’s financial troubles, we find depositors with uninsured balances,
depositors with loan linkages and staff of the bank are far more likely to run. Even before the run,
a regulatory audit, which was in principle private information, found the bank insolvent. We find
that depositors act on this private information and withdraw in a pecking order beginning at the time
of the regulatory audit, with staff moving first, followed by uninsured depositors and finally other
depositors. By comparing the response to this fundamental shock with an earlier panic at the same
bank, we argue that withdrawals in the fundamental run are due in part to monitoring by depositors
though the monitoring appears to be more of regulatory signals rather than of fundamentals. Our results
give sharp empirical evidence on the importance of fragility in a bank’s capital structure and may inform
banking regulation.
Rajkamal Iyer Nicholas Ryan
MIT Harvard Weatherhead Center
riyer@MIT.EDU K239 1737 Cambridge St.
Cambridge, MA 02138
Manju Puri nickryan@fas.harvard.edu
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
1 Towerview Drive, Box 90120
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
mpuri@duke.edu

I. Introduction
Do depositors monitor banks? Can depositors distinguish fundamental shocks to bank
solvency from noise? Are some depositors better at monitoring than others? These
questions are central to the role of fragility in the bank capital structure. Leading theories
of banking emphasize the importance of fragility—the possibility of liquidation by
depositors making a bank insolvent—as a commitment mechanism for banks (Calomiris
and Kahn, 1991; Diamond and Rajan, 2001). Calomiris and Kahn (1991) argue that the
ability of depositors to withdraw deposits on demand provides an incentive for informed
depositors to monitor banks and trigger a run if the bank is likely to expropriate depositor
funds. Diamond and Rajan (2001) say that the threat of runs commits banks to share rents
that accrue through their specific loan-collection skills, which, in turn, allows banks to
make loans at low cost. While these theories emphasize how bank fragility solves agency
problems, bank runs may be costly ex post for an individual bank or even ex ante, from
the perspective of the whole financial system (Kaufman, 1994; Calomiris and Mason,
2003). Fragility allows panics, unjustified runs that lead to the failure of solvent but
illiquid banks (Diamond and Dybvig, 1983).
In this paper, we study whether and how depositors monitor banks using a timeline of
public and private signals about the bank health. We obtain a unique proprietary dataset
with micro-level depositor data for a bank in India that experienced runs after a shock to
its solvency. The bank experienced deterioration in asset quality and was subject to runs
during and after a regulatory intervention that ultimately placed the bank in receivership.
We obtain detailed data on every depositor transaction along with characteristics of
depositors to examine the factors that affect depositor withdrawal. We also link the
timing of private and public information that came out during this failure to the behavior
of different types of depositors. The timeline we exploit is the following. The bank had a
build-up of bad loans. This build-up is uncovered by an audit by the central bank, which
is private information and documented the bank’s negative net worth. This audit is
followed, after several months, by public news that the central bank is imposing severe
restrictions on the bank’s activity.
2

We use this setting to address the following questions. Do depositors run based on public
information? Which kind of depositors run; is there differential behavior for uninsured
depositors, insiders, and relationship clients? Do certain kinds of depositor run based on
private signals before the release of public information? Even prior to the private
regulatory signal, do depositors run based on the fundamental health of the bank as
shown in the bank’s annual statement? Finally, how does depositor behavior compare in
a fundamental run with a non-fundamental run?
We find that there is a large run by depositors immediately following the disclosure of
regulatory action against the bank. Uninsured depositors are far more likely to run than
insured depositors. The magnitude of runs by depositors that are insured is modest,
despite the fact that there are large delays in settlement of deposit insurance claims. We
also find that depositors that have loan linkages with the bank or who are bank staff, i.e.
insiders, are more likely to run. Depositors are more likely to run if a member of their
network has already done so; the effect of having a network member run on own
liquidation is as large as the effect of being on the bank staff. Depositors with a longer
relationship with the bank are less likely to run.
Was there any evidence of a run prior to the public release of information? If depositors
actively monitor banks, one would expect informed depositors to withdraw deposits
before the initiation of formal regulatory action. We find that there is a silent run,
beginning at the time of the regulatory audit but prior to regulatory action, that is driven
by uninsured depositors, depositors with loan linkages and staff members. The size of
this silent run is smaller than that after the public release of information. A regulatory
audit can be a precursor to regulatory action and the conduct of this audit was private
information only available, in principle, to the bank. Indeed, staff of the bank withdraw
first in response to the audit, followed closely by uninsured depositors. The results show
that uninsured depositors and depositors with loan linkages are the most responsive to
regulatory signals regarding bank solvency.
3