NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BAILOUTS, TIME INCONSISTENCY, AND OPTIMAL REGULATION
V.V. Chari
Patrick J. Kehoe
Working Paper 19192
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19192
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2013
The authors thank Kathy Rolfe and Joan Gieseke for editorial help and the NSF for support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by V.V. Chari and Patrick J. Kehoe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Bailouts, Time Inconsistency, and Optimal Regulation
V.V. Chari and Patrick J. Kehoe
NBER Working Paper No. 19192
June 2013
JEL No. E0,E44,E6,E61
ABSTRACT
We develop a model in which, in order to provide managerial incentives, it is optimal to have costly
bankruptcy. If benevolent governments can commit to their policies, it is optimal not to interfere with
private contracts. Such policies are time inconsistent in the sense that, without commitment, governments
have incentives to bail out firms by buying up the debt of distressed firms and renegotiating their contracts
with managers. From an ex ante perspective, however, such bailouts are costly because they worsen
incentives and thereby reduce welfare. We show that regulation in the form of limits on the debt-to-value
ratio of firms mitigates the time-inconsistency problem by eliminating the incentives of governments
to undertake bailouts. In terms of the cyclical properties of regulation, we show that regulation should
be tightest in aggregate states in which resources lost to bankruptcy in the equilibrium without a government
are largest.
V.V. Chari
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
1035 Heller Hall
271 - 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
varadarajanvchari@gmail.com
Patrick J. Kehoe
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55480-0291
and NBER
pkehoe@res.mpls.frb.fed.us

Recent experience has shown that governments can and will intervene during financial
crises. During such crises, many firms are faced with the prospect of costly bankruptcy and
liquidation. In order to minimize these costs, governments intervene and bail out debt hold-
ers. Anticipations of such interventions, however, alter the incentives for firms and financial
intermediaries ex ante and by doing so reduce ex ante welfare. If the costs of these altered
incentives exceed the benefits of intervention during crises, governments would refrain from
bailouts if they had the power to commit themselves. In practice, however, governments do
not seem to have this power. The lack of commitment creates a time-inconsistency problem
in that the outcomes are worse without commitment than they are with commitment. Here,
we ask how optimal regulation should be designed to mitigate this problem.
To answer this question, we develop an infinitely repeated model that highlights the
time-inconsistency problem. In our model, debt contracts between firms and investors are
optimal. Such contracts lead some distressed firms to declare bankruptcy when their pro-
ductivity is sufficiently low. The desire to avoid the associated costs of bankruptcy provides
incentives for a benevolent government to bail out distressed firms. Anticipation of bailouts
leads managers and investors to design contracts under whichthe managers exert inefficiently
low levels of effort. We show that ex ante regulation in the form of limits on the debt-to-
value ratio of firms mitigates the time-inconsistency problem by eliminating the incentives of
a government to bail out distressed firms. The regulation, we also show, should vary over the
business cycle.
We begin by analyzing a one-period model without a government. The technology in
the model is as follows. Firms produce output using the effort of managers and the funds of
investors. The productivity of the firm has two idiosyncratic stochastic components: a public
one and a private one. The public component, referred to as the health status of the firm, is
the average level of productivity, which can be either high or low, indicating whether a firm
is healthy or distressed. Higher effort by the managers increases the likelihood that the firm
is healthy, that is, that average productivity is high. The private component is the firm’s
level of productivity relative to the average.
In the one-period model, managers and investors design optimal contracts intended
to induce effort and share output in the face of three key frictions. First, the effort of the

manager is privately observed by the manager. Second, although the public component of
productivity is costlessly observed by both the manager and the investors, only the manager
costlessly observes the private component of productivity. Investors can observe the private
component only by putting the firm through bankruptcy. We assume that bankruptcy is
costly in that it reduces the productivity of firms proportionately.1 (This feature implies
that our model has costly state verification, as in Townsend (1979), except that we have
proportional rather than fixed costs of verification.) Third, the manager and the investors
cannot commit to the terms of their contracts; that is, if the manager and investors agree to
renegotiate, they can renegotiate the terms of a contract after the manager chooses effort and
the public component of productivity has been realized. This lack of commitment implies
that any contract must be immune to renegotiation.
We show that costly bankruptcy, together with lack of commitment to the contract,
implies that the optimal contracts between firms and investors are debt contracts. These
contracts specify a fixed payment to investors contingent on the public component as long as
the firm can meet the fixed payment and bankruptcy otherwise. In the event of bankruptcy,
the investors receive all of the proportionately reduced output of the firm. The optimal
contracting problem is, thus, to find the debt contracts with payoffs contingent on the public
component,namely,thehealthofthefirms,whichprovidethebestincentivesforthemanagers
toexerteffort. Theresultingcompetitiveequilibriumisefficient inthataplanner, confronted
with the same information and renegotiation frictions, would choose the same outcomes.
Weintroduceabenevolentgovernment, intheformofabailout authority, intotheone-
period model in order to investigate the incentives of the government to bail out distressed
firms and show that lack of commitment by this authority leads to a time-inconsistency
problem. If this authority could commit to its policies, it would not intervene because the
competitive equilibrium is efficient.
Withoutsuchcommitment,thebailoutauthority’spoliciesareverydifferent. Consider
anexpostsituationinwhichmanydistressedfirmsareabouttoundergocostlybankruptcies.
1We think of this output reduction as arising from a variety of sources, including replacing incumbent
managers with new managers with fewer firm-specific skills. Alternatively, the reduction in output could
arise because bankruptcy leads specialized forms of capital to be sold for less suitable uses.
2