NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CREDIT RATINGS AND THE PRICING OF SOVEREIGN DEBT DURING THE
EURO CRISIS
Joshua Aizenman
Mahir Binici
Michael M. Hutchison
Working Paper 19125
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19125
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2013
We thank conference participants at the Oxford Review of Economic Policy Seminar at the Saïd Business
School, Oxford, especially Christoffer Koch and Christopher Bowdler, and seminar participants at
INSEAD, the Central Bank of Turkey, and Sveriges Riksbank for very helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Joshua Aizenman, Mahir Binici, and Michael M. Hutchison. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Credit Ratings and the Pricing of Sovereign Debt during the Euro Crisis
Joshua Aizenman, Mahir Binici, and Michael M. Hutchison
NBER Working Paper No. 19125
June 2013
JEL No. F30,F34,G01,G24,H63
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the impact of credit rating changes on the sovereign spreads in the European
Union and investigates the macro and financial factors that account for the time varying effects of
a given credit rating change. We find that changes of ratings are informative, economically important
and highly statistically significant in panel models even after controlling for a host of domestic and
global fundamental factors and investigating various functional forms, time and country groupings
and dynamic structures. Dynamic panel model estimates indicate that a credit rating upgrade decreases
CDS spreads by about 45 basis points, on average, for EU countries. However, the association between
credit rating changes and spreads shifted markedly between the pre-crisis and crisis periods. European
countries had quite similar CDS responses to credit rating changes during the pre-crisis period, but
that large differences emerged during the crisis period between the now highly-sensitive GIIPS group
and other European country groupings (EU and Euro Area excluding GIIPS, and the non-EU area).
We also find a complicated non-linear pattern dependent on the level of the credit rating. The results
are robust to the including credit “outlook” or “watch” signals by credit rating agencies. In addition,
contagion from rating downgrades in GIIPS to other euro countries is not evident once own-country
credit rating changes are taken into account.
Joshua Aizenman Michael M. Hutchison
Economics and SIR Department of Economics
University of Southern California E2
University Park University of California
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043 Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER hutch@ucsc.edu
aizenman@usc.edu
Mahir Binici
Central Bank of Turkey
Istiklal Cad. No : 10 Ulus
06100 Ankara
Turkey
mahir.binici@tcmb.gov.tr

1. Introduction and Overview
Concerns about the information content of credit ratings and their association with
sovereign spreads and default risk were mostly muted during the Great Moderation period. The
global crisis of 2008-9, and especially the on-going Euro crisis, again put to the fore these issues
at the time of an unprecedented rise in volatility. A number of issues arise in this context,
foremost among them are whether credit rating agency (CRA) rating changes systemically
provide markets with new information on the likelihood of sovereign default and how risk
pricing responds. Do credit rating agencies have superior information on current or likely future
fundamentals and/or provide value by coordinating disparate market views on credit worthiness
such that rating changes have an economically important? Has the information value of credit
ratings perceived by the markets been diminished since the advent of the global financial crisis
(GFC) and their failure to adequately judge default risk of mortgage back securities and other
derivative products at that time?
The impact of credit rating changes on sovereign bonds, and the impact on credit default
swap (CDS) pricing, seems particularly important in the European context for several reasons.
First, the first sovereign default in EU history occurred when Greece defaulted on government
bonds in 2012. Prior to the default many public officials and others had expressed frustration that
the credit rating agencies (CRAs) and market participants pricing CDS were betting on a Greek
default, in their view putting in motion a process driving down bond prices, causing the cost of
public funding to rise and creating a self-fulfilling prophesy leading to default. Second, the
GIIPS group (Greece-Italy-Ireland-Portugal-Spain), a subset of the EU, all of which participate
in the Eurozone, have been particularly affected by credit downgrades, with one or more CRA
rating Greece, Portugal, and Ireland to "junk" status since spring 2010. Many officials publically
stated that these downgrades accelerated a burgeoning Eurozone sovereign debt crisis and, partly
in response to this criticism, several new regulations and rules on CRAs have been put in place1.
A recent EC memo explaining new rules states: “CRAs have a major impact on today's financial
markets, with rating actions being closely followed and impacting on investors, borrowers,
issuers and governments: e.g. sovereign ratings play a crucial role for the rated country, since a
1These are commonly referred to as CRA I Regulation and CRA II regulation. New rules were also adopted in early
2013: http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/securities/agencies/index_en.htm.
2

downgrading has the immediate effect of making a country's borrowing more expensive.”
(European Commission, 2013). Third, there are concerns that the EU, and the Eurozone in
particular, is being divided into two distinct groups, one of which whereby sovereign risk is
priced fairly and by international norms, and another group (GIIPS), which is subject to
“excessive” pricing and sensitivity to economic development, in turn putting at risk the solvency
of public finances.2
To address these issues, we investigate how changes in credit ratings and economic factors
have influenced CDS spreads in Europe in the context of the recent crisis. Specifically, we use
monthly data, January 2005 to August 2012, for 26 EU countries, to evaluate the transmission of
credit rating changes on sovereign CDS spreads, while controlling for country-specific and
global economic factors, in the context of a dynamic panel model with fixed effects. We examine
possible time-varying responses to credit ratings, especially price sensitivity before and after the
GFC, and whether pricing responses and pricing dynamics differ between GIIPs and others in the
EU. In addition, we explore whether the response of CDS to rating changes depends upon the
initial level of credit rating, and hence whether non-linearity and particular threshold points (e.g.
investment grade credit rating point) are apparent in the pricing of risk. Finally, we investigate
cross-border transmission of credit rating changes from GIIPS to others in the EU, and the
degree to which these associations are time dependent and nonlinear.
The focus on Europe allows us to investigate the concern that market pricing of sovereign
risk during the crisis may not be justified by economic fundamentals, and whether the
association between credit ratings the pricing of sovereign debt is influenced by participation in
the Euro Zone. In addition, contrasting the crisis period (and heighted volatility of shocks) with
the preceding period of relative market tranquility provides sharper identification of these
linkages.
We find that changes in credit ratings are informative, significant economically, and
robust, even after controlling for conventional economic fundamentals. Specifically, an upgrade
decreases CDS spreads by about 45 basis points, while a one percent rise in the domestic stock
price index lowers CDS spreads by 1.5 to 2.0 basis points. World commodity and oil price
increases also consistently decrease CDS spreads, likely because world economic conditions are
2This is sometimes referred to in the European context as self-fulfilling “bad” expectations equilibrium (e.g.
DeGrauwe and Yi, 2013).
3