NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CENTRAL BANK DESIGN
Ricardo Reis
Working Paper 19187
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19187
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2013
I am grateful to comments from Alan Blinder, Anil Kashyap, David Romer, and Mike Woodford.
This paper was supported by the NBER and written for the conference "The First 100 Years of the
Federal Reserve," which took place on July 10th, 2013. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
The author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research. Further information
is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19187.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Ricardo Reis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Central Bank Design
Ricardo Reis
NBER Working Paper No. 19187
July 2013
JEL No. E5,E58
ABSTRACT
What set of institutions can support the activity of a central bank? Designing a central bank requires
specifying its objective function, including the bank's mandate at different horizons and the choice
of banker(s), specifying the resource constraint that limits the resources that the central bank generates,
the assets it holds, or the payments on its liabilities, and finally specifying how the central bank will
communicate with private agents to affect the way they respond to policy choices. This paper summarizes
the relevant economic literature that bears on these choices, leading to twelve principles on central
bank design.
Ricardo Reis
Department of Economics, MC 3308
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, Rm. 1022 IAB
New York NY 10027
and NBER
rreis@columbia.edu

1 Introduction
Starting from a blank page, how could one design the institutions of a central bank for
the United States? This paper examines what the relevant economic literature and the
experiences of the past reveal about this question, unencumbered by the history of how
the Fed got to what it is today or by the short-term political constraints it faced. The
perspective is akin to setting up a mechanism design problem, but falling well short of a
specific formalization and rather discussing what its main ingredients might look like. The
goal is to investigate the trade-offs associated with different choices and to identify areas
where there are clear messages about optimal central bank design.1
This question is not as outlandish as it may seem. As soon as the Iraq war ended in 2003,
“the first major issue that Coalition economists confronted: What should be done with the
Iraqi dinar?” (Foote et al., 2004, page 60) The economists involved stated that adopting a
new central bank law in March 2004 was one of their first and most important economic
accomplishments, and this is true in most transition countries as well. Even looking at
developed countries, just 20 years ago, Europeans had to come up with an answer to this
question after they signed the Maastricht Treaty (von Hagen, 1997). The Federal Reserve
has also not been an institution set in stone; slowly, and with turns in different directions,
its structure has been molded over 100 years into what it is today.2 My goal here is not to
describe these historical developments but rather to try to survey the economic literature on
the trade-offs involved in designing a central bank for the United States.
Stripped to its core, a central bank is the sole institution in a country with the power to
issue banknotes to the public and borrow from banks in the form of reserves that trade on
par with currency. More broadly, the central bank can choose some policy instruments that
1Romer and Romer (1997) and Blinder (2006) are important precursors.
2See Friedman and Schwartz (1963) for the classic account of the history of the Federal Reserve and
Meltzer (2003, 2010a,b) for a more recent alternative.
2

it controls directly, as well as a set of announcements about its knowledge of the economy or
future policy intentions. Designing the central bank then consists of specifying three objects.
First is the objective function, which comes from somewhere or someone, and includes only
a few macroeconomic variables, potentially at different horizons. Second, the central bank
faces a resource constraint, limiting both its ability to distribute dividends as well as the
set of policies that it can pursue. Third is the set of equilibrium constraints mapping policy
actions and announcements into the simultaneous evolution of private agents’ beliefs and
macroeconomic outcomes. In Ramsey problems, these would be called the “implementability
constraints”. Implicit in them is a notion of equilibrium, and because they depend on agents’
beliefs, thecommitmentsbythecentralbankortransparencyaboutitsfutureintentionshave
an effect on outcomes today. The following three sections discuss each of these ingredients
in turn, before a short conclusion in section 5.
2 The central bank’s goals
Choosing goals includes reflecting on who makes those choices, which macroeconomic vari-
ables are included and at what time horizon, and how to consider differing views.
2.1 The strictness of the central bank’s mandate
A central bank is nothing but an agent of the government that serves society. Basic demo-
cratic principles would suggest that society would give the central bank a clear goal.
However, the mandate of many central banks is vague. In the United States, the 1977
Amendment to the Federal Reserve Act established as goals for the central bank: “maximum
employment, stable prices and moderate long-term interest rates.” Few Fed governors spend
much time at their job without giving at least one official speech where they state their
interpretation of this mandate, since maximum employment does not mean that every able
3