NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE DYNAMIC PROPERTIES OF FINANCIAL-MARKET EQUILIBRIUM WITH
TRADING FEES
Adrian Buss
Bernard Dumas
Working Paper 19155
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19155
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 01238
June 2013, Revised July 2017
Previous versions were circulated and presented under the titles “The Equilibrium Dynamics of
Liquidity and Illiquid Asset Prices” and “Financial-market Equilibrium with Friction.” Buss is
with INSEAD (adrian.buss@insead.edu) and Dumas is with INSEAD, University of Torino,
NBER, and CEPR (bernard.dumas@insead.edu). Work on this topic was initiated while Dumas
was at the University of Lausanne and Buss was at the Goethe University of Frankfurt. Dumas’s
research has been supported by the Swiss National Center for Competence in Research
“FinRisk,” by grant #1112 of the INSEAD research fund and by the AXA chair of the University
of Torino. He is thankful to Collegio Carlo Alberto and to BI Norwegian Business School for
their hospitality. The authors are grateful for useful discussions and comments to Beth Allen,
Andrew Ang, Yakov Amihud, Laurent Barras, Sébastien Bétermier, Bruno Biais, John Campbell,
Georgy Chabakauri, Massimiliano Croce, Magnus Dahlquist, Sanjiv Das, Xi Dong, Itamar
Drechsler, Phil Dybvig, Thierry Foucault, Kenneth French, Xavier Gabaix, Nicolae Gârleanu,
Stefano Giglio, Francisco Gomes, Amit Goyal, Harald Hau, John Heaton, Terrence Hendershott,
Julien Hugonnier, Ravi Jagannathan, Elyès Jouini, Andrew Karolyi, Felix Kubler, David Lando,
John Leahy, Francis Longstaff, Abraham Lioui, Edith Liu, Hong Liu, Frédéric Malherbe, Ian
Martin, Alexander Michaelides, Pascal Maenhout, Stefan Nagel, Stavros Panageas, Luboš Pástor,
Paolo Pasquariello, Patrice Poncet, Tarun Ramadorai, Scott Richard, Barbara Rindi, Jean-Charles
Rochet, Leonid Ro¸su, Olivier Scaillet, Norman Schürhoff, Chester Spatt, Raman Uppal, Dimitri
Vayanos, Pietro Veronesi, Grigory Vilkov, Vish Viswanathan, Jeffrey Wurgler, Ingrid Werner,
Fernando Zapatero, and participants at workshops given at the Amsterdam Duisenberg School of
Finance, INSEAD, the CEPR’s European Summer Symposium in Financial Markets at
Gerzensee, the University of Cyprus, the University of Lausanne, Bocconi University, the
European Finance Association meeting, the Duke-UNC Asset Pricing Workshop, the National
Bank of Switzerland, the Adam Smith Asset Pricing workshop at Oxford University, the Yale
University General Equilibrium workshop, the Center for Asset Pricing Research/Norwegian
Finance Initiative Workshop at BI, the Indian School of Business Summer Camp, Boston
University, Washington University in St Louis, ESSEC Business School, HEC Business School,
McGill University, the NBER Asset Pricing Summer Institute, the University of Zurich, the
University of Nantes, the Western Finance Association and the Frankfurt School of Finance and
Management. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2013 by Adrian Buss and Bernard Dumas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Dynamic Properties of Financial-Market Equilibrium with Trading Fees
Adrian Buss and Bernard Dumas
NBER Working Paper No. 19155
June 2013
JEL No. G10,G12
ABSTRACT
We incorporate trading fees in a long-horizon dynamic general-equilibrium model in which
traders optimally and endogenously decide when and how much to trade. A full characterization
of equilibrium is provided, which allows us to study the dynamics of equilibrium trades,
equilibrium asset prices and rates of return in the presence of trading fees. We exhibit the effect
of trading fees on deviations from the consumption- CAPM and analyze the pricing of
endogenous liquidity risk. We compare, for the same shocks, the impulse responses of this model
to those of a model in which trading is infrequent because of trader inattention.
The current version reflects material that was previously in two papers, w21421 and w19155.
Adrian Buss
INSEAD
Boulevard de Constance
77305 Fontainebleau Cedex
FRANCE
adrian.buss@insead.edu
Bernard Dumas
INSEAD
boulevard de Constance
77305 Fontainebleau Cedex
FRANCE
and NBER
bernard.dumas@insead.edu

The…nancialsectoroftheeconomyissuesandtradessecurities.But, moreimportantly, it
provides aservicetoclients, suchas theserviceof accessingthe…nancial marketandtrading.
This service is provided at a cost to cover physical as well as wage costs and the adverse
selection e¤ect of facing potentially informed customers, plus a pro…t. Understanding the
impact of this cost on …nancial-market equilibrium is as important to the …nancial industry
as the cost of producing chickpeas to the chickpea industry.
In practice, traders trade through intermediaries. However, the end users being the
traders, access to a …nancial market is ultimately a service that traders make available to
each other. As a way of constructing a simple model, we bypass intermediaries and their
pricing policy, and let traders serve as dealers for, and pay trading fees to each other. We
view trading fees as a metaphor for the cost (plus markup) of keeping the …nancial sector in
operation.
We incorporate trading fees in a dynamic-equilibrium model in which traders optimally
and endogenously decide when and how much to trade, with the purpose of increasing our
understanding of the modi…cation of trading strategies, prices, and returns associated with
trading fees. We de…ne for this market a form of Walrasian equilibrium that is the limit of
a sequence of equilibria in which each trader’s complementary slackness condition has been
relaxed, and we invent an algorithm that takes that limit. It delivers an exact numerical
equilibriumthatsynchronizeslikeclockworkthetradersintheimplementationoftheirtrades
and allows us to analyze the way in which trades take place and in which prices are formed
and evolve. In doing this, we follow the lead of He and Modest (1995), Jouini and Kallal
(1995) and Luttmer (1996), but, unlike these authors, who established bounds on asset
prices, we reach a full description.
We take the cost function as given, but choose the functional form in such a way that it
re‡ects one special and important feature of the cost of …nancial services: while producers
of chickpeas only sell chickpeas and consumers only buy chickpeas, …nancial-market traders
sometimes buy and, at other times, sell the very same security.1 In both cases, they pay
a positive cost to the institution that organizes the market, irrespective of the direction of
the trade. For any cost function of the power type other than the square (or even-powered)
1Philippon (2015) de…nes the user cost of …nance as the sum of the rate of return to a saver plus the unit
cost of …nancial intermediation. That formulation presupposes that a saver is always a saver and a borrower
always a borrower. The cost of …nancial intermediation is then the spread between the borrowing and the
lending rates. The question of choosing between being a saver and a borrower is not on the table.
1

function, this implies that there is a kink at zero in the trading cost function that induces
traders not to trade whentheyotherwise(withouttradingfees)wouldhave. Wewanttodraw
the consequences of the traders’inaction for portfolio decisions, asset prices, and …nancial-
market equilibrium. In particular, we assume that the cost of trading, to an approximation,
is proportional to the value of the shares traded.
In our model, traders are endowed with an every-period motive for trading, over and
above the long-term need to trade for lifetime planning purposes. That is, we assume that
traders receive endowments that are not fully hedgeable as, even without trading fees, the
…nancialmarketisincomplete.Accordingly, wheneveratrader’srealizedendowmentisabove
or below the amount he has previously been able to hedge, he has the desire to adjust his
portfolio positions.
In the presence of proportional trading fees, traders, as is well-known from the literature
on non-equilibrium portfolio choice, tolerate a deviation from their preferred holdings, the
zone of tolerated deviation being called the “no-trade region.”Speci…cally, a trader may
decide not to trade, thereby preventing other traders from trading with him, which is an
additional endogenous, stochastic, and, perhaps, quantitatively more important consequence
of the trading fee. Liquidity begets liquidity. Conceptually and qualitatively speaking, this
endogenous stochastic process of the liquidity of a security is as important to investment
and valuation as is the exogenous stochastic process of its future cash ‡ows. That is, when
purchasing a security it is not su¢ cient for a trader to have in mind the cash ‡ows that the
security will pay into the inde…nite future, he must also anticipate his, and other people’s,
desire and ability to resell the security in the marketplace at a later time.
We show, analytically, how this endogenous stochastic process of the liquidity a¤ects
equilibrium securities prices. That is, we compare equilibrium securities prices to traders’
private valuations, which can be likened to private bid and ask prices, and explain how the
gapbetweenthemtriggerstrades. Inaddition,wecompareequilibriumsecuritiespricesinthe
presence of trading fees to those in the absence of trading fees. The di¤erences between the
two prices result fromchanges in the state prices, or, equivalently, consumption. Speci…cally,
in the presence of trading fees, traders face a trade-o¤between smoothing consumption and
smoothing holdings (to reduce trading costs).
Next, we provide quantitative results for an illustrative setting with two traded assets,
one of which, the stock, is subject to trading fees. We illustrate the degree to which capital
2