NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CONCENTRATION IN MORTGAGE LENDING, REFINANCING ACTIVITY AND
MORTGAGE RATES
David S. Scharfstein
Adi Sunderam
Working Paper 19156
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19156
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2013
We are grateful to Zahi Ben-David, Scott Frame, Andreas Fuster, Ed Golding, David Lucca, Amit
Seru, Jeremy Stein, Amir Sufi, and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
Harvard University, the NBER Corporate Finance Spring Meetings, and the UCLA/FRB - San Francisco
Conference on Ho using and the Macroeconomy for helpful comments and suggestions. We thank
Freddie Mac for data and Toomas Laarits for excellent research assistance. We also thank the Harvard
Business School Division of Research for financial support. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by David S. Scharfstein and Adi Sunderam. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Concentration in Mortgage Lending, Refinancing Activity and Mortgage Rates
David S. Scharfstein and Adi Sunderam
NBER Working Paper No. 19156
June 2013
JEL No. E44,E52,G21,G23,L85
ABSTRACT
We present evidence that high concentration in local mortgage lending reduces the sensitivity of mortgage
rates and refinancing activity to mortgage-backed security (MBS) yields. A decrease in MBS yields
is typically associated with greater refinancing activity and lower rates on new mortgages. However,
this effect is dampened in counties with concentrated mortgage markets. We isolate the direct effect
of mortgage market concentration and rule out alternative explanations based on borrower, loan, and
collateral characteristics in two ways. First, we use a matching procedure to compare high- and low-concentration
counties that are very similar on observable characteristics and find similar results. Second, we examine
counties where concentration in mortgage lending is increased by bank mergers. We show that within
a given county, sensitivities to MBS yields decrease after a concentration-increasing merger. Our results
suggest that the strength of the housing channel of monetary policy transmission varies in both the
time series and the cross section. In the cross section, increasing concentration by one standard deviation
reduces the overall impact of a decline in MBS yields by approximately 50%. In the time series, a
decrease in MBS yields today has a 40% smaller effect on the average county than it would have had
in the 1990s because of higher concentration today.
David S. Scharfstein
Harvard Business School
Baker 239
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
dscharfstein@hbs.edu
Adi Sunderam
Baker Library 245
Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163
asunderam@hbs.edu

I. Introduction
Housing is a critical channel for the transmission of monetary policy to the real economy.
As shown by Bernanke and Gertler (1995), residential investment is the component of GDP that
responds most strongly and immediately to monetary policy shocks. In addition, housing is an
important channel through which monetary policy affects consumption. An easing of monetary
policy allows households to refinance their mortgages at lower rates, reducing payments from
borrowers to lenders. If borrowers have higher marginal propensities to consume than lenders, as
would be the case if borrowers are more liquidity constrained, then refinancing should boost
aggregate consumption in the presence of frictions. Indeed, refinancing is probably the most
direct way in which monetary policy increases the disposable cash flow of liquidity-constrained
households (Hurst and Stafford 2004).
Using monetary policy to support housing credit has been an increasing focus of the
Federal Reserve in recent years. In particular, the Federal Reserve’s purchases of mortgage-
backed securities (MBS) in successive rounds of quantitative easing have had the explicit goal of
supporting the housing market. One of the aims of quantitative easing was to lower mortgage
rates by reducing financing costs for mortgage lenders (Bernanke 2009, 2012). However, it has
been argued that the efficacy of this policy has been hampered by the high indebtedness of many
households (Eggertson and Krugman, 2012; Mian, Rao, and Sufi, 2012). “Underwater”
households whose mortgage balances exceed the values of their homes have been unable to
refinance, potentially reducing the impact of low interest rates on the economy. Others have
noted that the reduction in MBS yields from quantitative easing has only been partially passed
through to borrowers, leading to historically high values of the so-called “primary-secondary
spread” – the spread between mortgage rates and MBS yields (Dudley, 2012). Fuster, et al.
(2012) consider a number of explanations for the increase in spreads, including greater costs of
originating mortgages, capacity constraints, and market concentration, but conclude that the
increase remains a puzzle.
In this paper, we explore in more detail whether market power in mortgage lending can
explain a significant amount of the increase in the primary-secondary spread and thereby impede
the transmission of monetary policy to the housing sector. We build on the literature in industrial
organization that argues that cost “pass-through” is lower in concentrated markets than in
1

competitive markets – when production costs fall, prices fall less in concentrated markets than
they do in competitive markets because producers use their market power to capture larger
profits (e.g., Rotemberg and Saloner, 1987). In the context of mortgage lending, this suggests
that when the Federal Reserve lowers interest rates, mortgage rates will fall less in concentrated
mortgage markets than in competitive mortgage markets. This could dampen the effects of
monetary policy in such markets.
Evidence from the aggregate time series is broadly consistent with the idea that
concentration in mortgage lending impacts mortgage rates. As shown in Figure 1, concentration
in the mortgage lending industry increased substantially between 1994 and 2011. Figure 2 shows
the average primary-secondary spread calculated as the difference between the mortgage rate
paid by borrowers and the yield on MBS for conforming loans guaranteed by the government-
sponsored entity (GSE) Freddie Mac. 1 The yield on Freddie Mac MBS is the amount paid to
investors in the securities, which are used to finance the mortgages. Thus, the spread is a
measure of the revenue going to mortgage originators and servicers. The spread rose
substantially from 1994 to 2011. Moreover, as shown in Figure 3, the spread is highly correlated
with mortgage market concentration. The correlation is 66% in levels and 59% in changes, so the
correlation does not simply reflect the fact that both series have a positive time trend.
Recent trends are one reason that market power has not received much scrutiny as an
explanation for rising primary-secondary spreads. Most recently, the spread spiked in 2011-2012
though concentration in mortgage lending has not increased since 2010 (Avery, et al., 2012 and
Fuster, et al., 2012).2 These recent trends are misleading for two reasons. First, they focus on the
market share of the top ten lenders at the national level. However, evidence suggests that a
significant part of competition in mortgage lending takes place at the local level, and at the local
level concentration is rising due to increased geographic segmentation of mortgage lending.3
1 Specifically, Figure 2 shows the time series of the borrowing rate reported in Freddie Mac’s Weekly Primary
Mortgage Market Survey minus the yield on current coupon Freddie Mac MBS minus the average guarantee fee
charged by Freddie Mac on its loans.
2 Fuster, et. al. (2012) also argue that the higher fees charged by the GSEs for their guarantees cannot account for the
rise in spreads.
3 To see this, suppose there are two identical counties where two lenders each have a 50% market share. Then the
average county market share and the aggregate share of each lender is 50%. However, if each lender concentrates in
a different county, the average county-level share can go to 100% while their aggregate shares remain at 50%.
2