NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY HIGH LEVERAGE IS OPTIMAL FOR BANKS
Harry DeAngelo
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 19139
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19139
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2013
We thank Anat Admati, Michael Brennan, John Cochrane, Peter DeMarzo, Doug Diamond, Nicola
Gennaioli, Charles Goodhart, Gary Gorton, Paul Pfleiderer, Jim Poterba, Andrei Shleifer, Richard
Smith, Jeremy Stein, and Anjan Thakor for useful comments. Brian Baugh and Yeejin Jang provided
excellent research assistance. René Stulz serves on the board of a bank that is affected by capital
requirements and consults and provides expert testimony for financial institutions. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Harry DeAngelo and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Why High Leverage is Optimal for Banks
Harry DeAngelo and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 19139
June 2013
JEL No. E42,E51,G01,G21,G32,L51
ABSTRACT
Liquidity production is a central role of banks. We show that, under idealized conditions, high leverage
is optimal for banks when there is a market premium for (socially valuable) liquid financial claims
and no deviations from Modigliani and Miller (1958) due to agency problems, deposit insurance, taxes,
or any other distortions. Our model can explain (i) why bank leverage increased over the last 150 years
or so, (ii) why high bank leverage per se does not necessarily cause systemic risk, and (iii) why limits
on the leverage of regulated banks impede their ability to compete with unregulated shadow banks.
Our model indicates that MM’s debt-equity neutrality principle is inapplicable to banks. Because
debt-equity neutrality assigns zero weight to the social value of liquidity, it is an inappropriately
equity-biased baseline for assessing whether the high leverage ratios of real-world banks are excessive.
Harry DeAngelo
University of Southern California
Marshall School of Business
701 Exposition Blvd., Ste. 701
Los Angeles, CA 90089
hdeangelo@marshall.usc.edu
René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu

Why High Leverage is Optimal for Banks
1. Introduction
Many economists believe that bank leverage is excessive, and should be curtailed by regulations
requiring much larger equity cushions. For example, twenty prominent economists conclude that, with
much more equity funding, banks could perform all their socially useful functions and support growth
without endangering the financial system.1 Admati and Hellwig (2013), building on Miller (1995),
Pfleiderer (2010), and Admati, DeMarzo, Hellwig, and Pfleiderer (2011), detail the case for strong
regulatory limits on bank leverage. As Myerson (2013, p. 3) discusses, the case rests on Modigliani and
Miller’s (1958, MM) leverage irrelevance theorem, which shows that, in perfect markets, equity is no
more expensive than debt as a source of capital. MM’s debt-equity neutrality principle leads Admati and
Hellwig (2013, p. 191) to conclude: “increasing equity requirements from 3 percent to 25 percent of
banks’ total assets would involve only a reshuffling of financial claims in the economy to create a better
and safer financial system. There would be no cost to society whatsoever.” In fact, with the MM theorem
at work, increasing bank equity requirements well above 25 percent would have no social costs.
This argument treats banks as firms that make loans and ignores banks’ role as producers of liquid
financial claims. The idea that liquidity production is intrinsic to financial intermediation is discussed
extensively in the literature by, among others, Diamond and Dybvig (1983), Diamond and Rajan (2001),
Gorton (2010), Gorton and Pennacchi (1990), and Holmstrom and Tirole (1998, 2011). If banks’ credit-
screening technology enables them to make better loans than other parties could and all other MM
assumptions hold, banks could adopt all-equity capital structures with no loss in value. However, if banks
generate value by producing liquid claims for financially constrained firms and households, those with
high-equity capital structures are not competitive with banks or bank-substitutes that have less equity.
We analyze bank capital structure in a simple segmented-markets model that deviates from MM by
inclusion of some financially constrained firms (non-banks) and households that willingly pay a premium
1 See “Healthy banking system is the goal, not profitable banks,” letter published in the Financial Times, November
9, 2010.

for liquid financial claims to provide assured access to capital. The model also allows, but does not
require, the existence of some financially constrained parties that willingly pay a premium to obtain bank
loans because their access to capital markets is costly or otherwise impaired. Our model indicates that:
 High leverage is an essential, uniquely optimal feature of bank capital structures when
liquidity is priced at a premium due to demand for assured access to capital.
 Banks choose high leverage despite the absence of agency costs, deposit insurance, tax
motives to borrow, reaching for yield, ROE-based compensation, or any other distortion.
 Greater competition that squeezes bank liquidity and loan spreads diminishes equity
value and thereby raises optimal bank leverage ratios.
 If conventional banks face regulatory limits on leverage while shadow banks do not, the
former will be at a competitive disadvantage to the latter. Liquidity production will
migrate from regulated banks into the unregulated shadow-banking sector.
 When liquidity is priced at a premium, banks can and will choose safe asset structures to
support capital structures that maximize the production of safe financial claims to satisfy
the demand for liquid claims.
 Because the MM capital-market conditions enable banks to construct perfectly safe asset
and liability structures, there is no chance of bank default and no chance of systemic
meltdown when these conditions hold.
These conclusions reflect the fact that a market price premium to induce banks to produce (socially
valuable) liquid financial claims is incompatible with MM’s leverage irrelevance result. A liquidity
premium is a price signal sent to banks and other liquidity producers to supply liquid financial claims that
meet the demand for such claims from financially constrained firms and other parties that desire assured
access to capital. The liquid financial claims (cash balances and similar claims) held as assets by
financially constrained parties are drawn from the supply of safe claims produced by the liability structure
decisions of banks and other liquidity suppliers.
When market prices embed a liquidity premium, bank capital structure decisions matter and are
jointly optimized with asset structure to capture the maximum value from liquid-claim production. Debt
and equity are not equally attractive sources of bank capital. Debt has a strict advantage because it has
the informational insensitivity property – immediacy, safety, and ease of valuation – desired by those
seeking liquidity. High bank leverage is accordingly optimal when the MM model is modified to include
2