NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WALL STREET VS. MAIN STREET:
AN EVALUATION OF PROBABILITIES
Robin L. Lumsdaine
Rogier J.D. Potter van Loon
Working Paper 19103
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19103
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2013
The authors are grateful to the RAND Corporation for assistance with the American Life Panel and
for supplying the sampling weights used in this analysis and to Yacine Aït-Sahlia, Ron Anderson,
Hector Calvo-Pardo, Maik Dierkes, Amos Golan, Anthony Hall, Nikolaus Hautsch, Peter Hudomiet,
Miles Kimball, Olivia Mitchell, Anders Rahbek, Matthew Shapiro, Neil Shephard, Timo Teräsvirta,
Martijn van den Assem, Peter Wakker, and Bob Willis, as well as seminar participants at American
University, the University of Exeter, the University of Michigan, the University of Portsmouth, the
ZEW Conference on “The Role of Expectations in Financial Markets”, the 2012 Society for Financial
Econometrics (SoFiE) annual meeting, and the 3rd Humboldt-Copenhagen Conference for comments
on an earlier draft. All errors remain our own. Financial support from the Netherlands Organisation
for Scientific Research (NWO) for the second author is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Robin L. Lumsdaine and Rogier J.D. Potter van Loon. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Wall Street vs. Main Street: An Evaluation of Probabilities
Robin L. Lumsdaine and Rogier J.D. Potter van Loon
NBER Working Paper No. 19103
June 2013
JEL No. C58,D84,G02,G13
ABSTRACT
This paper challenges recent conventional wisdom of a divide between Main Street (the average American
consumer) and Wall Street (financial market participants). The views of survey respondents regarding
the likelihood of stock index returns exceeding specific thresholds are compared to market views indicated
by index options with strikes at analogous thresholds. The econometric specification explicitly addresses
some important impediments to using elicited probabilities from survey data. We confirm that Main
Street views track Wall Street views, although the association is not one-for one. We find a closer
association for those demonstrating a better understanding of the laws of probability.
Robin L. Lumsdaine
Kogod School of Business
American University
4400 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20016
and NBER
robin.lumsdaine@american.edu
Rogier J.D. Potter van Loon
Erasmus School of Economics
Erasmus University Rotterdam
Burgemeester Oudlaan 50
PO Box 1738, 3000 DR
Rotterdam, The Netherlands
pottervanloon@ese.eur.nl

1. Introduction
The phrase “Wall Street versus Main Street” became commonplace during the recent
financial crisis as a shorthand means of describing opposing sides in a variety of contexts, from
blame attribution to beneficiaries of government intervention to investor protection. In the
aftermath of the crisis, this characterization has become synonymous with the divide between the
“haves” and “have-nots”, manifested for example in the sentiment apparent in the Occupy Wall
Street movement. It regularly appears in speeches of policymakers and politicians eager to
address perceptions related to the faltering economy. In short, “Wall Street versus Main Street”
distinguishes the views of financial insiders from those of the general population.
Yet beyond the rhetoric, is there really a divide between what Wall Street and Main
Street think? Those that would argue against a divide might appeal either to early theories of
information flow to argue that financial market transactions are merely the aggregate result of
individual investor decisions or to standard finance theories that indicate management decisions
of publicly-traded firms are a direct result of the desire to maximize shareholder value and that,
therefore, investment decisions are a reflection of the views of Main Street citizens. In addition,
both feedback and herding models in behavioral finance would suggest that Main Street
decisions are influenced by what happens on Wall Street (e.g., Shiller 2003).
On the other side of the debate, those arguing that a divide does indeed exist might
counter the above arguments by noting the low proportion of active investors in the Main Street
population, citing evidence of low financial literacy rates (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011), the fact
that few Americans hold stocks outside of a retirement portfolio (Poterba and Samwick, 1995),
and growing income inequality (Heathcote, Perri, and Violante, 2009). Even among the subset
of the population that is active in financial markets, there is evidence that not all participants are
informed (e.g., De Long, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann 1990) and that for a variety of
reasons, returns of the two groups often differ (e.g., Barber and Odean 2002).
This paper attempts to measure the magnitude of the Wall Street/Main Street divide. We
find a link between beliefs about future stock market returns elicited from surveys of a
representative sample of the U.S. population and market beliefs as calculated through option
prices using the Black-Scholes model. We also explore whether this link depends upon
1

observable characteristics and find that evidence of greater probabilistic understanding is
associated with a stronger Wall Street/Main Street link.
The approach taken in this paper draws on literature from finance, behavioral economics,
econometrics, and survey methodology, specifically the following areas: (1) the formation of
equity return expectations, (2) the information content of option prices, (3) the information
content of subjective expectations, and (4) the tendency of survey respondents to report focal
points (clustering around rounded numbers) when asked probabilistic questions.
Researchers using survey data find substantial heterogeneity across individuals with
regards to their expectations about future equity returns (Brennan, Cao, Strong, and Xu, 2005;
Dominitz and Manski, 2011; Hudomiet, Kézdi and Willis, 2011). Some of the interpersonal
heterogeneity is attributable to differences in optimism among population subgroups: for
example, women, African Americans and those in the lower education categories have less
optimistic expectations relative to the overall population. This heterogeneity in expectations has
in turn been used to explain heterogeneous equity investment decisions (Kézdi and Willis, 2003,
2011).
A separate literature gleans expectations of market participants from option price
information, following the results from an early paper by Breeden and Litzenberger (1978)
which shows that the price density of a state-contingent security can be derived from the prices
of European options. A variety of functions for the price of an option are admissible in this
context; the most often used one is the option pricing model described by Black and Scholes
(1973) and Merton (1973) and we follow that convention in this paper.
A number of researchers consider the inclusion of survey expectations in models of
economic behavior [see Manski (2004) for a survey of this literature] and demonstrate that
including probabilistic expectations can improve inference about economic behavior relative to
models using only data on economic choices (revealed preference models). Yet others show
that survey responses do not exactly align with true expectations – for example, due to large
clusters of responses occurring at focal points of the response distribution (e.g., Dominitz and
Manski, 1997; Hurd, McFadden, and Gan, 1998; Kleinjans and Van Soest, 2010) – and argue
that adjustments to survey data to account for such aspects are necessary to improve inference
2