NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECT OF MERGERS IN SEARCH MARKET:
EVIDENCE FROM THE CANADIAN MORTGAGE INDUSTRY
Jason Allen
Robert Clark
Jean-François Houde
Working Paper 19126
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19126
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2013
Jean-Francois Houde thanks NSF for funding (SES- 1024840). We thank the Canada Mortgage and
Housing Corporation and Genworth Financial for providing us with the data.The views of this paper
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of Canada or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Jason Allen, Robert Clark, and Jean-François Houde. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Mergers in Search Market: Evidence from the Canadian Mortgage Industry
Jason Allen, Robert Clark, and Jean-François Houde
NBER Working Paper No. 19126
June 2013
JEL No. L11,L41,L85
ABSTRACT
We examine the relationship between concentration and price dispersion using variation induced by
a merger in the Canadian mortgage market. Since interest rates are determined through a search and
negotiation process, consolidation eliminates a potential negotiation part- ner, weakening consumers
bargaining positions. We combine reduced-form techniques to es- timate the mergers distributional
impact, with a structural model to measure market power across consumers with different search costs.
Our results show that competition benefits only consumers at the bottom and middle of the transaction
price distribution. Estimates from a search and negotiation model attribute these differences to the
presence of large search frictions.
Jason Allen Jean-François Houde
Bank of Canada Wharton School
234 Wellington Street University of Pennsylvania
Ottawa, ON K1A 0G9 3620 Locust Walk
jallen@bankofcanada.ca 3008 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104
Robert Clark and NBER
Institute of Applied Economics houde@wharton.upenn.edu
HEC Montreal
3000, chemin de la Cote-Sainte-Catherine
Montreal (Quebec) H3T 2A7
Canada
Robert.Clark@hec.ca

Introduction
Like many consumer-finance products, mortgage contracts are negotiable: lenders post a com-
mon sticker price, and contract terms are determined through a search and negotiation process
between local branch managers and individual borrowers. This allows informed consumers to
gather multiple quotes and obtain an interest rate that reflects the expected lending cost, even
withasmallnumberofcompetinglenders. Inpractice,however,consumersdifferintheirability
to understand the subtleties of financial contracts and their willingness to negotiate and search
for multiple quotes. Indeed, recent surveys in North America show that while some buyers get
multiplequoteswhenshoppingfortheirmortgagecontract,nearlyhalfonlygetone.1
These features lead to price dispersion. In Allen et al. (2013) we document that the Canadian
mortgagemarketexhibitssubstantialdispersion,evenforcontractswithhomogeneoustermsand
for which lenders are fully protected against the risk of default by a government-backed insur-
anceprogram. Theinter-quartilerangeofthenettransactioninterestspreadapproaches100basis
pointsandthecoefficientofvariationisabout59%. Importantly,morethan60%ofthedispersion
inmarginsisunexplainedbystandardborrowerandcontractcharacteristics.
Similarphenomenahavebeendocumentedbyagrowingliteratureanalyzingpricedispersion
in retail markets: new cars (e.g. Goldberg (1996), Scott Morton et al. (2003), Busse et al. (2006),
and Langer (2012)), mortgage broker fees (Hall and Woodward (2012)), real-estate (Hendel et al.
(2009)),andhealthcareservices(e.g. Sorensen(2001),Grennan(2013)). BuildingonStigler(1961),
many of these papers have provided evidence that a significant fraction of the observed disper-
sion in prices is caused by the inability of (some) consumers to gather information and negotiate
discounts,suggestingthatsearchandinformationfrictionsareimportantfactorsinthesemarkets.
In contrast, we know relatively little about the impact of market structure and competition
on the distribution of negotiated prices.2 It remains an empirical question whether the benefit
ofcompetitionisspreadequallyacrossconsumers,andwhethercompetitionraisesorlowersthe
dispersionoftransactionprices. Indeed, search-theoreticmodelsofpricedispersionprovideam-
biguouspredictionswithrespecttotheimpactofconcentrationonpricedispersion,asdiscussed
inJanssenandMoraga-Gonza´lez(2004)andBayeetal. (2006).3
Our objective is to measure the role of competition in determining the distribution of prices
in markets with price negotiation. Unlike in markets without search frictions, in our context the
1InCanada,theCanadianAssociationofAccreditedMortgageProfessionalsconductsanannualsurveyonthestate
ofthemortgagemarketandonaveragehavereportedthatabout45%ofnewhomebuyersvisitonelender.Forsimilar
U.S.evidenceseeLeeandHogarth(2000).
2An exception is the recent literature on negotiation between buyer and seller networks (e.g. Town and Vistnes
(2001),CrawfordandYurukoglu(2012),LewisandPflum(2013),Gowrisankaranetal. (2013)). Whileitanalyzesthe
impactofmarketstructureontherelativebargainingleverageofparties,itdoesnotprovideaconvincinginterpretation
ofresidualpricedispersion,andabstractsfromtheroleofinformationandsearchfrictions.
3Thesameistruefordiscrimination-basedtheories:the“textbook”pricediscriminationmodelsuggestsanegative
relationshipbetweendispersionandcompetition,whileBorenstein(1985)andHolmes(1989)showthatanincreasein
competitioninmarketswiththird-degreepricediscriminationleadtomoredispersion.
1

effectofcompetitiononpricesdependsnotonlyontherelativemarketpoweroffirms,butalsoon
the willingness and ability of consumers to haggle with sellers. If there is heterogeneity in these
abilities across consumers and markets, then variation in transaction prices induced by changes
in competition may not reveal the importance of market power. Because of this ambiguity, we
combine reduced-form econometrics techniques to estimate the impact of losing a competitor on
negotiated prices, with a structural econometric model to measure the extent of market power
acrossconsumerswithdifferentsearchandnegotiationcosts.
Toperformouranalysis, weuseadministrativedataoninsuredmortgagecontracts, andtake
advantage of the quasi-experimental variation created by a horizontal merger between two im-
portant mortgage lenders in Canada. Our empirical strategy relies on the idea that the merger
of two banks’ networks creates discrete changes in the choice-set of consumers located near the
branches of both merging parties, while the number of options offered to consumers living close
toonlyoneorneitherremainsunchanged.
This variation naturally leads to a difference-in-difference estimator with which we infer the
average price changes among consumers directly affected by the merger by looking at the evo-
lutionofpricesincomparablelocalmarketsinwhichthenumberoflendersremainedconstant.4
Ourfirstsetofresultsshowsthatthelossofacompetitorledtoanincreaseintheaverageinterest
rateintreatedmarketsofapproximately6basispoints(bps), whichcorrespondstoabout15%of
residualpricedispersioninoursample.
Wethenestimatethedistributionaleffectofthemerger,anaspectofmergerevaluationthathas
beenignoreduptonowbytheliterature. Todoso,weusethechange-in-changeestimatorproposed
by Athey and Imbens (2006) to recover the counter-factual distribution of negotiated rates that
would have been observed if the merger had not been approved by antitrust authorities. This
allowsustodocumentsubstantialheterogeneityintheimpactofthemergeralongthedistribution
of negotiated rates. In particular, our second set of results show that the loss of a competitor
increasedinterestratesbetween7and9bpsforconsumersinthelowerandmiddlepercentilesof
thedistribution,andhadnoeffectonconsumersinthetop30%. Thisresultimpliesthatborrowers
whoarethemostadverselyaffectedbyanegotiation-basedpricingpolicydonotbenefitfroman
increaseinthedegreeofcompetitionbetweenlenders.
Having estimated the pre- and post-merger price distribution, we measure the impact of the
merger on residual price dispersion. Our third set of results shows that the merger led to a 16%
decrease in the inter-quartile range, while the coefficient of variation decreased by 15%. This
establishes a positive relationship between the number of firms and residual price dispersion in
marketswithnegotiatedprices.
We then develop and estimate a model of search and price negotiation that is consistent with
4Thisstrategyhasrecentlybeenusedtostudytheimpactofmergersingasolinemarkets(e.g. Hastings(2004),and
Houde(2012)),cementindustry(e.g.HortacsuandSyverson(2007)),health-careindustry(e.g.Dafnyetal.(2011)),and
durablegoods(e.g.Weinbergetal.(2013)).
2