NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE NEXT GENERATION OF THE PENN WORLD TABLE
Robert C. Feenstra
Robert Inklaar
Marcel Timmer
Working Paper 19255
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19255
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2013
This research received support through grants from the National Science Foundation and the Sloan
Foundation. We thank Erwin Diewert and Chad Jones for helpful comments as well as other seminar
participants at the University of Groningen, University of Pennsylvania, Norwegian School of Economics
and the Economic Growth group of the National Bureau of Economic Research. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Robert C. Feenstra, Robert Inklaar, and Marcel Timmer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Next Generation of the Penn World Table
Robert C. Feenstra, Robert Inklaar, and Marcel Timmer
NBER Working Paper No. 19255
July 2013
JEL No. O47
ABSTRACT
We describe the theory and practice of real GDP comparisons across countries and over time. Effective
with version 8, the Penn World Table (PWT) will be taken over by the University of California, Davis
and the University of Groningen, with continued input from Alan Heston at the University of Pennsylvania.
Version 8 will expand on previous versions of PWT in three respects. First, it will distinguish real
GDP on the expenditure side from real GDP on the output side, which differ by the terms of trade
faced by countries. Second, it will distinguish growth rates of GDP based on national accounts data
from growth rates that are benchmarked in multiple years to cross-country price data. Third, data on
capital stocks will be reintroduced. Some illustrative results from PWT version 8 are discussed, including
new results that show how the Penn effect is not emergent but a stable relationship over time.
Robert C. Feenstra Marcel Timmer
Department of Economics University of Groningen
University of California, Davis 9700 AB Groningen
One Shields Avenue The Netherlands
Davis, CA 95616 m.p.timmer@rug.nl
and NBER
rcfeenstra@ucdavis.edu
Robert Inklaar
University of Groningen
Faculty of Economics
PO Box 800
9700 AV Groningen
The Netherlands
R.C.Inklaar@rug.nl

1. Introduction
For over four decades, the Penn World Table (PWT) has been a standard source of data
on real GDP across countries. Making use of prices collected across countries in benchmark
years by the International Comparisons Program (ICP), and using these prices to construct
purchasing-power-parity exchange rates, PWT converts GDP at national prices to a common
currency – U.S. dollars – making them comparable across countries. Each version of PWT is
based in a newer ICP benchmark, so that PWT version 7 is based on the 2005 ICP prices. PWT
version 8 will still be based on the 2005 benchmark, but its construction will pass to the
University of California, Davis and the University of Groningen, while retaining the PWT
initials and with continued input from Alan Heston at the University of Pennsylvania.1
In this paper we describe the changes to the measurement of real GDP that will be
introduced in this “next generation” of PWT. We begin in section 2 with a brief overview of the
theory behind real GDP comparisons, including a new theorem. That discussion is intended to
indicate the challenges in making multilateral comparisons of real GDP. Diewert (1999) and Van
Veelen (2002) have argued that no multilateral measure of real GDP can satisfy all the axioms
we might like, so there are tradeoffs involved with any construction of this concept. Our
approach is a natural extension of what is already done in PWT, but will distinguish several
different concepts of real GDP.
In section 3 we describe the PWT calculation of real GDP before version 7. As argued by
Feenstra, Heston, Timmer and Deng (2009), prior measurement of real GDP in PWT was closer
to what is called “command-basis GDP” in the United States, or “real income” in the United
Nations System of National Accounts. That is, it was a measure of real GDP that reflected the
1 The data are available at www.ggdc.net/pwt. After the new ICP 2011 benchmark becomes available in 2014, then
PWT9 will be based on that new benchmark, again constructed at the University of California, Davis and the
University of Groningen.

2
standard of living in an economy rather than the production possibilities. Feenstra et al (2009)
refer to this concept as “real GDP on the expenditure side,” or real GDPe. Countries that have
strong terms of trade – meaning a higher than average prices for exports or lower than average
prices for imports – will have higher real GDPe as a result. We contrast this with “real GDP on
the output-side”, or real GDPo, which is intended to measure the production possibilities of an
economy. Both concepts are reported in PWT8.
In section 4 we move to the measurement of real GDP over time. This is the area where
there is perhaps the greatest confusion over concepts. The term “real” in multilateral
comparisons of GDP refers to the use of some common “reference” prices to add up across
goods and obtain real GDP in different countries. When the calculation is made in two years, the
values of real GDP obtained are not necessarily comparable because reference prices can be
changing. Stated differently, the purchasing-power-parity (PPP) exchange rate used to convert
from national currencies to U.S. dollars changes each year. The terms “current-price real GDP”
or “real GDP at current PPPs” refer to calculations across countries that are not comparable over
time, because the comparison is based on changing PPP exchange rates each year. In contrast, the
terms “constant-price real GDP” or “real GDP at chained PPPs” refer to calculations across
countries that are also comparable over time, because an appropriate correction is made for
changing reference prices and PPP exchange rates. The latter constant-price or chained concept
is denoted by RGDPe and RGDP o on the expenditure and output sides, respectively. But these
variables require the initial construction of current-price real GDP, denoted by CGDPe and
o
CGDP , so both concepts are reported in PWT8. The current and constant-price variables are
equal in the benchmark year 2005, but differ in other years because RGDPe and RGDP o use
“real” growth rates that correct for changing reference prices. We also include a third measure of