NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REGRESSION DISCONTINUITY AND THE PRICE EFFECTS OF STOCK MARKET
INDEXING
Yen-cheng Chang
Harrison Hong
Inessa Liskovich
Working Paper 19290
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19290
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. This draft is a substantially revised version of our SSRN
manuscript entitled "Rules and Regression Discontinuities in Asset Markets" dated March 25, 2011.
Hong acknowledges support from an NSF grant. We thank Jeffrey Kubik, Larry Harris, Pete Kyle,
David Lee, Jeremy Stein and seminar participants and discussants at Seoul National University, Tulane
University, University of Washington, 2012 WFA, CICF, FMA Asia, Fall 2011 NBER Behavioral
Finance Meeting, Winter 2011 Princeton-Lausanne EPFL Conference, Fudan University, National
Taiwan University and the Swedish Institute for Finance Research for very helpful comments. We
also thank Russell Investments for providing data and He Ai for her research assistance. The internet
appendix is available online at http://www.princeton.edu/~hhong/rd2000appendix
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Yen-cheng Chang, Harrison Hong, and Inessa Liskovich. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Regression Discontinuity and the Price Effects of Stock Market Indexing
Yen-cheng Chang, Harrison Hong, and Inessa Liskovich
NBER Working Paper No. 19290
August 2013, Revised October 2013
JEL No. G02,G12
ABSTRACT
Studies find price increases for additions to the S&P 500 index but no decreases for deletions. Additions
come with good earnings news, suggesting these studies are not just measuring an indexing effect.
We develop a regression discontinuity design using Russell Indices for cleaner identification. Stocks
are assigned to indices based on their end-of-May market capitalizations. Stocks ranked just below
1000 are in the Russell 2000. The indices are value-weighted so these stocks receive index buying
whereas those just above 1000 have close to none. Using this random assignment, we find price effects
for both additions and deletions.
Yen-cheng Chang Inessa Liskovich
Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance Department of Economics
Shanghai Jiao Tong University Princeton University
211 West Huaihai Road Fisher Hall
Shanghai, China Princeton, NJ 08544
ycchang@saif.sjtu.edu.cn iliskovi@princeton.edu
Harrison Hong
Department of Economics
Princeton University
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
hhong@princeton.edu

1. Introduction
We tackle a long-standing problem in the important literature on stock market indexing.
Many studies find that stocks that get added to the Standard and Poor’s (S&P) 500 index,
or other widely followed indices, experience a positive risk-adjusted return (see, e.g., Shleifer
(1986), Harris and Gurel (1986)). For instance, the most famous of these, the S&P 500
index addition effect, is around five to seven percent in the month following the addition
announcement date and a large fraction of the price effect is permanent (see, e.g., Beneish
and Whaley (1996), Lynch and Mendenhall (1997), Wurgler and Zhuravskaya (2002)).
The preferred interpretation of this finding is that the excess risk-adjusted return is due
to forced buying by passive stock index funds and by many active institutional investors who
are benchmarked to these indices. These studies suggest that the demand curves for stocks,
even large ones such as those in the S&P 500, are downward sloping. This is contrary to
the central tenet of the efficient markets hypothesis, which asserts that stocks have many
substitutes and hence their demand curves should be flat.
The traditional methodology assumes that added stocks differ from a control group of
non-added stocks, typically just the market portfolio, only due to forced buying. However,
a number of studies call into question the plausibility of this interpretation. First, Denis,
McConnell, Ovtchinnikov, and Yu (2003) find that additions to the S&P 500 are associated
with an increase in earnings forecasts and improvements in realized earnings. Second, Chen,
Noronha, and Singal (2004) find that stocks that get deleted, and every addition comes with
a deletion, have no permanent negative price effect. If the observed positive price effect
of addition is due to indexing or benchmarking by institutional investors, one should see a
negative price effect for deletion when such demand is no longer necessary.
Instead,thisasymmetricpricereactionseemsmoreconsistentwithanewseventasargued
by Denis, McConnell, Ovtchinnikov, and Yu (2003) or investor recognition (see, e.g., Merton
(1987)), where the stocks that get added to the S&P 500 index are subsequently recognized
and have higher prices for a variety of reasons other than forced tracking. Another related
1

mechanism is attention (see, e.g., Barber and Odean (2008) or Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh
(2009)). Recognition or attention might plausibly not go away after deletion, as Chen,
Noronha, and Singal (2004) rightly point out, which would then explain the asymmetric
price pattern.
While the S&P 500 studies are among the most insightful in financial economics, distin-
guishing between an indexing effect, news about fundamentals, or any alternative hypotheses
such as the recognition hypothesis remains important. If existing findings are not cleanly
identified as due to forced buying or tracking, but are instead correlated with other effects
or news shocks that coincide with addition, then the challenge to the efficient markets view
would be much weaker.
To solve this long-standing problem, we develop a new methodology, a set of regression
discontinuity (RD) experiments associated with the Russell 2000 index, that can cleanly
identify a forced tracking price effect. Stocks are ranked on the last trading day of May
(i.e. end-of-May) based on their market capitalizations. The first 1000 are in the Russell
1000. The next 2000 are in the Russell 2000. The end-of-May market capitalization cut-
offs lock in membership for an entire year. A stock that is in the Russell 2000 based on
the end-of-May market capitalization stays in the 2000 index for an entire year even if its
market capitalization subsequently grows and exceeds those of stocks in the Russell 1000.
Similarly a stock in the Russell 1000 stays in the 1000 index for an entire year even if its
market capitalization is subsequently lower than other stocks in the Russell 2000.
Since the indices are value-weighted, stocks with end-of-May market capitalizations just
below the 1000 cut-off receive significant forced buying, while those just above the cut-off
have almost none. Indeed, the index weights for the stocks in the Russell 2000 just below
the 1000 cut-off (e.g. stocks 1001 to 1110) are around ten to fifteen times larger than the
index weights for stocks just above the 1000 cut-off (e.g. stocks 990 to 1000). The amounts
of money benchmarked to the Russell 1000 and 2000 differ depending on whether one counts
passive indexing or total assets benchmarked. But these differences are small relative to the
2