NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNETHICAL CULTURE, SUSPECT CEOS AND CORPORATE MISBEHAVIOR
Lee Biggerstaff
David C. Cicero
Andy Puckett
Working Paper 19261
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19261
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2013
We thank Stewart Meyers, Luigi Zingales, Toa Shu, Yung Yu Ma, Matthew Cedergren, D. Scott Lee,
and seminar participants at the 2011 NBER Causes and Consequences of Corporate Culture Conference,
the University of Tennessee, the University of Georgia, the University of Delaware, the University
of Lugano, the 2012 AAA Annual Meeting (Washington, DC), the 2012 FMA Annual Meeting (Atlanta,
GA), and the 2012 Mid-Atlantic Research Conference (Villanova) for comments and suggestions.
The authors also thank Mia Li Rivolta for sharing her data on forced CEO turnovers. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Lee Biggerstaff, David C. Cicero, and Andy Puckett. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Unethical Culture, Suspect CEOs and Corporate Misbehavior
Lee Biggerstaff, David C. Cicero, and Andy Puckett
NBER Working Paper No. 19261
July 2013
JEL No. G3,G34
ABSTRACT
We show that firms with CEOs who personally benefitted from options backdating were more likely
to engage in other forms of corporate misbehavior, suggestive of an unethical corporate culture. These
firms were more likely to overstate firm profitability and to engage in less profitable acquisition strategies.
The increased level of corporate misbehaviors is concentrated in firms with suspect CEOs who were
outside hires, consistent with adverse selection in the market for chief executives. Difference-in-differences
tests confirm that the propensity to engage in these activities is significantly increased following the
arrival of an outside-hire ‘suspect’ CEO, suggesting that causation flows from the top executives to
the firm. Finally, while these suspect CEOs appear to have avoided market discipline when the market
was optimistic, they were more likely to lose their jobs and their firms were more likely to experience
dramatic declines in value during the ensuing market correction.
Lee Biggerstaff Andy Puckett
Stokely Management Center Stokely Management Center
Department of Finance Department of Finance
University of Tennessee University of Tennessee
Knoxville, TN 37996 Knoxville, TN 37996
lbiggers@utk.edu pucketta@utk.edu
David C. Cicero
University of Alabama
Culverhouse College of Commerce
Economics, Finance & Legal Studies
Tuscaloosa, AL 35487
dccicero@cba.ua.edu

“Finally, what we have learned from stock options backdating — and from every other scandal in the
financial markets in recent years — is that character matters. Corporate character matters — and
employees take their cues from the top. In our experience, the character of the CEO and other top
officers is generally reflected in the character of the entire company. If a CEO is known for his
integrity, integrity becomes the corporate norm. If, on the other hand, a company's top executives are
more interested in personal enrichment at the expense of the shareholders, our backdating
investigations demonstrate yet again that other employees will follow suit.”
- Linda Chatman Thomsen, Director, Division of Enforcement,
Securities and Exchange Commission
I. Introduction
Scandals at firms such as Enron, WorldCom, Tyco, and HealthSouth exposed numerous
corporate executives who were complicit in perpetuating fraudulent activities that ultimately resulted
in billions of dollars in shareholder losses. As a result, the topic of business ethics has received a
dramatic increase in attention from the U.S. legislature, regulatory bodies such as the Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC), the popular press, and business schools around the world.1 Of
particular importance in the current dialogue is an understanding of (and potential means to mitigate)
the forces that drive firms to mislead investors and cause the misallocation and destruction of scarce
societal resources.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that fraudulent firms are often characterized by an unethical
culture that permeates a nexus of employees, whose cooperation is necessary to perpetrate extensive
corporate malfeasance (Langevoort, 2006). For instance, approximately thirty employees at
Heathsouth and Peregrine Systems were convicted or pled guilty to charges related to financial
statement fraud. But where does an unethical culture originate? The above quotation by Linda
Thomsen, a former head of the Division of Enforcement at the SEC, represents a seasoned insiders’
view that an unethical culture emanates from the actions and attitudes of those at the very top level of
corporate leadership – in particular the CEO. Her top-down perspective is echoed in the influential
1 The Aspen Institute: Center for Business Education reports that the number of MBA programs that require a course
dedicated to societal and/or ethical issues has increased from 34% in 2001 to 79% in 2011.
2

academic “upper echelons theory” of corporate behavior (Chatterjee and Hambrick, 2007; Hambrick
2007). While numerous prior studies provide support for the upper echelons theory by establishing a
relationship between certain executive characteristics and the economic outcomes of the firms that
they manage (e.g., Betrand and Schaor, 2003),2 there is a clear deficiency of empirical work focused
on the ethical dimension of a corporate culture.
The dearth of empirical work in this area may stem from the fact that the ethical values of
executives and corporations are difficult to empirically quantify. In this paper, we propose a novel
way to identify an unethical pattern of behavior, based on systematic participation in options
backdating. We investigate the link between firms with CEOs who benefitted directly from options
backdating (hereafter ‘suspect’ firms) and other corporate misbehaviors and find that suspect firms
are more likely to overstate firm profitability and to engage in sub-optimal investment strategies. We
also contribute to an understanding of the origins of an unethical culture by showing that these
corporate misbehaviors increase following a suspect CEO’s arrival at her firm and are concentrated
in firms that hired their suspect CEOs from the outside. Our findings suggest that asymmetric
information may at times lead to the hiring of a “lemon” CEO through adverse selection and that the
damage to firms resulting from such a strategic mistake can be significant. Finally, we explore the
consequences of unethical behavior and find, consistent with theory (Povel, Singh, and Winton,
2007), that suspect CEOs are more likely to be fired and their firms are more likely to experience
large losses during a market correction.
Overall, our results provide support for the upper echelons theory in understanding how an
unethical culture prevails and contribute to a broader literature on organizational culture (Kreps,
1990; Hodgson, 1996). Our findings are also related to a literature that investigates the economic
2 Prior academic research has focused on executive characteristics such as overconfidence (Malmendier and Tate,
2008), political affiliation (Hutton, Jiang, and Kumar, 2010), gender (Huang and Kisgen, 2012), narcissism
(Chaterjee and Hambrick,, 2007), personal risk taking (Cain and McKeon, 2011), and personal tax aggressiveness
(Chyz, 2011).
3