NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OPTIMAL LIFE CYCLE PORTFOLIO CHOICE WITH VARIABLE ANNUITIES
OFFERING LIQUIDITY AND INVESTMENT DOWNSIDE PROTECTION
Vanya Horneff
Raimond Maurer
Olivia S. Mitchell
Ralph Rogalla
Working Paper 19206
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19206
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2013
The research reported herein was performed pursuant to a grant from the US Social Security Administration
(SSA) to the Michigan Retirement Research Center (MRRC) as part of the Retirement Research Consortium.
We are also grateful for research support provided by the TIAA-CREF Research Institute, the German
Investment and Asset Management Association (BVI), the Pension Research Council/Boettner Center
at The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, and the Metzler Exchange Professor program.
This research is part of the NBER programs on Aging, Public Economics, and Labor Studies. All opinions
and any errors are solely those of the authors and not of the institutions with whom the authors are
affiliated. © 2013 Horneff, Maurer, Mitchell, Rogalla. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19206.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Vanya Horneff, Raimond Maurer, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Ralph Rogalla. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Optimal Life Cycle Portfolio Choice with Variable Annuities Offering Liquidity and Investment
Downside Protection
Vanya Horneff, Raimond Maurer, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Ralph Rogalla
NBER Working Paper No. 19206
July 2013
JEL No. D1,D14,D91,G11,G22
ABSTRACT
We evaluate lifecycle consumption and portfolio allocation patterns resulting from access to Guaranteed
Minimum Withdrawal Benefit (GMWB) variable annuities, one of the most rapidly-growing financial
innovations over the last two decades. A key feature of these products is that they offer access to equity
investments with downside protection, hedging of longevity risk, and partially-refundable premiums.
Welfare rises since policyholders exercise the product’s flexibility by taking withdrawals and dynamically
adjusting their portfolios and consumption streams. Consistent with observed behavior, differences
across individuals’ cash out and annuitization patterns result from variations in realized equity market
returns and labor income trajectories.
Vanya Horneff Olivia S. Mitchell
Gruenebrugplatz 1 University of Pennsylvania
House of Finance Wharton School
60323 Frankfurt, Germany 3620 Locust Walk, St 3000 SH-DH
vhorneff@finance.uni-frankfurt.de Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
Raimond Maurer mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu
Finance Department
Goethe University Ralph Rogalla
Grüneburgplatz 1 (Uni-PF. H 23) Finance Department
Frankfurt am Main Goethe University
Germany Grüneburgplatz 1 (Uni-PF. H 23)
rmaurer@wiwi.uni-frankfurt.de Frankfurt am Main
Germany
rogalla@finance.uni-frankfurt.de

Optimal Life Cycle Portfolio Choice with Variable Annuities Offering
Liquidity and Investment Downside Protection
1. Introduction
Defined contribution pensions are the most rapidly growing form of retirement saving
product around the world. Yet participants in such self-directed pension plans often fail to
understand the risks associated with their investment and spending decisions (Lusardi and
Mitchell, 2007, 2008), exposing them to the possibility of potential retirement shortfalls
(Poterba, Rauh, Venti, and Wise, 2007). Accordingly, households could likely benefit from
incorporating income and return guarantees into their defined contribution pension plans
(Feldstein, 2009) in addition to improving their financial literacy (van Rooij, Lusardi, and
Alessie 2011). Specifically, such products offer lifelong benefit payments during retirement,
as well as protection of accumulated assets from downside market shocks. Such guarantees
are offered by insurers in the form of investment-linked variable annuities (VAs), though
relatively little is known about how to integrate these products into the pension context. This
paper shows how such VAs with guarantees can be used to enhance retirement security in the
context of a life cycle model.
Variable annuities are one of the most rapidly growing financial products in the past
few decades. As of 2010, some $1.5 trillion of assets were invested in VA contracts in the
U.S. (IRI 2011). By contrast, assets invested in fixed annuities were only $660 billion. In the
same year, the flow of annuity sales in the U.S. totaled $210 billion, two-thirds of which were
variable annuities. The specific and popular innovation we examine in this paper is a deferred
variable annuity with a Guaranteed Minimum Withdrawal Benefit (GMWB) rider; these
constitute almost 80% of recent variable annuity sales (IRI 2011). GMWBs are insurance
products with both investment and income components. During the accumulation phase, the
policyholder pays premiums to a life insurer, which (after expenses) are invested in mutual
fund-style sub-accounts. Then at retirement, the retiree has the possibility of converting her
accumulated assets into a lifelong income stream.
In the specific instance of the GMWB, the policyholder may elect to take back her
entire premium in small portions (i.e. a “money-back” guarantee) over a certain time frame,
regardless of the actual investment performance of her underlying portfolio (Milevsky and
Salisbury, 2006). Typically, the consumer may withdraw a maximum percentage of her
premium per year until the premium is completely recouped. Any remaining capital at the end
of the deferral period can be converted either into a lifelong annuity or paid to the

2
policyholder in the form of a lump sum. In this way, the GMWB offers access to equity
investments, downside protection against market risk, and the possibility of hedging longevity
risk via annuitization. Because of the withdrawal option, premiums are at least in part
refundable, so that GMWBs offer also liquidity which can help overcome consumer
reluctance to voluntary annuitize retirement wealth.1
Prior literature on dynamic portfolio choice has examined household demand for life
annuities and its welfare implications.2 Though several authors study immediate and fixed
annuities,3 only a few consider variable annuities with deferred benefits in a realistically-
calibrated lifecycle portfolio choice model.4 For instance Horneff, Maurer, Mitchell, and
Stamos (2009) investigate gradual annuitization with immediate variable annuities. Brown,
Mitchell, Poterba, and Warshawsky (2001) use the utility equivalence concept introduced by
Mitchell, Poterba, Warshawsky, and Brown (1999) to evaluate the welfare implications of
having access to variable annuities during the decumulation phase. Feldstein and Ranguelova
(2001) study variable annuities in an investment-linked Social Security system where
households take individual investment risk. Using a continous time framework, Milevsky and
Young (2007) allow the retiree to defer annuitization and move his entire savings into a
equity-linked annuity as of a single switching date. Recent work by Maurer, Mitchell,
Rogalla, and Kartashov (2013) examines variable deferred annuities where payments begin
only when the deferring period is over and continue for life. In that context, benefits depend
on the performance of the underlying asset portfolio (stocks, bonds, or some combination).
Nevertheless, these studies do not account for the guarantees typically included in VAs
actually offered in the market.
The research literature on GWMBs is sparse. Recently, Steinorth and Mitchell (2012)
evaluate variable annuities with guarantee riders and fees typical of the US annuity market.
They conclude that GMWBs are welfare-enhancing for risk-averse consumers, despite the fact
that their money’s worth ratios are substantially below 100%. Yet that study focuses only on
the decumulation phase. Several other authors have investigated how to price the complex
1 The discrepancy between the theoretical dominance of annuitization predicted by many economists (see originally
Yaari, 1965, and more recently Davidoff, Brown, and Diamond, 2005) and the low annuity take-up rates of older
households around the world is known as the ‘annuity puzzle’ (see, e.g., Inkmann, Lopez, and Michaelides, 2011).
2 Other innovative retirement and saving products recently introduced into lifecycle models include longevity
bonds to hedge the systematic mortality risk (Cocco and Gomes, 2012).
3 See for instance Milevsky and Young (2007), Horneff, Maurer, and Stamos (2008), as well as Huang and
Milevsky (2008) who study annuity with immediate fixed payouts within a dynamic portfolio choice model. Horneff,
Maurer, and Rogalla (2010) explore deferred annuities with flat benefits.
4 Xiong, Idzorek, and Chen (2010) provide a simulation analysis of GMWB products with various asset
allocations, but this analysis does not embed the product in a life cycle portfolio context.