NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ENTRY, EXIT, FIRM DYNAMICS, AND AGGREGATE FLUCTUATIONS
Gian Luca Clementi
Berardino Palazzo
Working Paper 19217
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19217
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2013
We are grateful to Dave Backus, Rudi Bachman, Susanto Basu, Russel Cooper, Jason Faberman, Shigeru
Fujita, Ramon Marimon, Gianluca Violante, and Stan Zin, as well seminar attendants at Boston College,
Boston University, European University Institute, Richmond Fed, New York University, University
of Southern California, University of Texas at Austin, University of Virginia, University of Western
Ontario, SED meeting, Canadian Macroeconomics Study Group, CREI-MOVE Workshop on Misallocation
and Productivity, Greenline Macroeconomics Meeting, NY/Philly Macroeconomics Workshop, and
Workshop on Macroeconomic Dynamics for their comments and suggestions. All remaining errors
are our own responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Gian Luca Clementi and Berardino Palazzo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Entry, Exit, Firm Dynamics, and Aggregate Fluctuations
Gian Luca Clementi and Berardino Palazzo
NBER Working Paper No. 19217
July 2013
JEL No. D92,E23,E32,L11
ABSTRACT
Do firm entry and exit play a major role in shaping aggregate dynamics? Our answer is yes. Entry
and exit propagate the effects of aggregate shocks. In turn, this results in greater persistence and
unconditional variation of aggregate time-series. These are features of the equilibrium allocation in
Hopenhayn (1992)'s model of equilibrium industry dynamics, amended to allow for investment in
physical capital and aggregate fluctuations. In the aftermath of a positive productivity shock, the
number of entrants increases. The new firms are smaller and less productive than the incumbents,
as in the data. As the common productivity component reverts to its unconditional mean, the new
entrants that survive become more productive over time, keeping aggregate efficiency higher than
in a scenario without entry or exit.
Gian Luca Clementi
Department of Economics
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
clem@nyu.edu
Berardino Palazzo
Department of Finance
Boston University School of Management
595 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02215
bpalazzo@bu.edu

1 Introduction
During the last 25 years or so, empiricists have pointed out a tremendous amount of
between–firmandbetween–plantheterogeneity, evenwithinnarrowlydefinedsectors. Yet,
for most of its young life the modern theory of business cycles has completely disregarded
such variation. What is the loss of generality implied by this methodological choice?
There are many reasons why heterogeneity may matter for aggregate fluctuations,
some of which have received a substantial attention in the literature.1 Our goal is to
contribute to the understanding of the role played by entry and exit. What are, if any,
the costs of abstracting from firm entry and exit when modeling aggregate fluctuations?
Our main result is that entry and exit propagate the effects of aggregate shocks. We
find this to be a feature of the equilibrium allocation in Hopenhayn (1992)’s model of
industry dynamics, amended to allow for investment in physical capital and for aggregate
fluctuations. We assume that firms’ productivity is the product of a common and of an
idiosyncratic component, both driven by persistent stochastic processes and orthogonal
to each other. Differently from Hopenhayn (1992), potential entrants are in finite mass
and face different probability distributions over the first realization of the idiosyncratic
shock.
We assume that the demand for firms’ output and the supply of physical capital are
infinitely elastic at the unit price, while the supply of labor services has finite elasticity.
The wage rate fluctuates to ensure that the labor market clears. This is crucial, as it is
often the case that the effects of shocks on endogenous variables are muted or reversed by
the ensuing adjustment in prices.
When parameterized to match a set of empirical regularities on investment, entry,
and exit, our framework replicates well–documented stylized facts about firm dynamics.
To start with, the exit hazard rate declines with age. Employment growth is decreasing
with size and age, both unconditionally and conditionally. The size distribution of firms
is skewed to the right and the skewness of a cohort’s size distribution declines with age.
Furthermore, the entry rate is pro–cyclical, while the exit rate is counter–cyclical.
Themechanics ofentryisstraightforward. Apositiveshocktothecommon productiv-
ity component makes entry more appealing. This is the case because, with a labor supply
elasticity calibrated to match the standard deviation of employment relative to output,
the equilibrium response of the wage rate is not large enough to undo the impact of the
1Thisisthecaseforthepossibilitythattheoccasionalsynchronizationinthetimingofestablishments’
investment may influence aggregate dynamics when nonconvex capital adjustment costs lead establish-
mentsto adjust capital in a lumpy fashion. SeeVeracierto (2002) and Khan and Thomas (2003, 2008).
1

innovation in aggregate productivity.
Entrantsaremoreplentiful,butofloweraverage idiosyncraticefficiency. Thishappens
because, with a time–invariant cost of entry, firms with poorer prospects about their
productivity find it worth entering. Aggregate output and TFP are lower than they
would be in the absence of this selection effect. However, given the small output share of
entering firms, the contemporaneous response of output is not very different from the one
that obtains in a model that abstracts from entry and exit.
It is the evolution of the new entrants that causes a sizeable impact on aggregate
dynamics. As the common productivity component declines towards its unconditional
mean, there is a larger–than–average pool of young firms that increase in efficiency and
size. The distribution of firms over idiosyncratic productivity improves. It follows that
entry propagates the effects of aggregate productivity shocks on output and increases its
unconditional variance.
For a version of our model without entry or exit to generate a data–conforming per-
sistence of output, the first–order autocorrelation of aggregate productivity shocks must
be as high as 0.775. In the benchmark scenario with entry and exit, it needs only be
0.685. As pointed out by Cogley and Nason (1995), many Real–Business–Cycle models
have weak internal propagation mechanisms. In order to generate the persistence in ag-
gregate time–series that werecover in thedata, they mustrely heavily on external sources
of dynamics. Our work shows that allowing for firm heterogeneity and for entry and exit
can sensibly reduce such reliance.
The propagation result depends on the pro–cyclicality of the entry rate, for which
evidence abounds,2 and on the dynamics of young firms. According to our theory, the
relativeimportanceofacohortisminimalatbirthandincreasesovertime. Strongsupport
forthispredictioncomesfromFoster,Haltiwanger, andKrizan(2001), whodocumentthat
the (positive) productivity gap between entrants and exiters grows larger over time.
In our setup idiosyncratic shocks only affect technical efficiency. In reality, however,
plants also face random shifts in input supply and product demand schedules, which lead
to changes in input and product prices, respectively.
It must be clear that the main implications of our theory do not hinge upon the
origin of plant–level shocks. In particular, they will still hold in setups with horizontal
product differentiation where idiosyncratic demand shocks play a major role, as long as
such models admit reduced forms where innovations in demand boil down to shocks to
Revenue Total Factor Productivity (TFPR) that resemble our own disturbances.
2See Campbell (1998) and Leeand Mukoyama(2012).
2