NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE FEDERAL RESERVE AND FINANCIAL REGULATION:
THE FIRST HUNDRED YEARS
Gary B. Gorton
Andrew Metrick
Working Paper 19292
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19292
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013
Thanks to Doug Diamond, Anil Kashyap, Christina Romer, and David Romer for helpful comments,
and to Ellis Tallman for sharing Figure 1, which appears in Tallman (2010). Neither author has anything
currently relevant to disclose. Gorton worked with AIG Financial Products during 1996-2008. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Gary B. Gorton and Andrew Metrick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Federal Reserve and Financial Regulation: The First Hundred Years
Gary B. Gorton and Andrew Metrick
NBER Working Paper No. 19292
August 2013
JEL No. E5,E6,G21,N0
ABSTRACT
This paper surveys the role of the Federal Reserve within the financial regulatory system, with particular
attention to the interaction of the Fed’s role as both a supervisor and a lender-of-last-resort (LOLR).
The institutional design of the Federal Reserve System was aimed at preventing banking panics, primarily
due to the permanent presence of the discount window. This new system was successful at preventing
a panic in the early 1920s, after which the Fed began to discourage the use of the discount window
and intentionally create “stigma” for window borrowing – policies that contributed to the panics of
the Great Depression. The legislation of the New Deal era centralized Fed power in the Board of Governors,
and over the next 75 years the Fed expanded its role as a supervisor of the largest banks. Nevertheless,
prior to the recent crisis the Fed had large gaps in its authority as a supervisor and as LOLR, with the
latter role weakened further by stigma. The Fed was unable to prevent the recent crisis, during which
its LOLR function expanded significantly. As the Fed begins its second century, there are still great
challenges to fulfilling its original intention of panic prevention.
Gary B. Gorton
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu
Andrew Metrick
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
metrick@yale.edu

1
I. Introduction
Interactions between agents in the financial system are rife with information asymmetry
and externalities. These market failures motivate the government regulation of financial
institutions and markets, with this regulation falling into two broad categories. The first
category deals with asymmetric information between buyers and sellers of financial products and
securities, with rules for investor protection, consumer financial protection, and disclosure. In the
United States, these rules have primarily been enforced by securities regulators, the Federal
Trade Commission, and state authorities. The second category deals with the externalities of
liquidity demand, with potential negative outcomes of credit cycles, bank runs, and financial
crises. This category has been the main focus of the Federal Reserve since its founding.
The negative externalities of liquidity demand are driven by a fundamental mismatch of
any industrial economy: long-term investment is required for growth, but such investment is by
its nature uncertain and costly to evaluate; at the same time, the ultimate suppliers of investment
capital are subject to liquidity shocks. The maturity and information mismatch between the
long-term investments and short-term liquidity needs are intermediated by the financial system
through the creation of liquid “money-like” assets. The negative externalities of liquidity
demand are manifested in a crisis when investors race to be the first to withdraw from the limited
pool of these liquid assets; the negative externalities in “normal times” occur when each
additional liquid claim does not fully price its contribution to the risk of such a crisis.
To mitigate the risk of a liquidity-driven crisis, the United States has a safety net with
two key pillars: the Federal Reserve as a lender-of-last-resort (LOLR) and the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation (FDIC) as a guarantor of bank deposits. The existence of this safety net
alters the incentives of regulated institutions, and motivates close supervision and regulations
that limit the scope, risk-taking, and leverage of these institutions. The tension between the
provision of a safety net (to prevent crises) and restrictions on the behavior of financial
institutions (to prevent abuse of this safety net) is the main theme of the Fed’s regulatory
activities. If the safety net is too large, then banks have no incentive to manage risks in a
socially optimal way; if the safety net is too small, then failure of a large institution could have
major spillovers to the whole financial system; and if only the largest institutions are thus given
the most protection, then the private incentive will be for every institution to grow “too big to
fail”. This dynamic presents a complex problem for the Fed as the LOLR and regulator of the

2
largest institutions. This paper traces the Fed’s attempts to solve this problem from its founding
and early activities in the 1920s, through the bank failures of the Great Depression, and its
attempts to prevent similar failures in the recent crisis.
Section II discusses the establishment of the Federal Reserve System and the passage of
the Federal Reserve Act (FRA) of 1913. We use quotations from scholars and from
contemporary observers to make the point that a main purpose of the Fed was to prevent future
banking panics. Section III focuses on the 1920s, where the effectiveness of the LOLR function
was gradually eroded through the confusion of multiple objectives for the discount window,
which in addition to its LOLR function was called upon to help create a national market for bills
and to finance the war deficits of the federal government. Section IV shows how this weakened
LOLR function contributed to the banking panics of the Great Depression, and created a stigma
around discount borrowing that has hampered its LOLR efforts to the present day.
Section V summarizes the regulatory changes of the New Deal, which by some
combination of luck and design contributed to a quiet period of nearly fifty years in the U.S.
financial system. The creation of deposit insurance and the establishment of the FDIC in the
Banking Acts of 1933 and 1935 were originally done through amendments to the Federal
Reserve Act, highlighting the connection of deposit insurance to the panic-prevention function of
the Fed.1 Other crucial elements of New Deal legislation include the vital section 13(3) of the
FRA (which became the statutory source of most of the special lending programs during the
recent crisis), and the centralization of Fed decision-making power in the Board of Governors.
The Fed-Treasury Accord of 1951 was an important step towards freeing the Fed from pressure
to finance deficits and restoring the discount window to its main LOLR function, and the Bank
Holding Company Act of 1956 greatly expanded the scope of the Fed’s supervisory authority.
Nevertheless, over the subsequent 50 years, bank supervision was only peripheral to the Fed’s
priorities, which moved steadily towards a focus on price stability using interest-rate policy as its
main instrument, and rarely needed to even think about the LOLR function.
Section VI examines the transformation of the banking sector that began in the late 1970s
and has continued to the present day. Under rising interest rates, non-bank financial
intermediaries began to compete successfully with regulated banks on both sides of their balance
sheets, resulting in the rise of money-market mutual funds (on the liability side) and in
1 The Federal Deposit Insurance Act of 1950 ultimately separated deposit insurance from the FRA.