NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ARE WOMEN MORE ATTRACTED TO COOPERATION THAN MEN?
Peter J. Kuhn
Marie-Claire Villeval
Working Paper 19277
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19277
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013
We are grateful to Philip Babcock, David Cooper, Uri Gneezy, Dorothea KuÌˆbler, Shelly Lundberg,
Matthias Sutter, Lise Vesterlund and participants at the 6th European Workshop on Experimental and
Behavioral Economics in Munich, the conference of the European Association of Labour Economists
at Bonn, the European meeting of the Economic Science Association in Cologne, the Broom Center
conference on Gender and Family in the New Millennium in Santa Barbara, the ASFEE conference
in Montpellier, and seminar participants at Oxford University, THEMA in Paris, WZB Berlin, UT
Austin, UN Reno, Wharton, DIW Berlin and University of Hamburg for useful comments on an earlier
version of this paper. We thank Sylvain Ferriol for programming this experiment. This research program
has been supported by a grant from the French National Research Agency (ANR, EMCO program,
HEIDI grant) and was performed within the framework of the LABEX CORTEX (ANR-11-LABX-0042)
of Université de Lyon, within the program “Investissements d'Avenir” (ANR-11-IDEX-007) operated
by the French National Research Agency (ANR). The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19277.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Peter J. Kuhn and Marie-Claire Villeval. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Are Women More Attracted to Cooperation Than Men?
Peter J. Kuhn and Marie-Claire Villeval
NBER Working Paper No. 19277
August 2013
JEL No. C91,J16,J24,J31,M5
ABSTRACT
We conduct a real-effort experiment where participants choose between individual compensation and
team-based pay. In contrast to tournaments, which are often avoided by women, we find that women
choose team-based pay at least as frequently as men in all our treatments and conditions, and significantly
more often than men in a well-defined subset of those cases. Key factors explaining gender patterns
in attraction to co-operative incentives across experimental conditions include women’s more optimistic
assessments of their prospective teammate’s ability and men’s greater responsiveness to efficiency
gains associated with team production. Women also respond differently to alternative rules for team
formation in a manner that is consistent with stronger inequity aversion
Peter J. Kuhn
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Barbara
2127 North Hall
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
pjkuhn@econ.ucsb.edu
Marie-Claire Villeval
GATE, CNRS, University of Lyon,
93, Chemin de Mouilles,
69130, Ecully,
France
and IZA
villeval@gate.cnrs.fr

1. Introduction
A considerable body of recent research has shown that women tend to shy away from
competitive work environments, and tend to perform worse than men when placed in those
environments (see for example Gneezy, Niederle and Rustichini, 2003; Gneezy and Rustichini,
2004; and Niederle and Vesterlund, 2007). In most of this research, women’s avoidance of
competition is attributed to a combination of distastes for competition and lower levels of
confidence in their relative abilities. This avoidance of competition has been offered as an
explanation for the continuing underrepresentation of women in top economic or political
positions in modern societies.
If indeed women’s talents are sometimes wasted because they avoid competitive
environments, it seems important to know which types of work environments do attract women,
and how women fare relative to men in those environments. In this paper we study women’s
choices to enter a work environment characterized by team incentives, and the role of women’s
perceived relative abilities in those choices. In our real-effort laboratory experiment, participants
can choose to receive either an individual piece rate or an equal share of a group’s output, after
experiencing each compensation scheme successively. In many respects, the design of our
experiment is similar to Niederle and Vesterlund’s (2007) study of selection into competitive
environments. The main contrast is that, instead of choosing between individual pay and a
situation where workers’ rewards depend negatively on their co-workers’ performance, in our
experiment the participants choose between individual pay and an environment where workers’
pay depends positively on their co-workers’ performance.
In addition to addressing a gap in the literature on self-selection into pay schemes –which
has focused almost exclusively on selection into tournaments--, our focus on selection into team
pay is motivated in part by the increasing use of explicit team-based incentives in the workplace.
For example, Lawler et al. (2003) report that the share of Fortune 1000 companies using work-
group or team incentives for more than a fifth of their workers more than doubled, from 21 to 51
percent, between 1990 and 2002. Well known studies of this transition towards team pay at the
firm- and industry level include Boning et al. (2007) for U.S. steel minimills, and Berg et al.
(1996) and Hamilton et al. (2003) for the apparel industry.1 More broadly, though, our objective
is to understand gender differences in selection into work environments where incentives for
cooperation versus competition can be implicit features of the employment contract, or are
1 Interestingly, teams also play an increasingly dominant role in the production of scientific information (Wuchty et
al., 2007).

2
deeply ingrained in corporate cultures. We hope thereby to shed light on the causes of gender
differences in occupational choice and wages, and on how changes in human resource
management policy and corporate culture might make work environments more female-friendly.
While it might be tempting to imagine that women are disproportionately attracted to
cooperative environments because they have more other-regarding preferences (e.g. Andreoni
and Vesterlund 2007), our results are more complex than this. On the one hand, we do find that
women are significantly more likely than men to select team-based compensation in our baseline
condition, where team production offers no efficiency advantages over individual production.
Statistically, this gap can be explained by gender differences in confidence: essentially, the same
confidence deficit that pushes women out of competitions pulls women into teams, where it is
beneficial to have an abler teammate. On the other hand, men become much more likely to join
teams and the gender gap vanishes when we introduce an instrumental reason for joining teams,
in particular an efficiency advantage to team production. We also find that women’s relative
propensities to join a team are strongly affected by the experimental ‘rules’ for team formation.
Specifically, when we replace Niederle-Vesterlund’s group formation procedure by an arguably
more realistic one where teams are formed by mutual consent, women’s team formation rates
increase dramatically. We show that this phenomenon is consistent with a model in which
women are more inequity-averse than men.
Other findings include the following. In contrast to a number of tournament studies, we find
a zero causal effect of the team environment on women’s absolute and relative task performance.
This is true both for the pure treatment effect of teams, i.e. when participants are randomly
assigned to different pay schemes, and for the treatment-on-the-treated (ToT) effect of teams, i.e.
the causal effect of team compensation for the subset of workers who self-select into teams when
choice is voluntary. At the same time, consistent with simple payoff-maximizing behavior, we
find strong and consistent evidence of adverse selection into teams: taking experimental
conditions as given, abler participants of both genders tend to avoid teams, and participants who
thought their partner was able tend to join teams. As a result, self-selected teams perform worse
than randomly-assigned teams, and worse than subjects who choose to avoid teams. Also, since
adverse selection is stronger among men, voluntarily-formed female teams outperform self-
selected male teams. Notably, this is not because women respond better (or less adversely) to the
team environment; it is purely a selection effect. Taken together, these findings may be useful
information for the design of work environments that are attractive to workers of both genders.