NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO FIRMS ISSUE MORE EQUITY WHEN MARKETS ARE MORE LIQUID?
René M. Stulz
Dimitrios Vagias
Mathijs A. van Dijk
Working Paper 19229
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19229
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2013
Van Dijk thanks the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO) for financial support
through a “Vidi” grant. We are grateful for comments from Brian Baugh, Andrew Carverhill, Thierry
Foucault, Yeejin Jang, Jeffrey Pontiff, Ioanid Rosu, and seminar participants at Boston College, Boston
University, Erasmus University, HEC Paris, and the 2012 Frontiers of Finance Conference at Warwick
Business School. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by René M. Stulz, Dimitrios Vagias, and Mathijs A. van Dijk. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Firms Issue more equity when markets are more liquid?
René M. Stulz, Dimitrios Vagias, and Mathijs A. van Dijk
NBER Working Paper No. 19229
July 2013
JEL No. F30,G15,G32
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates how public equity issuance is related to stock market liquidity. Using quarterly
data on IPOs and SEOs in 36 countries over the period 1995-2008, we show that equity issuance is
significantly and positively related to contemporaneous and lagged innovations in aggregate local
market liquidity. This relation survives the inclusion of proxies for market timing, capital market conditions,
growth prospects, asymmetric information, and investor sentiment. Liquidity considerations are as
important in explaining equity issuance as market timing considerations. The relation between liquidity
and issuance is driven by the quarters with the greatest deterioration in liquidity and is stronger for
IPOs than for SEOs. Firms are more likely to carry out private instead of public equity issues and to
postpone public equity issues when market liquidity worsens. Overall, we interpret our findings as
supportive of the view that market liquidity is an important determinant of equity issuance that is distinct
from other determinants examined to date.
René M. Stulz Mathijs A. van Dijk
The Ohio State University Rotterdam School of Management
Fisher College of Business Erasmus University
806A Fisher Hall P.O. Box 1738
Columbus, OH 43210-1144 3000 DR Rotterdam
and NBER The Netherlands
stulz@cob.osu.edu madijk@rsm.nl
Dimitrios Vagias
Rotterdam School of Management
Erasmus University
Postbus 1738
3000 DR, Rotterdam
The Netherlands
dvagias@rsm.nl

1. Introduction
If the demand for a firm’s shares is perfectly elastic, an increase in the supply of that firm’s
shares resulting from an equity issue has no effect on the share price keeping everything else the
same. The existing empirical literature presents considerable challenges to the view that the
demand for shares is perfectly elastic. First, many studies build on the finding in Shleifer (1986)
that a firm’s stock price increases when it experiences an increase in demand because of being
added to a stock index such as the S&P 500. Second, studies that have access to data that make it
possible to directly measure the demand for shares find that it is downward-sloping (e.g.,
Bagwell, 1992). Third, there is a vast literature showing that in many countries stock prices fall
when an equity issue is announced, a result that is consistent with the existence of downward-
sloping demand curves as well as other explanations (see Eckbo, Masulis, and Norli (2007) for a
review of the literature). Fourth, more generally, the theoretical and empirical market liquidity
literature suggests that buy and sell orders (which tend to involve far fewer shares than equity
issues) can move share prices (e.g., Kyle, 1985; Easley and O’Hara, 1987; Glosten and Harris,
1988; Breen, Hodrick, and Korajczyk, 2002). Fifth, a more recent literature shows that market
liquidity affects the expected cost of underwriters in placing an issue, their fees, and the price at
which shares are sold (e.g., Butler, Grullon, and Weston, 2005; Ellul and Pagano, 2006; Gao and
Ritter, 2010).
Imperfect liquidity is a common thread to these findings from the literature. As a firm’s
shares trade in a less liquid market, investors have to be given more of a discount to absorb these
shares. We would therefore expect that equity issuance is more costly for existing shareholders
when a firm’s stock is less liquid. As issuance becomes more costly, firms are expected to issue
less equity, everything else equal. In this paper, we investigate the hypothesis that security
issuance is inversely related to illiquidity. We find very strong evidence across the world that
firms become less likely to issue equity when the liquidity of equity markets worsens.
2

The liquidity of a firm’s common stock can worsen because aggregate liquidity worsens or
because of idiosyncratic shocks. Idiosyncratic liquidity shocks could be caused by shocks to firm
attributes related to firm value, so that it would be difficult to identify the impact of liquidity as
opposed to the impact of shocks to factors that affect liquidity but other firm characteristics as
well. For instance, adverse information about a firm could lower the stock price and increase
information asymmetry which would then lower liquidity as well. Since one would expect an
increase in information asymmetry to make it more expensive for a firm to issue equity,
identification of the liquidity effect when liquidity changes because of information asymmetry
would be challenging. In this paper, we resolve this identification issue by focusing on equity
issuance at the country level and by examining the relation between aggregate equity issuance
and aggregate liquidity. Aggregate liquidity could affect a firm’s decision to issue equity because
there are strong common factors in liquidity (e.g., Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam, 2000) and
because aggregate liquidity could proxy for the general capacity of the market to absorb new
shares.
We create a sample of equity issues that covers 36 countries from 1995 to 2008. Like earlier
papers that investigate equity issuance globally, such as Henderson, Jegadeesh, and Weisbach
(2006) and Kim and Weisbach (2008), we obtain the equity issues from SDC and include both
initial public offerings (IPOs) and seasoned equity offerings (SEOs). Our dataset has 1,872
country-quarters. We use two measures of equity issuance. The first measure consists of counts
normalized by listings. The second one uses proceeds normalized by market capitalization. Most
of our work focuses on the counts measure as the proceeds measure can be affected by a single
large issue in many countries. We use the Amihud (2002) liquidity measure estimated across
countries by Karolyi, Lee, and van Dijk (2012). Since the country-level Amihud measures are
non-stationary and since their levels are not comparable across countries due to differences in
trading volume definitions and currency units, we first construct time-series of market liquidity
innovations as the residuals from country-by-country AR(1) regressions, and subsequently
3