NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A THEORY OF MACROPRUDENTIAL POLICIES IN THE PRESENCE OF NOMINAL
RIGIDITIES
Emmanuel Farhi
Iván Werning
Working Paper 19313
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19313
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013
This paper was first circulated under the title "On the Inefficiency of Financial Market Equilibria in
Macroeconomic Models with Nominal Rigidities". We thank Fernando Alvarez, Adrien Auclert, Markus
Brunnermeier, Gauti Eggertsson, Olivier Jeanne, Guido Lorenzoni, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, Anton Korinek,
John Geanakoplos, Ben Moll, Herakles Polemarchakis, Tomas Sargent, Jean Tirole, Jaume Ventura,
for useful comments. We thank seminar and conference participants at various seminars and conferences.
Ben Hebert provided outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Emmanuel Farhi and Iván Werning. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

A Theory of Macroprudential Policies in the Presence of Nominal Rigidities
Emmanuel Farhi and Iván Werning
NBER Working Paper No. 19313
August 2013, Revised May 2015
JEL No. D5,D6,D62,E3,E4,E5,E58
ABSTRACT
We propose a theory of monetary policy and macroprudential interventions in financial markets. We
focus on economies with nominal rigidities in goods and labor markets and subject to constraints on
monetary policy, such as the zero lower bound or fixed exchange rates. We identify an aggregate demand
externality that can be corrected by macroprudential interventions in financial markets. Ex post, the
distribution of wealth across agents affects aggregate demand and output. Ex ante, however, these
effects are not internalized in private financial decisions. We provide a simple formula for the required
financial interventions that depends on a small number of measurable sufficient statistics. We also
characterize optimal monetary policy. We extend our framework to incorporate pecuniary externalities,
providing a unified approach to both externalities. Finally, we provide a number of applications which
illustrate the relevance of our theory.
Emmanuel Farhi
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
efarhi@harvard.edu
Iván Werning
Department of Economics, E17-234
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
iwerning@mit.edu

A Theory of Macroprudential Policies in the Presence
∗
of Nominal Rigidities
Emmanuel Farhi Iván Werning
Harvard University MIT
June 2015
We propose a theory of monetary policy and macroprudential interventions in financial mar-
kets. We focus on economies with nominal rigidities in goods and labor markets and subject
to constraints on monetary policy, such as the zero lower bound or fixed exchange rates. We
identify an aggregate demand externality that can be corrected by macroprudential interven-
tions in financial markets. Ex post, the distribution of wealth across agents affects aggregate
demand and output. Ex ante, however, these effects are not internalized in private financial
decisions. We provide a simple formula for the required financial interventions that depends
on a small number of measurable sufficient statistics. We also characterize optimal monetary
policy. We extend our framework to incorporate pecuniary externalities, providing a unified
approach to both externalities. Finally, we provide a number of applications which illustrate
therelevanceofourtheory.
1 Introduction
During the period known as the Great Moderation, a soft consensus emerged suggesting that
macroeconomic stabilization should be handled first and foremost by monetary policy. This con-
sensus has been shattered by the Great Recession. A new set of policies aimed at supplementing
monetary policy is gaining traction in policy circles. These so-called macroprudential policies in-
volve interventions in financial markets, in the form of taxes or quantity restrictions. Economists
are still searching for a comprehensive theoretical model that encompasses both monetary and
macroprudentialpolicies. Thegoalofthispaperistoprovidesuchaframework.
∗We thank Fernando Alvarez, Adrien Auclert, Markus Brunnermeier, Gauti Eggertsson, Olivier Jeanne, Guido
Lorenzoni, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, Anton Korinek, John Geanakoplos, Ben Moll, Herakles Polemarchakis, Tomas Sar-
gent, Jean Tirole, Jaume Ventura, for useful comments. We thank seminar and conference participants at various
seminarsandconferences. BenHebertprovidedoutstandingresearchassistance.
1

One of the dominant existing theoretical justifications for macroprudential policies is based
on pecuniary externalities, which were first shown to arise when a simple friction, market in-
completeness,isintroducedintotheArrow-Debreuframework(seee.g.Hart,1975;Stiglitz,1982;
Geanakoplos and Polemarchakis, 1985; Geanakoplos et al., 1990). The logic is as follows. When
assetmarketsareincompleteandthereismorethanonecommodity,aredistributionofassethold-
ings generically induces relative price changes in spot markets, in each state of the world. These
relative price changes, in turn, affect the spanning properties of the limited assets that are avail-
able,potentiallyimprovinginsurance. Suchapecuniaryexternalityisnotinternalizedbyprivate
agents. As a result, the equilibrium is generically constrained inefficient: it can be improved upon
by interventions in the existing financial markets. Similar results obtain in economies with bor-
rowingconstraintsthatdependonpricesofgoodsandassets,orwhencontractingisconstrained
by private information (see e.g. Greenwald and Stiglitz, 1986). A large literature has leveraged
thesetheoreticalinsightstojustifymacroprudentialinterventions.1
In this paper, we offer an alternative general theory for macroprudential policies based on a
different set of frictions. Indeed, in our baseline model, the only frictions are nominal rigidities
and, possibly, constraints on monetary policy such as the zero lower bound or a fixed exchange
rate. Instead of pecuniary externalities, our theory emphasizes aggregate demand externalities. In
addition to providing a new foundation for macroprudential policies, our framework, focusing
on monetary policy and nominal rigidities, is well posed for the joint study of monetary and
macroprudentialpolicy.
We provide two sets of results. First, using a perturbation argument similar in spirit to that
in Geanakoplos and Polemarchakis (1985), we show that equilibria that are not first best can be
improved upon by interventions in financial markets, except in non-generic knife-edged cases.
Althoughwesharethefocusonconstrainedinefficiencywiththepecuniaryexternalityliterature,
thesourceofinefficiencyiscompletelydifferent.2 Inthatliterature,thekeyfrictionslieinfinancial
marketsthemselves;inourbaselinemodel,weassumecompletemarkets. Pecuniaryexternalities
rely on price movements; in our framework price rigidities tend to negate such effects.3 Our
1Seee.g. CaballeroandKrishnamurthy(2001);Lorenzoni(2008);Farhietal.(2009);BianchiandMendoza(2010);
JeanneandKorinek(2010);Bianchi(2011);Korinek(2011);Davilla(2011);Stein(2012);Korinek(2012a,b);Jeanneand
Korinek (2013). Woodford (2011) studies a model with nominal rigidities and pecuniary externalities, and charac-
terizesoptimalmonetarypolicyandoptimalmacroprudentialpolicy. Importantly,andincontrasttoourtheory,the
justificationformacroprudentialinterventionsinhismodelisentirelydrivenbythepresenceofpecuniaryexternali-
ties.
2Byconstrainedinefficiencywemean,inbothcases,thattheplannerdoesnotnecessarilyhavethetoolsnecessary
to entirely overcome the frictions leading to inefficiencies. For example, in our applications the policy instruments
can be interpreted as taxes or regulation on borrowing or portfolio decisions. It is also important that monetary
policybe constrainedand unableto overcome thenominal rigidities. Insome applicationsit isalso importantthat
taxinstrumentsbesomewhatconstrained,toavoidbeingabletocontrolallrelativepricesandeffectivelyundoprice
rigidities.
3Using a disequilibrium approach, Herings and Polemarchakis (2005) show that under some conditions, it is
possibletoconstructfix-priceequilibriathatParetodominatecompetitive(flex-price)equilibriawhenassetmarkets
areincompleteintheabsenceofassetmarketinterventions. Insomeway,ourapproachisthepolaropposite. Ittakes
price rigidities as a constraint (if prices were flexible, competitive equilibria would be Pareto efficient) and looks
2