NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SOVEREIGN DEBT: A REVIEW
Mark Aguiar
Manuel Amador
Working Paper 19388
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19388
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013
Prepared for the Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 4. We thank Mark Wright and the editors
for very detailed and useful suggestions on an initial draft. We also thank Klaus Adam, Satyajit Chatterjee,
Enrique Mendoza, and Vivian Yue for helpful comments. Manuel Amador is grateful for financial
support from the NSF under grant number 0952816. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Mark Aguiar and Manuel Amador. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Sovereign Debt: A Review
Mark Aguiar and Manuel Amador
NBER Working Paper No. 19388
August 2013
JEL No. F34,F41
ABSTRACT
In this chapter, we use a benchmark limited-commitment model to explore key issues in the economics
of sovereign debt. After highlighting conceptual issues that distinguish sovereign debt as well as reviewing
a number of empirical facts, we use the model to discuss debt overhang, risk sharing, and capital flows
in an environment of limited enforcement. We also discuss recent progress on default and renegotiation;
self-fulfilling debt crises; and incomplete markets and their quantitative implications. We conclude
with a brief assessment of the current state of the literature and highlight some directions for future
research.
Mark Aguiar
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
mark@markaguiar.com
Manuel Amador
Stanford University
Department of Economics
Landau Economics Building
579 Serra Mall, Room 330
Stanford , CA 94305-6072
and NBER
amador@stanford.edu

Contents
1 Introduction: Conceptual Issues 3
2 Empirical Facts 4
3 A Benchmark Framework 7
3.1 An Endowment Economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2 Debt Overhang in a Production Economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4 Richer Notions of “Default” 25
4.1 Equilibrium Default . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.2 Renegotiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5 Self-fulfilling Debt Crises 30
6 Incomplete Market Models and their Quantitative Implementation 34
7 Concluding Remarks 42
2

1 Introduction: Conceptual Issues
The defining feature of sovereign debt is the limited mechanisms for enforcement. This distin-
guishes sovereign debt from private debt, whether domestic or international.1 A private agent
or corporation, at least technically, is always subject to a legal authority. Sovereign nations are
not. International bonds and bank loans are typically issued or contracted in a major financial
center, such as New York or London. As such, they are subject to the legal jurisdiction of the
place of issue. If a sovereign debtor fails to make a contracted payment, creditors have limited
legal recourse, relying only on overseas legal instruments and reputational considerations. The
mechanismsbywhichcountriesareinducedtofollowthetermsofcontracts,andtheimplications
of limited enforcement for risk sharing, growth, and other macroeconomic outcomes, is a major
theme developed in this chapter. This introductory section lays out some of the conceptual
issues that underlie the economics of sovereign debt.
In practice, the standard sovereign debt contract is typically non-contingent.2 That is, the
contractspecifiesapre-determined,non-state-contingentsequenceofpaymentsinadefinedcur-
rencydueatdefinedpointsintime. Thisnotionalnon-contingencyobscuresarichercontracting
spacethatcomesaboutthroughmaturitystructure,renegotiation,rescheduling,and“haircuts.”
Thequestionofstatecontingencyisanimportantthemediscussedinthischapter. Inadditionto
limitedenforcement,thelackofcontingencymayreflectasymmetricinformation. Totheextent
the government can manipulate the actual or reported behavior of macroeconomic aggregates,
contracts with state-contingent payoffs may be prone to moral hazard. Even if the government
cannot affect the outcome of the economy, the true state of the economy may not be verifiable
to creditors.
The contract (or the legal jurisdiction in which the bond is issued) will detail how the
termscan be changedat somefuturepoint. Forexample, collective-actionclauses willestablish
what fraction of bond holders must agree to change the terms of the initial debt contract.
There are several conceptual issues involved with renegotiation. One was mentioned in the
previous paragraph; namely, renegotiation can allow for ex post state contingency. Another
is the normative question of which type of collective-action clauses are best. A third is that
in practice, renegotiation is a lengthy and seemingly costly process. This raises the positive
questionofwhythisisso. Finally, thefactthatdebtmayberenegotiatedorrescheduledmakes
1Nevertheless,thelessonsderivedfromthestudyofsovereigndebtareoftenapplicabletoothercontexts,suchas
private credit markets in which enforcement is imperfect.
2Thereareafewexceptions,includingsomeoftheBradybondrestructuringsintheearly1990sandrecentbonds
issued by Argentina and Greece. Such state-contingent “macro assets” have been advocated by Shiller (1993) and
others, although such markets face challenges due to asymmetric information and limited verifiability.
3