NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCIAL MARKET SHOCKS AND THE MACROECONOMY
Avanidhar Subrahmanyam
Sheridan Titman
Working Paper 19383
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19383
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013
We are grateful to Pietro Veronesi (the editor) and an anonymous referee for insightful and constructive
comments. We also thank Rajesh Aggarwal, Ravi Anshuman, Michael Brennan, Charles Calomiris,
Larry Glosten, Wei Jiang, Charles Jones, Jayant Kale, Andrea Prat, Raghu Rau, Pedro Saffi, Tano
Santos, Dick Stapleton, Alex Taylor, Paul Tetlock, and seminar participants at Columbia University,
Indian Institute of Management (Bangalore), the University of Cambridge, and the University of Manchester,
for valuable comments. All errors are solely ours. Part of this work was completed when Subrahmanyam
was a Pembroke Visiting Scholar at Judge Business School, University of Cambridge. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Avanidhar Subrahmanyam and Sheridan Titman. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Market Shocks and the Macroeconomy
Avanidhar Subrahmanyam and Sheridan Titman
NBER Working Paper No. 19383
August 2013
JEL No. E3,G12,G14
ABSTRACT
Feedback from stock prices to cash flows occurs because information revealed by firms’ stock prices
influences the actions of competitors. We explore the implications of feedback within a noisy rational
expectations setting with incumbent publicly traded firms and privately held new entrants. In this setting
the equilibrium relation among stock prices and both future dividends and aggregate output depends
on the strategic environment in which these firms operate. In general, under reasonable conditions,
the relations between prices, dividends, and economic output in our framework are consistent with
empirical evidence in the macroliterature. We also generate new, potentially testable, implications.
Avanidhar Subrahmanyam
Anderson School of Management
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza C402
Los Angeles, CA 90095
subra@anderson.ucla.edu
Sheridan Titman
Finance Department
McCombs School of Business
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712-1179
and NBER
titman@mail.utexas.edu

Macroeconomic forecasts, such as the NBER macroforecast, typically use stock re-
turns as a leading economic indicator. This is intuitive. Stock prices are forward
looking and should thus reflect expectations of future economic activity. Indeed, a re-
lation between stock returns and expectations of future economic activity is a central
feature of the recent literature on consumption-based asset pricing (e.g., Bansal and
Yaron (2004)). Papers by Fama (1990) and Schwert (1990) are prominent examples
that provide evidence on the link between stock returns and industrial output.1
Although the “forward-looking” interpretation of the stock returns/economic ac-
tivity relation is intuitive, it is not really complete. Stock returns are not claims, for
example, on industrial production, which they do predict, but are claims on future
dividends. The rationale for the forward-looking view is that returns predict aggre-
gate economic activity because dividends tend to grow when the economy grows. As
Cochrane (2011) and others have emphasized,2 however, the return on the market
does not predict future changes in dividends on the market portfolio.3 If we believe
that stock returns predict aggregate economic activity because they are forward look-
ing, then the fact that they do not predict changes in future dividends is somewhat
puzzling.4
1SeealsoChoi, Hauser, andKopecky(1999). Barro(1990) andFarmer(2012) relatestock prices
to aggregate investment and unemployment, respectively. The Conference Board (www.conference-
board.org/data/bci/index.cfm?id=2160) uses the stock market return as a leading indicator for the
overall macroeconomy.
2See also Campbell and Shiller (1989) and Cochrane (1996).
3See, for example, page 1053 (Table III) in Cochrane (2011). Although dividends have been
the focus of the predictability literature, the findings of Larrain and Yogo (2008) suggest that the
ability of stock returns to predict shifts in net payouts (defined as dividends plus interest plus net
repurchases of equity and debt) is also quite limited (see their Table 4).
4In a back-of-the-envelope calculation to confirm the results of Fama (1990), Schwert
(1990), and Cochrane (2011), we retrieve data on the industrial production index from
http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/data/INDPRO.txt and retrieve S&P 500 index levels and divi-
dend levels fromwww.econ.yale.edu/˜shiller/data/ie data.xls fortheperiodJanuary 1919toMarch
1

The lack of correlation between stock returns and dividends indicates that a sub-
stantial portion of observed stock market volatility is due to changes in discount
rates.5 Thus, if an increase in stock prices does not reflect an increase in expected
dividends, then it must necessarily reflect a decline in the discount rate. Given that
discount rate changes can have economic consequences (e.g., through changes in in-
vestment choices), it is possible that stock returns are a leading economic indicator
because they cause, rather than just predict, macroeconomic change.
Although this story is intuitive, it is also incomplete. Specifically, it does not ex-
plain why discount rates (or risk premia) can change without shocks to economic fun-
damentals. Moreover, in addition to a rationale for exogenous discount rate changes,
a complete story requires that we establish a causal relation between stock prices
and economic activity and finally, a reason why the profits and dividends of public
corporations are only imperfectly correlated with aggregate economic activity.6
To address these issues, we develop a model that includes a publicly traded firm,
2013. We then regress quarterly growth in industrial production and in dividends, in turn, on con-
temporaneous and lagged values of the quarterly return on the S&P 500 index. (The forecasting
horizon accords with the quarterly returns used in Fama (1990) and Schwert (1990).) In the re-
gression for dividend growth, the coefficient of the lagged S&P 500 return is insignificant with a
t-statistic of 1.41. In the regression for the growth in industrial production, the lagged S&P 500
−
returnissignificantwithat-statisticof4.78. Thissimplecalculationconfirmsthefindingssuggested
by Fama (1990) and Cochrane (2011), that is, a significant link between aggregate output growth
and stock returns, but a very tenuous link between dividend growth and stock returns.
5Using a variance decomposition approach, Campbell (1991) finds that cash flow news and dis-
count rate news contribute equally (one-third each) to stock return volatility, with the balance
attributable to the covariance between the two types of news.
6There is a large class of models in which discount rates change as a function of shocks to
consumption and expected consumption. See for example, Campbell and Cochrane (1988) and
Bansal and Yaron (2004). Researchers, however, have questioned whether these preferences can
explainthemagnitudeoftheobservedvolatilityofriskpremia(e.g.,Hansen,Heaton,andLi(2008);
Hansen and Sargent (2007); Marakani (2009)), and no distinction is drawn between consumption
and dividends in these models of changing discount rates.
2