NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PAYMENT SIZE, NEGATIVE EQUITY, AND MORTGAGE DEFAULT
Andreas Fuster
Paul S. Willen
Working Paper 19345
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19345
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013
ˆWe are grateful to Ronel Elul, Andy Haughwout, Andrew Leventis, Brian Melzer, Anthony Murphy,
Joe Tracy, and seminar audiences at MIT Sloan, Freddie Mac, FRB Philadelphia, FRB New York,
the NBER Summer Institute, and the AREUEA National Conference for helpful comments and discussions.
The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Boston or New York, or the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Andreas Fuster and Paul S. Willen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Payment Size, Negative Equity, and Mortgage Default
Andreas Fuster and Paul S. Willen
NBER Working Paper No. 19345
August 2013
JEL No. E43,G21
ABSTRACT
Surprisingly little is known about the importance of mortgage payment size for default, as efforts to
measure the treatment effect of rate increases or loan modifications are confounded by borrower selection.
We study a sample of hybrid adjustable-rate mortgages that have experienced large rate reductions
over the past years and are largely immune to these selection concerns. We show that interest rate
reductions dramatically affect repayment behavior, even for borrowers who are significantly underwater
on their mortgages. Our estimates imply that cutting a borrower’s payment in half reduces his hazard
of becoming delinquent by about 55 percent, an effect approximately equivalent to lowering the borrower’s
combined loan-to-value ratio from 145 to 95 (holding the payment fixed). These findings shed light
on the driving forces behind default behavior and have important implications for public policy.
Andreas Fuster
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Research Group
33 Liberty St
New York, NY 10045
andreas.fuster@ny.frb.org
Paul S. Willen
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
600 Atlantic Avenue
Boston, MA 02210-2204
and NBER
willen968@gmail.com

1 Introduction
Measuringtherelativeimportanceofpaymentsizeandnegativeequityisacentralquestionin
theanalysis ofthemortgagedefault decision. Ongoingpolicydebates have pittedproponents
of principal reductions who argue that only the latter matters against opponents who argue
that monthly payment reductions aresufficient to prevent most defaults.1 Early inthe recent
crisis, the dominant view was that the increase in foreclosures was almost entirely the result
of rising monthly payments (for example, Bair 2007 and Eakes 2007). However, others such
as Foote, Gerardi, and Willen (2012) have argued that payment increases of adjustable-rate
loans were not a major driving factor behind the crisis, based on the fact that the number
of defaults does not seem to react much even to large payment increases.
In this paper, we contribute to this debate by exploiting the resets of Alt-A hybrid
adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) over the period 2008–2011. Hybrid ARMs have fixed
payments for 3, 5, 7, or 10 years andthen adjust annually or semiannually until themortgage
matures, meaning that the borrower’s required monthly payment can adjust substantially
at a particular moment in the life of the mortgage.2 What makes our sample unique is
that, because of the changed macroeconomic environment, required payments on most of
these loans fell at the reset, often dramatically (see Panel A of Figure 1). This gives us an
advantage over previous work, because, as we explain in Section 2, the prepayment option
makes it impossible to use payment increases to measure the effects of payment changes on
mortgage defaults.
We compare the performance of mortgages before and after payment reductions to the
performance of otherwise similar mortgagesthat did not receive a contemporaneous payment
reduction, becausetheyhadadifferentfixedpaymentperiod. Ouranalysisalsousesvariation
in the size of payment reductions coming from different origination dates across loans. We
find that payment reductions have very large effects. Panel B of Figure 1 plots the hazard of
becoming 60-days delinquent for three types of loans as a function of the number of months
since the origination of the loan. It shows the hazard for ARMs that reset in month 61 (5-
year or “5/1” ARMs3) dropping from 1.7 percent in month 58 (three months prior to reset)
1A recent Wall Street Journal article illustrates the debate: “Economists are split. ‘There’s no question
that in many cases, [principal forgiveness] is the only way to assure people will stay in the house,’ says
Kenneth Rosen of the University of California, Berkeley. Others say what really matters to borrowers is an
affordable monthly payment. ‘If people have a huge debt burden but the mortgage is not the problem, why
are we reducing the mortgage?’ asks Thomas Lawler, an independent housing economist in Leesburg, Va.”
(“How Forgiveness Fits in Housing-Fix Toolkit,” p. A2, July 30, 2012)
2We restrict our sample to “interest-only” (IO) loans that do not amortize principal over the first ten
years of their life. As discussed later, the IO feature was very common among Alt-A hybrid ARMs.
3WefollowindustryconventioninreferringtoloansthatresetafterX yearsas“X/1”withthe1referring
to the annual frequency of subsequent adjustments, generating a slight abuse of terminology as a majority
1

to 0.5 percent by month 64 (after the reset). Payments for these borrowers had fallen on
average by more than 3 percentage points, or 50 percent. The ARMs that reset after 7 or 10
years (“7/1+”) and thus had not yet reset in our observation period display no similar drop
around month 61. Until month 60, shortly prior to the reset, the hazard of the 7/1+ loans
was lower than that of the 5/1s, but after the reset the default hazard comes in dramatically
lower for the 5/1s.
While this figure is strongly suggestive, it obviously does not provide conclusive evidence
on the strength of the effects of payment reductions. In the remainder of this paper, we use
statistical techniques to show that the payment reductions indeed caused the changes in the
default hazards. In particular, we control for the possibility that changes in macroeconomic
conditions may differentially affect different loan types, and explore various alternative spec-
ifications to ensure that our effects are not driven by pre-reset trends or omitted variables.
We robustly find a large effect of payment reductions.
To quantify the size of the effect, we focus on comparing the effects of an interest rate
reduction with that of reducing a borrower’s negative equity position (while holding the
payment size constant). Our estimates indicate that a 2-percentage point reduction in the
interest rate charged to a borrower has effects on the default hazard approximately equiv-
alent, for instance, to reducing the borrower’s combined loan-to-value ratio (CLTV) from
135 to 105.4 A reduction of 4 percentage points or more, which indeed applied to about
20 percent of 5/1s in our sample, has approximately the same predicted effect on the delin-
quency hazard as a reduction in the CLTV from 155 to 80. As an alternative way to quantify
the effect, our estimates imply that an interest rate decrease of 3 percentage points for a
group of “typical” 5/1s at age 61 months (close to the mean reduction such loans actually
experienced) with a CLTV between 130 and 140 reduces the number of delinquencies for
these loans over the year after the reset by about 9 percentage points, or more than half.5
This illustrates the broader and important finding that our estimated effects are similar if
we look at only a subset of borrowers in our sample who are severely underwater. As we
show, this is consistent with basic finance theory and goes against the intuition held by some
commentators that once a borrower’s mortgage is sufficiently far underwater, it is always
optimal for him to default.
An interesting question is at what point in time the effects of a predictable interest rate
of the ARMs in our sample actually adjust every 6 months.
4A major advantage of the dataset we use overmost of the previous literature is that for a large fraction
of loans, we have updated information on the current CLTV, including all liens on a property.
5Suchcounterfactualsaccountforthefactthatpaymentreductionsalsoreducethehazardofprepayment,
as shown in PanelC of Figure 1. For underwater loans, the prepaymenthazardis verylow, so reductions in
the default hazard translate almost directly into reductions in the number of defaults.
2