NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SOVEREIGN DEFAULT RISK AND BANKS IN A MONETARY UNION
Harald Uhlig
Working Paper 19343
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19343
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013
I am grateful to Thorsten Drautzburg for excellent research assistance. This research has been supported
by the NSF grant SES-0922550 and by a Wim Duisenberg fellowship at the ECB. I have an ongoing
consulting relationship with a Federal Reserve Bank, the Bundesbank and the ECB. The views here
are entirely my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Harald Uhlig. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Sovereign Default Risk and Banks in a Monetary Union
Harald Uhlig
NBER Working Paper No. 19343
August 2013
JEL No. E51,E58,E61,E65,G21,G28,H63
ABSTRACT
This paper seeks to understand the interplay between banks, bank regulation, sovereign default risk
and central bank guarantees in a monetary union. I assume that banks can use sovereign bonds for
repurchase agreements with a common central bank, and that their sovereign partially backs up any
losses, should the banks not be able to repurchase the bonds. I argue that regulators in risky countries
have an incentive to allow their banks to hold home risky bonds and risk defaults, while regulators
in other “safe” countries will impose tighter regulation. As a result, governments in risky countries
get to borrow more cheaply, effectively shifting the risk of some of the potential sovereign default
losses on the common central bank.
Harald Uhlig
Dept. of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
huhlig@uchicago.edu

1 Introduction
The European Monetary Union is in distress. Mechanisms that were meant
to safe-guard key institutions and to assure stability have become sources
of balance sheet risk for these very institutions. Liquidity provision within
the European Monetary Union rests upon repurchase agreements, by which
banks guarantee the repurchase of assets deposited with the European Cen-
tral Bank. If either the bank fails or the asset fails, but not both, this
mechanism safe-guards the repayment to the ECB, since it can either rely
on the repurchase by the bank or sell the asset. However, when both fail as
well as the bank home country fails, the ECB incurs a loss.
One symptom of these developments are the dramatic increases in Tar-
get 2 imbalances, as extensively documented and discussed by Sinn (2012).
Indeed, banks in troubled Euro zone countries appear to concentrate their
portfolioofgovernment bondsparticularly onthebondsoftheir own country,
rather than seeking safety by holding bonds of other countries, see figure 1.
This behavior appearstobeencouraged orat least positively toleratedbythe
regulators in these countries, who may assert that purchases of the bonds of
their countries by their own banks is necessary in order to be able to finance
the government at all, thereby endangering the safety of their banks down
the road in the case of a sovereign default.
This paper is motivated by these developments. It seeks to understand
the underlying forces and incentives more deeply. It seeks to understand the
interplay between banks, bank regulation, sovereign default risk and central
bank guarantees in a monetary union. I assume that banks can use sovereign
bonds for repurchase agreements with a common central bank, and that their
sovereign partiallybacks upanylosses, shouldthebanksnotbeabletorepur-
chase the bonds. I argue that regulators in risky countries have an incentive
to allow their banks to hold home risky bonds and risk defaults, while reg-

).sop
gnol
.rd
.rg
fo
%(
erusopxe
ngierevos
fo
erahs
emoH
001
08
06
04
02
0
PLHUMTNOPTES IT DE IE SI LUGBFRNL FI BEATSEDKCY
Figure 1: This graph uses data from the European bank stress test in 2011
to show the fraction of sovereign debt held in the form of domestic sovereign
debt, aggregatingacross the banks inthedata sample in each country. Coun-
try key: PL Poland, HU Hungary, MT Malta, NO Norway, PT Portugal, ES
Spain, IT Italy, DE Germany, IE Ireland, SI Slovenia, LU Luxembourg, GB
United Kingdom, FR France, NL Netherlands, FI Finland, BE Belgium, AT
Austria, SE Sweden, DK Denmark, CY Cyprus.
2