NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE INCENTIVE EFFECT OF SCORES:
RANDOMIZED EVIDENCE FROM CREDIT COMMITTEES
Daniel Paravisini
Antoinette Schoar
Working Paper 19303
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19303
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013
Previously circulated as "The Incentive Effect of IT: Randomized Evidence from Credit Committees."
We are grateful to Heski Bar-Isaac, Greg Fischer, Luis Garicano, Danielle Li, Ulrike Malmendier,
Andrea Prat, Anjan Thakor, John Van Reenen, and the Arizona State University, Boston University,
Columbia University, Darmouth College - Tuck School of Business, HEC School of Management,
Imperial College Business School, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, Helsinki Center of Economic Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
- Sloan School of Business, Northwestern University - Kellogg School of Management, Nova School
of Business and Economics, Queen Mary School of Economics and Finance, Swiss Finance Institute
- USI, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, University of Lausanne, University of London - Royal
Holloway College, University of Namur, University of Oxford - SAID Business School, University
of Toulouse, and Washington University seminar participants; and the CEPR Workshop on Incentives,
Management and Organization, CEPR/AMID Development Economics Symposium, the NBER Corporate
Finance Workshop, the NBER Productivity, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship Workshop, and the
NBER Organizational Economics Workshop participants for helpful comments and discussions. We
wish to thank BancaMia for their support, and Gustavo Caballero, Ximena Cadenas, Isabela Echeverry,
Santiago Reyes and Lucia Sanchez for excellent research assistance. We thank IPA for the funding
that made this study possible. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Daniel Paravisini and Antoinette Schoar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Incentive Effect of Scores: Randomized Evidence from Credit Committees
Daniel Paravisini and Antoinette Schoar
NBER Working Paper No. 19303
August 2013, Revised July 2015
JEL No. D23,G21,L23,O33
ABSTRACT
We design a randomized controlled trial to evaluate the adoption of credit scoring with a bank that
uses soft information in small businesses lending. We find that credit scores improve the productivity
of credit committees, reduce managerial involvement in the loan approval process, and increase the
profitability of lending. Credit committee members' effort and output also increase when they anticipate
the score becoming available, indicating that scores improve incentives to use existing information.
Our results imply that credit scores improve the efficiency and decentralize decision-making in loan
production, which has implications for the optimal organization of banks.
Daniel Paravisini
Department of Finance
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
d.paravisini@lse.ac.uk
Antoinette Schoar
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-638
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
aschoar@mit.edu

1 Introduction
The use of statistical models to analyze the determinants of borrower repayment and
default behavior is standard in consumer and small business lending.1 The trade-offs
involved in summarizing complex, multidimensional information into a single summary
statistic —a credit score— are well understood in theory. On the benefits side, credit
scoring has a direct effect on productivity by reducing the transaction cost of analyzing
information. Itcanhaveacomplementaryeffectthroughreducingthecostofincentivizing
the agents who evaluate loans by making the information they possess easier to monitor
by the principal. On the costs side, relevant information may be lost in score-based
lending. This could occur either because the information is difficult to incorporate into
statistical models (soft information), or because reliance on the score encourages agents
to only consider the information captured in the score but to ignore any other information
(multitasking problems).2 Thus, from a theoretical standpoint scores may affect lending
quantityandqualitythroughdifferentmechanisms,andthesignoftheeffectisambiguous.
In the present paper we assess empirically whether and through which channel does
credit scoring affect lending in environments where soft information is a crucial input
in the lending decision. It is typically difficult to evaluate empirically the trade-offs in
adopting credit scoring technologies because adoption occurs in response to changes in
the environment and is bundled with other organizational innovations, such as changes
in job descriptions or compensation structures.3 Since these also affect productivity and
1Proprietary credit scoring models are widespread in the banking, credit card, crowd-funding, and
otherconsumerlendingsectors. Thereisalsoaworldwidecreditscoringindustryforconsumerandbusi-
ness lending, with Equifax, Transunion, Dun and Bradstreet, and Experian as some its most prominent
players.
2Rajan, Seru & Vig (2013) argue more generally that credit scoring is subject to the Lucas Critique:
sincemodelspredictdefaultonthebasisofhistoricaldata,theymayfailtoaccountforagents’behavioral
responses to the use of scores.
3This is the case, for example, in the study by Einav, Jenkins & Levin (2013), which compares the
change in lending practices by a large auto finance company before and after the adoption of automated
credit scoring. The problem of endogenous and bundled adoption is not unique to the credit industry.
See Milgrom & Roberts (1990) for examples in manufacturing and other industries.
2

incentives directly, they confound the evaluation of the net effect of the introduction of
credit scores, or of whether scores are substitutes or complements with effort provision by
the workers involved in the screening process.
We address these identification challenges by conducting a randomized control trial
(RCT) with a for-profit bank in Colombia where we were able to change the credit eval-
uation process of the bank. We also were able to obtain direct measures of the inputs to
the lending decision, including committee effort. The RCT approach allows us to evalu-
ate the effect of credit scoring ceteris paribus, holding constant all other determinants of
lending outcomes. We also design a novel treatment arm that allows us to measure the
effect of the score holding constant the information set of the committee. The design,
which we explain in more detail below, measures how committee behavior changes when
its members anticipate the score becoming available, but before actually observing it.4
We conduct the research with a for-profit bank in Colombia specialized in loans to
small enterprises. Since most of the prospective borrowers do not have audited financial
statements, the bank’s screening process begins when loan officers collect borrower infor-
mation in the field (e.g., measures of sales, costs, demand volatility). This implies that
most of the information is only verifiable by the loan officer who collects it. The informa-
tion is then evaluated by a credit committee that includes the loan officer who collects the
information and the local branch manager. When committees cannot reach a decision,
they can take actions that create substantial transaction costs for the bank: they either
refer the application to the regional manager who will then make the credit decision, or
send the officer to collect additional information and make the decision in a second round
4More information may affect agents’ behavior directly (the agent reacts to becoming more informed
herself)andindirectly(theagentreactstotheprincipalbecomingmoreinformed). Ourtreatmentdesign
evaluateshowtheagents’reacttotheexpectationoftheprincipalbecomingmoreinformed,andissimilar
in spirit to the empirical strategy used in Hertzberg, Liberti & Paravisini (2011). That paper evaluates
how one of the lenders to a firm reacts to the expectation that the private information it possesses about
thefirmwillbecomepubliclyobservablebytheotherlenderstothesamefirm,butbeforetheinformation
actually becomes public.
3