NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COMBINING BANKING WITH PRIVATE EQUITY INVESTING
Lily Fang
Victoria Ivashina
Josh Lerner
Working Paper 19300
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19300
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013
We thank the Editor, Andrew Karolyi, and two anonymous referees for comments that significantly
improved this paper. We also thank Viral Acharya, Oguzhan Karakas, Anna Kovner, Ron Masulis,
Manju Puri, Anthony Saunders, Antoinette Schoar, Andrei Shleifer, Morten Sorensen, Per Strömberg,
Greg Udell, Royce Yudkoff, and seminar audiences at the American Finance Association conference,
the Coller Institute Private Equity Findings Symposium, the New York Fed/NYU Stern Conference
on Financial Intermediation, Boston University, Indiana University, INSEAD, Maastricht University,
Tilburg University, UCSD, the University of Mannheim, and Wharton for helpful comments. We are
grateful to Anil Shivdasani and Yuhui Wang, Per Strömberg, and Oguzhan Ozbas for generously sharing
data with us. Jacek Rycko, Chris Allen, and Andrew Speen provided remarkable assistance with the
data collection. Harvard Business School’s Division of Research provided financial support. A number
of the authors has advised institutional investors in private equity funds, private equity groups, and
governments designing policies relevant to private equity. All errors and omissions are our own. Send
correspondence to Victoria Ivashina, Harvard Business School, Baker Library 233, Boston, MA 02163;
telephone (617) 495-8018. E-mail: vivashina@hbs.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Lily Fang, Victoria Ivashina, and Josh Lerner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Combining Banking with Private Equity Investing
Lily Fang, Victoria Ivashina, and Josh Lerner
NBER Working Paper No. 19300
August 2013
JEL No. G0,G21,G24
ABSTRACT
Bank-affiliated private equity groups account for 30% of all private equity investments. Their market
share is highest during peaks of the private equity market, when the parent banks arrange more debt
financing for in-house transactions yet have the lowest exposure to debt. Using financing terms and
ex-post performance, we show that overall banks do not make superior equity investments to those
of standalone private equity groups. Instead, they appear to expand their private equity engagement
to take advantage of the credit market booms while capturing private benefits from cross-selling of
other banking services.
Lily Fang Josh Lerner
INSEAD Harvard Business School
Lily.FANG@insead.edu Rock Center 214
Boston, MA 02163
Victoria Ivashina and NBER
Harvard Business School jlerner@hbs.edu
Baker Library 233
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
vivashina@hbs.edu

Banks’ involvement in private equity is an important economic phenomenon: Between 1983 and 2009,
30% of all U.S. private equity investments (representing over $700 billion of transaction value) were
sponsored by the private equity arm of a large bank (Figure 1). In the aftermath of the 2008 financial
crisis, the passing of the “Volcker Rule” as part of the Dodd-Frank Act required banks to limit their
exposure to private equity and hedge funds to no more than three percent of their Tier 1 capital. Although
this rule called for substantial cutbacks in banks’ involvement in principal investing activities including
private equity, very little is known about banks’ engagement in private equity and the pros and cons of
combining private equity with banking. We seek to address this gap.
[FIGURE 1]
Why do banks invest so actively in private equity? What positive and negative effects might
these activities have on the economy? To be clear, banks has two ways to invest in private equity deals:
they can act as the equity investor, or, as both the equity investor and the debt financier. In this paper, we
refer to the first type of investments as “bank-affiliated” deals, and the second type as “parent-financed”
deals. As such, bank involvement in private equity is a complex phenomenon that crosses a number of
theories. Both types of investments can be motivated by good or bad reasons.
For bank-affiliated private equity deals, a worrisome view—often invoked to justify the Volcker
Rule—is that equity investments by banks could reflect bank managers’ incentives to grow revenues and
maximize volatility, which can create systemic risks. Such incentives might arise because banks’ own
equity values increase with volatility, and large banks enjoy implicit bail-out guarantees.1
On the other hand, there are also positive economic arguments for banks’ equity investments in
firms. Through the screening of loans and monitoring, banks obtain private information about their clients
1 Expressing this view, President Barack Obama said on January 21, 2010, “Our government provides deposit
insurance and other safeguards and guarantees to firms that operate banks. […] When banks benefit from the safety
net that taxpayers provide—which includes lower-cost capital—it is not appropriate for them to turn around and use
that cheap money to trade for profit. […] The fact is, these kinds of trading operations can create enormous and
costly risks, endangering the entire bank if things go wrong. We simply cannot accept a system in which hedge
funds or private equity firms inside banks can place huge, risky bets that are subsidized by taxpayers and that could
pose a conflict of interest.” http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/remarks-president-financial-reform.
1

which can be valuable in other transactions. This informational advantage leads to the certification effect
in cases of repeated lending (James (1987)) and securities underwriting (James and Weir (1990); Puri
(1996)). Likewise, banks could use information generated during past banking relationships to make
private equity investment decisions. Not only does the bank enjoy information synergies from combining
different activities, but also there is a positive externality: The bank’s engagement as a private equity
investor could carry a positive signal about the quality of the deal to outside (debt) investors, resulting in
better financing terms. This type of certification is akin to the arguments made for universal banks that
combine commercial banking (lending) and investment banking (underwriting) in the debate about the
Glass-Steagall Act (Kroszner and Rajan (1994); Puri (1996)).
A third reason that may motivate banks to make private equity investments in firms is cross-
selling, a common phenomenon for large banks. Drucker and Puri (2005) provide evidence that banks
cross-sell investment banking services to commercial banking clients. Hellmann, et al. (2008) document
that banks cross-sell services to firms that receive their venture funding. By investing equity in a target
firm, a bank stands to gain from future banking revenues from that company. Cross-selling is rational for
banks and reflects efficiencies of a “one-stop-shop” of banking services, but there might be a concern if
cross-selling gives banks incentives to make poor investments and take on excess risks.
Approximately one-third of the bank-affiliated private equity deals have the loan backing the
transaction arranged by the parent bank (Figure 1). The parent-financing arrangement gives banks
additional incentives to get involved in a private equity deal. It is worth noting that parent-financing is a
unique bank-related phenomenon: Standard private equity groups by definition can only act as the equity
investor but not the debt financier.
Parent-financing might concern policymakers if banks use their position as intermediaries in the
debt market to “originate and distribute” the debt of their own risky deals during the peak of the market,
amplifying the cyclicality of investments and the credit market. Since the mid-1980s, debt financing for
private equity deals has primarily come in the form of syndicated loans. Unlike traditional bank loans,
syndicated loans are originated by banks but funded by a syndicate of lenders; banks retain only a fraction
2