NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CEO INVESTMENT CYCLES
Yihui Pan
Tracy Yue Wang
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 19330
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19330
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013
We would like to thank Shan Ge and Jongsik Park for excellent research assistance and Murillo Campello,
Sergey Chernenko, Charlie Hadlock, Brandon Julio, Kathy Kahle and seminar participants in the 2013
China International Conference on Finance for helpful comments on an earlier draft. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Yihui Pan, Tracy Yue Wang, and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

CEO Investment Cycles
Yihui Pan, Tracy Yue Wang, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 19330
August 2013
JEL No. G32,G34,M12,M51
ABSTRACT
This paper documents the existence of a CEO Investment Cycle, in which firms disinvest early in a
CEO’s tenure and increase investment subsequently, leading to “cyclical” firm growth in assets as
well as in employment over CEO tenure. The CEO investment cycle occurs for both firings and non-performance
related CEO turnovers, and for CEOs with different relationships with the firm prior to becoming CEO.
The magnitude of the CEO cycle is substantial: The estimated difference in investment rate between
the first three years of a CEO’s tenure and subsequent years is approximately 6 to 8 percentage points,
which is of the same order of magnitude as the differences caused by other factors known to affect
investment, such as business cycles or financial constraints. We present a variety of tests suggesting
that this investment cycle is best explained by a combination of agency-based theories: Early in his
tenure the CEO disinvests poorly performing assets that his predecessor established and was unwilling
to give up on. Subsequently, the CEO overinvests when he gains more control over his board. There
is no evidence that the investment cycles occur because of shifting CEO skill or productivity shocks.
Overall, the results imply that public corporations’ investments deviate substantially from the first-best,
and that governance-related factors internal to the firm are as important as economy-wide factors in
explaining firms’ investments.
Yihui Pan Michael S. Weisbach
Department of Finance Department of Finance
1655 Campus Center Drive Fisher College of Business
University of Utah Ohio State University
Salt Lake City, UT 84112-9303 2100 Neil Ave.
Yihui.Pan@business.utah.edu Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
Tracy Yue Wang weisbach.2@osu.edu
Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
wangx684@umn.edu

1. Introduction
Much of what we study in business schools concerns the role of the CEO and his management
team. Yet, there is still substantial uncertainty about the right economic model for understanding the role
of the CEO. The literature has adopted a variety of viewpoints, ranging from a first-best world in which
the CEO always picks value-maximizing projects, to a principal-agent framework that allows for a variety
of types of agency concerns.1 It is unclear what is the right way to view the role of CEOs in firms, or even
how one would go about addressing this issue. Moreover, while the popular press typically ascribes many
important actions firms take to CEOs, it is difficult to verify systematically the extent to which top
management actually matters.
One way to measure the extent to which CEOs make a difference is to estimate the way in which
firms’ activities vary over their time in office. While there are numerous measurable and unmeasurable
differences across CEOs and firms, a CEO’s incentives and power inside the firm are likely to vary
systematically over his career, so systematic differences in firm behavior over CEO tenure are likely to
reflect the effects of the CEO’s incentives and power. In this paper, we document striking patterns in
corporate investment and disinvestment activities over the “CEO cycle” in a large sample of publicly
traded U.S. firms. Disinvestments are fairly common in the early years of a CEO's tenure and decrease
over time. Investments, on the other hand, are relatively low in the early years of a CEO’s tenure and
increase over time. The overall effect is “cyclical” firm growth in assets as well as in employment over
CEO tenure, with the firm growth rate being lower in early years of a CEO’s tenure than in his later years.
We estimate the magnitude of the CEO cycle in terms of the differences in disinvestment,
investment, and firm growth, between the first three years of a CEO’s tenure and the later years, holding
other factors constant. The magnitude of the changes in firm investment and growth over the CEO cycle
1 In the literature on principal-agent problems, CEOs have been accused of providing too little effort, overinvesting,
underinvesting, enjoying the “quiet life”, investing the firm’s assets in projects that maximize their own human
capital, delaying recognition of mistakes, building empires that maximize their utility rather than firm value, etc. See
Jensen and Murphy (1990), Jensen and Meckling (1976), Myers (1977), Bertrand and Mullinathan (2003), Shleifer
and Vishny (1989), Kanodia et al. (1989), Boot (1992), Demsetz and Lehn (1985), Yermack (1999), and Bebchuk
and Fried (2004).
1

is substantial. For example, the annual investment rate (investment-to-capital-stock ratio) tends to be 6 to
8 percentage points lower and the asset growth rate tends to be 3.2 percentage points lower in the first
three years of a CEO’s tenure than in his later years in office. Given that the median investment rate in
our sample is 24% and the median asset growth rate is 7.6%, the differences in investment and growth
between the earlier and the later parts of the CEO cycle are clearly non-trivial. The effect of CEO cycle
on investment is also of the same order of magnitude as the effects of other factors known to influence
investment such as the business cycle, political uncertainty, and financial constraints.
Our estimates of the changes in investment with CEO tenure are robust to alternative ways of
measuring corporate investment and disinvestment. To measure disinvestment, we consider the likelihood
of asset sales, discontinued operations, or the combination of both. To measure investment, we consider
the values of both acquisitions and capital expenditures. We find that both disinvestment and investment
vary systematically over the CEO cycle regardless of the way we measure them, using information from
firm-level financial statements, corporate announcements, acquisition data, or segment level data. The
CEO investment cycles are present regardless of the reason for the CEO turnover (e.g., forced turnovers
vs. exogenous turnovers due to death, illness, or retirement of the departing CEOs), CEO background
(e.g., insider vs. outsider), time in office, and the industry conditions at the time of turnover. The
existence of the CEO investment cycle regardless of the circumstances under which the incoming CEO
takes office or his background suggests that this cyclical behavior of investment is a general phenomenon
in publicly traded corporations.
We argue that the cyclical behavior of investment over CEO tenure is best understood through a
combination of agency explanations. First, when a CEO takes office, he will have incentives to divest
poorly performing assets that the previous CEO established and was unwilling to abandon (e.g., Boot
(1992)). Second, for many reasons, CEOs usually prefer their firms to grow, potentially at the expense of
shareholder value maximization. The board of directors is an important constraint on CEOs’ ability to
deviate from the shareholders’ interest. However, as the CEO becomes more powerful in the firm over
time, he will have more sway over his board and will be able to undertake investments that maximize his
2