NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OPTIMALITY AND EQUILIBRIUM IN A COMPETITIVE INSURANCE MARKET
UNDER ADVERSE SELECTION AND MORAL HAZARD
Joseph Stiglitz
Jungyoll Yun
Working Paper 19317
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19317
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013
Financial support from the Institute for New Economic Thinking (INET) is gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.˛
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Joseph Stiglitz and Jungyoll Yun. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Optimality and Equilibrium In a Competitive Insurance Market Under Adverse Selection and
Moral Hazard
Joseph Stiglitz and Jungyoll Yun
NBER Working Paper No. 19317
August 2013
JEL No. D86
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes optimal and equilibrium insurance contracts under adverse selection and moral
hazard, comparing them with those under a single informational asymmetry. The complex interactions
of self-selection and moral hazard constraints have important consequences. We develop an analytic
approach that allows a characterization of equilibrium and optimal (Pareto Optimal (PO), and Utilitarian
optimal (UO)) allocations. Among the results : (i) a PO allocation may involve “shirking” (not only
less care in accident avoidance than is possible, but less care compared to the case of pure moral hazard)
either by high risk individuals in the case of single-crossing preference or by one or both types in the
case of multi-crossing preference (as may naturally be the case under the double informational asymmetry);
and (ii) while an equilibrium, which is unique (even under multi-crossing preferences) if it exists, is
more likely to exist as the non-shirking constraint for low-risk type gets more stringent (i.e. when low
risk individuals shirk with lower levels of insurance). We also show that a pooling equilibrium, which
is not feasible under pure adverse selection, may exist when individuals differ in risk aversion (as well
as in accident probability) or when the provision of insurance is non-exclusive (i.e. individuals can
purchase insurance from more than one firm). Furthermore, while with pure adverse selection, UO
always entails pooling with complete insurance (in the standard model), with adverse selection and
moral hazard, all PO allocations may entail separation and the UO may entail incomplete insurance.
We show further that, in general, any PO allocation can be implemented by a basic pooling insurance
provided by the government and a supplemental separating contracts that can be offered by the market,
although, in the presence of moral hazard, a tax needs to be imposed upon the market provision.
The analysis suggests that two commonly observed features of many countries’ public insurance schemes
are consistent with PO: (a) Some individuals (type H) shirk—contrary to widespread views, it is
not a sign of a poorly designed system that some individuals shirk; and (b) there exists a hybrid provision
of insurance by the government and the market.
Joseph Stiglitz
Uris Hall, Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Room 212
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jes322@columbia.edu
Jungyoll Yun
Department of Economics,
Ewha University,
Seoul
Korea
jyyun@ewha.ac.kr

1. Introduction
Risk and improvements in the way that it can be managed has been a central theme in
economic theory and policy in recent decades. Individuals are risk averse, so the insecurity
posed by the risk of unemployment, accident, disease, etc. has major adverse effects on
welfare.2 Partially because of perceptions that private markets have not adequately
responded, governments throughout the world have designed social insurance systems to help
mitigate the economic effects of these untoward events.3 Yet controversies rage over the
best design of insurance schemes, including the extent to which reliance can be placed on
markets.
It has long been known that insurance can attenuate incentives to avoid the insured against
event. Optimal insurance balances out the benefits of improved risk mitigation with the
costs of weakened incentives. Practical policies are bedeviled by the further complications
of individual heterogeneity and the complexities posed by the interaction of public insurance
and private provision. A currently fashionable approach has it that government should
provide some level of “basic coverage,” but that people should be free to purchase additional
coverage from private carriers. There has, to date, been little theoretical work establishing
contexts in which such a mixed system (which we refer to below as a “hybrid” system) would
satisfy optimality properties. The argument for the base coverage is often related to the fear
that private markets will focus on “cream skimming”—providing insurance to those of the
lowest risk-- so that basic coverage at affordable prices to high risk individuals can only be
obtained through some version of an enforced pooling equilibrium, in which low risk
individuals subsidize high risk individuals. The US Medicare program, for instance, works
this way, with those wishing to buy supplemental insurance being encouraged to do so.
Over the past thirty years, a large literature has developed considering market equilibrium
with adverse selection and moral hazard. The original results of, say, Rothschild-Stiglitz
[1976] in the context of adverse selection or Arnott-Stiglitz [1991] in the context of moral
hazard, have proven robust. Take the canonical insurance model, where an equilibrium is
defined as a set of contracts, each of which break even when chosen by those who prefer the
contract to any other offered in the market, and such that there does not exist another contract
which, given the existing set of contracts, would make a profit were it to be offered. In
adverse selection models where the single crossing property holds,4 if there is an equilibrium,
it is a separating equilibrium characterized by full insurance of the high risk individual, and
incomplete insurance of the low risk individual.
Remarkably, in the ensuing thirty years since the canonical models were first developed,
there has been little literature devoted to the question of what happens when there is both
moral hazard and adverse selection, as is almost always the case in the real world. Such
situations pose difficult policy dilemmas.
Consider the on-going debate over health care reform. Those focusing on moral hazard
2 See the recent report of the Sarkozy commission (Stiglitz, et al (2010))
3 Research over the past four decades has helped explain why markets may not respond adequately—there may
not exist a competitive equilibrium, and when it does exist, it may provide only limited insurance and attempts
to differentiate among individuals with different risks may be very costly.
4 That is, the indifference curves of high and low risk individuals (in say {benefit, premium} space) cross only
once.
2

argue that we should encourage people to self-insure, through health insurance savings
accounts. But critics say that that will result in a breaking down of existing insurance
pools: the least risky will self-insure, leaving the worse risks in the insurance pool. That
in turn will lead to higher insurance premiums, leading more to be uninsured. Clearly, it is
not a Pareto improvement: those that chose not to avail themselves of the tax subsidized
accounts are worse off, essentially because they lose the implicit cross subsidy from low risk
individuals in the earlier pooling equilibrium. Worries about adverse selection effects of the
reforms introduced to mitigate moral hazard have hampered health care reform.
Similarly, in financial loan markets, requiring more collateral might mitigate the
moral hazard problem—those with more collateral will be less induced to engage in
excessively risky behavior. But it is possible that wealthier people with more collateral will
be more risk prone (either because of the higher level of wealth, or because those with wealth
include disproportionately large numbers who have gambled and “won.”) Again, the
interaction of adverse selection and moral hazard effects are at the center of the analysis of
how to address problems posed by information asymmetries.
To date, however, there has been neither a full analysis of the market equilibrium nor of the
Pareto optimal (PO) or utilitarian optimum (UO) set of insurance contracts (nor does such an
analysis exist in other simple market contexts) in which there is the double informational
asymmetry problem of both moral hazard and adverse selection.5 This paper provides such
an analysis, with results that are strikingly simple, though even in the simplest model the
analytics turn out to be remarkably complex. We combine the Rothschild-Stiglitz insurance
model with two groups with the Arnott-Stiglitz model with two activity levels, providing an
analysis of the full set of Pareto efficient contracts, characterizing the utilitarian optimum,
describing the market equilibrium, and ascertaining how the government might be able to
implement the optimal allocations.
This paper identifies several distinctive features of optimal and equilibrium allocations that
are not present under pure adverse selection or under pure moral hazard; these distinctive
features are the results of self-selection and moral hazard constraints interacting with each
other: (i) a PO allocation may involve “shirking” (less care in accident avoidance compared
to the case of pure moral hazard) either by high risk individuals in the case of single-crossing
preference or by one or both types in the case of multi-crossing preference (as may naturally
be the case under the double informational asymmetry)6; and (ii) while an equilibrium, which
is unique (even under multi-crossing preferences) if it exists, is more likely to exist as the
non-shirking constraint for low-risk type gets more stringent (i.e. when low risk individuals
shirk with lower levels of insurance). We also show that a pooling equilibrium, which is not
feasible under pure adverse selection, may exist when individuals differ in risk aversion (as
5 Three exceptions are the study of Whinston [1983] , who uses the Diamond/Mirrlees social
insurance/retirement model, and shows that the utilitarian optimum involves pooling; Stiglitz-Weiss [1987],
who look at moral hazard and adverse selection in a credit market with collateral, where individuals differ in
both their collateral and the probability of default; and Chassagnon-Chiappori (1997), who examined the
properties of equilibrium in a model of adverse selection and moral hazard, which is characterized by multiple-
crossing preferences. This paper makes clear how each employs assumptions that are special cases of the
model analyzed here. There have been some works (Laffont-Tirole(1986), Piscard(1987)) that integrate both
moral hazard and adverse selection problems into a single model where all the parties of contracts are risk-
neutral. But they do not explain the insurance arrangements for risk-averse parties.
6 This result can be contrasted with the previous arguments (Stewart(1994)) that adverse selection and moral
hazard may partially offset the welfare loss associated with each other.
3