NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ASSET PRICING IN THE DARK:
THE CROSS SECTION OF OTC STOCKS
Andrew Ang
Assaf A. Shtauber
Paul C. Tetlock
Working Paper 19309
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19309
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013
The authors thank Bill Aronin for providing MarketQA data. We appreciate helpful comments from
Andrew Karolyi (editor), David Hirshleifer (executive editor), two anonymous referees, Randy Cohen,
Kent Daniel, Larry Harris, Cam Harvey, Narasimhan Jegadeesh, Charles Jones, Tyler Shumway, Rossen
Valkanov, and Adrien Verdelhan. We are also grateful to seminar participants at the Western Finance
Association meetings and at the following universities: Arizona, Berkeley, Columbia, Michigan, North
Carolina, Stanford, and Virginia. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Andrew Ang, Assaf A. Shtauber, and Paul C. Tetlock. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Asset Pricing in the Dark: The Cross Section of OTC Stocks
Andrew Ang, Assaf A. Shtauber, and Paul C. Tetlock
NBER Working Paper No. 19309
August 2013
JEL No. G10,G12,G14,G20
ABSTRACT
Over-the-counter (OTC) stocks are far less liquid, disclose less information, and exhibit lower institutional
holdings than listed stocks. We exploit these different market conditions to test theories of cross-sectional
return premiums. Compared to premiums in listed markets, the OTC illiquidity premium is several
times higher, the size, value, and volatility premiums are similar, and the momentum premium is three
times lower. The OTC illiquidity, size, value, and volatility premiums are largest among stocks held
predominantly by retail investors and those not disclosing financial information. Theories of differences
in investors’ opinions and limits on short sales help explain these return premiums.
Andrew Ang Paul C. Tetlock
Columbia Business School Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 3022 Broadway, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027 New York, NY 10027
and NBER pt2238@columbia.edu
aa610@columbia.edu
Assaf A. Shtauber
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
ashtauber13@gsb.columbia.edu

While hundreds of studies have investigated expected return patterns in listed stocks that
trade on the NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ, many U.S. stocks—roughly one-fifth of the number
of stocks listed on the major exchanges—trade in OTC markets. The definition of an OTC stock
is one that trades on either the OTC Bulletin Board (OTCBB) or OTC Link (formerly Pink
Sheets, or PS) interdealer quotation system, where at least one licensed broker-dealer agrees to
make a market in the stock. We examine market data for 6,668 OTC firms from 1977 through
2008. To our knowledge, this is the largest dataset of U.S. stock prices to be introduced to
research since the Center for Research on Security Prices (CRSP) added data on NASDAQ
stocks in 1984.
The OTC and listed stock markets consist of many similar firms and market participants.
More than 80% of OTC firms with market capitalizations above $1 million are traded in listed
markets either before, concurrently, or after their OTC trading activity. Most broker-dealers who
act as market makers in OTC stocks are also market makers in listed markets. Moreover, many
investors, including retail investors and hedge funds, actively trade both groups of stocks.
There are, however, three important differences between OTC and listed stocks. First,
there is far lower liquidity in OTC markets than on the major exchanges. Second, whereas firms
in listed stock markets must file regular financial disclosures, disclosure requirements for firms
traded in OTC markets are minimal, if non-existent, for most of our sample period.1 Third, non-
institutional (i.e., retail) investors are the primary owners of most OTC stocks, whereas
institutional investors hold significant stakes in nearly all stocks on listed exchanges, including
small stocks. Possibly as a consequence of low ownership by institutions, the main lenders of
shares, short selling of OTC stocks is difficult, expensive, and rare.
1 After June 2000, firms listed on the OTCBB but not the PS must have at least 100 shareholders, file annual reports,
hold annual shareholder meetings, and meet other governance requirements (see Bushee and Leuz, 2005).
1

We exploit these features of OTC and listed stock markets to distinguish among myriad
theories of return premiums. Differentiating theories whose predictions depend on stocks’
information environments and investor clientele using only the listed markets is challenging
because all listed stocks are subject to the same reporting requirements and nearly all are held by
institutions.2 We estimate return premiums both within and across OTC markets and listed
markets, sorting stocks by the characteristics that distinguish the two markets. This combined
cross-market and within-market identification strategy allows for powerful tests of competing
theories because the data exhibit enormous heterogeneity along both dimensions.
In light of the large cross-market differences in liquidity, we devote special attention to
measuring illiquidity premiums. We find that the return premium for illiquid stocks is much
higher in OTC markets than in listed markets. One of our key liquidity measures is the
proportion of non-trading days (PNT), where higher PNT indicates higher illiquidity, and we sort
OTC stocks into PNT quintiles. When constructing listed return factors, we focus on
“comparable” listed stocks with market capitalizations similar to the typical OTC stock to
control for differences in firm size. We first evaluate factors’ pre-cost returns. We find that an
OTC illiquidity factor has an annual Sharpe ratio of 0.91, whereas the comparable listed
illiquidity factor has a Sharpe ratio of just 0.14.
Asset pricing theories based on transaction costs, such Amihud and Mendelson (1986)
and Constantinides (1986), do not explain the OTC illiquidity premium. These theories predict
that stocks exhibit positive pre-cost risk-adjusted returns that increase with bid-ask spreads to
compensate rational investors for their expected trading costs. Empirically, the most liquid OTC
2 Researchers can also use international data, like Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2007) who estimate illiquidity
premiums, or different asset classes like Karolyi and Sanders (1998), to study determinants of return premiums.
International studies are hampered by different treatments of creditor rights and securities not having the same
claims to cash flows across countries.
2