NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE REAL COSTS OF DISCLOSURE
Alex Edmans
Mirko Heinle
Chong Huang
Working Paper 19420
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19420
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2013
We thank Vincent Glode, Itay Goldstein, David Hirshleifer, and seminar participants at London
Business School, Philadelphia Fed, UC Irvine, and Wharton for valuable comments. AE thanks the
Wharton Dean's Research Fund for financial support. CH thanks the CORCL Awards for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Alex Edmans, Mirko Heinle, and Chong Huang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Real Costs of Disclosure
Alex Edmans, Mirko Heinle, and Chong Huang
NBER Working Paper No. 19420
September 2013
JEL No. G18,G31
ABSTRACT
This paper models the effect of disclosure on real investment. We show that, even if the act of
disclosure is costless, a high-disclosure policy can be costly. Some information ("soft") cannot be
disclosed. Increased disclosure of "hard" information augments absolute information and reduces
the cost of capital. However, by distorting the relative amounts of hard and soft information, increased
disclosure induces the manager to improve hard information at the expense of soft, e.g. by cutting
investment. Investment depends on asset pricing variables such as investors' liquidity shocks; disclosure
depends (non-monotonically) on corporate finance variables such as growth opportunities and the
manager's horizon. Even if a low disclosure policy is optimal to induce investment, the manager may
be unable to commit to it. If hard information turns out to be good, he will disclose it regardless of
the preannounced policy. Government intervention to cap disclosure can create value, in contrast
to common calls to increase disclosure.
Alex Edmans Chong Huang
The Wharton School University of California, Irvine
University of Pennsylvania The Paul Merage School of Business
2460 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall Building 221 Periera Drive
3620 Locust Walk CA 92697-3125
Philadelphia, PA 19104 chong.h@uci.edu
and NBER
aedmans@wharton.upenn.edu
Mirko Heinle
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
1330 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
miheinle@wharton.upenn.edu

1 Introduction
This paper analyzes the e¤ect of a …rm’s disclosure policy on real investment. An
extensive literature highlights numerous bene…ts of disclosure. Diamond (1985) shows
that disclosing information reduces the need for each individual shareholder to bear
the cost of gathering it. In Diamond and Verrecchia (1991), disclosure reduces the
cost of capital by lowering the information asymmetry that shareholders su¤er if they
subsequently need to sell due to a liquidity shock. Kanodia (1980) and Fishman and
Hagerty (1989) show that disclosure increases price e¢ ciency and thus the manager’s
investment incentives.
However, the costs of disclosure have been more di¢ cult to pin down. Standard
models (e.g. Verrecchia (1983)) typically assume an exogenous cost of disclosure, justi-
…ed by several motivations. First, the actual act of communicating information may be
costly. While such costs were likely signi…cant at the time of writing, when information
had to be mailed to shareholders, nowadays these costs are likely much smaller due to
electronic communication. Second, there may be costs of producing information. How-
ever, …rmsalreadyproducecopiousinformationforinternalortaxpurposes. Third, the
information may be proprietary (i.e., business sensitive) and disclosing it will bene…t
competitors (e.g., Verrecchia (1983) and Dye (1986)). However, while likely important
for some types of disclosure (e.g., the stage of a patent application), proprietary con-
siderations are unlikely to be for others (e.g., earnings).1 Perhaps motivated by the
view that, nowadays, the costs of disclosure are small relative to the bene…ts, recent
government policies have increased disclosure requirements, such as Sarbanes-Oxley,
Regulation FD, and Dodd-Frank.
This article reaches a di¤erent conclusion. We show that, even if the actual act of
disclosure is costless, a high-disclosure policy can still be costly due to its e¤ect on real
investment. Central to our analysis is the idea that only some types of information
(“hard”, i.e., quantitative and veri…able) can be credibly disclosed, but others (“soft”,
i.e., non-veri…able) cannot be.2 For example, a …rm can credibly communicate its
earnings, but not the quality of its corporate culture. It may seem that this distinction
1Fourth, Hirshleifer (1971) shows that disclosure in insurance markets may worsen risk-sharing,
e.g. if it is made public which individuals will su¤er heart attacks before they have a chance to take
out medical insurance. Kanodia and Lee (1998) apply this idea to …nancial markets and show that
disclosureof…rmfundamentalsbeforecurrentinvestorscantradewillimposeriskonthem;iftheyare
more risk-averse than future investors, this in turn distorts investment decisions. However, Diamond
(1985)arguesthatthiscostisunlikelytobesigni…cantfor…nancialmarkets,wherecontinuoustrading
is possible.
2See, e.g., Stein (2002) and Petersen (2004) for the distinction between hard and soft information.
2

does not matter: even if a …rm cannot increase the amount of soft information, it
can still disclose more hard information. The absolute amount of overall information
will rise, reducing the cost of capital. However, the manager’s investment decision
depends on the relative weighting between hard and soft information. If neither type
of information is disclosed, the manager chooses the investment policy that maximizes
…rmvalue. Incontrast,anincreaseintheabsoluteamountofhardinformationdisclosed
alsoaugmentstheamountofhardinformationrelativetosoft. Thisinturndistortsthe
manager’s actions towards improving the hard signal at the expense of the soft signal
–for example, cutting investment in corporate culture to increase current earnings.
Our model features a …rm initially owned and run by a manager, who must raise
funds from an outside investor. After funds are raised, the …rm turns out to be either
high or low quality, and this type is unknown to the investor. As in Diamond and
Verrecchia (1991), the investor may subsequently su¤er a liquidity shock which forces
her to trade additional shares. Also present in the market is a speculator (such as
a hedge fund) who has private information on …rm value, and a market maker. The
investor expects to lose to the speculator from her liquidity trading and thus demands
a larger stake when contributing funds, augmenting the cost of capital.
The manager can reduce the investor’s informational disadvantage, and thus the
cost of capital, by disclosing a hard signal (such as earnings) that is partially infor-
mative about …rm value, just before the trading stage. We initially assume that the
manager can commit to a disclosure policy when raising funds, as in the literature on
mandatory disclosure. High disclosure indeed reduces the cost of capital, but has an
important cost. A high-quality …rm has the option to undertake an intangible invest-
ment that improves the …rm’s long-run value, but this value cannot be disclosed as it is
soft information. The investment also raises the probability of delivering low earnings,
which lowers the short-term stock price since low-quality …rms always generate low
earnings. Thus, a manager concerned with the stock price will underinvest. While ex-
isting literature typically assumes that …rm value is exogenous and studies the optimal
level of information to disclose about this …xed value, here …rm value is endogenous to
the disclosure policy (even absent a competitor who can use the disclosed information).
The optimal level of disclosure is thus a trade-o¤between the bene…ts of disclosure
(reduced cost of capital) and its costs (ine¢ cient investment). The manager chooses
either full disclosure to minimize the cost of capital, or partial disclosure to maximize
investment. Thus, the model delivers predictions on how disclosure should vary cross-
sectionally across …rms. The e¤ect of …rm characteristics on disclosure is typically
3