NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PROPERTY RIGHTS AND INTRA-HOUSEHOLD BARGAINING
Shing-Yi Wang
Working Paper 19427
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19427
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2013
This paper has benefited from comments from Santosh Anagol, A.V. Chari, Nancy Qian, Nicola Persico
and various seminar participants. Lizi Chen provided excellent research assistance. All errors are my
own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Shing-Yi Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Property Rights and Intra-Household Bargaining
Shing-Yi Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 19427
September 2013
JEL No. O1
ABSTRACT
This paper examines whether an individual-level transfer of property rights increases the individual's
bargaining power within the household. The question is analyzed in the context of a housing reform
that occurred in China that gave existing tenants the opportunity to purchase the homes that they had
been renting from their state employers. The rights to each housing unit were granted to a particular
employee, so property rights were defined at the individual level rather than the household level. The
results indicate that transferring ownership rights to men increased household consumption of some
male-favored goods and women's time spent on chores. Transferring ownership rights to women
decreased household consumption of some male-favored goods.
Shing-Yi Wang
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
was@wharton.upenn.edu

1 Introduction
Land and housing assets represent a large share of the total value of assets held by households
across the world. In the United States, data from the Federal Reserve Flow of Funds Account
in 1990 indicate that real estate represented about one-third of household assets. In developing
countries, the corresponding numbers are often much higher at 45% of urban wealth in China,
80% of rural wealth in China, 78% of urban wealth in India and 87% of rural wealth in India.1
The importance of real estate for the economic lives of households has motivated property
rights reforms in many developing countries. Such reforms include land titling and privatization
programs aimed at encouraging households to maximize their use of land and housing assets.
Research has demonstrated that property rights affect household decision-making, includ-
ing investments (Besley 1995, Field 2005, Galiani and Schargrodsky 2010, Goldstein and Udry
2008), labor market choices (Field 2007, Wang 2012) and residential decisions (Wang 2011).
However, the economics literature on property rights has generally focused on the household as
a single agent. In reality, property rights can accrue to individuals within a household rather
than to a unitary household unit or in equal proportion to all members of a household. For
example, property titles often include only the name of the head of household (Deere and Leon
2001[a], Deere and Leon 2001[b]). In developing countries, the household head is often male;
thus, programs that transfer land titles or other forms of property rights to households with-
out careful consideration of intra-household issues may have important implications for gender
inequality within households.
Thispaperexamineshowindividual-leveltransfersofpropertyrightsaffectthedistribution
of bargaining power within the household. Thus, the results contribute to a growing policy
debate on structuring property rights reforms to be cognizant of the implications for women’s
rights in developing countries. Concern for women’s rights is behind the growing interest in
1The sources of data for these estimates are the 1995 Urban and Rural Household Income Surveys of China
and the National Sample Survey Organization of India in 1991.
2

mandating that the names of both the husband and wife be included on property registration
and other forms of protection of individual rights within households (Field 2003, Deere and
Leon 2001[a], Lastarria-Cornhiel 2009, Meizen et al 1997).
Descriptive evidence demonstrates a positive correlation between female ownership of land
or housing and her outcomes within the household as measured by domestic violence (Panda
and Agarwal 2005). To my knowledge, my analysis is the first to offer a rigorous empirical
method for identifying the causal impact of individual-level property rights transfers on the
bargaining outcomes of men and women within households. This question is answered in the
context of a housing reform that occurred in China that gave existing tenants the opportunity
to purchase thehomes thathad beentied withtheir employment withinthe statesector. Rights
to each housing unit were granted to a particular employee, so property rights were defined at
the individual level rather than the household level. Prior to the reform, people had use rights
to the housing units, but the reform gave them full ownership rights including the right to lease,
sell and collateralize the property. Using a panel data set, the empirical strategy compares the
outcomes of same households before and after the reform, as well as relative to a comparison
group of households.
In addition to the literature on the microeconomic effects of property rights, this paper
contributes to an understanding of the intra-household bargaining outcomes between men and
women.2 This literature can be broadly separated into two areas. One area considers the deter-
minants of bargaining weights within a couple focus on gender differences in income (Anderson
and Eswaran 2009, Browning et al 1994, Duflo 2003, Hoddinott and Haddad 1995, Luke and
Munshi 2011, Lundberg, Pollak and Wales 1997, Ponczek 2011, Thomas 1990). The other
area of this literature examines individual asset ownership rather than control over income
(Thomas, Contreras, and Frankenberg 2002, Fafchamps and Quisumbing 2002, Fafchamps and
Quisumbing 2005, Fafchamps, Kebede, and Quisumbing 2009).
2See Basu (2006), Haddad, Hoddinott and Alderman 1997, Manser and Brown (1980) and McElroy and
Horney (1981) for the use of bargaining models of intra-household allocation.
3