NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INCENTIVIZING CALCULATED RISK-TAKING:
EVIDENCE FROM AN EXPERIMENT WITH COMMERCIAL BANK LOAN OFFICERS
Shawn Cole
Martin Kanz
Leora Klapper
Working Paper 19472
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19472
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2013
We thank the cooperating financial institution for providing us with the data on loan applications used
in this paper. For helpful comments and suggestions, we thank Philippe Aghion, Andreas Fuster, Victoria
Ivashina, Raj Iyer, Michael Kremer, Rohini Pande, Jose Liberti, Daniel Paravisini, Enrichetta Ravina,
Andrei Shleifer, Antoinette Schoar, Erik Stafford, Jeremy Stein, and numerous seminar and conference
participants. Samantha Bastian, Doug Randall, and Wentao Xiong provided excellent research assistance.
Data from loan files, used in this experiment, were obtained under a Non-Disclosure Agreement from
a financial institution. Financial assistance from the Kauffman Foundation, the International Growth
Center, and the Harvard Business School Division of Faculty Support and Research, is gratefully
acknowledged. None of the authors has a potentially relevant outside financial relationship. The
opinions expressed do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors,
the countries they represent, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Shawn Cole, Martin Kanz, and Leora Klapper. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Incentivizing Calculated Risk-Taking: Evidence from an Experiment with Commercial Bank
Loan Officers
Shawn Cole, Martin Kanz, and Leora Klapper
NBER Working Paper No. 19472
September 2013
JEL No. D03,G21,J33
ABSTRACT
We use an experiment with commercial bank loan officers to test how performance based compensation
affects risk-assessment and lending. High-powered incentives lead to greater screening effort and more
profitable lending decisions. This effect, however, is muted by deferred compensation and limited
liability, two standard features of loan officer incentive contracts. We find that career concerns and
personality traits affect screening behavior, but show that the response to monetary incentives does
not vary with traits such as risk-aversion, optimism or overconfidence. Finally, we present evidence
that incentive contracts distort the assessment of credit risk, even among trained professionals with
many years of experience. Loans evaluated under permissive incentives are rated significantly less
risky than the same loans evaluated under pay-for-performance.
Shawn Cole Leora Klapper
Harvard Business School The World Bank
Baker Library 271 1818 H Street, NW
Soldiers Field Washington, DC 20433
Boston, MA 02163 lklapper@worldbank.org
and NBER
scole@hbs.edu
Martin Kanz
The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington, DC 20433
mkanz@worldbank.org

1 Introduction
The effect of performance-based compensation on risk-taking is of fundamental importance
in finance.1 However, the precise mechanism through which financial incentives affect risk-
assessment and decision making remains poorly understood. Existing research has estab-
lishedthatbanklendingisresponsivetotheexternaleconomicenvironment(see,forexample,
Dell’Ariccia and Marquez [2006] or Keys et al. [2010])2 and, more recently, that agency prob-
lemswithinabankmayaffectcreditallocation(LibertiandMian[2009], andHertzbergetal.
[2010]). By contrast, there is little evidence on individual responses to performance-based
compensation, a key instrument banks may use to influence the decisions of loan officers
tasked with making actual lending decisions.3
Linking compensation practices to lending decisions is difficult, for at least two impor-
tant reasons. First, incentive structures are endogenously determined by financial institu-
tions, yielding standard identification problems. Second, even setting identification chal-
lenges aside, the data typically available in observational studies, such as lending, interest
income, and write-offs, are often insufficient to distinguish between competing hypotheses.
To surmount these challenges, this paper uses a high-stakes field experiment with com-
mercial bank loan officers in India, that enables us to present direct evidence on the effect
of performance-based compensation on risk-assessment and lending decisions. In the exper-
iment, loan officers were paid to review and assess actual loan applications, making 14,675
1Theimpactofincentivesonrisk-takinghasbeencitedasankeyfactorinseveralfinancialcrisespreceded
by a lending boom. See Bebchuk et al. [2010], Fahlenbrach and Stulz [2012], Acharya et al. [2013] for a
discussion of incentives and risk-taking in the run-up to the recent global financial crisis. Devlin [1989] and
Gourinchasetal.[2001]highlighttheroleofemployeeincentivesandsupplysidefactorsintheLatinAmerican
debt crisis. For a general discussion of incentives and risk-taking at banks, see also “Crazy compensation
and the crisis”. Alan Blinder, The Wall Street Journal. May 28, 2009.
2For evidence on credit booms and screening incentives see also Dell’Ariccia et al. [2012]. Theoretical
approaches have modeled variation in screening standards as a result of herding, business cycle factors
[Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997], or limited screening capacity of banks [Berger and Udell, 2004].
3See Freixas and Rochet [2008] for a discussion of incentive problems specific to lending. For reviews of
the literature on incentive compensation in firms see Baker et al. [1988] and Prendergast [1999].
1

lending decisions under exogenously assigned incentives. We pinpoint the relationship be-
tween compensation and lending decisions by exogenously varying the incentive contracts
faced by loan officers and evaluate three classes of incentive schemes [i.] volume incentives
that reward origination, [ii.] low-powered incentives that reward origination conditional on
performanceand[iii.] high-poweredincentivesthatrewardperformanceandpenalizedefault.
While much of the literature on performance-based compensation in banking and finance
has focused on incentives for risk-taking provided to top management,4 this paper explores
the hypothesis, often advanced in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, that non-
equity incentives for loan originators, such as commissions, can play an important role in
determining the fate of a bank’s lending operation.5 Indeed, providing appropriate incentives
to employees at the lower tiers of a commercial bank’s corporate hierarchy is a difficult
problem: their very responsibility is to collect information that the bank cannot otherwise
observe, making monitoring difficult. They enjoy limited liability, and may have different
risk and time preferences than the bank’s shareholders.
The design of our experiment closely matches the loan approval process of low- docu-
mentation loans in an emerging credit market, and has several features that are particularly
well-suited for studying the question at hand. First, while still novel in finance, the use
of randomized experiments has grown rapidly in other areas of economics, in large part
because they allow clear tests of causal relationships. Our unique experimental approach,
which brings professional loan officers with many years of experience in credit assessment
into a controlled laboratory environment, allows us to track aspects of loan officer behavior
that would normally be unobservable to a bank or econometrician and allows for the causal
identification of the impact of monetary incentives on loan officer behavior.
4See Jensen and Murphy [1990] and Murphy [1999] for an overview of this literature.
5Acharya et al. [2013] note that the literature on executive compensation disagrees about the effect of
performance pay on risk-taking and argues that these conflicting results could be due to an omitted factor,
such as the impact of non-executive compensation on risk-taking.
2