NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WAGE ADJUSTMENT IN THE GREAT RECESSION
Michael W. Elsby
Donggyun Shin
Gary Solon
Working Paper 19478
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19478
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2013
The authors are grateful for helpful comments from David Card, Henry Farber, Alexandre Mas, Jennifer
Smith, and participants at the May 2013 NBER conference on labor markets and the Great Recession.
The paper is based partly on data from the New Earnings Survey (Crown copyright 2012) originally
created, funded, and deposited by the Office for National Statistics, and distributed under secure access
by the UK Data Archive. Neither the Office for National Statistics nor the UK Data Archive bears
responsibility for the accuracy, comprehensiveness, analysis, or interpretation of these data. Crown
copyright material is reproduced with the permission of the Controller of HMSO and the Queen’s
Printer for Scotland. Elsby gratefully acknowledges funding from the Philip Leverhulme Prize granted
by the Leverhulme Trust. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research, or the Leverhulme Trust.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Michael W. Elsby, Donggyun Shin, and Gary Solon. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Wage Adjustment in the Great Recession
Michael W. Elsby, Donggyun Shin, and Gary Solon
NBER Working Paper No. 19478
September 2013
JEL No. E24,E32,J3,J64
ABSTRACT
Using 1979-2011 Current Population Survey data for the United States and 1975-2011 New Earnings
Survey data for Great Britain, we study wage behavior in both countries, with particular attention to
the Great Recession. Real wages are procyclical in both countries, but the procyclicality of real wages
varies across recessions, and does so differently between the two countries. U.S. distributions of year-to-year
nominal wage change show many workers reporting zero change (suggesting wage stickiness) and
many reporting nominal reductions (suggesting wage flexibility), but both findings could be distorted
by reporting error. The British data, which are based on employers’ payroll records, show much lower
prevalence of zero wage change, but still show surprisingly frequent nominal wage cuts. The complex
constellation of empirical regularities defies explanation by simple theories.
Michael W. Elsby Gary Solon
University of Edinburgh Department of Economics
School of Economics Michigan State University
31 Buccleuch Place East Lansing, MI 48824-1038
Edinburgh and NBER
EH8 9JT solon@msu.edu
United Kingdom
Mike.Elsby@ed.ac.uk
Donggyun Shin
Department of Economics
Kyung Hee University
Seoul, Republic of Korea
dgshin@khu.ac.kr

Wage Adjustment in the Great Recession
As of a quarter-century ago, the conventional wisdom among macroeconomists was that
real wage rates are more or less non-cyclical, and many macroeconomic models described wage
inflexibility as a key contributor to cyclical unemployment. Since then, however, numerous
empirical studies based on microdata for workers have found that real wages are substantially
procyclical.1 This procyclicality had been obscured in aggregate wage statistics, which tend to
give more weight to low-skill workers during expansions than during recessions. As
summarized by Martins, Solon, and Thomas (2012), the microdata-based literature has found
that the cyclical elasticity of real wages is similar to that of employment.
Most of the U.S. microdata-based literature, however, is based on data extending no later
than the early 1990s. An obvious question is what the cyclical wage patterns have been more
recently. Most importantly, how have wages behaved during the Great Recession? Is there
reason to think that wages responded especially sluggishly during this downturn and that
stickiness of wages contributed to the Great Recession’s high unemployment?2
This article addresses these questions with data for both the United States and Great
Britain. Section I uses March Current Population Survey data to trace U.S. real wage behavior
over the 1979-2011 period. Section II uses additional Current Population Survey data to explore
the role of inflation and nominal wage stickiness. Section III presents parallel analyses for Great
Britain based on data from the New Earnings Survey. Section IV summarizes and discusses our
findings.
I. Real Wages in the United States, 1979-2011
Our U.S. analyses of real wages are based on the annual March Current Population
Surveys (CPS). Every March CPS asks sample members about their annual earnings and
1 Examples from the U.S. literature are Stockman (1983), Bils (1985), Solon, Barsky, and Parker (1994), Devereux
(2001), Bowlus, Liu, and Robinson (2002), and Shin and Solon (2007). Similar studies for other countries include
Devereux and Hart (2006) for Great Britain; Carneiro, Guimarães, and Portugal (2012) and Martins, Solon, and
Thomas (2012) for Portugal; and Shin (2012) for Korea.
2 For example, in a brief Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco note entitled “Why Has Wage Growth Stayed
Strong?” Daly, Hobijn, and Lucking (2012) concluded from aggregate wage data that “Real wage growth ... has held
up surprisingly well in the recent recession and recovery,” and also found that, “During the recent recession and
recovery, the run-up in the fraction of workers subject to downward nominal wage rigidity has been especially
large…. This may partly explain why real wage growth has not significantly declined since the onset of the
recession in December 2007 and why hiring has been slow since the start of the recovery in mid-2009.”
1

employment in the preceding calendar year, so we can measure each worker’s hourly wage in the
preceding year as the ratio of annual earnings to annual hours of work. Relative to alternative
U.S. data sets, the March CPS has three advantages. First, because the Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS) generates the public use files quickly, we have access to recent data, up through
the March 2012 CPS data for 2011 (and dating back in a comparable way to 1979). We
therefore have good data for the Great Recession and its immediate aftermath, as well as for
earlier recessions, including the similarly severe recession of the early 1980s. Second, the CPS
provides large nationally representative samples. Our main analyses of real wages are based on
well over 20,000 workers of each gender every year.
Third, access to the microdata goes a considerable way towards reducing the
composition-bias issues associated with aggregate data such as the average hourly earnings series
from the BLS employer survey. As discussed by Solon, Barsky, and Parker (1994) and others,
such aggregate series are constructed as hours-weighted averages of workers’ wages, so workers
with more employment get greater weight in the statistics. It is well documented that low-skill
workers’ employment is especially sensitive to cyclical fluctuations, so low-skill workers get less
weight in aggregate wage statistics during recessions than they do during expansions. This
imparts a countercyclical bias in aggregate wage statistics, making workers’ real wage
opportunities appear less procyclical than they really are. Thanks to access to the CPS
microdata, we can obtain a reliable hourly wage variable for every worker with substantial
employment sometime during the calendar year, and we can weight those workers equally
instead of weighting them by their annual hours. Unfortunately, though, we cannot avoid
composition bias entirely. We cannot measure the wage opportunities of individuals with no
work during the calendar year (and, as we will discuss in a moment, for data reliability reasons
we also will exclude individuals with very few work hours over the calendar year). We will
achieve a partial correction of the resulting composition bias by regression-adjusting our annual
wage measures for some observable characteristics (education, potential work experience, and
race) of the worker samples. Finally, for workers employed for only part of the year, we
measure their wages when they were employed, but we do not observe their wage opportunities
during the time they were not employed. Of course, this is an insoluble problem in every data
set.
2