NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOUSES AS ATMS? MORTGAGE REFINANCING AND MACROECONOMIC
UNCERTAINTY
Hui Chen
Michael Michaux
Nikolai Roussanov
Working Paper 19421
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19421
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2013
We gratefully acknowledge comments and suggestions by Andy Abel, Rui Albuquerque, Fernando
Alvarez, Nick Bloom, Paco Buera, John Campbell, Chris Carroll, Dean Corbae, John Driscoll, Joao
Gomes, Lars Hansen, Erik Hurst, Urban Jermann, Greg Kaplan, Ralph Koijen, Dirk Krueger, David
Laibson, Francis Longstaff, Debbie Lucas, Hanno Lustig, Rajnish Mehra, Dimitris Papanikolaou,
Jonathan(cid:3)Parker, Monika Piazzesi, Vincenzo Quadrini, Victor Rios-Rull, Tom Sargent, Martin
Schneider,(cid:3)Antoinette(cid:3)Schoar, Amit Seru, Todd Sinai, Nick Souleles, Kjetil Storesletten, Harald
Uhlig, Luis Viceira, Gianluca(cid:3)Violante, Jessica Wachter, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, Pierre-Olivier
Weill, Toni Whited, Randy Wright,(cid:3)Amir Yaron, and seminar participants at the AEA, ASU Sonoran
Winter Finance conference, CFEA,(cid:3)Columbia, Econometric Society, Federal Reserve Board, Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, FIRS,(cid:3)NBER Summer Institute, SED, SITE, 2012 Summer Real Estate
Symposium, Tepper/LAEF Conference,(cid:3)UC Berkeley, USC, UCLA-USC Finance Day, UC San Diego,
University of Hawaii, University of Virginia, and Wharton. Roussanov acknowledges support from
the Rodney White Center for Financial Research and the Cynthia and Bennett Golub Endowed Faculty
Scholarship at Wharton. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Hui Chen, Michael Michaux, and Nikolai Roussanov. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Houses as ATMs? Mortgage Refinancing and Macroeconomic Uncertainty
Hui Chen, Michael Michaux, and Nikolai Roussanov
NBER Working Paper No. 19421
September 2013
JEL No. E21,E44,G21
ABSTRACT
We estimate a structural model of household liquidity management in the presence of long-term
mortgages.(cid:3)Households face counter-cyclical idiosyncratic labor income uncertainty and borrowing
constraints,(cid:3)which affect optimal choices of leverage, precautionary saving in liquid assets and
illiquid home equity, debt repayment, mortgage refinancing, and default. Taking the observed
historical path of house prices, aggregate income, and interest rates as given, the model quantitatively
accounts for the run-up in household debt and consumption boom prior to the financial crisis, their
subsequent collapse, and mild recovery following the Great Recession, especially among the most
constrained households.
Hui Chen (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)Nikolai Roussanov
MIT Sloan School of Management (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)University of Pennsylvania
100 Main Street, E62-637 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)Wharton School, Finance Department
Cambridge, MA 02142 (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)2400 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
and NBER (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)3620 Locust Walk
huichen@mit.edu (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)and NBER
Michael Michaux (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)nroussan@wharton.upenn.edu
Department of Finance and Business Economics
Marshall School of Business,
University of Southern California,
3670 Trousdale Parkway, BRI-308,
Los Angeles, CA 90089
michaux@marshall.usc.edu

1 Introduction
We show that a rational model of home equity-based borrowing by liquidity-constrained
households can quantitatively account for the empirical patterns in household leverage and
consumption over the last decade. In the aggregate, taking the observed historical path of
house prices, aggregate household income, and interest rates as exogenously given, our model
reproduces both the dramatic run-up in the housing debt over the period 2000-2006, and
the sharp contraction in consumption that followed. In the cross section, the interaction of
idiosyncraticlaborincomeshockswithliquidityconstraints,absentanyexanteheterogeneity,
generates wide dispersion in liquid assets, debt holdings, and the ability of households to
refinance their mortgages. This dispersion implies diverging paths of consumption following
the Great Recession for households with different boom-time leverage.
Both the origins of the recent financial crisis and the severity of the Great Recession are
often attributed to the increase in consumer indebtedness during the period of house price
run-up in mid-2000s and the subsequent deterioration of household balance sheets with the
sharp decline in house prices (e.g., Dynan (2012), Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013)). There is
less consensus on the structural forces driving both the borrowing boom and the consump-
tion slump that followed. In particular, the expansion of household leverage and growth
of consumer expenditures financed with extracted home equity over the period of house
price boom as documented by Mian and Sufi (2010) is consistent with liquidity-constrained
households taking advantage of relaxed housing collateral constraints. These facts are also
qualitatively consistent with alternative explanations featuring self-control problems on the
part of consumers (e.g., Laibson (1997)), irrationally optimistic expectations about future
income and house prices, and/or moral hazard on the part of mortgage originators (e.g.,
Keys, Mukherjee, Seru, and Vig (2010)).
In order to provide a benchmark for evaluating the alternative explanations of the ob-
served household behavior both prior to the recent financial crisis and during the Great
Recession, we build a quantitative framework of the consumption, saving, and mortgage
financing decisions of households who are subject to idiosyncratic labor income risk and
liquidity constraints. Our analysis focuses on households’ optimal choices of leverage, pre-
1

cautionary savings in liquid assets and illiquid home equity, as well as the dynamic decisions
in debt repayment, mortgage refinancing, cash-out, and default. The model captures the
relevant frictions impacting the households’ ability to smooth consumption over time and
across states of nature when borrowing collateralized with housing wealth is the main source
of consumer credit. We estimate the structural parameters of the model by targeting the key
moments of household consumption, asset and debt holdings, and the aggregate dynamics
of mortgage refinancing and equity extraction in relation to macroeconomic conditions.
Whilemuchoftheexistingliteraturetreatsmortgagerefinancingandhome-equity-backed
borrowinginisolation, ouranalysisindicatesthatanintegratedapproachisimportantforun-
derstanding both. Specifically, the decision to refinance trades off the benefits of refinancing,
including lower interest rates and/or higher liquidity, against the substantial costs of origi-
nating a new loan, both financial and non-pecuniary. Our model also incorporates two sets
of realistic borrowing constraints, the loan-to-value (LTV) constraint and the loan-to-income
(LTI) constraint, which require that the refinanced loan amount is not too large relative to
current house value and household income, respectively. Another important feature of our
model is the counter-cyclical volatility of idiosyncratic labor income growth, documented by
Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2004) (see also Meghir and Pistaferri (2004)). This prop-
erty of the labor income process implies that a macroeconomic downturn not only can make
more households become liquidity constrained, but also make households more concerned
about the increased uncertainty of future income.
Together, these ingredients generate a set of new predictions about household refinanc-
ing and consumption decisions. First, because households do not have access to complete
financial markets, the embedded options to default, prepay, or refinance the mortgage can
no longer be analyzed in the standard option-pricing framework. In particular, interest rates
are not the only consideration in refinancing. The ability to convert some of the home equity
into liquid assets can make refinancing more attractive even when the costs of borrowing are
higher than before, a puzzle for traditional models that consider lowering the interest rate
as the only reason to refinance a fixed rate mortgage.1
1Hurst and Stafford (2004) first pointed out this possibility and supported it with empirical evidence
using household-level data from an earlier time period.
2