NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK FAILURES AND OUTPUT DURING THE GREAT DEPRESSION
Jeffrey A. Miron
Natalia Rigol
Working Paper 19418
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19418
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2013
We thank Jaron Cordero, Linxi Wu, and Stephanie Hurder for superb research assistance. John Lapp,
Randall Parker, Greg Mankiw, Tom Sargent, Kate Waldock and participants at the Wake Forest conference
“The Federal Reserve Was a Bad Idea” provided helpful comments on an earlier draft. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Jeffrey A. Miron and Natalia Rigol. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Bank Failures and Output During the Great Depression
Jeffrey A. Miron and Natalia Rigol
NBER Working Paper No. 19418
September 2013
JEL No. E32
ABSTRACT
In response to the Financial Crisis of 2008, macroeconomic policymakers employed a range of tools
designed to prevent failures of large, complex financial institutions (“banks”). The Treasury and the
Fed justified these actions by arguing that bank failures exacerbate output declines, rather than just
reflecting output losses that have already occurred. This view is consistent with economic models
based on credit market imperfections, but it is an empirical question as to whether the feedback from
failures to output losses is substantial.
This paper examines the relation between bank failures and output by re-considering Bernanke’s (1983)
analysis of the Great Depression. We find little indication that bank failures exerted a substantial or
sustained impact on output during this period.
Jeffrey A. Miron
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
miron@fas.harvard.edu
Natalia Rigol
Department of Economics
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
nrigol@MIT.EDU

I. Introduction
In response to the Financial Crisis of 2008, macroeconomic policymakers employed several tools
designed to prevent the failure of large and complex financial institutions (“banks”).1 Most importantly,
the Treasury injected capital directly into banks, and the Fed expanded its balance sheet by purchasing
roughly $1.3 trillion in mortgage-backed securities (Fuster and Willen 2010). The Federal Housing
Finance Agency also placed Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac into conservatorship, and the Treasury supplied
$100 billion of capital to each agency.
The Treasury and the Fed justified these actions by appealing to the claim that bank failures
contribute to output declines, rather than just reflecting output losses that have already occurred. This
proposition stems from theoretical perspectives (e.g., Bernanke and Gertler 1985) and has been supported
by certain empirical work (e.g., Bernanke 1983, Bernanke and James 1991). Economists as a group
supported the Fed and Treasury policies, mainly from concern that widespread bank failures would
exacerbate the recession. A few even speculated that failure to support banks would risk another Great
Depression.
Yet government aid to failing banks has costs, whether or not that support calms recessions. Most
importantly, moral hazard generated by the prospect of bailouts can distort lending and investment
decisions toward excessively risky projects or sectors. More broadly, the prospect of bailouts might
increase uncertainty, delay appropriate adjustments as banks wait for policymakers to decide whether and
whom to bail out, generate strategic actions by banks seeking to profit from bailouts, or reward politically
connected banks rather than systemically crucial ones.
In assessing the wisdom of bailouts, therefore, it is important to know whether the feedback from
bank failures to output is substantial or modest. If failures have a large impact on output, bailouts are
potentially desirable even if they generate their own costs. If failures have a modest impact on output, the
case for bailouts is less convincing.
1 Some of the financial institutions targeted by these actions were not banks per se, but we use the term
bank throughout for ease of presentation.
2

This paper examines evidence on the relation between bank failures and output by reconsidering
the findings in Bernanke (1983). Bernanke (1983) appears to show that bank failures had a substantial
impact on output during the Great Depression. We argue that the data provide little support for this
proposition. Our conclusion follows, in part, because determining whether failures cause or reflect output
losses is difficult. But the conclusion also follows because even under the most generous identifying
assumption, the impact of bank failures during the Great Depression does not appear to have been large or
persistent.
II: Bank Failures and Output During the Great Depression
In attempting to understand the Great Depression, Bernanke (1983) argues that the Friedman and
Schwartz (1963) monetary explanation is incomplete because theoretical models of money cannot easily
explain the protracted non-neutrality necessary to account for the length of the downturn from 1929-1933.
Further, Bernanke suggests that the declines in money were not sufficient to explain the magnitude of the
fall in output over the same period.
Bernanke therefore proposes that bank failures had a non-monetary effect on the real economy
through credit rationing since failures made credit scarcer for borrowing firms. In his view, banks act as
low-cost credit intermediaries who collect funds from lenders and evaluate the risk of borrowers. The
non-trivial and costly-to-replicate service that the banking system provides is to differentiate between
good and bad borrowers. Bank failures therefore decrease intermediation capital, raise the cost of loans,
and reduce output because alternative sources of credit intermediation cannot arise quickly or in sufficient
quantity after banks fail.2
Bernanke’s Empirical Strategy
To quantify the importance of monetary versus non-monetary factors in generating the output
declines of 1929-33, Bernanke estimates the equation
2 Following Fisher (1933), Bernanke also argues that debt deflation in the 1930s decreased the net worth
of both borrowers and banks, destroying intermediaries and available credit.
3