NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO MANAGERS DO GOOD WITH OTHER PEOPLE'S MONEY?
Ing-Haw Cheng
Harrison Hong
Kelly Shue
Working Paper 19432
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19432
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2013
Hong acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation through grant SES-0850404.
We(cid:3)thank Jeremy Stein, Vicente Cuñat, Uday Rajan, E. Han Kim, Amy Dittmar, Nadja Guenster
and seminar(cid:3)participants at the Swedish Institute for Financial Research, St. Gallen, the Berkeley-
ECGI Conference(cid:3)on CSR, U of Texas at Dallas, 2013 Meetings of the American Finance Association,
2013 UC Davis-CalPERS(cid:3)Sustainability Symposium and Gamma Foundation Conference for helpful
comments. Online appendix(cid:3)available at http://www.dartmouth.edu/~icheng/. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors(cid:3)and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Ing-Haw Cheng, Harrison Hong, and Kelly Shue. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Managers Do Good with Other People's Money?
Ing-Haw Cheng, Harrison Hong, and Kelly Shue
NBER Working Paper No. 19432
September 2013
JEL No. D03,G02,G10,G3,G39
ABSTRACT
We find support for two key predictions of an agency theory of unproductive corporate social
responsibility. First, increasing managerial ownership decreases measures of firm goodness. We
use the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut to increase after-tax insider ownership. Firms with moderate levels
of insider ownership cut goodness by more than firms with low levels (where the tax cut has no
effect) and high levels (where agency is less of an issue). Second, increasing monitoring reduces
corporate goodness. A regression discontinuity design of close votes around the 50% cut-off finds
that passage of shareholder governance proposals leads to slower growth in goodness.
Ing-Haw Cheng Kelly Shue
100 Tuck Hall University of Chicago
Tuck School of Business Booth School of Business
Dartmouth College 5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Hanover, NH 03755 Chicago, IL 60637
ing-haw.cheng@tuck.dartmouth.edu kelly.shue@chicagobooth.edu
Harrison Hong
Department of Economics
Princeton University
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
hhong@princeton.edu
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19432

1. Introduction
Milton Friedman (1970), in a biting op-ed for the New York Times, declared that the only social
responsibility of corporations is to make money. His view regarding spending on corporate
social responsibility (CSR) is one of agency problems, managerial perks and pet projects. In
other words, managers are doing good with other people’s money. A contrasting popular
view of the business case for corporate goodness is that firms do well by doing good. Firm
goodness spending generates a halo effect that increases firm profits and insulates firms from
risks associated with litigation or regulation.1
Despite the many papers that have been written on this topic, it is difficult to draw causal
conclusions regarding the motives for corporate goodness spending because of a lack of a clear
identification strategy. Notably, the large literature on “doing well by doing good” explores
the correlation between firm performance and CSR and concludes in favor of the profit thesis.
Evidence from experiments and field studies also suggest that there are potential halo effects
from being charitable or good (see, e.g., Elfenbein, Fisman, and McManus, 2012; List, 2006).
However, altruistic managers may invest in CSR to protect stakeholders such as employees or
the broader community, in ways that do not directly contribute to shareholder wealth. As
Tirole (2001) points out, a stakeholder instead of shareholder maximization paradigm can very
quickly lead to mission creep and agency perils.
Indeed, recent research on the thesis of doing well by doing good finds that market reactions
to increased goodness announcements are mixed, consistent with the idea that some forms of
goodness may be value destroying (Kruger, 2013). Even more troubling, using financial shocks
such as the bursting of the Internet bubble and the credit crisis of 2007, Hong, Kubik, and
Scheinkman (2011) show that the correlation between performance and goodness is related to
omitted variables bias in the form of heterogeneity in firm financial constraints.
1Thethesisof“doingwellbydoinggood” haslongbeenadvancedinthemanagementliteratureandisreviewed
in Benabou and Tirole (2010) and Heal (2005). A number of theories implicitly rely on the idea that firms are
well-positionedtodeliverwarm-glowfeelings(Becker,1974;Andreoni,1989)toconsumers. Forinstance,Besley
and Ghatak (2005) models strategic complementarities involving goodness in the production function. Baron
(2001)modelsstrategicdeterrenceofregulationthroughtheuseofcorporategoodness. Goodnessmayalsopay
by improving employee efficiency, reducing conflicts among stakeholders, mitigating litigation risk, deterring
potential regulation, signaling product quality, and improving investor and consumer relations by preventing
product or capital market boycotts by socially responsible consumers or investors.
1

Yet, the stakes in this debate have never been higher. Anecdotal evidence suggests that
some firms, especially large corporations, invest hundreds of millions of dollars annually on
energy conservation projects, employee and community development programs, or other al-
truistic endeavors.2 Many institutional investors are increasingly adopting socially responsible
factors, also known as “environmental, social and governance” (ESG) factors, in their portfolio
choices. For example, the United Nations Principles of Responsible Investing (UNPRI) has
institutions that manage around 1.5 trillion dollars globally as signatories. The ESG movement
tends to make the argument for socially responsible investing on the basis of a combination of
the business case for corporate goodness and moral principles.
In this paper, we provide a first attempt to identify whether there is an agency motive for
CSR. Namely, we test the two key predictions of an agency theory in which managers engage in
unproductiveCSRasawaytoenjoyprivatebenefits. Thesetwokeypredictionstypicallyemerge
from most variants of agency models in which low managerial ownership stakes and imperfect
monitoring lead to managers who maximize a combination of private benefits and firm profits.
Our novel perspective here is that agency problems need not simply manifest themselves as
managerial selfish perks, as has traditionally been framed since Jensen and Meckling (1976),
butalsoasmanagerialaltruismorsocialpreferences(see,e.g.,FehrandSchimdt,1999;Charness
and Rabin, 2002).
The first and most basic prediction is that increasing the ownership stakes of a manager
leads to a reduction in firm goodness. Since managerial ownership stakes regulate the degree of
agency conflicts between the manager and shareholders, these models predict that larger stakes
lead to less of an agency conflict and lower unproductive CSR spending. The second prediction
is that an increase in monitoring leads to less firm goodness. Monitoring is costly and is a
substitute for larger managerial ownership stakes, so increasing monitoring through improved
governance yields the same comparative statics as increasing managerial stakes.
We measure corporate social responsibility using the most comprehensive scores in the
literature, the Kinder, Lydenberg and Domini (KLD) scores of CSR. KLD scores are developed
2Hong, Kubik, and Scheinkman (2011) provide some figures, including $100 million for global education
programs and energy conservation by Intel, $160 million to community and employee philanthropic programs
andearmarkedbillionsmoreforthedevelopmentofeco-friendlyproductsbyGeneralElectric, andGoogle’s1%
program to invest 1% of its profits in philanthropic and non-profit interests. In addition, firms may switch to
greener and more costly production processes or voluntarily choose to pay living wages to employees.
2