NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW CONSUMER PRICE SUBSIDIES AFFECT NUTRITION
Neeraj Kaushal
Felix Muchomba
Working Paper 19404
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19404
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2013
The authors thank Michael Grossman and Robert Kaestner for their insightful comments on the paper.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Neeraj Kaushal and Felix Muchomba. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

How Consumer Price Subsidies affect Nutrition
Neeraj Kaushal and Felix Muchomba
NBER Working Paper No. 19404
September 2013, Revised November 2013
JEL No. I10,I32,I38
ABSTRACT
We study the effect on nutrition of an exogenous increase in food grain subsidy in rural India resulting
from a program targeting the poor. Our analysis suggests that increase in income resulting from the
food price subsidy changed consumption patterns in favor of the subsidized grains and certain more
expensive sources of calorie, and lowered consumption of coarse grains that are cheaper, yet taste-wise,
inferior sources of nutrition, but had no effect on calorie, protein and fat intake in poor households.
Further, our analysis shows that households allocated some of the increase in income from food price
subsidy to expenditures on non-food items. Estimates of the price effect of food price subsidy on the
three measures of nutrition are also negligible. We find evidence that the decline in the price of wheat
and rice, changed consumption patterns toward increased consumption of wheat and rice and lower
consumption of coarse grains, the unsubsidized staple food. Our analysis thus suggests that food price
subsidies are likely to affect agriculture markets without impacting nutrition.
Neeraj Kaushal
Columbia University
School of Social Work
1255 Amsterdam Avenue
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
nk464@columbia.edu
Felix Muchomba
Columbia University
1255 Amsterdam Ave
New York, NY 10027
fmm2116@columbia.edu

Introduction
There is a longstanding debate on the extent to which nutrition among the poor in
developing countries improves with income. Conventional wisdom is that higher income would
solve the problem of undernourishment. Empirical studies, however, provide mixed evidence
with calorie-income elasticities ranging from 0.01 to 0.56.1 The evidence is also mixed from
research on the effect of food price subsidy programs on nutrition.2 A key concern with many of
these studies is that income and price variation are not exogenous. In a randomized experiment
conducted in two Chinese provinces, Jensen and Miller (2011) find no evidence that subsidies
improved nutrition, and some evidence of a substitution away from the subsidized staple food
towards foods that are expensive sources of nutrition.3 The subsidy recipients, in that study, were
aware that the subsidy would last only six months. The impact of a longer-term food price
subsidy program may differ from that of a short-term experiment where the recipients know that
the benefit is temporary.
In this paper, we study the effect of an exogenous increase in food price subsidy to poor
families resulting from the introduction in 1997 and expansion in 2002 of a targeted food price
subsidy program in India called the Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS). The Indian
government issued ration cards, called BPL cards, to households with incomes below the official
poverty threshold, which could be used to purchase at approximately a third of the market price
1 Studies that have estimated high elasticities of calorie consumption to income include: Ravallion (1990); Strauss
and Thomas (1989); Subramanian and Deaton (1996) ; and studies that have estimated close to zero elasticities
include: Behrman and Deolalikar (1987); Bouis and Haddad (1992); Bouis (1994); also see Ogundari and Abdulai
(2013) for more recent studies.
2 There is a large literature on the nutritional impact of food prices in developing countries with mixed results (Ecker
and Qaim, 2011, Behrman et al., 1988, Guo et al., 1999, Shimokawa, 2010).
3 Shimokawa (2010), on the other hand, finds that response to food price subsidies in China is asymmetric:
introduction of subsidies improves nutrition, but their disruption has an insignificant effect.
3

10 kg of rice or wheat per household per month - an amount that was raised to 35 kg in 2002.4
We use the probability of BPL card ownership as an instrumental variable to predict the food
price subsidy of households and study how the increase in predicted food price subsidy and the
overall subsidy amount resulting from the expansion of TPDS affected the nutritional intake and
consumption patterns of poor families in rural India. The latter allows us to study changes in
consumption patterns underlying the changes in nutritional outcomes.
We take advantage of divergent consumption patterns across districts to stratify the
sample covered by our study into two groups: districts where wheat and rice are the staple food
and districts where coarse grains are the staple food. In districts where wheat and rice are the
staple food, the average monthly household consumption of wheat and rice in the pre-TPDS
period is 35 kg, the PDS purchase limit, or higher. In these districts, TPDS will have a purely
income effect on households receiving the subsidy. In 15 districts, however, the average
consumption of wheat and rice in the pre-TPDS period is 20 kg or less. These are districts where
coarse grains are the staple food, but the price subsidy is provided for wheat and rice. As we
illustrate below, the marginal price of wheat and rice for most households receiving the subsidy
in these districts would be the subsidized price. In the empirical analysis, we first estimate the
effect of total subsidy amount in 66 districts where the average household consumption is 35 kg
or higher in the pre-TPDS period, followed by an analysis of the effect of price subsidy on poor
households in the 15 districts where average combined consumption of wheat and rice is 20 kg or
less in the pre-TPDS period. In the latter analysis, we specifically estimate the effect of the price
4 The government provides rice and wheat at about 50% of the government’s cost of procurement, which is
somewhat higher than the market price. In our data, the price subsidy is on average 36% of the market price.
4