NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES THE FEDERAL RESERVE CARE ABOUT THE REST OF THE WORLD?
Barry Eichengreen
Working Paper 19405
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19405
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2013
Prepared for the NBER Symposium on the First 100 Years of the Federal Reserve, July 10, 2013. I
thank Christina, David Romer, and the editors of this journal for comments and Chris Krogslund for
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Barry Eichengreen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Does the Federal Reserve Care About the Rest of the World?
Barry Eichengreen
NBER Working Paper No. 19405
September 2013
JEL No. E4,N1
ABSTRACT
Many economists are accustomed to thinking about Federal Reserve policy in terms of the institution’s
dual mandate, which refers to price stability and high employment, and in which the exchange rate
and other international variables matter only insofar as they influence inflation and the output gap
– which is to say, not very much. This conventional view is heavily shaped by the distinctive circumstances
of the last three decades, when the influence of international considerations on Fed policy has been
limited. I discuss how the Federal Reserve paid significant attention to international considerations
in its first two decades, followed by relative inattention to such factors in the two-plus decades that
followed, then back to renewed attention to international aspects of monetary policy in the 1960s,
before the recent period of benign neglect of the international dimension. This longer perspective
is a reminder that just because the Fed has not attached priority to international aspects of monetary
policy in the recent past is no guarantee that it will not do so in the future.
Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
549 Evans Hall 3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
eichengr@econ.Berkeley.edu

Does the Federal Reserve Care About the Rest of the World?1
Barry Eichengreen
Many economists are accustomed to thinking about Federal Reserve policy in terms of
the institution’s “dual mandate,” which refers to price stability and high employment, and in
which the exchange rate and other international variables matter only insofar as they influence
inflation and the output gap – which is to say, not very much.
In fact, this conventional view is heavily shaped by the distinctive and peculiar
circumstances of the last three decades, when the influence of international considerations on
Fed policy has been limited. In this paper, I will discuss how the Federal Reserve paid significant
attention to international considerations in its first two decades, followed by relative inattention
to such factors in the two-plus decades that followed, then back to renewed attention to
international aspects of monetary policy in the 1960s, before the recent period of benign neglect
of the international dimension. This longer perspective is a reminder that just because the Fed
has not attached priority to international aspects of monetary policy in the recent past is no
guarantee that it will not do so in the future. Indeed, I will argue in the conclusion that in the next
few decades, international aspects are likely to play a larger role in Federal Reserve policy-
making.2
International from the Start
The founding of the Federal Reserve in 1913 is commonly portrayed in terms of domestic
financial-stability considerations. Prior to 1914 financial crises were frequent. Interest rates
spiked in the planting and harvest seasons, giving rise to financial stringency and instability.
There was dissatisfaction with how market participants had managed the most recent crisis in
1907. The Fed was therefore created “to furnish an elastic currency…and for other purposes” in
the words of the Federal Reserve Act of 1913. Importantly, the Act did nothing to change the
international dimension of American monetary policy. The dollar was still convertible
exclusively into gold at $20.67 a troy ounce, as it had been since the Gold Standard Act of 1900.
Federal Reserve Banks were now obliged hold gold in the amount of 40 per cent of their notes
(and gold and other eligible assets equal to 35 per cent of deposits and reserves) and to pay out
gold at this price.
But this is only part of the story. Political agreement to create a new central banking
institution required building a coalition. In addition to those desiring a more elastic currency,
there were exporters, importers and financiers interested in establishing a market in dollar-
1 Prepared for the NBER Symposium on the First 100 Years of the Federal Reserve, July 10, 2013. I thank Christina,
David Romer, and the editors of The Journal of Economic Perspectives for comments and Chris Krogslund for
research assistance.
2 The treatment here is necessarily summary in form. For readers interested in additional rigor and detail on the
intersection of international issues and monetary policy, some starting points would be Gali and Gertler (2010),
which is an especially useful compendium of recent scholarship; Friedman and Schwartz’s (1963) Monetary History
of the United States, which touches more than incidentally on the role of international factors in Fed decision
making; and my personal favorite, William Adams Brown’s (1940) The International Gold Standard Reinterpreted,
which devotes successive chapters to the United States and its central bank.
1

denominated trade credits and enhancing the currency’s role as a vehicle for international
investment (Broz 1997). Attaining these goals required creating a central bank to provide liquidity
to international markets. Before World War I, the US dollar and American financial firms played
little role in financing international trade, including even the trade of U.S. importers and
exporters. A U.S. coffee roaster seeking to import beans from Brazil would request a letter of
credit from its bank, and that bank in turn would arrange a letter of credit denominated in pounds
sterling with its London correspondent, because that was the only instrument that the Brazilian
exporter would accept. Taking payment in dollars was unattractive, given the volatility of US
markets. In addition, because US banks were prohibited from branching abroad, exporters to US
markets faced practical difficulties in converting US dollar payments back into their local
currencies.
Thus, the New York financial community found itself unable to compete with London for
an important source of business. US importers and exporters faced a competitive disadvantage
from having to pay two commissions, one to their local bank and one to its London
correspondent, in order to arrange trade credit. Paul Warburg, the German-born financier who
was heavily involved in drawing up the blueprint that became the Federal Reserve Act, was
familiar from his career in the import-export and banking business in Hamburg and London with
the advantages that European economies derived from possessing local markets “trade
acceptances”--the contemporary name for what we now call trade credits. These are essentially
explicit documented promises by the purchaser of a good produced in another country to pay for
a purchase at a future time.
Agreement to establish the Fed required building an alliance between those with
financial-stability concerns and these other groups seeking the remedy the problems created by
the absence of a trade-acceptance market. The Federal Reserve Act thus authorized U.S. banks to
branch abroad to originate foreign business. And one of the first initiatives of the new central
bank was to take steps to foster a market in acceptances (LaRoche 1993; Eichengreen and Flandreau
2012). A key challenge in creating a new financial market is the problem of developing liquidity.
Without a minimum level of transactions, the market will lack liquidity; conversely, if the market
lacks liquidity no one will transact. This was the chicken-and-egg problem that the Fed, seeking
to foster a market in acceptances, faced in the 1920s. It responded by stepping in as buyer and
liquidity provider of last resort, purchasing US dollar trade acceptances when private demand
was lacking. For much of the 1920s, the Fed it was the dominant purchaser. Its efforts succeeded
in that New York and the dollar matched and in some years surpassed London and sterling as a
source of credit for global trade. This was a startling change from before 1914.
In addition to underscoring the early Fed’s international orientation, this episode had two
further features relevant to modern central banking. First, a policy of direct Federal Reserve
purchases in credit markets with liquidity problems – while a controversial aspect of recent
policy -- is not at all unprecedented. Second, the success of the 1920s was fleeting. When
international trade declined in the 1930s, the market in trade acceptances declined even more
rapidly. The other investors who the Fed had sought to attract by providing liquidity and
stabilizing pricing never entered the market in large numbers. It is tempting to speculate that the
Fed’s overwhelming buy-side dominance crowded out potential entrants. When the central bank
curtailed its involvement in the trade acceptance market the 1930s, at a time when it had bigger
fish to fry, the market collapsed.
2