NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECTS OF MANDATORY TRANSPARENCY IN FINANCIAL MARKET DESIGN:
EVIDENCE FROM THE CORPORATE BOND MARKET
Paul Asquith
Thom Covert
Parag Pathak
Working Paper 19417
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19417
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2013, Revised April 2019
We are grateful to Hank Bessembinder, Edith Hotchkiss, Leonid Kogan, Deborah Lucas, Jun Pan,
and Alp Simsek for discussions, and Ola Persson and FINRA for conversations about the data.
We also thank Jane Choi, Abhishek Dev, Daniel Green, Joseph Shayani, Josh Weiss, and Ahmad
Zia Wahdat for their research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2013 by Paul Asquith, Thom Covert, and Parag Pathak. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effects of Mandatory Transparency in Financial Market Design: Evidence from the Corporate
Bond Market
Paul Asquith, Thom Covert, and Parag Pathak
NBER Working Paper No. 19417
September 2013, Revised April 2019
JEL No. D47,G14,G18,L51
ABSTRACT
In July 2002, FINRA began mandatory dissemination of price and volume information for
corporate bond trades. This paper, using recently released data, measures transparency’s effect on
trading activity and costs for the entire corporate bond market. Even though trading costs decrease
significantly across all types of bonds, trading activity does not increase and, by one measure,
decreases. Transparency affects high-yield bonds differently than investment grade bonds. High-
yield bonds have the largest decrease in trading activity, 71.1%, and in trading costs, 22.9%. High-
yield bonds also disproportionately contribute to the estimated reduction in total trading costs of
$600 million a year.
Paul Asquith Parag Pathak
MIT Sloan School of Management Department of Economics, E52-426
100 Main Street, E62-660 MIT
Cambridge, MA 02142 50 Memorial Drive
and NBER Cambridge, MA 02142
pasquith@mit.edu and NBER
ppathak@mit.edu
Thom Covert
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
thomas.covert@chicagobooth.edu
An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19417

I. Introduction
Many financial markets have recently become subject to new regulations requiring
transparency. This paper studies how transparency affects trading in the US corporate bond market. In
July 2002, FINRA began requiring the timely public dissemination of post-trade price and volume
information for the $4.4 trillion-a-year U.S. corporate bond market through TRACE (FINRA’s Trade
Reporting and Compliance Engine). Dissemination took place in Phases over two-and-a-half years.
Actively traded, investment grade bonds became transparent before thinly traded, high-yield bonds.
TRACE has become the template for increased transparency in other over-the-counter financial
markets.3 The increase in information due to TRACE was so significant that it has been likened to the
early 20th century introduction of stock market tickers for equities and electronic screens for Treasuries
(Vames 2003).
When market participants have timely information about transaction prices and quantities, it
may lower search costs and alter bargaining between customers and dealers. Several models suggest
that post-trade transparency reduces trading costs and improve market performance. In Duffie,
Garleanu, and Pedersen (2005)’s search-and-matching model, bid-ask spreads decrease when investors
have greater bargaining power. In models with information differences, a reduction in information
asymmetries also reduces transaction costs (e.g., Glosten and Milgrom 1985). FINRA’s (then NASD)
stated rationale for TRACE emphasized that more information would level the playing field between
institutional and retail market participants. TRACE proponents anticipated that everyone, including
dealers, would benefit from increased market participation. For instance, SEC commissioner Arthur
Levitt (1999) remarked, “This participation means more trading, more market liquidity, and perhaps
even new business for bond dealers.”
In this paper, we use previously unreleased data to examine the effects of TRACE on trading
activity and costs over all four Phases of its introduction. The new data includes anonymized dealer
identifiers. These identifiers allow us to directly measure trading costs by measuring the cost of round-
trip trades for all bonds. The data also include transaction information on bond trades that were
collected by TRACE, but not publicly disseminated. The non-disseminated trades allow us to exploit
TRACE’s four distinct Phases to estimate difference-in-differences models of TRACE’s effect. This
provides complete coverage across all segments of the bond market for the first time. In addition, our
research design, which exploits the introduction of TRACE in Phases, isolates the effect of transparency
from other elements of market design since bonds continued to be traded over-the-counter in a dealer
market afterwards.
3 Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank) (2010) required that
swaps (including credit default swaps, interest rate swaps, collateralized debt obligations, and other derivatives)
adopt TRACE-like post-trade transparency beginning in 2011. In addition, FINRA has expanded TRACE to several
other asset classes, including Agency-Backed Securities, Asset-Backed Securities, and 144a bonds. TRACE was
expanded in March 2010 to include Agency-Backed Securities and in May 2011 to include Asset-Backed Securities.
FINRA started publicly disseminating 144A transactions on June 30, 2014. European MiFID II/R regulations mimic
TRACE for European corporate bonds and were implemented starting January 3, 2018.
1

Bonds differ substantially between the Phases as does trading activity and trading costs. For
example, bonds in the last Phase (3B) are far more likely to be lower rated high yield bonds than bonds
in the first two Phases (1 and 2), which are all investment grade. In addition, bonds in Phase 3B trade
less frequently than bonds in Phases 1, 2, and 3A. At the same time, Phase 3B bonds have the largest
average trade size and the highest trading-cost per round-trip trade.
These differences in bonds across Phases allow us to show that TRACE has significantly different
effects on the investment-grade and high-yield segments of the bond market. Using a difference-in-
differences methodology, we find that TRACE results in an 11.7% reduction in the number of trades
overall. 4 This result is driven by Phase 3B bonds. TRACE significantly reduces the number of Phase 3B
trades by 71.1% from the mean number of trades prior to dissemination.5 These findings are robust
across variations of our difference-in-differences research design.
TRACE does not significantly change trading volume for any Phase, however. Even though the
number of trades for Phase 3B bonds decrease, TRACE increases the average trade size for Phase 3B
bonds significantly increases by 4.3% or $50,101. Moreover, the reduction in the number of trades in
Phase 3B is driven by trades less than 100,000. These are exactly the small retail trades that proponents
of TRACE predicted would increase the most, yet the data show that they decrease the most.
There is no effect on trading volume even though TRACE reduces round-trip trading costs
significantly in each Phase. A round-trip trade is one where a given quantity of a bond is bought and sold
by the same dealer within a certain amount of time. There is a reduction in round-trip trading costs,
both by trade and by bond traded for each Phase. TRACE reduces round-trip trading costs across all
Phases by 18.5% per round-trip trade and 4.9% per round-trip bond traded. The effects on trading costs
are largest, at 22.9% per round-trip trade and 10.9% per round-trip bond traded, for Phase 3B bonds.
These significant effects are present even though Phase 3B occurs more than two-and-a-half years
following the introduction of transparency in segment of the bond market.
We also investigate differences between dealer and customer trading. We divide round-trip
trades between those with a customer on both ends and a dealer in between (“CDC”), which we refer to
as customer round trips, and those with no customers (“DDD”), which we refer to as dealer round trips.
The customer trading cost per round-trip trade is larger than for dealers at $2,562 for CDCs versus
$1,035 for DDDs. This fact is consistent with dealers having market power or more information than
customers. TRACE has the largest negative effect on customer round-trip trades, and reduces the
dealer cost advantage, but it does not eliminate it. There is a significant reduction in trading cost per
round-trip trade of $454 for CDCs and a $225 for DDDs. On a percentage basis, however, these effects
are similar, showing that TRACE does not level the playing field between customers and dealers.
4 Since there is no systematic data on corporate bond trading prior to TRACE’s introduction, we cannot use our
research design to study Phase 1. Following Bessembinder, et. al. (2005), we use data from the National
Association of Insurance Commissioners together with our difference-in-differences research design to measure
Phase 1 effects on trading activity and costs. Appendix A details these results.
2