NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COMPENSATION MATTERS:
INCENTIVES FOR MULTITASKING IN A LAW FIRM
Ann Bartel
Brianna Cardiff-Hicks
Kathryn Shaw
Working Paper 19412
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19412
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2013
The authors acknowledge helpful comments from participants at the Columbia Business School
Microeconomics Faculty Lunch, the Trans-Pacific Labor Seminar and the Association for Private
Enterprise Education Annual Conference. All remaining errors are their own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Ann Bartel, Brianna Cardiff-Hicks, and Kathryn Shaw. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Compensation Matters: Incentives for Multitasking in a Law Firm
Ann Bartel, Brianna Cardiff-Hicks, and Kathryn Shaw
NBER Working Paper No. 19412
September 2013
JEL No. J33,L23,L84
ABSTRACT
Due to the limited availability of firm-level compensation data, there is little empirical evidence on
the impact of compensation plans on personal productivity. We study an international law firm that
moves from high-powered individual incentives towards incentives for “leadership" activities that
contribute to the firm's long run profitability. The effect of this change on the task allocation of the
firm's team leaders is large and robust; team leaders increase their non-billable hours and shift billable
hours to team members. Although the motivation for the change in the compensation plan was the
multitasking problem, this change also impacted the way tasks were allocated within each team, resulting
in greater teamwork.
Ann Bartel Kathryn Shaw
Graduate School of Business Graduate School of Business
Columbia University Stanford University
3022 Broadway, 623 Uris Hall Stanford, CA 94305-5015
New York, NY 10027 and NBER
and NBER kathryns@gsb.stanford.edu
apb2@columbia.edu
Brianna Cardiff-Hicks
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
bcardiff@stanford.edu

Compensation Matters:
Incentives for Multitasking in a Law Firm
Ann Bartel∗, Brianna Cardiff-Hicks†and Kathryn Shaw‡§
August 23, 2013
Abstract
Due to the limited availability of firm-level compensation data, there is little empirical evidence on the
impact of compensation plans on personal productivity. We study an international law firm that moves
from high-powered individual incentives towards incentives for “leadership” activities that contribute to the
firm’s long run profitability. The effect of this change on the task allocation of the firm’s team leaders is
large and robust; team leaders increase their non-billable hours and shift billable hours to team members.
Althoughthemotivationforthechangeinthecompensationplanwasthemultitaskingproblem,thischange
also impacted the way tasks were allocated within each team, resulting in greater teamwork.
1 Introduction
Firmsfacethedifficulttaskofaligningtheiremployees’interestswiththelongrungoalsofthe
firm. A multitasking problem can arise if measured individual performance omits important
contributions to the firm that are essential for long term profitability. If a firm can measure
individual performance, pay for such performance will raise productivity (Lazear, 2000).
But pay based on individual productivity alone is only desirable if other activities cannot be
measuredordonotcontributetothelongrunprofitabilityofthefirm. Whileeconomistshave
∗ColumbiaBusinessSchoolandNBER
†StanfordGSB
‡StanfordGSBandNBER
§The authors acknowledge helpful comments from participants at the Columbia Business School Microeconomics Faculty
Lunch,theTrans-PacificLaborSeminarandtheAssociationforPrivateEnterpriseEducationAnnualConference. Allremaining
errorsaretheirown.
1

built models of optimal compensation plans,1 there is a lack of extensive empirical evidence
on how a variety of typical compensation plans actually alter an employee’s allocation of
time across competing tasks.2 Data on compensation practices and productivity are often
not available within firms; even more rare is an experiment which enables the researcher to
precisely measure the impact of a change in the compensation plan on productivity.
We study the impact on task allocation and personal productivity when a firm moves
from high-powered individual performance incentives towards incentives for enhancing the
long term growth of the firm. The data come from one international law firm headquartered
outside of the U.S., with 431 lawyers, for the time period 2005 to 2010, with 14,430 lawyer-
month observations. The firm is continuously organized into teams, having 177 teams over
this time period; each team is headed by a team leader (who is a senior lawyer or partner)
and has, on average, an additional two to seven members.
A new compensation plan was implemented to encourage team leaders to take a long term
view of the firm. This was in response to difficulties in getting team leaders to spend time on
activities that benefitted the firm but took time away from the leaders’ billable hours. Both
individual output and these other activities were valuable to the firm, but the firm’s original
compensation plan tied wages to personal productivity with little or no reward for leadership
activities that would enable the firm to increase its long run profitability. Since individual
outputandleadershipactivitieswerebothvaluabletothefirm,thecompensationplanneeded
to balance the tradeoff between the two. In order to do this, the firm reduced the commission
that the leader received for billable hours and introduced a bonus that included objective
and subjective metrics that measured a variety of leadership activities. The activities on
which the bonus was based were: setting the future direction of the firm and enhancing its
reputation (done in part through client selection, firm meetings, conference presentations,
and writing newspaper articles), enhancing long run commercial success (via cross-selling
1SeeLazear(1986);HolmstromandMilgrom(1991);Gibbons(1998);Prendergast(2009)formodelsofoptimalcompensation
designinthepresenceofmultitasking.
2Forsummariesoftheempiricalliterature,seeLazear(1999),LazearandOyer(2012),LazearandShaw(2007),Ichniowski
andShaw(2003,2012),andBloomandVanReenen(2011).
2