NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INCENTIVES, SELECTION, AND TEACHER PERFORMANCE:
EVIDENCE FROM IMPACT
Thomas Dee
James Wyckoff
Working Paper 19529
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19529
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013
We received exceptional research assistance from Mindy Adnot and Veronica Katz at the University
of Virginia. We are grateful to the District of Columbia Public Schools for the data employed in this
paper and to Scott Thompson, Kim Levengood and Austin Zentz of DCPS for addressing our questions
regarding the data and IMPACT. We received financial support for this research from the Carnegie
Corporation of New York and the National Center for the Analysis of Longitudinal Data in Education
Research (CALDER). CALDER is supported by IES Grant R305A060018. The views expressed in
the paper are solely those of the authors and may not reflect those of the funders. Any errors are attributable
to the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Thomas Dee and James Wyckoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Incentives, Selection, and Teacher Performance: Evidence from IMPACT
Thomas Dee and James Wyckoff
NBER Working Paper No. 19529
October 2013
JEL No. I2,J45
ABSTRACT
Teachers in the United States are compensated largely on the basis of fixed schedules that reward experience
and credentials. However, there is a growing interest in whether performance-based incentives based
on rigorous teacher evaluations can improve teacher retention and performance. The evidence available
to date has been mixed at best. This study presents novel evidence on this topic based on IMPACT,
the controversial teacher-evaluation system introduced in the District of Columbia Public Schools
by then-Chancellor Michelle Rhee. IMPACT implemented uniquely high-powered incentives linked
to multiple measures of teacher performance (i.e., several structured observational measures as well
as test performance). We present regression-discontinuity (RD) estimates that compare the retention
and performance outcomes among low-performing teachers whose ratings placed them near the threshold
that implied a strong dismissal threat. We also compare outcomes among high-performing teachers
whose rating placed them near a threshold that implied an unusually large financial incentive. Our
RD results indicate that dismissal threats increased the voluntary attrition of low-performing teachers
by 11 percentage points (i.e., more than 50 percent) and improved the performance of teachers who
remained by 0.27 of a teacher-level standard deviation. We also find evidence that financial incentives
further improved the performance of high-performing teachers (effect size = 0.24).
Thomas Dee
Stanford University
520 Galvez Mall, CERAS Building, 5th Floor
Stanford, CA 94305-3084
and NBER
tdee@stanford.edu
James Wyckoff
Curry School of Education
University of Virginia
P.O. Box 400277
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4277
wyckoff@virginia.edu

1
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, a research consensus has coalesced around the notion that teacher quality is a
critically important determinant of student development and achievement (Sanders and Rivers,
1996; Aaronson, Barrow and Sander, 2007; Rockoff, 2004; Rivkin, Hanushek and Kain, 2005) as
well as later life outcomes (Chetty et al., 2011). However, there is no similarly wide agreement
on how to systematically drive improvements in the quality of the teacher workforce. Districts
and schools allocate substantial resources to teacher professional development (e.g., in-service
training) despite the fact that there is surprisingly little rigorous evidence on the efficacy of these
efforts (e.g., Yoon et al. 2007). Moreover, almost none of this professional development is driven
by rigorous assessments of the teaching strengths and weaknesses of individual teachers
(Weisberg et al, 2009). Furthermore, decades of empirical research have provided relatively little
evidence on observed teacher traits that can consistently predict teacher quality. Nonetheless, the
“single salary” schedules commonly used in U.S. public school districts compensate teachers
according to tightly structured rules that typically reward only teacher experience and education
credentials; traits among those without consistent links to teacher quality.
Critics of this status quo argue that such rigid and misaligned compensation systems cannot
adequately attract and retain a high-quality teacher workforce (see, for example, Johnson and
Papay, 2009; Hanushek, 2007; Murnane and Olsen, 1989). This misalignment is thought to be
especially acute in difficult-to-staff schools where the working conditions are more difficult yet
the compensation, due to the single salary schedule, is often similar to schools with better
working conditions. This dissatisfaction has motivated new efforts to design and implement
programs to assess and reward teacher performance (Johnson and Papay 2009; Cavanagh 2011).
The enthusiasm for such reforms among some policymakers and some practitioners is
underscored by new federal and state initiatives (e.g., the Teacher Incentive Fund, Race to the
Top, state waivers from the federal requirements under the No Child Left Behind Act) that
promote, among other goals, the design and use of measures of teacher performance in
compensation and other personnel decisions. However, these efforts are also extraordinarily
controversial and their ongoing implementation appears to be uneven among school districts
nationwide. For example, several large urban school districts recently terminated their federally
sponsored programs after failing to secure the required buy-in of their teachers’ unions
(Zubrzycki 2012). New York State Commissioner of Education, John King recently imposed a
!
!

2
teacher assessment system on New York City after the New York City Department of Education
and the United Federation of Teachers failed to agree on one, resulting in a loss of $250 million
in state aid (Joseph, 2013). More generally, there appears to be renewed resistance to the use of
teacher evaluations to assess performance, especially for high-stakes financial and dismissal
decisions (McNeil 2013a; Weiss and Long, 2013).
The heated and ongoing national discussion about reforming teacher evaluation and
compensation arguably has its recent genesis in the seminal policy innovations introduced in the
District of Columbia Public Schools (DCPS) several years ago under then-Chancellor Michelle
Rhee. In the 2009-10 academic year, DCPS introduced IMPACT, a high-stakes teacher
evaluation system designed to drive improvements in teacher quality and student achievement.
IMPACT established several explicit measures of teacher performance and linked the overall
measured performance of individual teachers both to the possibility of large financial incentives
as well as to the threat of dismissal. Specifically, during the first 3 years under this nationally
visible program, teachers rated as “highly effective” (HE) have received substantial increases in
one-time and base compensation while hundreds of teachers rated as ineffective (or minimally
effective for two consecutive years) have been forcibly separated.
State and local efforts to provide stronger incentives to teachers are by no means new (e.g.,
Murnane and Cohen 1986). A recent body of smaller-scale experimental studies (e.g., Springer et
al. 2010) suggests that short-term financial incentives linked only to the test performance of a
teacher’s students are largely ineffective. However, IMPACT has several design features that
make it distinctive relative to the conventional teacher incentives piloted in prior studies. For
example, IMPACT has created especially high-powered incentives for teachers; most notably, a
dismissal threat for low-performing teachers but also exceptionally large financial rewards for
high-performing teachers. This design feature implies that IMPACT targets differential retention
of low- and high-performing teachers as well as performance-based financial incentives. A
second unique feature of IMPACT is that its incentives are linked to a multi-dimensional
measure of teacher performance (e.g., multiple classroom observations as well as test scores) that
is likely to have more validity than test scores alone (e.g., MET 2013). This targeted
performance measure may also enhance the efficacy of IMPACT’s incentives because it places
some weight on actions teachers control more clearly and directly (e.g., how their classroom
practice relates to defined standards of effective instruction). Third, DCPS provided teachers
!
!