NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SHADOW INSURANCE
Ralph S.J. Koijen
Motohiro Yogo
Working Paper 19568
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19568
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013
A.M. Best Company owns the copyright to Best’s Statement File and Best’s Schedule S, which we
use with permission through their license agreement with the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Koijen acknowledges financial support from the European Research Council (grant 338082). For
comments and discussions, we thank Tobias Adrian, Daniel Bergstresser, Bruno Biais, Randolph
Cohen, Liran Einav, Andrew Ellul, Francisco Gomes, Scott Harrington, Victoria Ivashina,
Chotibhak Jotikasthira, Robert McDonald, Andrew Metrick, Alexander Michaelides, Alan
Morrison, Adair Morse, Gregory Niehaus, Radek Paluszynski, and Harald Uhlig. We also thank
seminar participants at Arizona State University; Bank of England; Cass Business School; CKGSB;
Columbia University; Consumer Financial Protection Bureau; Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis;
Federal Reserve Board; Financial Stability Board; Harvard University; INSEAD; IIES; London
Business School; Nederlandsche Bank; Office of Financial Research; Stockholm School of
Economics; Toulouse School of Economics; University of Alberta, British Columbia, California
Berkeley, Illinois at Chicago, Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Lausanne, Melbourne, Minnesota, and
South Carolina; UCSD; Uppsala University; Vienna Graduate School of Finance; Yale University; the
2013 FRIC Conference on Financial Frictions; the 2014 NBER Insurance Working Group Meeting;
the 2014 Adam Smith Asset Pricing Workshop; the 2014 NBER Asset Pricing Program Meeting;
the 2014 Workshop on Safety, Risk, and Incentives: The Role of the Insurance Industry in the
Modern Financial System; the 2014 FMA Asian Conference; the 2014 Annual Conference of the
Paul Woolley Centre; the 2014 North American Summer Meeting of the Econometric Society; the
2014 WEAI Annual Conference; the 2014 NBER Summer Institute Corporate Finance Workshop; the
2014 Workshop on Insurance and Systemic Risks; the 2014 Wharton Conference on Liquidity and
Financial Crises; and the 2015 AFA Annual Meeting. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal
Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Ralph S.J. Koijen and Motohiro Yogo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Shadow Insurance
Ralph S.J. Koijen and Motohiro Yogo
NBER Working Paper No. 19568
October 2013, Revised May 2016
JEL No. G22,G28
ABSTRACT
Life insurers use reinsurance to move liabilities from regulated and rated companies that sell
policies to shadow reinsurers, which are less regulated and unrated off-balance-sheet entities
within the same insurance group. U.S. life insurance and annuity liabilities ceded to shadow
reinsurers grew from $11 billion in 2002 to $364 billion in 2012. Life insurers using shadow
insurance, which capture half of the market share, ceded 25 cents of every dollar insured to
shadow reinsurers in 2012, up from 2 cents in 2002. By relaxing capital requirements, shadow
insurance could reduce the marginal cost of issuing policies and thereby improve retail market
efficiency. However, shadow insurance could also reduce risk-based capital and increase
expected loss for the industry. We model and quantify these effects based on publicly available
data and plausible assumptions.
Ralph S.J. Koijen
London Business School
Regent's Park
London NW1 4SA
United Kingdom
rkoijen@london.edu
Motohiro Yogo
Department of Economics
Princeton University
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
myogo@princeton.edu

1. Introduction
LifeinsuranceandannuityliabilitiesofU.S.lifeinsurerswere$4,068billionin2012,which
is substantial even when compared with $6,979 billion in savings deposits at U.S. depository
institutions (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013)). However, little
research exists on life insurer liabilities, especially in comparison with the large banking
literature. The reason, perhaps, is the traditional view that life insurance and annuity
liabilities are safe because they are more predictable, have a longer maturity, and are less
vulnerable to runs. Thus, the conventional wisdom is that all of the interesting action is on
the asset side of the balance sheet, where life insurers take on some investment risk.
Developments in the life insurance industry over the last decade challenge this traditional
view. As a consequence of changes in regulation (see Section 2), life insurers are using
reinsurance to move liabilities fromoperating companies (i.e., regulated and ratedcompanies
that sell policies) to less regulated and unrated off-balance-sheet entities within the same
insurance group. These “shadow reinsurers” are captives or special purpose vehicles in
states (e.g., South Carolina and Vermont) or offshore domiciles (e.g., Bermuda, Barbados,
and Cayman Islands) with more favorable capital regulation or tax laws. In contrast to
traditional reinsurance with unaffiliated reinsurers, these transactions do not transfer risk
because the liabilities stay within the same insurance group.
Using U.S. data on reinsurance agreements (see Section 3), we document new facts about
life insurance and annuity liabilities in Section 4, with a special emphasis on the shadow
insurance sector. We find that liabilities ceded to shadow reinsurers grew significantly from
$11 billion in 2002 to $364 billion in 2012. This activity now exceeds total unaffiliated
reinsurance in the life insurance industry, which was $270 billion in 2012. Life insurers
using shadow insurance tend to be larger and capture 48% of the market share for both life
insurance and annuities. These companies ceded 25 cents of every dollar insured to shadow
reinsurers in 2012, up from 2 cents in 2002.
By relaxing capital requirements, shadow insurance could reduce the marginal cost of
issuing policies and thereby improve retail market efficiency. However, shadow insurance
could also reduce risk-based capital because it allows life insurers to issue more policies for
a given amount of equity. We develop a simple model in Section 5 to illustrate these effects.
In our model, a holding company consists of an operating company that sells policies and
an affiliated reinsurer whose only role is to assume reinsurance from the operating company.
The key friction is that required capital in the two companies is regulated, and the operating
company faces tighter capital regulation than the affiliated reinsurer.1 Affiliated reinsurance
1Wetakeasgiventhatlifeinsurersareregulated,whichbreakstheModiglianiandMiller(1958)theorem.
The deeper economic frictions that justify regulation include informational frictions and agency problems,
2

allows the holding company to reallocate liabilities between the two companies to reduce the
overall cost of regulatory frictions.
The model predicts that affiliated reinsurance reduces the operating company’s marginal
cost of issuing policies and increases the equilibrium supply in the retail market. To quan-
tify this effect, we estimate a differentiated product demand system for the life insurance
market, assuming oligopolistic price setting (Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995)). Our iden-
tifying assumption is that shadow insurance reduces the operating company’s marginal cost,
but it does not affect demand directly. Our structural estimates imply that shadow insur-
ance reduces life insurance prices by 10% for the average company and increases annual life
insurance issued by $6.8 billion for the industry, which is 7% of the current market size.
If rating agencies and retail customers already have full knowledge of shadow insurance,
life insurers and regulators should be indifferent to disclosing the financial statements of
captives, or they may even prefer full disclosure to avoid any chance of misinterpretation.
Yet, the financial statements of captives are not publicly available, except for those recently
released by the Iowa Insurance Division (2014). This leaves open the possibility that shadow
insurancereducesrisk-basedcapitalandincreasesexpectedlossfortheindustry. InSection6,
we discuss the evidence from Lawsky (2013) and the financial statements of Iowa captives,
which suggest that captives have significantly less equity than operating companies. We
also quantify the potential risk of shadow insurance by adjusting measures of risk based
on publicly available data and plausible assumptions. Our adjustment reduces risk-based
capital by 53 percentage points (or 3 rating notches) and increases the 10-year cumulative
default probability by a factor of 3.5 for the average company using shadow insurance.
Our work on life and annuity reinsurance is related to the literature on property and
casualty reinsurance. This literature finds that property and casualty reinsurance is used for
various reasons, including risk transfer as well as capital and tax management (Mayers and
Smith (1990), Adiel (1996)). For life insurers, risk transfer has always been a less important
motive because of the more predictable nature of their business, which explains why there
is relatively little unaffiliated reinsurance. All of the growth in life and annuity reinsurance
over the last decade is within the same insurance group, which points to capital and tax
management as the primary motive for this activity.
Our work is also related to the literature on financial and regulatory frictions on the
supply side of insurance markets. In particular, some recent papers show that capital reg-
ulation and accounting rules, when they interact with financial frictions, affect investment
behavior ontheasset side of thebalance sheet (Merrill, Nadauld, Stulz, andSherlund (2012),
Becker andOpp(2013),Becker andIvashina(2015),Ellul, Jotikasthira, Lundblad, andWang
such as moral hazard in the presence of state guaranty funds (Lee, Mayers, and Smith (1997)).
3