NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR IN THE WAKE OF NATURAL DISASTERS
Lisa Cameron
Manisha Shah
Working Paper 19534
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19534
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013
The authors gratefully acknowledge funding from the Australian Research Council. ARC Grant No.
DP0987011. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Lisa Cameron and Manisha Shah. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Risk-Taking Behavior in the Wake of Natural Disasters
Lisa Cameron and Manisha Shah
NBER Working Paper No. 19534
October 2013
JEL No. D81,O12,Q54
ABSTRACT
We investigate whether experiencing a natural disaster affects risk-taking behavior. We conduct standard
risk games (using real money) with randomly selected individuals in rural Indonesia. We find that
individuals who recently suffered a flood or earthquake exhibit more risk aversion. Experiencing a
natural disaster causes people to perceive that they now face a greater risk of a future disaster. We
conclude that this change in perception of background risk causes people to take fewer risks. We provide
evidence that experimental risk behavior is correlated with real life risk behavior, highlighting the
importance of our results.
Lisa Cameron
Monash University
Australia
and IZA
lisa.cameron@monash.edu
Manisha Shah
Department of Public Policy
University of California, Los Angeles
Luskin School of Public Affairs
3250 Public Affairs Building
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1656
and NBER
manishashah@ucla.edu

Over the last decade, direct losses from natural disasters in the developing world averaged 35
billion USD annually. These losses are increasing and are more than eight times greater than the
losses suffered as a result of natural disasters during the 1960’s (EM-DAT, 2009). Three main
categories of natural disasters account for 90% of the world’s direct losses: floods, earthquakes, and
tropicalcyclones. Adisproportionateshareofthedeathsanddamagecausedbysuchenvironmental
shocks is borne by people in developing countries (Kahn, 2005). Developing countries are not
necessarily more susceptible to natural disasters, but the impact is often more severe due to poor
building practices and lack of adequate infrastructure. The enormity of these losses has focused
attention on how natural disasters can undermine countries long-term efforts to attain and sustain
economic growth (Freeman, 2000). This is becoming an increasingly important issue as climate
change scientists have predicted an increase in the frequency of disasters like floods and tropical
cyclones (IPCC, 2001).
Natural disasters are traumatic events and it is thus likely that they affect individuals’ behavior
intheshortandpossiblylongerterm. Ifnaturaldisastersaffectpeople’sperceptionsoftheriskiness
of their environment, then experiencing a disaster can be thought of as an addition of background
risk and if people are “risk-vulnerable,” in the sense of Gollier and Pratt (1996), they will then
exhibit more risk-averse behavior. This could have potential dampening effects on post-recovery
growth if, for example, people are less willing to be entrepreneurial, particularly since aid money is
often infused into natural disaster sites just after the disaster occurs, and consequently the cost of
more risk averse behavior at this time is heightened. Psychological theories however suggest that
individuals who already live in high risk environments may not be particularly concerned about
the addition of small independent risks or that individuals may react emotionally (as opposed to
cognitively) and exhibit more risk-loving behavior. Thus, the question is an empirical one.
We investigate the relationship between natural disasters and individuals’ risk-taking behavior
using experimental data from Indonesia. Our identification strategy is simple. We exploit geo-
graphic variation in the timing of natural disasters in an area where any village could be hit by an
earthquake or flood. Our study area, East Java, is highly vulnerable to such events.
Our results are consistent with the concept of risk-vulnerability. We find that individuals in
villages that suffered a flood or earthquake in the past three years exhibit higher levels of risk
aversion compared to like individuals in villages that did not experience a disaster. Individuals
who have experienced an earthquake or a flood in the past three years are 7 percentage points
less likely to make risky choices. This is a large effect and translates into a 41 percent decrease
1

in the probability of making a risky choice. Recent disasters affect risk-taking behavior even after
we control for the mean occurrence of earthquakes and floods over the previous 30 years. We also
show that these results are likely not biased due to selection of residential location or migration
patterns and that the effects of particularly severe shocks are long lasting.
Natural disasters change people’s beliefs. We show that individuals who recently experienced a
natural disaster perceive the world to be a riskier place. People (inaccurately) update their percep-
tion of background risk after experiencing a disaster. They report unrealistically high probabilities
that another will occur in the next year and that it will be severe. These perceptions persist for
several years. Our results are thus consistent with Di Tella et al. (2007) and Malmendier and Nagel
(2011)in findingthatdifferentexperiences(of landreform andmacroeconomicshocks respectively)
lead to differing beliefs and different behavior. Even more in line with our results is Callen et al.
(forthcoming) who find that fearful recollections of individuals exposed to violence in Afghanistan
triggers changes in risk and certainty preferences.
We conclude by examining the extent to which behavior in the risk experiments is correlated
with “real life” risk-taking like opening a new business or changing jobs, and provide evidence that
more risk averse individuals are less likely to take these types of risks.
The economics literature on natural disasters is relatively new. However, recent papers have
examined the impact of natural disasters on outcomes such as macroeconomic output (Noy, 2009),
incomeandinternationalfinancialflows(Yang,2008a), migrationdecisions(Halliday,2006;Paxson
and Rouse, 2008; Yang, 2008b), fertility and education investments (Baez et al., 2010; Finlay, 2009;
Portner, 2008; Yamauchi et al., 2009), and even mental health (Frankenberg et al., 2008). A
small number of working papers examine the effect of natural disasters on risk-taking behavior
and discount rates in various developing countries (Callen, 2011; Cassar et al., 2011; van den Berg
et al., 2009) with similar results to what we find here—that risk taking decreases as a result of
natural disasters. Our paper aims to provide greater certainty that these results are not simply
due to selection and examines pathways that might explain this result. This is an important
question since risk-taking behavior determines many crucial household decisions related to savings
and investment behavior (Rosenzweig and Stark, 1989), fertility (Schultz, 1997), human capital
decisions (Strauss and Thomas, 1995), and technology adoption (Liu, 2010); and natural disasters
are becoming increasingly prevalent all over the world. Therefore, the results from this paper have
important ramifications for various household decisions that influence economic development.
2