NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DIGITAL DARK MATTER AND THE ECONOMIC CONTRIBUTION OF APACHE
Shane Greenstein
Frank Nagle
Working Paper 19507
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19507
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013
We thank Justin Ng for research assistance. We are grateful for the many useful comments we received
from audiences at the NBER, Kristina McElheran, Dan Sichel, Ashish Arora, and two anonymous
referees. All errors are our responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Shane Greenstein and Frank Nagle. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Digital Dark Matter and the Economic Contribution of Apache
Shane Greenstein and Frank Nagle
NBER Working Paper No. 19507
October 2013, Revised December 2013
JEL No. O3,O31,O47
ABSTRACT
Researchers have long hypothesized that spillovers from government, university, and private company
R&D contribute to economic growth, but these contributions may be difficult to measure when they
take a non-pecuniary form. The growth of networking devices and the Internet in the 1990s and 2000s
magnified these challenges, as illustrated by the deployment of the descendent of the NCSA HTTPd
server, otherwise known as Apache. This study asks whether this experience could produce measurement
issues in standard productivity analysis, specifically, omission and attribution issues, and, if so, whether
the magnitude is large enough to matter. The study develops and analyzes a novel data set consisting
of a 1% sample of all outward-facing web servers used in the United States. We find that use of Apache
potentially accounts for a mismeasurement of somewhere between $2 billion and $12 billion, which
equates to between1.3 percent and 8.7 percent of the stock of prepackaged software in private fixed
investment in the United States. We argue that these findings point to a large potential undercounting
of the rate or return from IT spillovers from the invention of the Internet, and to a large potential undercounting
of “digital dark matter” in general.
Shane Greenstein
The Elinor and Wendell Hobbs Professor
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2013
and NBER
greenstein@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Frank Nagle
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
fnagle@hbs.edu
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19507

1. Introduction
Astrophysicists draw on the term “dark matter” to describe the unseen parts of the
universe. Many artifacts, such as the rotational speed of galaxies and gravitational effects,
indicate the presence of dark matter, although measuring its existence directly can be difficult.
Economists need a similar label for some innovative building blocks of the digital economy that
standard tools cannot measure. Digital dark matter can serve as the phrase for these digital goods
and services that are non-pecuniary and effectively limitless, and serve as inputs into production.
They are hybrids of public goods and private investments. This study develops an example that
illustrates the potential for the growth and importance of these inputs and their impact.
Our study of digital dark matter draws attention to the (mis)measurement of spillovers
from knowledge generated by the government, university, or private research and development.
It has long been believed that such spillovers are economically important, but are very difficult to
measure when they take non-pecuniary form. It is sometimes possible to overcome measurement
challenges and assign an economic value to some of these spillovers. We investigate a situation
where a spillover became embodied in open source software, and took the form of digital dark
matter. By understanding the value of one specific example of digital dark matter, we aim to add
evidence to the debate on the contribution of spillovers to economic productivity. Further, we
aim to better understand the size of the mismeasurement that occurs due to the presence of digital
dark matter.
The growth of networking devices and the Internet in the 1990s and 2000s magnified the
challenges affiliated with measuring digital dark matter. After decades of development under the
3

auspices of the Department of Defense and the National Science Foundation (NSF), the NSF
privatized the Internet backbone in the first half of the 1990s. Software and standards affiliated
with operating TCP/IP networks migrated into widespread commercial use. Additionally, in
1991 Tim Berners-Lee made available the basic building blocks of the World Wide Web,
supporting its use and development by founding the World Wide Web Consortium in 1994. Its
use became common, and formed the basic software infrastructure for a wide range of new forms
of electronic commerce and new media.
This study examines one part of these larger events, the deployment of the descendants of
the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA)2 HTTPd server, today known as
Apache. It was one of two notable pieces of NCSA software, the Mosaic browser3 being the
other one. Both inventions moved into widespread use in the middle of the 1990s, continued to
evolve thereafter, and subsequently became essential for online commercial activities. Apache’s
experience deserves academic scrutiny because, in part, it is convenient to examine. Though no
publically available data provides a definitive estimate of the size of the Apache economy, it is
believed to be the second largest open source project after Linux. It is so large that it has left
more observable traces than many other examples of digital dark matter, albeit, such traces are
not easy to find.
This study contains two sections. It initially reviews the practices surrounding Apache’s
deployment, and extends existing measurement theory to this setting, showing how Apache’s
2 The NCSA is one of the four original supercomputing centers funded jointly by the NSF and state governments. It
was founded in 1984 to help address the scientific research needs of the future.
3 Together, the HTTPd server and the Mosaic browser propelled the World Wide Web forward with the HTTPd
server acting as a content publisher and the Mosaic browser acting as a content reader.
4