NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HIGH FREQUENCY TRADERS:
TAKING ADVANTAGE OF SPEED
Yacine Aït-Sahalia
Mehmet Saglam
Working Paper 19531
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19531
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Yacine Aït-Sahalia and Mehmet Saglam. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

High Frequency Traders: Taking Advantage of Speed
Yacine Aït-Sahalia and Mehmet Saglam
NBER Working Paper No. 19531
October 2013
JEL No. G12
ABSTRACT
We propose a model of dynamic trading where a strategic high frequency trader receives an imperfect
signal about future order flows, and exploits his speed advantage to optimize his quoting policy. We
determine the provision of liquidity, order cancellations, and impact on low frequency traders as a
function of both the high frequency trader's latency, and the market volatility. The model predicts
that volatility leads high frequency traders to reduce their provision of liquidity. Finally, we analyze
the impact of various policies designed to potentially regulate high frequency trading.
Yacine Aït-Sahalia
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
yacine@princeton.edu
Mehmet Saglam
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton University
msaglam@princeton.edu

1. Introduction
High-frequencytraders(HFTs)havebecomeapotentforceinmanyequityandfuturesmarkets. HFTs
invest in and develop a trading infrastructure designed to analyze a variety of trading signals and send
orders to the marketplace in a fraction of a second. The potential profit from any single transaction
resulting from an execution may be very tiny, and be achieved ex ante with a probability only slightly
above 50%, but HFTs rely on this process being repeated thousands, if not more, times a day. As
the law of large numbers and the central limit theorem relentlessly take their hold, profits ensue and
presumably justify their large investment in trading technology.
Speed has always been of the essence in financial markets. Traders were among the first to adopt
the telegraph and then the telephone. Closer to us, “high frequency” meant anything intraday; then
minute-by-minute transactions became the norm, quickly to be replaced by second-by-second time
stamps. The time it now takes for an order to be sent and displayed on an electronic exchange, that
is, the latency associated with the implementation of an order, is currently measured in milliseconds.
The latest software and infrastructure developments are making it possible for the most cutting-edge
trading firms to implement microsecond-based algorithms.
MeasuringtheextentofHFTactivityisinherentlyacomplextask. Althoughestimatesvaryacross
markets,tradingvenuesandtimeperiod,itisgenerallythoughtthatHFTsrepresentanywherebetween
40 and 70% of the trading volume in US futures and equity markets, and slightly less in European,
Canadian and Australian markets (see Biais and Woolley (2011)). The trend points towards high
frequency trading having perhaps plateaued in some of the markets where it was first introduced, but
still expanding globally in new markets.
Thissignificantamountofmarketactivityhasbeenaccompaniedbytheoreticalresearchaddressing
some of issues arising from the rapid rise of HFTs1. In particular, Foucault et al. (2012) consider
a setting in which a HFT enjoys a speed advantage when gathering information. They compare
two models of trading under asymmetric information which differ in the presence of an informed
trader precessing information faster than the other market participants, and extend Kyle’s model by
incorporating heterogeneity in the speed of information processing. Foucault et al. (2013) develop
a model in which HFTs choose the speed at which to react to news, based on a trade-off between
the advantages of trading first compared to the attention costs of following the news. They focus in
1See forexamplePagnottaandPhilippon(2011),JarrowandProtter(2012), MoallemiandSaglam (2012), Pagnotta
(2010), Cespa and Foucault (2008).
1

particular on liquidity cycles, where traders compete alternatively to make (by positing limit orders)
andtake(bysendingmarketorders)liquidityfromthemarket. Biaisetal.(2011)analyzethearmsrace
and equilibria arising in a model where traders choose whether to invest in fast trading technologies.
Jovanovic and Menkveld (2010) study the effect of high frequency trading activity on welfare and
adverse selection costs. Cvitani´c and Kirilenko (2010) study the distribution of prices in a market
before and after the introduction of HFTs. They find that the introduction of HFTs results in more
mass around the center of the distribution and thinner tails.
The innovation in our paper is the modeling of a fully dynamically optimizing HFT. The dynamic
optimizationnatureofthequotingprocessbyHFTsisadeparturefromtheexistingliterature,allowing
us to address a new set of inherently dynamic questions: we use the model to study the quoting
optimization by a HFT, initially in a monopolistic position, who enjoys a latency advantage and
trades against many uninformed LFTs; quantify the HFT’s latency advantage over LFTs; determine
why HFTs cancel their orders at a very rapid rate; how their (endogenous) inventory constraints help
shape their order placement and cancellation strategies; how the HFT’s provision of liquidity can be
expectedtochangeindifferentmarketenvironments,suchashighvolatilityones; andhowcompetition
among HFTs can be expected to affect the provision of liquidity and the welfare of LFTs.
Additionally, anumberofregulatoryproposalshaverecentlybeendiscussed, andinsomecountries
implemented, generally aiming at curbing the growth of trading by HFTs. Some of the proposed
provisions include a transaction tax, limiting the ability of HFTs to cancel orders before some amount
of time has elapsed, or taxing such cancellations. Using the model of the paper, we analyze the
potential impact of these proposed regulations.
Technically, the innovation is the use of multiple, staggered, Poisson processes to represent the
arrival of the various elements of the model: market orders by LFTs, signals to the HFT, changes
in the asset’s fundamental price, arrival of a competing trader who also provides liquidity, etc. This
modelingdevicekeepstheanalysisof thedynamicoptimizationproblemfacingtheHFTtractableand
flexible, and makes it possible to analyze different market environments by varying the parameters of
the model.
In our model, a HFTis able to(imperfectly) predict theupcoming order flow andexploit his speed
advantage by placing and possibly canceling limit orders ahead of incoming market orders by LFTs.
The HFT receives a private signal about the likely type of the next upcoming market order, buy or
sell, and decides to quote or not to quote a limit order at the best available prices. These signals can
2