NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RISKY INVESTMENTS WITH LIMITED COMMITMENT
Thomas F. Cooley
Ramon Marimon
Vincenzo Quadrini
Working Paper 19594
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19594
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013
We would like to thank Youssef Cassis, Robert Lucas, Facundo Piguillem, Kim Schoenholtz, Danyang
Xie and other seminar participants at Banca d'Italia, Banque de France, Bank of Turkey, Tel Aviv
University, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, New York University, et al., for their comments on previous
versions of this work. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19594.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Thomas F. Cooley, Ramon Marimon, and Vincenzo Quadrini. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Risky Investments with Limited Commitment
Thomas F. Cooley, Ramon Marimon, and Vincenzo Quadrini
NBER Working Paper No. 19594
October 2013
JEL No. E25,E44,G01,G3
ABSTRACT
Over the last three decades there has been a dramatic increase in the size of the financial sector and
in the compensation of financial executives. This increase has been associated with greater risk-taking
and the use of more complex financial instruments. Parallel to this trend, the organizational structure
of the financial sector has changed with the traditional partnership replaced by public companies. The
organizational change has increased the competition for managerial talent, which may have weakened
the commitment between investors and managers. We show how increased competition and the weaker
commitment can raise the managerial incentives to undertake risky investment. In the general equilibrium,
this change results in higher risk-taking, a larger and more productive financial sector with greater
income inequality (within and across sectors), and a lower market valuation of financial institutions.
Thomas F. Cooley Vincenzo Quadrini
Department of Economics Department of Finance and Business Economics
Stern School of Business Marshall School of Business
44 West 4th Street, Room 7-88 University of Southern California
New York, NY 10012-1126 701 Exposition Boulevard
and NBER Los Angeles, CA 90089
tcooley@stern.nyu.edu quadrini@usc.edu
Ramon Marimon
European University Institute
Department of Economics
Via della Piazzuola 43
50133 Florence
ITALY
and UPF - BarcelonaGSE
and also NBER
ramon.marimon@eui.eu

1 Introduction
The past several decades have been characterized by dramatic changes in the size and
structure of financial firms in the United States and elsewhere. What was once an in-
dustry dominated by partnerships has evolved into a much more concentrated sector
dominated by large public firms. In this paper we argue that this evolution has altered
the structure of contractual arrangements between investors and managers in ways that
weakened commitment and increased the managers’ incentives to undertake risky invest-
ments. At the aggregate level, the change resulted in a larger financial sector and greater
income inequality.
The increase in the size and importance of the financial sector in the United States
hasbeen documentedby Phillipon (2008)and Phillipon andResheff (2009).1 Thisis also
shown in Figure 1 which plots the shares of the financial industry in value added and
employment since 1970. The contribution of the finance industry to GDP doubled in size
between 1970 and 2011. The share of employment has also increased but by less than
the contribution to value added. This is especially noticeable starting in the mid 1980s
when the share of employment stopped growing while the share of value added continued
to expand. Accordingly, we observe a significant increase in productivity compared to
the remaining sectors of the economy.
Size of Finance and Insurance
9%
8%
7%
6%
5%
Value added
(% Total GDP)
4%
Employment
(% Nonfarm)
3%
1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010
Figure 1: Share of Value Added and Employment
The increase in size was also associated with a sharp increase in compensation.
Clementi and Cooley (2009) show that between 1993 and 2006 the average compen-
sation levels of CEOs in the financial sector increased from parity with other sectors of
1PhilliponandResheff(2013)alsostudythegrowthoffinanceinacrosssectionofcountriesandfind
that the share of the financial sector in many of them is signficantly hgher today than at any point in
the past century.
1

theeconomytonearlydouble. Atthesametimecompensationofmanagersbecamemore
unequal in the financial sector. Figure 2 shows the evolution of the income share of the
top 5% of managerial positions in the sector compared to other occupations.
Income Share of Top 5%
60%
55% Managerial occupations financial sector
All other occupations
50%
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
1989 1992 1995 1998 2001 2004 2007 2010
Figure 2: Share of the top 5%
Thisperiodofincreasedsizeandimportanceofthefinancialsectorfollowedsignificant
changes in the organizational form of financial firms—especially the transformation from
partnerships to public corporations—that had two important effects. The first was to
increasecompetitioninthefinancialsectorraisingthedemandformanagers. Thesecond
was to alter the structure of contractual arrangements between investors and managers
inwaysthatweakenedcommitments. Aswewillsee, thecombinationofthesetwoeffects
increased the managers’ incentives to undertake risky investments and generated greater
income inequality within and between sectors.
Historically, it was common for investment firms to be organized as partnerships.
Many argued that this was a preferred form of organization because in a partnership,
managersandinvestorswerethesamepeopleanditwasthepartnersownassetsthatwere
at risk when risky investments were taken. Effectively, the separation between ownership
and investment control is minimized, reducing the agency issues. Public companies,
on the other hand, are organizational structures with significant separation between
ownership (shareholders) and investment control (managers), and it is well understood
that this organizational form is characterized by significant agency issues.2
Until 1970 the New York Stock Exchange prohibited member firms from being public
companies. When the organizational restriction on financial companies was relaxed,
2This is largely consistent with the literature on incomplete contract theory. According to Grossman
and Hart (1986) and Hart and Moore (1990), more efficient organizational forms are those where the
agents who control the investment surplus own a larger share of the assets.
2