NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PATTERNS OF CONVERGENCE AND DIVERGENCE IN THE EURO AREA
Ángel Estrada
Jordi Galí
David López-Salido
Working Paper 19561
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19561
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013
Prepared for the IMF Thirteenth Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference, November 8(cid:0)9, 2012. We
thank Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Ayhan Kose, and two anonymous referees and conference participants
for their comments. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors alone and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Banco de España, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, its
staff, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19561.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Ángel Estrada, Jordi Galí, and David López-Salido. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Patterns of Convergence and Divergence in the Euro Area
Ángel Estrada, Jordi Galí, and David López-Salido
NBER Working Paper No. 19561
October 2013
JEL No. E24,F31,O47
ABSTRACT
We study the extent of macroeconomic convergence/divergence among euro area countries. Our analysis
focuses on four variables (unemployment, inflation, relative prices and the current account), and seeks
to uncover the role played by monetary union as a convergence factor by using non-euro developed
economies and the pre-EMU period as control samples
Ángel Estrada David López-Salido
Bank of Spain Federal Reserve Board
Alcala 48 20th and C Streets, N.W.
21014 Madrid (Spain) Washington, DC 20551
angel.estrada@bde.es david.j.lopez-salido@frb.gov
Jordi Galí
Centre de Recerca en Economia Internacional (CREI)
Ramon Trias Fargas 25
08005 Barcelona
SPAIN
and NBER
jgali@crei.cat

1. Introduction
The creation of the European Monetary Union (EMU) in 1999 was widely
expected to become a catalyst for further economic integration and convergence
within Europe. But the ongoing sovereign debt crisis and, more generally, the
differential macroeconomic performance across euro area members in the
aftermath of the financial crisis have called that prediction into question. It has
even led some commentators to argue that the adoption of a common currency
may have instead been a factor of divergence and, in particular, a source of a
growing gap between a “virtuous core” and a “sinful periphery.” The goal of
the present paper is to assess whether the data supports that view. In particular,
we examine the extent of macroeconomic convergence/divergence among euro
area countries over the 19992012 period, and the role that sharing a common
currency may have played in accounting for that evolution. Our analysis
focuses on the differential performance across countries of labor markets, as
reflected in the unemployment rate, as well as measures of inflation and
competitiveness. The relation between price-competitiveness and current
account imbalances is also explored, paying special attention to the role played
by non price-competitiveness factors. Throughout we treat the performance
during the pre-EMU period, as well as the experience of a number of non-euro
developed economies, as control samples.2
Our main findings can be summarized as follows. The first nine years of EMU
witnessed a strong converge in unemployment rates across euro area countries.
But both the long-term trends and the extent of the short-term comovement of
unemployment rates appear to be shared by other non-euro economies. With
the onset of the financial crisis, however, that convergence process among euro
area countries has been interrupted and largely reversed, more so than in other
non-euro economies.
Secondly, we report strong evidence of convergence towards low inflation rates
over the past quarter century, though that convergence seems unrelated to
monetary union itself since it has been experienced by most advanced
economies. The previous long-term trend notwithstanding, our analysis
uncovers persistent inflation differentials within the euro area during the EMU
period and, as a result, large cumulative changes in relative prices.
Interestingly, though, rather than representing increasingly divergent patterns,
those inflation differentials have implied a substantial convergence in price
2 Our focus is on macroeconomic convergence. For overview of the impact of EMU on trade and
financial integration see, e.g., Lane (2006), Santos-Silva and Tenreyro (2010), and Kalemli-Ozcan
et al. (2010).
2

levels, especially in the case of tradable goods. This feature contrasts with the
evidence regarding other developed economies.
Thirdly, we point to the presence of large differences in the evolution of the
current account balance across euro area countries. Perhaps more surprisingly,
those differences seem to display little relation with “narrow” measures of
competitiveness, as represented by relative price levels of tradable goods.
Instead they seem to bear a stronger relation with broader, non-price
competitiveness factors. A possible implication of that finding is that internal
devaluation policies may have limited success in the medium run at reducing
external imbalances unless accompanied by structural reforms that boost some
of those non-price factors.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we analyze the
behavior of the unemployment rate. Section 3 considers the degree of nominal
convergence, as reflected in inflation differentials. Section 4 examines the
evolution of relative prices, distinguishing between tradable and non-tradable
sectors. The relationship between price-competitiveness and the current
account is explored in Section 5 of the paper, which also introduces other non-
price components of competitiveness. The final section summarizes the main
results and concludes.
2. Patterns of Convergence of Unemployment Rates in the Euro
Area
As of April 2013, the unemployment rate in the euro area was holding at 12.1%,
almost five percentage points higher than in March 2008, when it had reached a
record low since the start of EMU. The aggregate unemployment rate, however,
conceals huge differences across countries, as brought out in Figure 1. The
lowest unemployment rates can be observed in Austria (4.8%) and Germany
(5.4%), while the highest are found in Greece (26.9%) and Spain (26.8%). Thus,
the range of unemployment rates is above 20 percentage points. The standard
deviation is 6.6%.
3