NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PREDATORY LENDING AND THE SUBPRIME CRISIS
Sumit Agarwal
Gene Amromin
Itzhak Ben-David
Souphala Chomsisengphet
Douglas D. Evanoff
Working Paper 19550
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19550
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013
We thank Caitlin Kearns for outstanding research assistance. We thank Amit Seru and an anonymous
referee for important and insightful comments. Thanks are also due to participants at numerous conferences
and seminars for their helpful feedback. Ben-David’s research is supported by the Dice Center and
the Neil Klatskin Chair in Finance and Real Estate. The views in this paper are those of the authors
and may not reflect those of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Sumit Agarwal, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Douglas
D. Evanoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Predatory Lending and the Subprime Crisis
Sumit Agarwal, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Douglas
D. Evanoff
NBER Working Paper No. 19550
October 2013
JEL No. D14,D18
ABSTRACT
We measure the effect of an anti-predatory pilot program (Chicago, 2006) on mortgage default rates
to test whether predatory lending was a key element in fueling the subprime crisis. Under the program,
risky borrowers and/or risky mortgage contracts triggered review sessions by housing counselors who
shared their findings with the state regulator. The pilot cut market activity in half, largely through
the exit of lenders specializing in risky loans and through decline in the share of subprime borrowers.
Our results suggest that predatory lending practices contributed to high mortgage default rates among
subprime borrowers, raising them by about a third.
Sumit Agarwal Souphala Chomsisengphet
Associate Professor of Finance and Real Estate Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
NUS Business School Department of Treasury
Mochtar Raidy Building, BIZ1 Washington, DC.
15 Kent Ridge Road souphala.chomsisengphet@occ.treas.gov
Singapore, 119245
ushakri@yahoo.com Douglas D. Evanoff
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
Gene Amromin 230 South LaSalle Street
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Chicago, IL 60604-1413
230 South LaSalle Street devanoff@frbchi.org
Chicago, IL 60604-1413
gamromin@frbchi.org
Itzhak Ben-David
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
bendavid@fisher.osu.edu

1. Introduction
Predatory lending has been the focus of intense academic and policy debate surrounding
the recent housing crisis. Predatory lending—commonly defined as imposing unfair and abusive
loan terms on borrowers, often through aggressive sales tactics, or loans that contain terms and
conditions that ultimately harm borrowers (GAO, 2004; FDIC, 2006)—has also captured much
media attention and appears to be a major concern for borrowers.1 While all agree that mortgages
with abusive terms are costly to borrowers and to taxpayers, the extent of the phenomenon is
hard to quantify and is politically charged (e.g., Agarwal and Evanoff, 2013; Engel and McCoy,
2007). Several journalistic accounts and industry reports take the position that predatory lending
had a central role in creating and feeding the housing bubble, particularly through subprime loan
originations (e.g., the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, 2010; Hudson, 2010; Center for
Responsible Lending, 2009). To our knowledge, there is no systematic evidence to date
measuring the effect of predatory lending on mortgage performance. Our paper attempts to fill
this gap.
In academic literature, predatory lending is modeled as cases in which lenders possess
private information about borrowers’ future ability to repay loans and encourage mortgages with
terms that borrowers cannot afford (Bond, Musto, and Yilmaz, 2009). This model clearly
portrays the empirical challenge in measuring predatory lending: because it is difficult to observe
lenders’ informational advantage over borrowers, it is hard to measure the size of the
phenomenon and assess its role in precipitating the subprime mortgage crisis.
In this paper, we attempt to overcome this challenge by analyzing the effects of a pilot
anti-predatory legislative program implemented in Chicago near the peak of the real-estate
boom. The pilot required “low-credit-quality” applicants and applicants for “risky” mortgages to
submit their loan offers from state-licensed lenders for third-party review by HUD-certified
financial counselors. As described in greater detail below, the fact that the pilot applied only in
certain areas during a specific time period, only to certain borrower and mortgage contract
1 Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2013) find that about half of surveyed borrowers would be willing to strategically
default on their mortgage should they discover that their lender was involved in predatory lending.
2

combinations, and only to a specific set of lenders allows us to parse out its effect on the
availability of mortgage credit with predatory characteristics and to evaluate ex post mortgage
performance. The study draws on detailed loan-level data from public and proprietary sources, as
well as data provided by one of the largest counseling agencies involved in the pilot.
Our empirical strategy is based on classic difference-in-differences analysis that contrasts
changes in mortgage market composition and loan performance in the treated sample with those
in a control sample. Unlike bacteria in a petri dish, lenders and borrowers could respond to the
mandated treatment either by leaving the pilot area or by adapting to the new rules. Hence, we
pay particular attention to endogenous selection of lenders and borrowers out of treatment. If
predatory lending resulted in significantly higher default rates and thus precipitated the crisis, we
should observe a significant reduction in default rates in the targeted market as predatory lending
declined.
We find that following passage of the legislative pilot, the number of active lenders
declined disproportionately in the target geographic area. The decline was particularly
pronounced among state-licensed lenders that specialized in the origination of subprime loans,
many of which included contract features deemed objectionable by the legislation. Nearly half of
the state-licensed lenders exited the pilot zip codes, more than double the exit rate in the control
areas. The remaining lenders made fewer risky loans and originated credit to borrowers with
higher credit quality. Specifically, we show that the volumes of loan applications and
originations by state-licensed lenders in the pilot area declined by 51% and 61%, respectively.
The average FICO score of borrowers who were able to obtain credit during the pilot period was
8 points higher (15% of one standard deviation).
The resulting mortgages issued in the pilot area were less likely to feature “risky”
characteristics (as defined by legislators) that would subject them to counselor review. For
instance, there were fewer loans with negative amortization or prepayment penalties, as well as
fewer low-documentation and low down-payment loans. This set of findings suggests, therefore,
3