NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MEASURING THE ACCURACY OF SURVEY RESPONSES USING ADMINISTRATIVE REGISTER DATA:
EVIDENCE FROM DENMARK
Claus Thustrup Kreiner
David Dreyer Lassen
Søren Leth-Petersen
Working Paper 19539
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19539
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013
This paper is prepared for the conference in Washington 2(cid:0)3 December 2011 on Improving the
Measurement(cid:3)of Consumer Expenditures sponsored by Conference on Research in Income and
Wealth and the National(cid:3)Bureau of Economic Research, with support from the Centre for Microdata
Methods and Practice.(cid:3)The Danish Social Science Research Council provided support for the work
presented in this paper.(cid:3)We are also thankful to Amalie Sofie Jensen and Gregers Nytoft Rasmussen
for competent research(cid:3)assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views(cid:3)of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Claus Thustrup Kreiner, David Dreyer Lassen, and Søren Leth-Petersen. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Measuring the Accuracy of Survey Responses using Administrative Register Data: Evidence
from Denmark
Claus Thustrup Kreiner, David Dreyer Lassen, and Søren Leth-Petersen
NBER Working Paper No. 19539
October 2013
JEL No. C42,D31
ABSTRACT
This paper shows how Danish administrative register data can be combined with survey data at the
person level and be used to validate information collected in the survey. Register data are collected
by automatic third party reporting and the potential errors associated with the two data sources are
therefore plausibly orthogonal. Two examples are given to illustrate the potential of combining survey
and register data. In the first example expenditure survey records with information about total expenditure
are merged with income tax records holding information about income and wealth. Income and wealth
data are used to impute total expenditure which is then compared to the survey measure. Results suggest
that the two measures match each other well on average. In the second example we compare responses
to a one-shot recall question about total gross personal income (collected in another survey) with tax
records. Tax records hold detailed information about different types of income and this makes it possible
to test if errors in the survey response are related to the reporting of particular types of income. Results
show bias in the mean and that the survey error has substantial variance. Results also show that the
errors are correlated with conventional covariates suggesting that the errors are not of the classical
type. The latter example illustrates how Denmark can be used as a “laboratory” for future validation
studies. Tax records with detailed information about different types of income are available for the
entire Danish population and can be readily merged to survey data. This makes it possible to test the
ability of respondents to accurately report different types of income using different interviewing techniques
and questions. The examples presented in this paper are based on cross section data. However, the
possibility to issue surveys repeatedly to the same persons and linking up to longitudinal tax records
provides an opportunity to learn more about the time series properties of measurement errors, a subject
about which little evidence exist, in the future.
Claus Thustrup Kreiner Søren Leth-Petersen
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of Copenhagen University of Copenhagen
Oster Farimagsgade 5 Oster Farimagsgade 5
Building 26 Building 26
DK-1353 Copenhagen K DK-1353 Copenhagen K
Denmark Denmark
claus.thustrup.kreiner@econ.ku.dk Soren.Leth-Petersen@econ.ku.dk
David Dreyer Lassen
Department of Economics
University of Copenhagen
Oster Farimagsgade 5
Building 26
DK-1353 Copenhagen K
Denmark
David.Dreyer.Lassen@econ.ku.dk

1. Introduction
Danish administrative register data can readily be combined at the person level with survey data. This
makes it possible to compare survey based measures directly with corresponding measures based on
information from administrative registers. Because register information is collected by third‐party
automatic reporting and completely independently from the survey collection we believe this provides
an inexpensive and powerful way to validate survey measures.
The objective of this paper is to illustrate how Danish register and survey data may be combined at the
person or household level and used for validating measures collected by survey, and we illustrate the
potential of this methodology by two examples. In the first example we use administrative records
about disposable income and wealth to validate the total expenditure measure collected in the Danish
family expenditure survey. In the second example we use third party reported information about gross
personal income from the income‐tax register to validate a survey measure of gross personal income.
Validating total expenditure requires assumptions as the register measure of total expenditure is itself
ridden with error. The most important assumption is that the errors of the two measures are
uncorrelated. This is not likely to be a restrictive assumption since the data are collected from
completely independent sources. We find that total expenditure from the expenditure survey is mean
unbiased, but noisy.
In the second example, where we validate survey information about gross income, the register
measure of gross personal income is collected entirely from third‐party automatically reported
information. This is thought to be very close to the “truth” and the validation exercise therefore relies
on few assumptions. We find that survey answers are noisy and mean biased. We also compare our
results about the magnitude of income mismeasurement with the results from Bound et al (cid:4666)1994(cid:4667).
They compared survey responses with payroll data from a single US manufacturing company where
workers are homogenous and received regular and well‐defined payments. Consistent with our
broader income measure and broader sample, we find larger errors than the study by Bound et al.
The methodology presented in this paper is simple but powerful. In the Danish context, it is possible to
match survey and register data for any subsample of the population and it can be done at relatively
low costs. In this way Denmark can be thought of as a “laboratory” for very detailed and focused
validation studies to investigate the impact of survey methodology on the accuracy of survey
responses so as to optimize the survey methodology across different groups and balancing this with
survey costs.1 It is possible for international researchers or statistical agencies to conduct new studies
1 Reducing measurement error is the primary mission of the Gemini project. The Gemini Project Vision Document
(cid:4666)http://www.bls.gov/cex/ovrvwgeminivision.pdf(cid:4667), however, also emphasizes that the CEX budget is constant and that new
initiatives to reduce measurement error should be balanced with the potential negative effects on response rates.
2

on Danish data through collaboration with researchers based in Denmark or directly with Statistics
Denmark if necessary funding is available.
The next section outlines the Danish institutional setup facilitating the collection of administrative
register data and the merging of register and survey records. Section 3 outlines the analytical
framework that we use to asses the importance of measurement error in the survey data. Section 4
shows how income‐tax records with information about income, tax payments and wealth have been
used to impute a measure of total household expenditure that is then matched at the household level
to data from the Danish expenditure survey in order to check how well the total expenditure measure
in the survey matches the register based imputation. The analysis presented in that section
complements the analysis presented in Browning and Leth‐Petersen (cid:4666)2003(cid:4667) and is based on the same
data. In section 5 we combine income‐tax records with new survey data containing a measure of total
gross personal income to directly validate the survey measure of gross income. Section 6 sums up and
discusses the possibilities for future validation studies based on combining Danish register and survey
data.
2. Matching administrative register data with survey data
All persons in Denmark are assigned a unique personal identification number (cid:4666)CPR(cid:4667). This number is
used by all government institutions to store person specific information including information
relevant for taxation, for example the information contained in tax returns, but also information about
car ownership, contacts to the health care system, the educational system, and about family
composition and place of residence, allowing for the construction of household units. Many
administrative registers, including population registers and income tax registers, are collected by
Statistics Denmark which merges them and provides access to researchers working at authorized
Danish research institutions. The data are confidential, are kept on servers at Statistics Denmark, and
are accessed under comprehensive security precautions. The data must be kept at the servers and only
aggregated numbers such as regression coefficients can be extracted.
The register data have many outstanding features, but the features most important in this context are
that they covers the entire population and contains tax records with third party reported information
about income and wealth. In this study we shall rely on register data from the income tax registers to
validate survey information about spending and income. The income‐tax register is collected by the
tax authorities in order to calculate the amount of taxes to be paid by all persons in Denmark by the
end of each calendar year. The tax authorities collect information from many sources. Most important
for this study are earnings and employers’ pension contributions collected directly from employers,
3