NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BLOCKHOLDERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Alex Edmans
Working Paper 19573
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19573
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013
I am grateful to Bo Becker, Jerry Davis, Christine Dobridge, Vivian Fang, Slava Fos, Todd Gormley,
Cliff Holderness, Sudarshan Jayaraman, Giorgia Piacentino, Enrique Schroth, and Luke Taylor for
valued comments, David Schoenherr for research assistance, and Janet Chater for help in preparing
this manuscript. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Alex Edmans. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Blockholders and Corporate Governance
Alex Edmans
NBER Working Paper No. 19573
October 2013
JEL No. G34
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews the theoretical and empirical literature on the different channels through which
blockholders (large shareholders) engage in corporate governance. In classical models, blockholders
exert governance through direct intervention in a firm’s operations, otherwise known as “voice.” These
theories have motivated empirical research on the determinants and consequences of activism. More
recent models show that blockholders can govern through the alternative mechanism of “exit” – selling
their shares if the manager underperforms. These theories give rise to new empirical studies on the
two-way relationship between blockholders and financial markets, linking corporate finance with asset
pricing. Blockholders may also worsen governance by extracting private benefits of control or pursuing
objectives other than firm value maximization. I highlight the empirical challenges in identifying
causal effects of and on blockholders, and the typical strategies attempted to achieve identification.
I close with directions for future research.
Alex Edmans
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2460 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
aedmans@wharton.upenn.edu

1. INTRODUCTION
Berle and Means’s (1932) seminal article highlighted the agency problems that arise from the
separation of ownership and control. When a firm’s managers are distinct from its ultimate owners,
they have inadequate incentives to maximize its value. For example, they may exert insufficient
effort, engage in wasteful investment, or extract excessive salaries and perks. The potential for such
value erosion leads to a first-order role for corporate governance – mechanisms to ensure that
managers act in shareholders’ interest. The importance of firm-level governance for the economy
as a whole has been highlighted by the recent financial crisis, which had substantial effects above
and beyond the individual firms involved.
Since the source of agency problems is that managers have inadequate stakes in their firms,
large shareholders – otherwise known as blockholders – can play a critical role in governance,
because their sizable stakes give them incentives to bear the cost of monitoring managers.
Blockholders are prevalent across companies and around the world. Holderness (2009) finds that
96% of U.S. firms contain at least one blockholder (defined as a shareholder who holds at least 5%);
this ratio is the 15th highest out of the 22 countries that he studies. Thus, understanding the role that
blockholders play in corporate governance is an important question.
Large shareholders can exert governance through two main mechanisms (see Hirschman
(1970)). The first is direct intervention within a firm, otherwise known as voice. Examples include
suggesting a strategic change via either a public shareholder proposal or a private letter to
management, or voting against directors. While most of the early research on blockholder
governance has focused on voice, a recent literature has analyzed a second governance mechanism
– trading a firm’s shares, otherwise known as exit, following the “Wall Street Rule,” or taking the
“Wall Street Walk.” If the manager destroys value, blockholders can sell their shares, pushing
2

down the stock price and thus hurting the manager ex post. Ex ante, the threat of exit induces the
manager to maximize value.
Blockholders may also exacerbate rather than solve agency problems. First, even if
blockholders’ actions maximize firm value ex post, their presence may reduce value ex ante: the
threat of intervention may erode managerial initiative, and their mere presence may lower liquidity.
Second, instead of maximizing firm value, they may extract private benefits. While blockholders
may alleviate conflicts of interest between managers and investors, there may be conflicts of interest
between the large shareholder and small shareholders. For example, blockholders may induce the
firm to buy products from another company that they own at inflated prices.
This article will survey the three mechanisms through which large shareholders can affect firm
value – improving it by governance through voice, improving it by governance through exit, or
worsening it through extracting private benefits or other channels. I start by reviewing the
theoretical literature, in particular highlighting empirical implications. While the two governance
mechanisms share some predictions – for example, a larger stake generally improves governance
through both voice and exit, and such governance in turn enhances firm value – they differ in many
others. Most notably, voice theories yield implications for the causes and consequences of activism,
while exit theories predict how blockholders affect financial markets and how their effectiveness
depends on microstructure factors. I then move to the empirical evidence on the determinants and
effects of blockholder structure.
In linking the theoretical and empirical literatures, I emphasize four challenges. First,
identifying causal effects is difficult: instead of causing changes in firm outcomes, potential
investors may predict changes in firm outcomes and acquire a block accordingly, or unobservable
variables may jointly attract large shareholders and affect outcomes. Second, blockholders can
exert governance through the threat of exit and voice, rather than only actual acts of exit and voice.
3