NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOME BIAS AND LOCAL CONTAGION:
EVIDENCE FROM FUNDS OF HEDGE FUNDS
Clemens Sialm
Zheng Sun
Lu Zheng
Working Paper 19570
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19570
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013
We thank Richard Evans, Mariassunta Giannetti, Alok Kumar, Pedro Matos, Tobias Moskowitz, Loriana
Pelizzon, Mark Westerfield, Scott Yonker, and seminar participants at the 2012 Conference of Financial
Economics and Accounting, the 2013 American Finance Association Annual Conference, the 2013
China International Conference in Finance, the 2013 European Finance Association Annual Conference,
the 2013 University of Oregon Finance Conference on Institutional Investors and Asset Management
Industry, the First Luxembourg Asset Management Conference, the Institute for Quantitative Investment
Research Conference (Inquire UK), the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Duisenberg
School of Finance and the Tinbergen Institute in Amsterdam, the University of Miami, and the University
of California at Irvine for helpful comments. Clemens Sialm thanks the Stanford Institute for Economic
Policy Research for financial support during his Sabbatical. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Clemens Sialm, Zheng Sun, and Lu Zheng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Home Bias and Local Contagion: Evidence from Funds of Hedge Funds
Clemens Sialm, Zheng Sun, and Lu Zheng
NBER Working Paper No. 19570
October 2013
JEL No. G02,G11,G23
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the geographical preferences of hedge fund investors and the implication of these
preferences for hedge fund performance. We find that funds of hedge funds overweight their investments
in hedge funds located in the same geographical areas and that funds of funds with a stronger local
bias exhibit superior performance. However, this local bias of funds of funds adversely impacts the
hedge funds by creating excess comovement and local contagion. Overall, our results suggest that
while local funds of funds benefit from local performance advantages, their local bias creates market
segmentation that could destabilize financial markets.
Clemens Sialm Lu Zheng
University of Texas at Austin Paul Merage School of Business
McCombs School of Business University of California, Irvine
1 University Station; B6600 Irvine, CA 92617
Austin, TX 78712 luzheng@uci.edu
and NBER
clemens.sialm@mccombs.utexas.edu
Zheng Sun
Paul Merage School of Business
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92617
zhengs@uci.edu

1. Introduction
The hedge fund industry represents one of the fastest growing sectors in financial markets.
According to French (2008), the total assets managed by hedge funds grew by 175% from 1994
to 2007, as compared to the 81% growth rate of mutual funds over the same period. Despite the
sharp growth of hedge funds, there is relatively little understanding on how investors select
hedge funds,1 and in turn how their investment choices affect the underlying hedge funds. Our
paper fills this gap by analyzing the geographical preferences of funds of hedge funds (FoFs).
Compared to investors of publicly traded securities, hedge fund investors may have stronger
incentives to generate private information and to monitor their investments. Many studies show
that being close to their investments may provide advantages in generating information and in
providing effective monitoring (e.g., Coval and Moskowitz (1999)). Consequently, hedge fund
investors may exhibit a stronger local preference. It is well known that hedge funds are opaque
and risky compared to public equities. They follow complex trading strategies and often trade in
illiquid assets. In addition, hedge funds are restricted from advertising publicly and face limited
disclosure requirements (Agarwal, Jiang, Tang, and Yang (2013)). These properties incentivize
investors to seek private information and to strengthen monitoring by locating close to their
investments. For example, FoFs can use soft information generated from their local social
networks to obtain information about the quality of local hedge funds. It is also possible that
FoFs can use their local connections to obtain access to reputable local managers.
1 The academic literature on this regard mainly focuses on how investors select hedge funds based on past
performance. See, for example, Goetzmann, Ingersoll, and Ross (2003), Agarwal, Daniel, and Naik (2004), Fung,
Hsieh, Naik, and Ramadorai (2008), Ding, Getmansky, Liang, and Wermers (2009), Getmansky (2012), and Aragon,
Liang, and Park (2013).
1

We start by investigating whether FoFs on average overweight local hedge funds.
Unfortunately, information on portfolio holdings of hedge funds is generally not available to
academic researchers. We therefore propose a novel methodology to estimate FoFs’ loadings on
local hedge funds and non-local hedge funds based on their return information. We find that
FoFs on average overweight local hedge funds to a substantial degree.
We also document a significant cross-sectional variation in the local bias, indicating that
some FoFs exhibit a strong local bias while others tend to be more geographically diversified.
We find that the degree of local bias is related to a number of characteristics of FoFs in an
intuitive way. For example, smaller and younger FoFs invest more heavily in local hedge funds.
Also, FoFs in which managers invest their personal capital are more biased toward local hedge
funds, which is consistent with a stronger incentive to search for private information and exert
monitoring efforts. Finally, FoFs that concentrate on local portfolios impose a longer redemption
notice period to their investors, which may reflect their concerns for increased need for liquidity
due to the location concentration.
We next test whether the local bias of FoFs is related to their performance. We find that
FoFs that tilt their portfolios more heavily toward local hedge funds on average perform better.
The result is statistically and economically significant and holds for different measures of
performance and various proxies for the local bias. A one-standard deviation increase in the local
bias is associated with a 35 basis points increase in the Fung-Hsieh seven-factor alpha over the
next quarter. Moreover, the performance predicting power of the local bias is incremental to
other fund characteristics that have been found to be important for hedge fund performance.
2