NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CONTRACTING OVER THE DISCLOSURE OF SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE:
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY AND ACADEMIC PUBLICATION
Joshua S. Gans
Fiona E. Murray
Scott Stern
Working Paper 19560
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19560
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013
Thanks to Dan Burk, Iain Cockburn, Julian Kolev, Mark Lemley, Michael Riordan, Chris Snyder,
Glen Weyl, Heidi Williams, and participants at the 2008 Organisational Economics Workshop (Sydney),
Workshop on Scholarly Communication (Michigan), Summer Workshop on Industrial Organisation
(Auckland), 2009 International Industrial Organization Society Conference (Boston), 2009 Conference
on the Patent Crisis (UC Irvine), 2010 NBER Summer Institute and seminars at Northwestern, Colorado,
Stanford, Hong Kong, Melbourne, Queensland, the Australian National University, Wharton, Harvard,
Toronto, Georgetown, Yahoo Research, Case Western, MIT and Boston. Thanks to Vivienne Groves
for research assistance. JG acknowledges an ARC Discovery Grant for financial assistance. FM and
SS acknowledge a National Science Foundation Science of Science Policy Grant. Responsibility for
all errors lies with us. The latest version of this paper is available at research.joshuagans.com. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19560.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Joshua S. Gans, Fiona E. Murray, and Scott Stern. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Contracting Over the Disclosure of Scientific Knowledge: Intellectual Property and Academic
Publication
Joshua S. Gans, Fiona E. Murray, and Scott Stern
NBER Working Paper No. 19560
October 2013, Revised September 2014
JEL No. M55,O32,O34
ABSTRACT
This paper provides a theoretical investigation of the tension over knowledge disclosure between
firms and their scientific employees. While empirical research suggests that scientists exhibit a “taste
for science,” such open disclosures can limit a firm’s competitive advantage or ability to profitably
commercialize their innovations. To explore how this tension is resolved we focus on the strategic
interaction between researchers and firms bargaining over whether (and how) knowledge will be
disclosed. We evaluate four disclosure strategies: secrecy, patenting, open science (scientific publication)
and patent-paper pairs providing insights into the determinants of the disclosure strategy of a firm.
We find that patents and publications can be complementary instruments facilitating the disclosure
of knowledge-providing predictions as to when stronger IP protection regimes might drive openness
by firms.
Joshua S. Gans Scott Stern
Rotman School of Management MIT Sloan School of Management
University of Toronto 100 Main Street, E62-476
105 St. George Street Cambridge, MA 02142
Toronto ON M5S 3E6 and NBER
and NBER sstern@mit.edu
joshua.gans@gmail.com
Fiona E. Murray
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-470
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
fmurray@mit.edu

I. Introduction
An enduring puzzle in the management of innovation is that many firms fund basic
research and embrace practices from open science (such as publishing and conference
participation) alongside their more traditional and applied development activities. Industry
scientists even appear to have internal career paths tied to publishing success and career ladders
that resemble those in academia with advancement solely through individual technical
contributions (O’Mahony and Dahlander 2011). To explain these observations, scholars have
hypothesized that open science practices serve as a “ticket of admission” to absorb scientific
knowledge from academia, allowing firms to more rapidly reach the frontier and exploit first
mover advantages (Rosenberg 1990; Cohen and Levinthal 1990). By implication, firms adopting
open science practices are more productive. However, upon empirical examination, the adoption
of open science by firms is found to be negatively correlated with the incomes of scientists at
those firms (Stern, 2004). Moreover, patent quality may be negatively correlated with the
magnitude of scientific impact of associated papers (Gittelman and Kogut 2002). This suggests
that scientists themselves have a “taste for science” (Merton 1973; Dasgupta and David 1994)
and that, in fact, firms face costs in engaging in scientific practices. This raises a critical question
for scholars and for managers of innovation: What types of disclosure practices – particularly
with regards to open and closed practices – should firms adopt? And, relatedly, as firms make
these disclosure choices, what tradeoffs are being made with regards to firm-level
competitiveness on one the hand and employee preferences one the other?
The importance of exploring the collection of disclosure practices that firms should adopt
reframes the question of open science in a broader context. Specifically, while much of the
current literature counterpoints open science with “closed” practices, such as intellectual
property, there exist a wide variety of disclosure strategies that might be pursued. For example,
trade secrets are widely used in industry but are rarely adopted in academia. Moreover, one of
the distinguishing features of science as practiced by industry (compared to that practiced in
academic settings) is the greater adoption of mechanisms to protect intellectual property. This
includes patent protection, which, of course, involves some disclosures but can restrict use, as
well as trade secrecy. Indeed, there is an increased incidence of patents being associated with
publications of the same underlying research (Murray 2002; Azoulay, Ding and Stuart 2009) and

2
this incidence is greater for industry than academia (Murray and Stern 2007).
The second of our key questions relates to the contractual relationship regarding
disclosure between scientists and the firms who employ them. Studies of scientists’ preferences
for open science ignore the fact that firms have preferences and these preferences may be at odds
with those scientists who desire open publication. Moreover, these studies ignore the fact that
scientists may have more complex preferences over the bundle of disclosure approaches – not
simply publication. For example, the recent Twitter employment contract suggests that scientists
may have preferences over the use of their intellectual property: the firm provided employees
with significant future control rights over the use of their patents, including commitments not to
use the patents in “troll” situations.1 A similar commitment to “open science-like” practices can
be observed with IBMs agreement to contribute intellectual property related to open source
software. To complicate matters, scientists may have preferences with regards to combinations of
disclosure practices. The backlash over the patenting (and publishing) of the Oncomouse
discovery in the 1980s demonstrates that (academic) scientists resist attempts to exclude the use
of research results through intellectual property protection and generally look with skepticism on
practices that allow unfettered commercial exploitation of research (Bok 2003). Does this imply
that industry scientists will be less interested in open science publication practices when they are
combined with simultaneous patenting? Put more broadly, what is the negotiation that arises
between industry scientists and the firms who employ them with regards to disclosure?
To date, there has been no thorough theoretical examination of the drivers of firm
adoption of a full range of disclosure practices: open science publication alongside other
commercial options, including secrecy and intellectual property. Thus, while the empirical
studies show that scientists pay to be scientists (Stern 2004) – that is, accept lower salaries to
engage in open disclosure through publication – in industry settings they cannot explain why
some firms adopt those practices while others do not. If one were to take a pure “taste for
science” view of the management of scientific workforces, we might expect that, in industries
were intellectual property protection is weak (and, therefore, less consequential for firms),
scientific practices would be more widely adopted as a means of economizing on labor costs.
However, open science is most widely found in sectors such as the pharmaceutical industry
where intellectual property protection is strong (Cockburn and Henderson 1998; Lim 1999). To
1 https://blog.twitter.com/2012/introducing-innovators-patent-agreement (accessed 12 September 2014).