NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CORPORATE LIQUIDITY MANAGEMENT:
A CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK AND SURVEY
Heitor Almeida
Murillo Campello
Igor Cunha
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 19502
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19502
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013
We thank Sergey Chernenko, Filippo Ippolito, Kathy Kahle, Ander Perez-Orive, René Stulz and Anjan
Thakor for helpful suggestions. We also thank Shan Ge and Xi Wu for excellent research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Heitor Almeida, Murillo Campello, Igor Cunha, and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Corporate Liquidity Management: A Conceptual Framework and Survey
Heitor Almeida, Murillo Campello, Igor Cunha, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 19502
October 2013
JEL No. G31,G32
ABSTRACT
Ensuring that a firm has sufficient liquidity to finance valuable projects that occur in the future is at
the heart of the practice of financial management. Yet, while discussion of these issues goes back
at least to Keynes (1936), a substantial literature on the ways in which firms manage liquidity has
developed only recently. We argue that many of the key issues in liquidity management can be understood
through the lens of a framework in which firms face financial constraints and wish to ensure efficient
investment in the future. We present such a model and use it to survey many of the empirical findings
on liquidity management.
Much of the variation in the quantity of liquidity can be explained by the precautionary demand for
liquidity. While there are alternatives to cash holdings such as hedging or lines of credit, cash remains
“king”, in that it still is the predominate way in which firms ensure future liquidity for future investments.
We discuss theories on the choice of liquidity measures and related empirical evidence. In addition,
we discuss agency-based theories of liquidity, the real effects of liquidity choices, and the impact of
the 2008-9 Financial Crisis on firms’ liquidity management.
Heitor Almeida Igor Cunha
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Nova School of Business and Economics
515 East Gregory Drive, 4037 BIF Lisbon
Champaign, IL, 61820 Portugal 1099-032
and NBER igor.cunha@novasbe.pt
halmeida@illinois.edu
Michael S. Weisbach
Murillo Campello Department of Finance
Johnson Graduate School of Management Fisher College of Business
Cornell University Ohio State University
114 East Avenue 2100 Neil Ave.
369 Sage Hall Columbus, OH 43210
Ithaca, NY 148531-6201 and NBER
and NBER weisbach.2@osu.edu
campello@cornell.edu

1. Introduction
The 2008-9 Financial Crisis has renewed interest in the way in which firms manage liquidity,
since firms’ access to external financing was a major determinant of firms’ survival during this period.
Yet, liquidity management is an old topic and has been discussed at least since Keynes’ (1936) General
Theory. Keynes argued that liquidity management and financing constraints are fundamentally linked: If
financial markets work as well as we typically assume they do, firms’ liquidity decisions would be
irrelevant. Like most corporate financial decisions, it is only to the extent that financial markets contain
frictions that liquidity decisions are interesting.
Many CFOs consider decisions about corporate liquidity to be among the most important
decisions they make; to a large extent, they view their job as being able to find a way to fund investments
proposed by the CEO (see, e.g., Graham and Harvey (2001)). The way in which firms manage liquidity is
clearly an important concern to practitioners and policy-makers, and has become an active topic of
research. Liquidity management contains a number of issues for CFOs to address, but the main ones
come down to the question of how liquid the firm’s position ought to be, and how to maintain this given
level of liquidity (through cash, lines of credit, hedging, or other mechanisms).
The literature on optimal cash holdings took off around 2000, motivated by the growing cash
balances held by U.S. firms at that time.1 This literature has led our understanding of the unique role that
cash holdings play in firms’ liquidity management to grow substantially. Early models of optimal cash
holdings ignore other mechanisms to manage liquidity and focus on the precautionary motive for holding
cash. Since then, the literature has considered the role of cash holdings when other options such as debt
capacity, derivatives, and credit lines are also available. The broad conclusion of this literature is that cash
remains “king,” at least for certain groups of firms. Debt capacity does not provide the same degree of
downside protection as cash holdings and derivatives can only help with a limited set of risks that are
traded in the market. While bank credit lines are the best all-around substitute for cash holdings, firms
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
1!There is an earlier literature that focuses on the transaction motive to hold cash using inventory-type models of
cash holdings, such as Meltzer (1963), Miller and Orr (1966), and Baumol (1970).!
! 1

with large liquidity risks still tend to prefer cash, especially if their liquidity risk is aggregate in nature.
Recent research on liquidity management has addressed these issues, as well as a number of others,
including the relationship between firms’ decisions about liquidity and the financial constraints they
currently face or are likely to face in the future, and the extent to which taxes and agency considerations
affect firms’ liquidity decisions.
This paper surveys the literature on liquidity management. It does so through the lens of a model
in which firms hold liquidity to ensure efficient investment in the future, while simultaneously
management must be motivated to provide a high effort level. Keynes’ notion of a precautionary motive
for having a liquid balance sheet presumes that in some states of the world, firms are financially
constrained; such constraints occur endogenously in the model because of a limited pledgeability problem
that arises from a moral hazard.2 It turns out that many insights about liquidity management can be
understood through this framework.
Since cash holdings are the most common way that firms use to ensure liquidity, the literature
has paid much attention to the determinants of cash holdings. Cash holdings vary both across countries
and across firms within countries, and also over time. We discuss in detail a number of studies examining
both the cross-sectional and time series behavior of the level of cash. The underlying cause of cross-
sectional variation in liquidity appears to be, as Keynes suggested, variation in financial frictions that
these firms expect to experience in the future. However, it remains a puzzle why the level of cash held by
most firms has varied so much, and in particular, why cash holdings have increased so dramatically in
recent years.
In addition to the level of cash holdings, theory predicts that the sensitivity of cash holdings to
cash flows should depend on whether the firm is financially constrained. We explain in detail why
corporate savings in response to incremental cash flows are likely to be related to the financial frictions
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
2!The model follows Holmstrom and Tirole (1998) and Tirole (2006). While their moral hazard framework is a
convenient modeling tool, moral hazard is not the only friction that can generate limited pledgeability and a
precautionary demand for liquidity. For example, limited pledgeability also arises from an asymmetric information
framework (see Tirole (2006), Chapter 6).!!
! 2