NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEFINED CONTRIBUTION PENSION PLANS:
STICKY OR DISCERNING MONEY?
Clemens Sialm
Laura Starks
Hanjiang Zhang
Working Paper 19569
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19569
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013
The authors thank Susan Christoffersen, Zhi Da, Steve Dimmock, Nancy Eckl, Michael Halling, Jennifer
Huang, Veronika Pool, Jim Poterba, Jonathan Reuter, John Simon, Irina Stefanescu, Marno Verbeek,
conference participants at the 2012 SIFR Conference on Mutual Funds in Stockholm, the 2013 Asian
Bureau of Finance and Economic Research Conference in Singapore, the 2013 China International
Conference in Finance in Shanghai, the 2013 Conference on Professional Asset Management at the
Rotterdam School of Management, and seminar participants at Georgia State University, the Hanken
School of Economics, the Helsinki School of Economics at Aalto, New York University, the University
of Oklahoma, the University of Texas at Austin, the University of Texas at Dallas, and the University
of Virginia for helpful comments. We thank Veronika Pool and Irina Stefanescu for sharing their Form
11-K data with us. The authors also thank Tania Davila for research assistance. Clemens Sialm thanks
the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research for financial support during his Sabbatical. Laura
Starks is a trustee of mutual funds and variable annuities offered by a retirement service provider.
She has also consulted for mutual fund management companies and 401(k) plan sponsors. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Clemens Sialm, Laura Starks, and Hanjiang Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Defined Contribution Pension Plans: Sticky or Discerning Money?
Clemens Sialm, Laura Starks, and Hanjiang Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 19569
October 2013
JEL No. G02,G18,G23,G28,H55
ABSTRACT
Participants in defined contribution (DC) retirement plans rarely adjust their portfolio allocations,
suggesting that their investment choices and consequent money flows are sticky and not discerning.
Yet, the participants’ inertia could be offset by the DC plan sponsors, who adjust the plan’s investment
options. We examine these countervailing influences on flows into U.S. mutual funds. We find that
flows into funds that derive from DC assets are more volatile and exhibit more performance sensitivity
than non-DC flows, primarily due to the adjustments of the investment options by the plan sponsors.
Thus, DC retirement money is less sticky and more discerning.
Clemens Sialm Hanjiang Zhang
University of Texas at Austin Division of Banking and Finance
McCombs School of Business Nanyang Business School
1 University Station; B6600 Nanyang Technological University
Austin, TX 78712 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore, 639798
and NBER Zhanghj@ntu.edu.sg
clemens.sialm@mccombs.utexas.edu
Laura Starks
University of Texas at Austin
McCombs School of Business
1 University Station; B6600
Austin, TX 78712
laura.starks@mccombs.utexas.edu

Mutual fund holdings in employer sponsored defined contribution (DC) plans are an
important and growing segment of today’s financial markets. Assets in DC plans increased from
$1.7 trillion in 1995 to $5.1 trillion in 2012. Further, at the end of this period, DC plans
constituted 22% of total U.S. mutual fund assets and 27% of U.S. equity fund assets.1 Such
holdings are expected to remain important with the increasing number of Americans moving
toward retirement and with the transition of corporations and public entities towards the use of
defined contribution plans rather than defined benefit (DB) plans.
Despite the prevalence of mutual fund holdings in employer-sponsored retirement
accounts, little is known about the effects of DC plan sponsors (i.e., employers) and participants
(i.e., employees) on mutual fund flows. Our paper analyzes the behavior of these sponsors and
participants and asks the central question of whether DC pension plan investments constitute a
source of sticky or discerning money for mutual funds. Conventional wisdom, based on previous
studies regarding the behavior of DC plan participants, suggests that the DC plan assets in
mutual funds should be sticky.2 However, the decisions regarding the composition of DC plan
menus are made by DC plan sponsors, who might frequently delete funds with poor prior
performance and add funds with superior prior performance. Which of these influences has a
greater effect on fund flows is an empirical question that we address in this paper. Further, we
consider the implications of these influences for both plan participants and the mutual fund
industry.
Although investors who own mutual funds directly have the flexibility to choose among
the universe of mutual funds, typically participants in employer-sponsored DC plans have
limited choices.3 These choices arise through a two-stage process. In the first stage plan sponsors
1 Investment Company Institute (ICI), The U.S. Retirement Market, Fourth Quarter 2012, Trends in Mutual Fund
Investing, February 2013, and 2013 Investment Company Handbook, p. 114.
2 See for example, Benartzi and Thaler (2001); Madrian and Shea (2001); Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick
(2002); Agnew, Balduzzi, and Sunden (2003); Duflo and Saez (2003); Huberman and Jiang (2006); and Carroll et
al. (2009). In contrast, evidence suggests that individual investors exhibit relatively high turnover in their traditional
(directly held) brokerage accounts (e.g., Barber and Odean (2000), Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001), and Ivković and
Weisbenner (2009)).
3 For example, a 2011 Deloitte survey of DC plan sponsors found that the median DC plan includes 16 investment
options.
1

select the DC plan menus and adjust the investment options through time by removing or adding
options. In a second stage, the employees allocate their individual DC account balances among
the choices made available to them by the plan sponsors.
This two stage process contributes to different investor behavior patterns for DC plan
investors versus ordinary mutual fund investors. Thus, we expect the fund flows from DC plans
to behave differently than flows from non-DC sources. On the one hand, DC plan participants
make periodic retirement account contributions and withdrawals, which are persistent over time.
In addition, they may evaluate their present and prospective fund holdings differently from non-
DC fund investors due to longer investment horizons and a different tax status.4 These aspects
may explain the documented inertia by DC plan participants in the previous literature in which
retirement savers are found to have a tendency to rebalance and trade infrequently and to follow
default options. The documented inertia in DC plan participants’ investment decisions leads to
the commonly held belief that retirement money flows should have low volatility, high
autocorrelation, and low sensitivity to prior fund performance.
On the other hand, the infrequent trading by individual plan participants could be offset
by the plan sponsors’ adjustments to the plan’s menus. That is, to satisfy their fiduciary
responsibilities, plan sponsors monitor the available investment options.5 They may choose to
replace poorly-performing funds with investment options that exhibited superior prior
performance.6 Thus, rather than being sticky, DC money could actually act as an important
disciplining mechanism for fund managers, resulting in money flows that exhibit higher
volatility, lower autocorrelation, and higher flow-performance sensitivity.
4 The tax on income to investments in DC plans is deferred until the income is distributed. See Sialm and Starks
(2012) for a discussion of tax clienteles in equity mutual funds.
5 See the U.S. Department of Labor’s Employee Benefits Services Administration website for information on
fiduciary obligations in DC plans: http://www.dol.gov/ebsa/publications/fiduciaryresponsibility.html. Over the last
decade there have been numerous lawsuits filed against plan sponsors and service providers. Most of these lawsuits
allege the plans are charging excessive or hidden fees, however, the complaints have also included allegations of
improper monitoring of options
(http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970204777904576651133452868572.html).
6 In 2011, 43% of plan sponsors responding to a Deloitte survey of DC plans stated that they had replaced at least
one fund due to poor performance within the previous year.
2