NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PREDATORY SHORT SELLING
Markus K. Brunnermeier
Martin Oehmke
Working Paper 19514
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19514
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013
For helpful comments, we thank Thierry Foucault, Charles Jones, Marco Pagano, Alejandro van der
Ghote, and seminar participants at Columbia University. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19514.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Markus K. Brunnermeier and Martin Oehmke. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Predatory Short Selling
Markus K. Brunnermeier and Martin Oehmke
NBER Working Paper No. 19514
October 2013
JEL No. G01,G20,G21,G23,G28
ABSTRACT
Financial institutions may be vulnerable to predatory short selling. When the stock of a financial institution
is shorted aggressively, leverage constraints imposed by short-term creditors can force the institution
to liquidate long-term investments at fire sale prices. For financial institutions that are sufficiently
close to their leverage constraints, predatory short selling equilibria co-exist with no-liquidation equilibria
(the vulnerability region) or may even be the unique equilibrium outcome (the doomed region). Increased
coordination among short sellers expands the doomed region, where liquidation is the unique equilibrium.
Our model provides a potential justification for temporary restrictions on short selling of vulnerable
institutions and can be used to assess recent empirical evidence on short-sale bans.
Markus K. Brunnermeier
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
markus@princeton.edu
Martin Oehmke
Finance and Economics Division
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 420
New York, NY 10027
moehmke@columbia.edu

1 Introduction
The financial crisis of 2007-09 and the recent European sovereign debt crisis have led to
a heated discussion on short selling financial stocks. For example, as financial stocks fell
sharply in the spring, summer, and fall of 2008, a number of banks, most notably Bear
Stearns, Lehman Brothers, and Morgan Stanley, blamed short sellers for their woes.1 In
response, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and a number of international
financial regulators took measures against short selling; most significantly, some imposed
temporary restrictions on the short selling of financial stocks, some even on short selling in
general. In August 2011, when European banks were struggling because of losses due to
the European sovereign debt crisis, market regulators in France, Spain, Italy, and Belgium
imposed temporary bans on short selling for some financial stocks.
On both occasions, the worry was that short selling was “predatory,” in the sense that
short sellers were attempting to bring down fundamentally solvent financial institutions by
triggering self-fulfilling downward spirals. However, this line of argument is at odds with the
consensus view in economics, which—broadly speaking—says that there is nothing wrong
with short selling. In fact, most economists would argue that short selling is a valuable
activity—short sellers help enforce the law of one price, facilitate price discovery, and en-
hance liquidity. Moreover, short sale restrictions may lead to overvaluation and bubbles,
and reduce the ability of investors to hedge exposures.2 In the light of these findings, is
there any economic justification to impose restrictions on short selling the stock of financial
institutions?
1See, for example, “Anatomy of the Morgan Stanley Panic,” Wall Street Journal, November 24, 2008.
2For theoretical models on how short-sale constraints can lead to overvaluation, speculative trading, and
bubbles, see, for example, Miller (1977), Harrison and Kreps (1978), Scheinkman and Xiong (2003), and
Hong and Stein (2003). Diamond and Verrecchia (1987) show theoretically that a market with short-sale
constraints incorporates information more slowly than a market in which short sales are not restricted.
Empirical evidence that short sellers contribute to market efficiency and market quality can be found in,
among others, Dechow, Hutton, Meulbroek, and Sloan (2001), Desai, Krishnamurthy, and Kumar (2006),
Bris, Goetzmann, and Zhu (2007), Chang, Cheng, and Yu (2007), Boehmer, Jones, and Zhang (2008), Saffi
and Sigurdsson (2011), and Boehmer and Wu (2013). Short positions are important hedging tools in a
number of common trading strategies (e.g., hedging options, convertible bonds, or market risk in long-short
strategies).
1

In this paper, we present a model of predatory short selling. We show that, even though
short-sellingactivityisbeneficialduring“normaltimes,”intimesofstressshortsellerscan,in
fact, destabilize financial institutions through predatory short sales. Predatory short selling
can occur in our model because financial institutions are subject to leverage constraints
imposed by their short-term creditors and uninsured depositors. These leverage constraints
captureafirst-orderdifferencebetweenfinancialinstitutionsandregularcorporates: Relative
to corporations that can match maturities of assets and liabilities, the business model of a
financial institution almost necessarily involves maturity and liquidity mismatch (see, e.g.,
Diamond and Dybvig (1983) and Brunnermeier, Gorton, and Krishnamurthy (2013)), which
exposes financial institutions to sudden withdrawal of funding in response to declines in
equity value. We show that, in the presence of such leverage constraints, predatory short
sellersthattemporarilydepressthestockpriceofafinancialinstitutioncanforcethefinancial
institution to sell long-term assets in order to repay debt to satisfy their leverage constraint.
When long-term assets have to be unwound at a sufficient discount, the resulting losses for
the financial institution allow predatory short sellers to break even on their short positions.
Our model implies that financial institutions can be vulnerable to attacks from preda-
tory short sellers when their balance sheets are weak. For financial institutions that are
sufficiently close to their leverage constraints, predatory short selling equilibria co-exist with
no-liquidation equilibria (the vulnerability region) or may even be the unique equilibrium
outcome (the doomed region). In the vulnerability region there are two stable equilibria.
In one equilibrium, no predatory short selling occurs. In that case, the financial institution
does not violate its constraint and can hold its long-term investments until maturity. In the
second equilibrium, however, predatory short selling causes the financial institution to vio-
late its leverage constraint, leading to a complete liquidation of its long-term asset holdings.
In the doomed region, there is a unique stable equilibrium in which predatory short sellers
force the financial institution to liquidate its entire long-term asset holdings.
Comparing a regime with short selling to one with short-sale restrictions shows that, dur-
2