NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CONSUMER CREDIT:
TOO MUCH OR TOO LITTLE (OR JUST RIGHT)?
Jonathan Zinman
Working Paper 19682
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19682
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2013
Thanks to Neil Bhutta, David Laibson, Jialan Wang, Glenn Weyl, and audiences at the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau and the Chicago Benefit-Cost Conference for helpful comments, and to
many co-authors (and especially Dean Karlan and Victor Stango) for shaping and sharpening my thinking
over the years The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Jonathan Zinman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Consumer Credit: Too Much or Too Little (or Just Right)?
Jonathan Zinman
NBER Working Paper No. 19682
November 2013
JEL No. D03,D14,D18,D82,E32,G21,G23,G28,R31
ABSTRACT
The intersection of research and policy on consumer credit often has a Goldilocks feel. Some researchers
and policymakers posit that consumer credit markets produce too much credit. Other researchers and
policymakers posit that markets produce too little credit. I review theories and evidence on inefficient
consumer credit supply. For each of eight classes of theories I sketch some of the leading models and
summarize any convincing empirical tests of those models. I also discuss more “circumstantial” evidence
that does not map tightly into a particular model but has the potential to shed light on, or obscure, answers
to key questions. Overall there is a lack of convincing evidence on whether markets err, and in which
direction. We do not yet understand whether and under what conditions markets over-supply or under-supply
credit, much less why.
Jonathan Zinman
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
314 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
jzinman@dartmouth.edu

I. Introduction
The intersection of research and policy on consumer credit often has a Goldilocks feel.2
Some researchers and policymakers posit that consumer credit markets produce too much credit.
Other researchers and policymakers posit that markets produce too little credit.
Do markets actually over- or under-supply credit? If yes, to what extent, and what is the
underlying source of the inefficiency- the underlying “market” failure (which, to be fair, also
include the possibilities of consumer decision, and policy, failures)? These are vital threshold
questions for policymaking. Without convincing answers we lack motivation for seriously
considering policy interventions, and we lack guidance for designing policy that might actually
improve outcomes and hence be worth subjecting to rigorous cost-benefit analyses. Yet
empirical evidence on these threshold questions is thin, and mixed. Perhaps more to the point,
links between theory, empirics, and welfare analysis are even thinner.
This paper reviews theories and evidence on inefficient consumer credit supply. I sacrifice
depth for breadth and acknowledge the likelihood that my review may still lack some breadth. I
focus mostly on the U.S. and its largest markets—mortgage, auto, student, credit card, and
“small-dollar” (principally payday and bank overdraft)-- but reference other settings and markets
opportunistically. I do not cover the very short-term loans that are more the province of
literatures on money and payments. Nor do I explicitly consider lending to small businesses or
entrepreneurs, although the considerable overlap between these agents and “consumers” seems
noteworthy: most enterprises are closely held, particularly in their early stages. Indeed, there is
evidence that “consumer” credit is often used to finance business activities, while “commercial”
or “microenterprise” credit is often used to finance household activities.
I start with three classes of theories of credit under-supply. Two are canonical: market power,
and regulations outlawing products that would be welfare-enhancing. The third is only slightly
less canonical: varieties of asymmetric information that can lead to rationing.
Next I consider five classes of theories of credit over-supply (with “over-supply” being
loosely defined in some cases).3 The first considers varieties of asymmetric information that can
2 A rhetorical nod to Gordon and Stock (1998).

lead to over-supply: advantageous selection, and moral hazard under competition (common pool
problems). A second class of theories focuses on externalities in the markets for assets used to
collateralize borrowing. A third class focuses on systemic risk introduced by collateralized
borrowing in concert with other factors. A fourth focuses on how deleveraging can slow or halt
recoveries if initial debt loads are high enough (arguably too high in some sense). A fifth focuses
on consumers who are “behavioral” in some way that makes them psychologically/cognitively
predisposed to borrow “too much”.4
For each class of theory I sketch some of the leading models and summarize any convincing
empirical tests of those models. I also discuss more “circumstantial” evidence that does not map
tightly into a particular model but has the potential to shed light on, or obscure, answers to the
threshold questions.
Speaking of circumstantial evidence, I also review the growing body of reduced-form
evidence on the impacts of credit supply shocks on consumers. This evidence is clearly related to
the threshold questions in the sense that it addresses the question of whether more or less access
to credit makes people better or worse off. But mapping this evidence into policy and welfare
analysis is complicated by possible non-linearities, coarse diagnosis, and equally coarse policy
treatments with limited enforcement.
3 As I discuss below, many models of over-supply also have a key element of under-supply. More
precisely, they generate over-supply in the 2nd-best sense that, conditional on some friction that produces
binding credit constraints in some important state of the world (e.g., an economic crisis), we can end up
with too much credit entering that state of the world.
4 I should also mention government subsidies, which have a long history of being blamed for falsely
operating under the assumption of under-supply, and instead inducing over-supply. In U.S. consumer
credit the main subsidies are for mortgages (via guarantees, and the interest deduction) and student loans.
Interestingly, Hoff and Stiglitz (1998) show that subsidies can lead to higher prices and undersupply
when there is monopolistic competition with endogenous enforcement costs. To my knowledge there is
little consensus on the direction or magnitude of any distortion, although Gale (1991) and Glaeser et al
(2010) find that subsidies induce nontrivial excess/inefficient supply in U.S..