NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE HOME FRONT: RENT CONTROL AND THE RAPID WARTIME INCREASE
IN HOME OWNERSHIP
Daniel K. Fetter
Working Paper 19604
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19604
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013
For helpful comments I thank Richard Arnott, Jeremy Atack, John Bellows, Price Fishback, Eric Hilt,
Lee Lockwood, Hugh Rockoff, Ken Snowden, Richard Sutch, John˛Wallis, Heidi Williams, and seminar
participants at Arizona, Harvard, Stanford, Vanderbilt, Wellesley, Yale, the Washington Area Economic
History Seminar, the 2012 Cliometrics Conference, the 2012 NBER Summer Institute, the 2013 AREUEA
Annual Meeting, the 2013 AALAC Mellon 23 Workshop, and the May 2014 All-UC Conference.˛For
feedback at the earliest stages of this project I am also grateful to David Autor, Erica Field, Erzo Luttmer,
Robert Margo, Rohini Pande, and especially to Edward Glaeser, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence Katz.
Chloe Breider, Andong Liu, Mengyuan Liu, Bing Wang, and Wendy Wu provided excellent research
assistance. I also gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Taubman Center for State and
Local Government, the Real Estate Academic Initiative at Harvard, and Wellesley College. All errors
are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Daniel K. Fetter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Home Front: Rent Control and the Rapid Wartime Increase in Home Ownership
Daniel K. Fetter
NBER Working Paper No. 19604
October 2013, Revised June 2016
JEL No. N00,N42,N92,R00,R28,R31,R38
ABSTRACT
The US home ownership rate rose by 10 percentage points between 1940 and 1945, about half the
size of the net change over the 20th century, despite severe restrictions on construction during World
War II. I present evidence that wartime rent control played an important role in this shift. The empirical
test exploits features of the central authority's method of imposing rent control, which generated variation
in the frozen level of rents for cities that had seen similar increases in rents prior to control. Greater
rent reductions at the onset of rent control were associated with greater increases in home ownership
over the first half of the 1940s. This relationship is not driven by differential trends in housing demand
or other unobserved factors potentially correlated with variation in rent reductions. The results imply
that if maximum rents had been set at their peak pre-control level rather than at a lower level, the increase
in home ownership would have been 10 percent smaller. Combined with new data showing rapid house
price appreciation during the war, this result suggests that 10 percent is a lower bound on the share
of the "wartime" increase in home ownership that rent control can explain.
Daniel K. Fetter
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
dfetter@wellesley.edu

1 Introduction
...many a landlord is deciding that it is better to sell at the inflated market price than
to rent at a fixed ceiling price. The ceiling on rents, therefore, means that an increasing
fraction of all housing is being put on the market for owner-occupancy, and that rentals
are becoming almost impossible to find, at least at the legal rents.
– Milton Friedman and George J. Stigler, Roofs or Ceilings? (1946)
The mid-20th century increase in home ownership in the United States is often framed as a
post-World War II change, associated with surging construction of new housing in suburban areas
(e.g., Jackson, 1985). The years from 1945 to 1960 indeed saw home ownership rise rapidly. Yet in-
tercensal survey estimates suggest that the home ownership rate increased by 10 percentage points
between 1940 and 1945, slightly more than the postwar rise from 1945 to 1960. The timing of
this increase is seemingly incongruous with differences in housing supply between the wartime and
postwar periods: in contrast to the high elasticity of postwar construction, residential construction
was severely restricted during the war. This paper investigates one of the largest government inter-
ventions in housing markets during the 1940s – wartime and postwar rent control – and illuminates
its role in this “wartime” rise in home ownership.
World War II saw the most widespread imposition of rent control in the history of the United
States. Roughly80percentofthe1940rentalhousingstocklayinareasthatthefederalgovernment
put under rent control between 1941 and 1946. At the same time, sales prices were not controlled.
Many observers at the time, including Friedman and Stigler (1946), argued that rent control led
to higher rates of home ownership as landlords chose to sell at uncontrolled prices rather than
continuing to rent out their properties at the controlled price. Consistent with this story, a large
shareofthewartimeincreaseinhomeownershipcamefromthesamedwellingsshiftingfromrenter-
to owner-occupancy.1 But most contemporary arguments on the importance of rent control were
based solely on aggregate national trends, even though many other factors – such as rising income
and savings or increasing marginal tax rates – could have played a role in the observed shift in
1Given the link between tenure and structure type – Glaeser and Shapiro (2003) show that in modern data most
singlefamilydetachedunitsareowner-occupiedandmostmultifamilyunitsarerenter-occupied–itisusefultonote
thatin1940about43percentofsingle-familydetachedunitswererenter-occupied(by1950,only27percentofsingle
familydetachedunitswererenter-occupied). Itwascertainlytrue,however,thatmostowner-occupierhouseholdsin
1940 – about 84 percent – lived in single family detached housing.
1

housing tenure.
An empirical test of the hypothesis that wartime rent control increased home ownership is
complicated by the fact that nearly all urban areas were placed under rent control during the war.
To overcome this challenge, I leverage local-level variation in the severity of rent control at the
time it was imposed, generated by the central authority’s method of determining rent reductions.
The empirical test compares cities with similar increases in rents prior to control, but different
reductions in rent when control was imposed. The key idea is illustrated in Figure 1. On the date
when rent control was imposed in each city (the right vertical line), the maximum legal rent for
each dwelling was set at its level on the city’s ‘base’ date (the left vertical line). The spirit of the
test is to draw comparisons like that between Baltimore and Buffalo and to avoid comparisons like
that between Baltimore and Boston, since Boston’s low severity of control was most likely due to
lesser growth of housing demand. Conditioning on the degree of rent appreciation before control, I
use the implied reduction in rents from their pre-control levels to their base date levels as variation
in the initial severity of rent control, and test whether cities in which rent control was more severe
at imposition saw greater increases in home ownership over the first half of the 1940s.
To implement this test, I compile a dataset of 51 cities for which the National Industrial Con-
ference Board (NICB) had begun publishing a monthly rent index by March 1940, and link the
data on rents to newly digitized records from intercensal housing surveys carried out by the Census
Bureau and the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) between 1944 and 1946. The results provide
evidence that rent control did increase home ownership. A 2.5 percentage point greater reduction
in rents relative to their maximum pre-control levels at the time control was imposed – roughly a
standard deviation in the sample cities – was associated with roughly a 1 percentage point greater
increase in home ownership between 1940 and the city’s survey date.
Spillover of excess demand from the rental to the sales market also raises the possibility that
rent controlhad significant effectson house priceappreciation over thewar. Becauseof thescarcity
of data, house prices over this period have been seldom studied, especially in a sample of more than
a few cities. To shed light on how rent control may have influenced them, I use new data on home
asking price appreciation between April 1940 and September 1945, obtained from records at the
2