NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIQUIDITY AND GOVERNANCE
Kerry Back
Tao Li
Alexander Ljungqvist
Working Paper 19669
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19669
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2013
We are grateful to Nick Gantchev for sharing his hedge fund activism data. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Kerry Back, Tao Li, and Alexander Ljungqvist. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Liquidity and Governance
Kerry Back, Tao Li, and Alexander Ljungqvist
NBER Working Paper No. 19669
November 2013
JEL No. G23,G34
ABSTRACT
Is greater trading liquidity good or bad for corporate governance? We address this question both
theoretically and empirically. We solve a model consisting of an optimal IPO followed by a dynamic
Kyle market in which the large investor's private information concerns her own plans for taking an
active role in governance. We show that an increase in the liquidity of the firm's stock increases the
likelihood of the large investor 'taking the Wall Street walk.' Thus, higher liquidity is harmful for
governance. Empirical tests using three distinct sources of exogenous variation in liquidity confirm
the negative relation between liquidity and blockholder activism.
Kerry Back Alexander Ljungqvist
Rice University Stern School of Business
Kerry.E.Back@rice.edu New York University
44 West Fourth Street, #9-160
Tao Li New York, NY 10012
City University of Hong Kong and NBER
taoli3@cityu.edu.hk aljungqv@stern.nyu.edu

1. Introduction
A liquid secondary market in shares facilitates capital formation but may be deleterious for
corporate governance. Bhide (1993) argues that greater liquidity reduces the cost to a blockholder
of selling her stake in response to managerial problems (‘taking the Wall Street walk’), resulting in
too little monitoring by large shareholders. Bhide’s work has spawned an active literature on the
effects of liquidity on governance. The present paper makes two contributions to that literature: (i)
we solve a theoretical model consisting of an optimal IPO mechanism followed by a dynamic Kyle
(1985)marketinwhichthelargeinvestor’sprivateinformationconcernsherownplansfortakingan
active role in governance and show that greater liquidity leads to lower blockholder activism, and
(ii) we verify the negative theoretical relation between liquidity and activism using three distinct
natural experiments.
Liquidity has opposing effects on governance because it facilitates both block acquisition and
block disposition (Maug, 1998). We show that this is true in a dynamic Kyle model: the prob-
ability of blockholder activism increases (decreases) with the amount of liquidity trading if the
blockholder’s initial block is smaller (larger) than a certain critical value. We assume that the
initial block is determined in an IPO. Following the analysis of IPO mechanisms in Stoughton and
Zechner (1998), we show that any optimal IPO mechanism leads to a block of sufficient size so that
liquidity is harmful for governance (a conclusion opposite to that of Maug). A novel aspect of the
dynamic Kyle model we study is that the realized sign and magnitude of liquidity trading affect
the blockholder’s choice about becoming active and so affect the ultimate value of the stock. If
liquidity traders happen to sell shares, the blockholder is likely to buy shares and become active;
conversely, if liquidity traders buy shares, the blockholder is likely to take the Wall Street walk.
Our empirical results support our theoretical results. Establishing the causal effect of liquidity
on governance is empirically challenging because, as Edmans, Fang, and Zur (2013) note, liquidity
and governance are likely jointly determined by a firm’s unobserved characteristics. To address
this challenge, we use three natural experiments: brokerage closures (Kelly and Ljungqvist, 2012),
marketmakerclosures(Balakrishnanetal.,2013),andmergersofretailwithinstitutionalbrokerage
firms (Kelly and Ljungqvist, 2012). Events of the first two types exogenously reduce liquidity and
events of the third type exogenously increase liquidity. For two of them, we can even sign the
1

directionoftheresultingchangeinliquiditytrading:asKellyandLjungqvistshow,liquiditytraders
sell in response to brokerage-closure shocks and buy in response to retail brokerage-mergers.
In all three experiments, we find that blockholder activity, as measured by hedge fund activism
and the number of shareholder proposals submitted in opposition to management, increases when
liquidity decreases and vice versa. These findings suggest that for the average stock market-listed
firmintheU.S.,greatertradingliquidityisharmfulforgovernance,inthesenseofdiscouraginglarge
shareholders from engaging in the governance of the firm. They stand in contrast to prior empirical
workthattreatsthelevelofafirm’stradingliquidityasexogenous(forexample, Norlietal.(2010))
or that uses decimalization as a shock to liquidity. A potential explanation for the difference in
results is that decimalization, which undoubtedly improved some aspects of liquidity, coincided
with some other aggregate shock that independently improved governance (such as Regulation Fair
Disclosure).1 The staggered nature of the 43 brokerage closures, the 50 market maker closures, and
the six retail brokerage-mergers we use makes it highly unlikely that our results are confounded in
a similar way.2
We are aware of only two other papers that study a dynamic market with a blockholder whose
actions affect corporate value. One is Collin-Dufresne and Fos (2013), who in contemporaneous
and independent work also solve a dynamic Kyle model with a blockholder who can expend costly
effort to increase firm value. For the most part, they address different issues, though with a similar
model.3 The major difference between our theoretical model and theirs is that we determine the
equilibriuminitialblocksizeintheKylemarketbyanalyzingoptimalIPOmechanisms. Thisallows
us to answer the question whether liquidity is harmful for governance. On the empirical side, they
employblockholdertradedatatoanalyzepredictionsconcerningthelargetrader’sstrategy,whereas
we look at three distinct sources of exogenous variation in liquidity to confirm the negative relation
between liquidity and blockholder activism that our theoretical model predicts.
DeMarzo and Uroˇsevi´c (2006) also analyze a dynamic market with a blockholder whose actions
affect corporate value. A key distinction between their paper and ours is that they assume a fully
1SeeCaietal.(2011)forevidencethatRegulationFDhadapositiveeffectontheintensityofboardmonitoring.
2We contrast our empirical approach to that used in decimalization studies in Section 5.2.
3Their version of the Kyle model differs from ours in some respects. For example, they assume continuous effort,
whereas we assume effort is all-or-none. And unlike us, they assume the large trader has private information about
the exogenous component of firm value.
2