NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOUSING COLLATERAL AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Martin C. Schmalz
David A. Sraer
David Thesmar
Working Paper 19680
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19680
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2013
For helpful comments and discussions we would like to thank Sugato Bhattacharyya, Markus Brunnermeier,
Denis Gromb, Antoinette Schoar, José Scheinkman, Philip Strahan, as well as seminar participants
at IDC, the University of Michigan, the University of Amsterdam, the 10th Annual Corporate Finance
Conference at Olin Business School, and the CEPR European Workshop on Entrepreneurship Economics.
All errors are our own. David Thesmar thanks the HEC foundation for financial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Martin C. Schmalz, David A. Sraer, and David Thesmar. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Housing Collateral and Entrepreneurship
Martin C. Schmalz, David A. Sraer, and David Thesmar
NBER Working Paper No. 19680
November 2013
JEL No. G3
ABSTRACT
This paper shows that collateral constraints restrict entrepreneurial activity. Our empirical strategy
uses variations in local house prices as shocks to the value of collateral available to individuals owning
a house and controls for local demand shocks by comparing entrepreneurial activity of homeowners
and renters operating in the same region. We find that an increase in collateral value leads to a higher
probability of becoming an entrepreneur. Conditional on entry, entrepreneurs with access to more
valuable collateral create larger firms and more value added, and are more likely to survive, even in
the long run.
Martin C. Schmalz David Thesmar
University of Michigan HEC Paris
701 Tappan St 1 rue de la libération
R5456 78351 Jouy-en-Josas cedex
Ann Arbor, MI 48109 France
schmalz@umich.edu thesmar@hec.fr
David A. Sraer
Princeton University
Bendheim Center for Finance
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
dsraer@princeton.edu

“Higher home prices can stoke the economy by providing owners with more valuable
collateral to borrow against for other purchases; many entrepreneurs fund their business this
way.” The Economist, Oct 19, 2013.
1. Introduction
This paper provides evidence that entrepreneurs face credit constraints, which restrict firm
creation, post-entry growth, and survival, even over the long run. The existing literature
documents a strong correlation between entrepreneurial wealth and the propensity to start
or keep a business (Evans and Jovanovic, 1989; Evans and Leighton, 1989; Holtz-Eakin et al.,
1993). However, aconsiderabledebateiswagingaboutwhethersuchacorrelationconstitutes
evidence of financial constraints. For instance, individuals who experience a wealth shock,
through personal accumulation or inheritance, may also experience an expansion of business
opportunities for reasons unrelated to their wealth (Hurst and Lusardi, 2004). In this case,
policies aimed at facilitating the financing of new businesses would not increase welfare.
Worse yet, in the absence of financial constraints, positive shocks to entrepreneurial wealth
may lead to excessive investment, provided that entrepreneurs derive private benefits from
remaining in business (Andersen and Nielsen, 2011; Nanda, 2011). On the other hand, if
financing frictions lead to underinvestment and fewer than optimal business starts, public
intervention in favor of small firm financing may be welfare improving. For these reasons,
the question of whether financing constraints significantly hinder firm creation and growth
carries important policy implications.
To contribute to this debate, this paper uses variations in local house prices, combined
with micro-level data on home ownership by entrepreneurs.1 We employ a difference-in-
differences approach. We compare entrepreneurial outcomes of entrepreneurs owning a house
andentrepreneursrentingahouse,andcomparethisdifferenceacrossgeographicregionswith
different house price dynamics. The comparison between owners and non-owners allows us
1We refer to all owners of newly created businesses as “entrepreneurs.”
1

to filter out local economic shocks that may drive the creation, growth, and survival of local
businesses. This approach is similar to Chaney et al. (2012), who document the effect of
collateral values on the investment of publicly traded corporations in the United States.
We investigate both the extensive and intensive margin of entrepreneurship, that is, entry
decisionsaswellaspost-entrygrowth. Ourinvestigationstartswithfirmgrowthandsurvival,
conditional on entry. We construct a large cross section of French entrepreneurs starting a
businesses in 1998. Combining survey data and administrative data, we are able to observe
a variety of personal characteristics, in particular, the home location of the entrepreneurs, as
wellastheirhome-ownershipstatus. Wematchthisinformationtofirm-levelaccountingdata
of the newly created firms for up to eight years following creation. We find that in regions
with greater house price growth in the 1990s, firms started by homeowners in 1998 are
significantly larger and more likely to survive than firms started by renters. In other words,
the difference in the size of businesses created by owners and renters is larger in regions
in which house prices have appreciated more in the past five years. This effect is robust to
controllingforalargesetofentrepreneurialcharacteristics. Itisalsopersistent: in2005,firms
started by entrepreneurs with lower collateral values in 1998 remain significantly smaller in
terms of assets, sales, employment, or value added. Finally, this effect is economically large:
going from the 25th to the 75th percentile of house price growth in the five years preceding
creation allows homeowners to create firms that are 6.5% larger in terms of total assets.
We then verify how collateral shocks affect the probability of starting a business, that is,
the extensive margin of entrepreneurship. To this end, we use a different dataset, the French
labor force survey, which is a rotating panel that tracks randomly selected individuals for
three consecutive years. Importantly, these data contain information on home ownership,
geographic location, and entrepreneurial activity. We find that homeowners located in re-
gions where house prices appreciate more are significantly more likely to create businesses,
relative to renters located in the same regions. In other words, the difference between owners
and renters in the propensity to start a business is larger in regions in which house prices
2