NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE COST OF CAPITAL FOR ALTERNATIVE INVESTMENTS
Jakub W. Jurek
Erik Stafford
Working Paper 19643
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19643
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2013
We thank Joshua Coval, Ken French, Samuel Hanson, Campbell Harvey (editor), Jonathan Lewellen,
Andrew Lo (discussant), Burton Malkiel, Robert Merton, Gideon Ozik (discussant), André Perold,
David Sraer, Jeremy Stein, Marti Subrahmanyam (discussant), Jules van Binsbergen (discussant),
Russell Wermers (discussant), and seminar participants at Dartmouth College, Harvard Business School,
Imperial College, Bocconi University, USI Lugano, Princeton University, Spring 2013 Q-Group Seminar,
2013 CEAR Workshop on Institutional Investors, the 2012 NBER Asset Pricing Summer Institute,
the 2011 NYU Five-Star Conference, the 4th NYSE Liffe Hedge Fund Research Conference, and the
BYU Red Rock Finance Conference for helpful comments and discussions. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Jakub W. Jurek and Erik Stafford. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Cost of Capital for Alternative Investments
Jakub W. Jurek and Erik Stafford
NBER Working Paper No. 19643
November 2013
JEL No. G11,G12,G23
ABSTRACT
We document that the risks and pre-fee returns of broad hedge fund indices can be accurately matched
with simple equity index put writing strategies, which provide monthly liquidity and complete transparency
over their state-contingent payoff profiles. This nonlinear risk exposure combines with large allocations,
typical among investors in alternatives, to produce required rates of return that are more than twice
as large as those implied by popular linear factor models. Despite earning annualized excess returns
over 6% between 1996 and 2010, many hedge fund investors have not covered their proper cost of
capital.
Jakub W. Jurek
Princeton University
Bendheim Center for Finance 211
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
jjurek@princeton.edu
Erik Stafford
Graduate School of Business
Harvard University
Baker 371
Boston, MA 02163
estafford@hbs.edu

This paper develops a simple method for calculating the cost of capital for alternative investments. Ex ante
costofcapitalestimatesarecentraltotheefficientallocationofcapital,andgenerallydependonthecomposition
of the investor’s total portfolio and the payoff profile of the new investment relative to the remainder of the
portfolio. Inthecontextofalternativeinvestments,theseallocations(1)constitutealargeshareoftheinvestor’s
total portfolio and (2) have nonlinear payoffs relative to the remainder of the portfolio at horizons that permit
rebalancing. We find that these two features interact to produce very large required rates of return relative to
commonly used benchmarking techniques, including those developed recently to address the nonlinear payoffs
ofalternativeinvestments.
Merton (1987) develops a model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete information in which in-
vestorsmustbeinformedaboutaninvestmentbeforetheyallocateanycapitaltoit. Thiscreatesspecializationin
investingandleadssomeinvestorstoholdhighlyconcentratedportfoliosinequilibrium. Asaresult,theequilib-
riumrequiredrateofthereturnontheseinvestmentsexceedswhatwouldberequiredinafrictionlessmodel. An
importantclassofrealworlddecisionstowhichthisappliesarealternativeinvestments. Conditionaloninvesting
inalternatives,allocationsaretypicallylargerelativetotheequilibriumsupplyoftheserisks,inordertoamortize
the fixed costs associated with expanding the traditional investment universe to include alternatives. For exam-
ple,asofJune2010,theIvyLeagueendowmentshad40%oftheircombinedassetsallocatedtonon-traditional
assets(Lerner, etal. (2008)), whereastheshareofalternativesintheglobalwealthportfoliowascloserto2%.1
This paper argues that the wedge between the proper cost of capital and that implied by a frictionless model is
likely to be particularly large here due to the non-linearity of the payoff profile relative to the remainder of the
portfolio. Taking observed portfolio allocations as given, we study the role concentrated allocations play in the
costofcapitalforalternativeinvestments.
To the extent that the real world equilibrium is affected by market frictions that lead some investors to hold
highly concentrated portfolios, these consequences must be explicitly handled in cost of capital estimates, but
typicallyarenot. Forexample,traditionalcostofcapitalcomputationsareheavilyreliantonlinearfactormodels,
whichimplicitlyassumethat: (a)investorstradeinfrictionlessmarkets,andthusholdefficientportfolios;and(b)
assetreturnsarewelldescribedbytheconsideredsetoftradedfactors. Merton(1987)highlightsthetheoretical
and empirical challenges posed by the first assumption when the equilibrium is one where a small subset of
investors hold relatively large shares of a particular risk, as appears to be the case for alternative investments.
The linear factor model approach relies on the notion that all agents agree on the required rate of return for
1Asofendof2010,thetotalassetsundermanagementheldbyhedgefundsstoodatroughly$2trillion(source:HFRI),incomparison
toacombinedglobalequitymarketcapitalizationof$57trillion(source: WorldFederationofExchanges)andacombinedglobalbond
marketcapitalizationof$54trillion,excludingthevalueofgovernmentbonds(source:TheCityUK,“BondMarkets2011”).
1

a marginal deviation from their efficient portfolios, but this will generally not be true when market frictions
causesomeinvestorstoholdconcentratedportfolios. Ignoringtheseissuesaltogether,thefocusoftheempirical
literature has been on expanding the factor set (e.g. by adding non-linear factors) in an attempt to describe the
downside risk exposure of alternatives. Nonlinear factors have been included in an ad hoc way, such that they
oftendonotrepresentfeasibleinvestments,andareunlikelytocapturethespecificnonlinearriskprofileofhedge
funds.2 Moreover,thisdoeslittletocorrectfortheproblemsduetoreturnsmoothingorassetilliquidity(Asness,
et al. (2001), Getmansky, et al. (2004)). We remedy these shortcomings, and produce cost of capital estimates
foralternativesreflectingtheeconomicrealityoftheconcentratedportfoliotowhichtheybelong.
Toderiveestimatesofthecostofcapitalinasettingwhereinvestorsmakelargeallocationstodownsiderisks,
weassembleasimplestaticportfolioselectionframeworkthatcombinespowerutility(CRRA)preferences,with
a state-contingent asset payoff representation, in the spirit of Arrow (1964) and Debreu (1959). We specify the
joint structure of asset payoffs by describing each security’s payoff as a function of the aggregate equity index
(here, the S&P 500).3 Finally, to capture the non-linear risk exposure of alternatives, we model hedge fund
returnsasaportfolioofcashandashortpositioninequityindexputoptions. Thecontractualnatureofindexput
optionsimmediatelyprovidesacompletestate-contingentdescriptionofaninvestablealternativetotheaggregate
hedge fund universe. In turn, the availability of a state-contingent risk profile allows us to determine the rate of
return that an investor would require as a function of his risk aversion, portfolio allocation, and the underlying
returndistributionsofotherassetclasses,allofwhicharenecessaryforanyassetallocationdecision.
Ourfirstempiricalcontributionistoprovideanewmethodologyforreplicatingthereturnstoabroadcross-
sectionofhedgefundindices. Whileevidenceofnon-linearsystematicriskexposuresresemblingthoseofindex
put writing has been provided by Mitchell and Pulvino (2001) for risk arbitrage, and Agarwal and Naik (2004)
for a large number of equity-oriented strategies, the literature – aside from Lo (2001) – has been comparatively
silent on exploring non-linear replicating strategies. We take seriously the problem of capital requirements
(Santa-Clara and Saretto (2009)) and transaction costs to produce the returns of feasible put writing strategies,
thusextendingthelinearhedgefundreplicationanalysisofLoandHasanhodzic(2007). Foragivenhedgefund
index,weidentifysuitablereplicatingstrategiesbymatchingthemeanpre-feereturnsoftheindex. Ourprocedure
does not rely on linear regression, and therefore sidesteps problems due to return smoothing or asset illiquidity.
Whencomparedwithourputwritingstrategies,linearstrategiesidentifiedviain-sampleregressions: (a)generate
2Forexample,AgarwalandNaik(2004)useoptionsthatare1%out-of-the-moneytoexplainhedgefundreturns,whichmaynotbe
theappropriatedownsideriskprofileoftheseinvestments. FungandHsieh(2004)constructfactorsbasedonthetheoreticalreturnsto
lookbackstraddleportfolios,whichrepresenthighlyinfeasibleportfolioreturnssincetheydonotsatisfymarginrequirements.
3Thesamestate-contingentpayoffmodelisusedinCoval,etal.(2009)tovaluetranchesofcollateralizeddebtobligationsrelativeto
equityindexoptions,andinJurekandStafford(2013)toelucidatethetimeseriesandcross-sectionofrepomarketspreadsandhaircuts.
2