NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MORAL HAZARD, INFORMED TRADING, AND STOCK PRICES
Pierre Collin-Dufresne
Vyacheslav Fos
Working Paper 19619
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19619
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2013
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Pierre Collin-Dufresne and Vyacheslav Fos. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Moral Hazard, Informed Trading, and Stock Prices
Pierre Collin-Dufresne and Vyacheslav Fos
NBER Working Paper No. 19619
November 2013
JEL No. G0,G1,G10,G12,G14,G3,G34
ABSTRACT
We analyze a model of informed trading where an activist shareholder accumulates shares in an anonymous
market and then expends costly effort to increase the firm value. We find that equilibrium prices are
affected by the position accumulated by the activist, because the level of effort undertaken is increasing
in the size of his acquired position. In equilibrium, price impact has two components: one due to asymmetric
information (as in the seminal Kyle (1985) model) and one due to moral hazard (a new source of illiquidity).
Price impact is higher the more severe the moral hazard problem, which corresponds to a more productive
activist. We thus obtain a trade-off: with more noise trading (less `price efficiency') the activist can
build up a larger stake, which leads to more effort expenditure and higher firm value (more `economic
efficiency').
Pierre Collin-Dufresne
Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne
CDM SFI SFI-PCD
EXTRA 209
CH-1015 Lausanne
Switzerland
and NBER
pierre.collin-dufresne@epfl.ch
Vyacheslav Fos
College of Business
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL, 61820
vfos@illinois.edu

1. Introduction
Activist shareholders play an active role in modern corporate governance. Among
themostactiveandvisibleactivistsareoutsideshareholderswhoidentifyafirmwiththe
potential for value creation, purchase a significant number of shares in the open market
and then publicly announce their intention to influence management.1 The empirical
literature suggests that these activists are often successful in increasing the value of
targeted companies (e.g., Brav, Jiang, Partnoy, and Thomas, 2008). The key ingredient
to the success of outside activists is their ability to purchase shares in the open market
before stock prices reflect their intention to become active, and therefore to increase firm
value. The value created presumably depends on the activist’s effort expenditure, which
in turn depends on the size of the stake that was acquired during the trading period.
The larger the stake the higher the incentives for the insider to provide additional effort.
Thus, there is a fundamental link between market conditions that influence the block
acquisition process, the activist’s final position, the activist’s effort expenditure, and the
firm’s value.
In his seminal contribution, Kyle (1985) derives the equilibrium price dynamics in
a model where a large trader possesses long-lived private information about the value
of a stock that will be revealed at some known date, and optimally trades into the
stock to maximize his expected profits. Risk-neutral market makers try to infer from
1Activist hedge funds constitute the core of this group. Carl Icahn, who manages several activist
hedge funds, is one prime example of such outside activist shareholder. Activist shareholders also
includelong-termshareholderswhoownlargestakesofacompany,monitormanagement,andinfluence
management in various ways. Pension funds, mutual funds, and insurance companies are among
prominent representatives of this group.
2

aggregate order flow the information possessed by the insider. Because order flow is also
driven by uninformed ‘noise traders,’ who trade solely for liquidity purposes, prices are
not fully revealing. Instead, prices respond linearly to order flow. In Kyle’s model the
insider has private information about a value that is independent of his actions. In other
words, after the start of the trading game the insider cannot affect the liquidation value.
Whether or not the insider chooses to trade in the stock, this value will be realized.
In this paper we generalize Kyle’s model (in the continuous time formulation given
by Back, 1992) of informed trading to an activist who can affect the liquidation value
of the firm by expending effort at some cost. We solve for the optimal effort level and
trading strategy of the activist, as well as for the equilibrium price and corresponding
market liquidity. The key feature of the model is that the activist’s optimal effort level
is increasing in the size of the stake he has accumulated. The endogenous liquidation
value of the firm is thus a function of the position accumulated by the insider, which
itself depends on the noise trading activity (market liquidity). The model thus delivers
an intricate relation between price and market liquidity.
Unlike in the original Kyle/Back model where the position of the insider is irrelevant
for the equilibrium price in our setting the market maker’s estimate of (and uncertainty
about) the position of the activist affects the equilibrium price. Therefore, price
dynamics are more complex than in the standard Kyle/Back model.
First, in equilibrium, price impact has two components: an asymmetric information
component due to the fact that the activist has better information about the exogenous
component of the liquidation value (his ‘stock picking’ ability similar to Kyle’s model)
and a moral hazard component due to the fact that the position accumulated by the
3