NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY DO HEDGERS TRADE SO MUCH?
Ing-Haw Cheng
Wei Xiong
Working Paper 19670
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19670
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2013
Xiong acknowledges financial support from Smith Richardson Foundation grant #2011-8691. We
are grateful to Jose Scheinkman and Glen Weyl for helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Ing-Haw Cheng and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Why Do Hedgers Trade So Much?
Ing-Haw Cheng and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 19670
November 2013, Revised January 2014
JEL No. G1
ABSTRACT
Futures positions of commercial hedgers in wheat, corn, soybeans and cotton fluctuate much more
than expected output. Hedgers’ short positions are positively correlated with price changes. Together,
these observations raise doubt about the common practice of categorically classifying trading by hedgers
as hedging while trading by speculators as speculation, as hedgers frequently change their futures positions
over time for reasons unrelated to output fluctuations, arguably a form of speculation.
Ing-Haw Cheng
100 Tuck Hall
Tuck School of Business
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
ing-haw.cheng@tuck.dartmouth.edu
Wei Xiong
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton, NJ 08450
and NBER
wxiong@princeton.edu

Financial innovations such as derivatives facilitate not only risk sharing and price discovery, but
critics also argue that they lead to reckless speculation which amplifies price volatility and hinders
efficient risk sharing (Posner and Weyl, 2013). This concern has led to a debate on the regulation
of financial innovation and trading of financial derivatives, and warrants a benefit-cost analysis of
financial regulation. In this debate, as well as in other broad contexts of analyzing risk sharing and
trading in financial markets, it is common to separate two groups of traders – one group of traders
with established commercial interests, labeled hedgers, and another group of financial traders,
labeled speculators.
Perhaps due to this distinction, the debate heavily focuses on examining the behavior and impact
of speculators, with little attention on how hedgers trade in practice. Policy prescriptions often
focus on the behavior of the speculator group while exempting the hedger group.1 Is this
categorical treatment justified? Do hedgers trade just to hedge risk in their commercial business?
Or might there be other factors driving their trading? In this paper, we systematically examine how
hedgers trade in the futures markets of a set of agricultural commodities: wheat, corn, soybeans and
cotton.
Commodity futures markets offer a nice setting to examine the distinction between hedgers and
speculators. Futures contracts on agricultural commodities were early financial innovations that
have a long history of serving farmers and commodity producers to hedge the commodity price risk
they face. The long-standing hedging pressure theory of Keynes (1923) emphasizes the imbalance
between the need of commodity producers to short sell commodity futures contracts and the lack of
interest from speculators to take the long side as a key determinant of commodity futures prices.
Through the financialization of commodity futures markets in the last decade, commodity futures
became a popular asset class for portfolio investors and have attracted large inflows of investment
capital in the magnitude of hundreds of billions dollars to the long side. The large capital inflows
have led to a heated debate on the role of speculation in commodity futures markets, particularly
concerned with financial traders destabilizing commodity prices.2 While this debate focuses on
financial traders, more attention on how hedgers trade is also warranted.
1 For example, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) has considered position limits in futures markets,
from which so-called “bona fide hedgers” may obtain exemptions.
2 See Cheng and Xiong (2013) for a review of this debate.
1

The U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) publishes data on the aggregate
position levels in its Commitments of Traders (COT) reports. By regulation, clearing houses of
commodity futures markets report the end-of-day positions of traders with positions larger than
certain reporting thresholds to the CFTC, which classifies each reportable trader into several
categories, and reports aggregated weekly positions at the group level to the public. Individual
traders are distinguished based on whether they have commercial interests in each commodity
(CFTC, 2013). For the bulk of our analysis, we focus on the behavior of
Producer/Merchant/Processor/User positions reported in the CFTC’s Disaggregated COT report,
and consider how these commercial hedgers trade.
Our analysis examines whether commercial hedgers’ trading patterns are consistent with a
simple benchmark notion of hedging in which risk-averse commercial hedgers take short positions
in futures to mitigate their endowed commodity price and output risk. We proceed in two steps.
First, we compare the intensity of hedgers’ trading with the uncertainty in the aggregate output
of each commodity. Intuitively, in the absence of output uncertainty, a fixed hedging position equal
to the size of the output would perfectly hedge the price risk faced by hedgers. In the presence of
output uncertainty, Rolfo (1980) and Hirshleifer (1991) develop theoretical models to show that
hedgers tend to under-hedge as output is negatively correlated with price and that their hedging
position would fluctuate with expected output. Our empirical analysis shows that although hedgers’
futures positions are much smaller than output, the volatility of their positions is much higher than
the output volatility measured by either the year-to-year output fluctuation or month-to-month
fluctuation of professional output forecasts. Furthermore, although output uncertainty declines over
the harvest season, hedgers’ trading volatility remains stable throughout the year.
In the second step of our analysis, we examine what else might explain the volatility of hedgers’
futures positions. We find that hedgers respond strongly to price changes. They short more futures
contracts when the futures price rises, and reduce their short position as the futures price falls.3 It is
difficult to reconcile such trading behavior purely based on hedging strategies of risk-averse
hedgers seeking to hedge price and output uncertainty. For example, if prices rise in response to a
3 In a related paper, Kang, Rouwenhorst, and Tang (2013) discuss how hedgers trade frequently and in a contrarian
fashion and find that they provide liquidity to speculators. Our paper explicitly relates their trading to output forecasts.
2