NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CORPORATE CASH HOLDING IN ASIA
Charles Y. Horioka
Akiko Terada-Hagiwara
Working Paper 19688
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19688
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2013
This paper was prepared for the Asian Development Bank TA 7428-REG on “Sustaining Asia’s Growth
and Investment in a Changing World.” The authors are indebted to Maria Socorro Bautista, Kazuo
Ogawa, and Noli Sotocinal and to Xiang Lin and the other participants of the Ninth Annual Conference
of the Asia-Pacific Economic Association (APEA) 2013, held in Osaka, Japan, on July 27-28, 2013,
for their valuable comments and to Romana Domingo for her superb assistance. Any remaining errors
are the authors’. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Charles Y. Horioka and Akiko Terada-Hagiwara. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Corporate Cash Holding in Asia
Charles Y. Horioka and Akiko Terada-Hagiwara
NBER Working Paper No. 19688
December 2013
JEL No. D92,E21,E22,G11,O53
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we analyze the determinants of corporate saving in the form of changes in the stock of
cash for 11 Asian economies using firm-level data from the Oriana Database for the 2002–2011 period.
We find some evidence that cash flow has a positive impact on the change in the stock of cash, which
suggests that Asian firms are borrowing constrained and that they save more when their cash flow
increases so that they will be able to finance future investments. Moreover, we find in the developed
economy sample that, as expected, cash flow has a positive impact on the change in the stock of cash
only in the case of the smallest firms, which are more likely to be borrowing constrained, and find
in the developing economy sample that, as expected, the positive impact of cash flow on the change
in the stock of cash declines with firm size. In addition, we find that the cash flow sensitivity of cash
declined after the global financial crisis. Finally, we find some evidence that Tobin’s q has a positive
impact on the change in the stock of cash.
Charles Y. Horioka
Room 223, Encarnacion Hall
School of Economics
University of the Philippines
Diliman, Quezon City 1101
PHILIPPINES
and NBER
horioka@iser.osaka-u.ac.jp
Akiko Terada-Hagiwara
Asian Development Bank
Manila, Philippines
ahagiwara@adb.org

I. INTRODUCTION
Corporate saving has always played an important role, but it has shown a substantial
upward trend in many, if not most, of the developed and Asian economies for the past 2
decades, as pointed out by Karabarbounis and Neiman (2012), and thus is of even
more importance now. Yet most previous analyses of saving have focused on
household (or personal) saving or national (or domestic) saving, and there have been
relatively few analyses of corporate (or firm) saving (refer to the papers in the
references section for a representative sampling of previous theoretical and empirical
analyses of corporate saving).
Why do firms accumulate liquid assets? In other words, why do firms channel
their cash flow into liquid assets rather than into physical capital (capital formation) or
into shareholder distributions (dividends)? The high saving rates in Asia have been
called a “saving glut” and have been blamed for the pre-global financial crisis “global
imbalances,” and both academics and policy makers have expended much effort in
trying to understand the saving behavior of this region generally (see, for example,
Horioka and Terada-Hagiwara (2011), but the factors driving the surge in corporate
saving in Asia have yet to be disentangled. The objective of this paper is to fill this void
by doing an empirical analysis of the saving behavior of Asian firms.
The recent literature on corporate saving has proposed two main explanations
for the excess corporate saving in emerging markets. First, emerging markets have a
limited supply of financial assets and are financially constrained (see, for example,
1

Dooley, Folkerts-Landau, and Garber 2005; Matsuyama 2007; Ju and Wei 2006, 2010;
and Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas 2008). In this explanation, the underdeveloped
financial sector serves as the main driver of corporate saving behavior.
The second strand of the literature on corporate saving focuses on the role of
the precautionary motive. In this explanation, excess saving and thence net capital
outflows result from precautionary saving arising from idiosyncratic risk (see, for
example, Mendoza, Quadrini, and Rios-Rull 2009, Sandri, 2010, and Benhima, 2010).
In these precautionary saving models, rising uncertainties cause a decline in corporate
investment, as has been particularly noticeable in some of the Southeast Asian
economies.
The goal of this paper is not to directly address the macroeconomic
phenomenon of the saving glut, but rather to understand the process whereby firms
accumulate liquid assets or saving by analyzing firm-level income statement data. In
particular, we are interested in why firms channel their cash flow into liquid assets
(defined to include cash as well as other financial assets) rather than into physical
capital. We also seek to determine whether and when corporate saving behavior can
serve as a useful indicator of the extent to which firms face external borrowing
constraints. Thus, we focus on two specific determinants of corporate saving: income
uncertainty and the cost of external finance.
In this paper, we analyze the determinants of corporate saving in the form of
changes in the stock of cash for 11 Asian economies using firm-level data from the
2