NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
USING THE NEW PRODUCTS MARGIN TO PREDICT THE INDUSTRY-LEVEL
IMPACT OF TRADE REFORM
Timothy J. Kehoe
Jack M. Rossbach
Kim J. Ruhl
Working Paper 19692
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19692
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2013
The data used here are available at http://www.econ.umn.edu/~tkehoe/. The authors thank the National
Science Foundation for support through grant SES-0962993. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Timothy J. Kehoe, Jack M. Rossbach, and Kim J. Ruhl. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Using the New Products Margin to Predict the Industry-Level Impact of Trade Reform
Timothy J. Kehoe, Jack M. Rossbach, and Kim J. Ruhl
NBER Working Paper No. 19692
December 2013, Revised February 2014
JEL No. F13,F14,F17
ABSTRACT
This paper develops a methodology for predicting the impact of trade liberalization on exports by industry
(3-digit ISIC) based on the pre-liberalization distribution of exports by product (5-digit SITC). Using
the results of Kehoe and Ruhl (2013) that much of the growth in trade after trade liberalization is in
products that are traded very little or not at all, we predict that industries with a higher share of exports
generated by least traded products will experience more growth. Using our methodology, we develop
predictions for industry-level changes in trade for the United States and Korea following the U.S.-Korea
Free Trade Agreement (KORUS). As a test for our methodology, we show that it performs significantly
better than the applied general equilibrium models originally used for the policy evaluation of the North
American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
Timothy J. Kehoe Kim J. Ruhl
University of Minnesota NYU Stern School of Business
Department of Economics Department of Economics
1925 Fourth Street South 44 West Fourth Street, Suite 7-86
Minneapolis, MN 55455-0462 New York, NY 10012-1126
and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis kruhl@stern.nyu.edu
and also NBER
tkehoe@umn.edu
Jack M. Rossbach
University of Minnesota
Department of Economics
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455-0462
rossb013@umn.edu
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19692

1. Introduction
Employing the insight from Kehoe and Ruhl (2013) that products (5-digit SITC) that are
traded very little or not at all are disproportionately responsible for changes in aggregate trade
following trade reform, we hypothesize that they are important for predicting changes in
industry-level (3-digit ISIC) trade after trade reform. We develop a methodology to classify
products as least traded and compute the share of exports in an industry accounted for by these
least traded products. We predict that industries with the highest shares of exports accounted for
by least traded products will experience the largest increases in trade. Using this methodology,
we predict what industries will experience the largest increases in trade between the United
States and Korea following the signing of their free trade agreement. We aggregate our
industries in order to contrast our predictions with those from standard general equilibrium
models that use alternative industry definitions.
To demonstrate the usefulness of our methodology, we compare the actual changes in
bilateral industry-level trade between Canada, Mexico, and the United States during NAFTA
with the predictions our methodology would have yielded had we developed our methodology
before the implementation of NAFTA. We compare the accuracy of our projections with those
of a standard model that was used to predict the effects of NAFTA. We show that, in the case of
NAFTA, our methodology performs better in its predictions, and we use the results from our
evaluation of NAFTA to develop predictions not only for the relative growth of trade by industry
between Korea and the United States, but also for the absolute level of growth of trade for each
industry.
2. Growth in trade on the extensive margin
In this section, we develop a methodology based on the insight from Kehoe and Ruhl
(2013): Much of the growth in trade following a trade liberalization occurs within the set of
products that were not traded or were traded very little. We refer to growth in trade from
products that were not previously traded or were traded very little as growth on the extensive
margin or the new products margin. We refer to growth in trade from products that were
previously traded in large amounts as growth on the intensive margin. Our methodology, based
on that of Kehoe and Ruhl (2013), allows our cutoff for what products we consider to be least
1

traded to vary across country pairs in order to take into account the relative importance of each
product for a country’s trade.
We define a product to be a 5-digit SITC Rev. 2 code, and, following Kehoe and Ruhl
(2013), we sort all of the products from lowest to highest by their average value of trade over the
first three years in our sample. (We average over three years to minimize the measure’s
dependence on any particular year.) Starting with the products with the least trade in the first
three years, we then sum the value of trade in the base year until we accumulate a set of products
that accounts for 10 percent of total trade in the base year. If a product is in that set, we classify
it as a least traded product. Within the set of least traded products are products from different
industries, where an industry — here a 3-digit ISIC Rev. 2 code — is itself a collection of
products. A list of our industries and their descriptions are given in table 1. Adapting a
concordance developed by Muendler (2009), we map each of the 1,836 5-digit SITC codes into
one of 37 3-digit ISIC codes, and then compute the share of trade accounted for by least traded
products with each industry. How prevalent are these least traded products across industries? In
table 2 we report the fraction of trade in an industry accounted for by least traded products in
1989. There are substantial differences across industries. For example, least traded products
made up 67 percent of total textile exports (ISIC 321) from the United States to Korea in 2005,
but only 7 percent of exports in the pottery, china, and earthenware industry (ISIC 361).
3. Predictions for U.S.-Korea FTA
The United States and Korea signed a free trade agreement, KORUS, in 2007, which was
enacted in 2012. To make our predictions for the effects of KORUS, we look at bilateral trade at
the product level between the United States and Korea from Comtrade and identify products as
least traded or not using the base year of 2005. Using our concordance, we aggregate products
into 3-digit ISIC industries and compute the share of least traded products in each industry. How
is the level of least traded products in an industry related to the growth in trade in that industry
following liberalization? Kehoe and Ruhl (2013) show that growth in the least traded products
can be explosive after liberalization, so it follows that industries with more least traded products
would be expected to grow faster after liberalization than industries with fewer least traded
products. Therefore our prediction is that industries with higher shares of least traded products
will experience more growth than industries with lower shares of least traded products.
2