NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE ECONOMICS OF CHINA:
SUCCESSES AND CHALLENGES
Shenggen Fan
Ravi Kanbur
Shang-Jin Wei
Xiaobo Zhang
Working Paper 19648
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19648
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2013
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19648.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Shenggen Fan, Ravi Kanbur, Shang-Jin Wei, and Xiaobo Zhang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Economics of China: Successes and Challenges
Shenggen Fan, Ravi Kanbur, Shang-Jin Wei, and Xiaobo Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 19648
November 2013
JEL No. O1,P2
ABSTRACT
This paper is the first chapter in the Oxford Companion to the Economics of China (Oxford University
Press, forthcoming). Rather than trying to summarize other contributors’ views, we provide our own
perspectives on the Economics of China—the past experience and the future prospects. Our reading
of China’s economic development over the past 35 years raises two major sets of issues, one of which
is inward looking, and the other of which is outward looking. While Chinese aggregate development
is impressive, it has raised the question of whether the growth is sustainable, and has led to a set of
distributional issues and well-being concerns. We argue that these internal issues combine with those
raised by China’s rapid integration and ever growing presence in the international arena, to jointly
frame the challenges faced by China in the next 35 years, as it approaches the 100th anniversary of
the People’s Republic in 2049.
Shenggen Fan Shang-Jin Wei
IFPRI Graduate School of Business
s.fan@cgiar.org Columbia University
Uris Hall 619
Ravi Kanbur 3022 Broadway
301J Warren Hall, New York, NY 10027-6902
Cornell University, and NBER
Ithaca, NY 14853-7801, U.S.A. shangjin.wei@columbia.edu
sk145@cornell.edu
Xiaobo Zhang
National School of Development
Peking University
and
International Food Policy Research Institute
2033 K Street, NW
Washington, DC 20006
x.zhang@cgiar.org

1. Introduction
“Even if it is a fading symbol of Chinese society, the bicycle remains a tempting
metaphor for its economy. Bikes—especially when fully laden—are stable only so long as they
keep moving. The same is sometimes said about China’s economy. If it loses momentum, it will
crash. And since growth is the only source of legitimacy for the ruling party, the economy would
not be the only thing to wobble.”
The Economist, May 26, 2012; Special Report: China’s Economy.
It is now the fourth decade since the start of China’s economic reforms launched the
country on perhaps the most spectacular growth and poverty reduction performance in the
history of the world. This achievement has been accompanied by equally dramatic outcomes in
other economic spheres. There has been growth in exports, infrastructure, reserves, foreign direct
investment and development assistance. But, at the same time, there has been growth in
inequality, spatial divergence, corruption, an underclass of migrant workers, environmental
pollution and carbon emissions. These twin dimensions frame the economics of China as it looks
ahead to the next four decades, approaching the 100th anniversary of the People’s Republic in
2049.
This paper introduces the Oxford Companion to the Economics of China; a new
collection of perspectives on the Chinese economy’s past, present and future. The entries are
brief but wide ranging, covering China’s aggregate performance, the main sectoral trends, issues
of inequality in its many dimensions, and China’s role in the world economy. The contributors of
these entries include: the best of young Chinese researchers based in China and outside;
2

renowned academics from the top universities in China, Europe and North America; present and
past senior officials of international agencies like the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund; senior Chinese government officials from the Centre and the Provinces; and four
recipients of the Nobel Prize in Economics. Other than the requirement that the entry be
analytical and not polemical, the contributors were given freedom to put forward their particular
perspective on a topic. The entries are not therefore surveys of the literature. Rather, they
constitute a picture of the concerns of modern economics as it is applied to China’s problems, as
seen by the leading economists working on China.
This introduction cannot, should not, and does not summarize or synthesize the entries in
the Companion. Rather, in what follows we provide our own perspectives on the Economics of
China—the past experience and the future prospects. While the entries in the Companion provide
some of the input to our discussion, we rely also on the broader literature on Chinese economic
development. Section 2 of the paper begins the exercise (2.1) with an account of how the broad
aggregates of the Chinese economy have moved in the last 35 years, setting out the remarkable
acceleration in growth and trade that the reform process unleashed. The section then moves on to
a more sectoral perspective (2.2) on these developments, looking at movements in agriculture
and industry in particular. Finally, based on this aggregate picture, Section 2.3 highlights
emerging issues for the future.
Our reading of China’s economic development raises two major sets of issues, one of
which is inward looking, and the other of which is outward looking. While Chinese aggregate
development is impressive, and has led to dramatic poverty reduction, it has also led to a set of
issues which section 3 discusses under the heading of “Domestic Challenges.” Section 3.1 takes
3