NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EFFICIENCY AND FORECLOSURE EFFECTS OF VERTICAL REBATES:
EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE
Christopher T. Conlon
Julie Holland Mortimer
Working Paper 19709
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19709
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2013
Previously circulated as "All-Units Discounts: Experimental Evidence from the Vending
Industry" and "Efficiency and Foreclosure Effects of All-Units Discounts: Empirical Evidence."
We thank Mark Stein, Bill Hannon, and the drivers at Mark Vend Company for implementing the
experiment used in this paper, providing data, and generally educating us about the vending
industry. We thank Susanto Basu, Michaela Draganska, Scott Hemphill, Wills Hickman, J. F.
Houde, Sylvia Hristakeva, Robin Lee, Joe Quinn, Michael Riordan, Greg Shaffer, Mike
Whinston, and seminar participants at Bates White, Boston College, Boston University, Harvard
Business School, Harvard University (Economics Department), MIT, Pennsylvania State
University, Rochester University, SUNY Stony Brook, Tufts University, Universitat Autonoma
de Barcelona, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, University of Toronto, and Washington University in
St. Louis, Yale University, and participants at the Quantitative Marketing and Economics
conference and the Workshop on Conditional Pricing Practices (held jointly by the Department of
Justice and the Federal Trade Commission), for helpful comments. Any remaining errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2013 by Christopher T. Conlon and Julie Holland Mortimer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Efficiency and Foreclosure Effects of Vertical Rebates: Empirical Evidence
Christopher T. Conlon and Julie Holland Mortimer
NBER Working Paper No. 19709
December 2013, Revised August 2016
JEL No. L0,L4,L42
ABSTRACT
Vertical rebates are prominently used across a wide range of industries. These con- tracts may
induce greater retail effort, but may also prompt retailers to drop competing products. We study
these offsetting efficiency and foreclosure effects empirically, using data from one retailer. Using
a field experiment, we show how the rebate allocates the cost of effort between manufacturer and
retailer. We estimate structural models of demand and retailer behavior to quantify the rebate's
effect on assortment and retailer effort. We find that the rebate increases industry profitability and
consumer utility, but fails to maximize social surplus and leads to upstream foreclosure.
Christopher T. Conlon
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 W. 118th St.
New York City, NY 10027
cc3264@columbia.edu
Julie Holland Mortimer
Department of Economics
Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
julie.mortimer.2@bc.edu

1
Introduction
Vertical arrangements between manufacturers and retailers have important implications for
how markets function. These arrangements may align retailers’ incentives with those of man-
ufacturers, and induce retailers to provide demand-enhancing effort. However, they may also
result in exclusion of competitors, restricting competition and limiting product choice for
consumers. Many types of vertical arrangements can induce these offsetting efficiency and
foreclosure effects, including vertical integration, bundling, and rebates, among other con-
tractual forms. Accordingly, these arrangements are a primary focus of antitrust authorities
in many countries. Vertical rebates in particular are prominently used across a wide range
of industries, including pharmaceuticals, hospital services, microprocessors, snack foods, and
heavy industry, and have been the focus of several recent Supreme Court cases and antitrust
settlements.1
Althoughverticalrebatecontractsareimportantintheeconomyandhavethepotentialto
induce both pro- and anti-competitive effects, understanding their economic impacts can be
challenging. Tension between the potential for efficiency gains from mitigating downstream
moral hazard on one hand, and exclusion of upstream rivals on the other hand, implies
that the contracts must be studied empirically in order to gain insight into the relative
importance of the two effects. Unfortunately, the existence and terms of these contracts
are usually considered to be proprietary information by their participating firms, frustrating
most efforts to study them empirically. An additional challenge for analyzing the effect of
vertical contracts is the difficulty in measuring downstream effort, both for the upstream
firm and the researcher.
We address these challenges by examining a vertical rebate known as an All-Units Dis-
count (AUD). The specific AUD we study is used by the dominant chocolate candy man-
1Depending on the form of the vertical rebate, it may be referred to as a loyalty contract (if it uses a
market-share requirement) or an all-units discount (if it is based on a retailer’s total purchases). The use
of a vertical rebate contract was central to several recent antitrust cases involving Intel. In 2009, AMD vs.
Intel wassettledfor$1.25billion, andthesameyeartheEuropeanCommissionleviedarecordfineofe1.06
billion against the chipmaker. In a 2010 FTC vs. Intel settlement, Intel agreed to cease the practice of
conditioning rebates on exclusivity or on sales of other manufacturer’s products. Similar issues were raised
intheEuropeanCommission’s2001caseagainstMichelin, andLePage’s v. 3M.Inanotherrecentcase, Z.F.
Meritor v. Eaton (2012), Eaton allegedly used rebates to obtain exclusivity in the downstream heavy-duty
truck transmission market. The 3rd Circuit ruled that the contracts in question were a violation of the
Sherman and Clayton Acts, as they were de facto (and partial) exclusive dealing contracts. In 2014, Eisai
v. Sanofi-Aventis applied the Meritor reasoning to loyalty contracts between Sanofi and hospitals for the
purchaseofablood-clottingdrug,rulinginfavorofthedrugmanufactureronthebasisofapredatorypricing
standard. The DOJ and the FTC, in June 2014, held a joint workshop on Conditional Pricing Practices
exploring the implications of this class of contracts for antitrust policy.
1

ufacturer in the United States: Mars, Inc.2 The AUD implemented by Mars consists of
three main features: a retailer-specific per-unit discount, a retailer-specific quantity target
or threshold, and a ‘facing’ requirement that the retailer carry at least six Mars products.
Mars’ AUD stipulates that if a retailer meets the facing requirement and his total purchases
exceed the quantity target, Mars pays the retailer an amount that is equal to the per-unit
discount multiplied by the retailer’s total quantity purchased. We examine the effect of
the rebate contract through the lens of a retail vending operator, Mark Vend Company,
for whom we are able to collect extremely detailed information on sales, wholesale costs,
and contractual terms. The retailer also agreed to run a large-scale field experiment on our
behalf, which provides us with additional insight into how the AUD might influence the
retailer’s decisions. To the best of our knowledge, no previous study has had the benefit of
examining a vertical rebate contract using such rich data and exogenous variation.
The insights that we gain from studying Mars’ rebate contract allow us to contribute to
understanding principle-agent models in which downstream moral hazard plays an impor-
tant role. Downstream moral hazard is an important feature of many vertically-separated
markets, and is thought to drive a variety of vertical arrangements such as franchising and
resale price maintenance (RPM).3 However, empirically measuring the effects of downstream
moral hazard is difficult. Downstream effort may be impossible to measure directly, and ver-
tical arrangements are endogenously determined, making it difficult to identify the effects of
downstream moral hazard on upstream firms. Our ability to exogenously vary the result of
downstream effort (in this case, retail product availability), combined with detailed data on
wholesale prices, allows us to directly document the effects of downstream moral hazard on
the revenues of upstream firms.
InordertoanalyzetheeffectofMars’AUDcontract, wespecifyadiscrete-choicemodelof
consumer demand and a model of retailer behavior, in which the retailer chooses two actions:
a set of products to stock, and an effort level. We hold retail prices fixed throughout the
analysis, consistent with the data and common practice in this industry.4 The number of
units the retailer can stock for each product is constrained by the capacity of his vending
2With revenues in excess of $50 billion, Mars is the third-largest privately-held company in the United
States (after Cargill and Koch Industries).
3See,amongothers,Shepard(1993)foranearlyempiricalstudyofprinciple-agentproblemsinthecontext
ofgasolineretailing,andHubbard(1998)foranempiricalstudyofaconsumer-facingprinciple-agentproblem.
4By holding retail prices fixed, we do not require an equilibrium model of downstream pricing responses
to the AUD contract. In practice, we see almost no pricing variation over time or across products within a
category(i.e.,allcandybarsarepricedthesameaseachother,andthispriceholdsthroughouttheperiodof
analysis). Over a short-run horizon of about three to five years, the retailer has exclusive contractual rights
to service a location, and these terms may also commit him to a pricing structure during that time.
2