NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE VALUE OF CONNECTIONS IN TURBULENT TIMES:
EVIDENCE FROM THE UNITED STATES
Daron Acemoglu
Simon Johnson
Amir Kermani
James Kwak
Todd Mitton
Working Paper 19701
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19701
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2013
We thank Isil Erel, Taylor Nadauld, and René Stulz for sharing data. For helpful comments we thank
Josh Angrist, Caroline Hoxby, Suresh Naidu, Francesco Trebbi, and people who provided comments
during or after our talks at MIT, Northwestern, Harvard Business School, the International Monetary
Fund, the University of Alberta, BYU, Yale, the University of California at Berkeley, and the 2012
Econometric Society meetings. We are also grateful for constructive suggestions from some former
officials. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19701.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, Amir Kermani, James Kwak, and Todd Mitton. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Value of Connections in Turbulent Times: Evidence from the United States
Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, Amir Kermani, James Kwak, and Todd Mitton
NBER Working Paper No. 19701
December 2013
JEL No. G01,G14,G21,G28
ABSTRACT
The announcement of Timothy Geithner as nominee for Treasury Secretary in November 2008 produced
a cumulative abnormal return for financial firms with which he had a connection. This return was about
6% after the first full day of trading and about 12% after ten trading days. There were subsequently
abnormal negative returns for connected firms when news broke that Geithner’s confirmation might
be derailed by tax issues. Excess returns for connected firms may reflect the perceived impact of relying
on the advice of a small network of financial sector executives during a time of acute crisis and heightened
policy discretion.
Daron Acemoglu James Kwak
Department of Economics, E18-269D University of Connecticut
MIT School of Law
77 Massachusetts Avenue james.kwak@law.uconn.edu
Cambridge, MA 02139
and CIFAR Todd Mitton
and also NBER Marriott School
daron@mit.edu Brigham Young University
684 TNRB
Simon Johnson Provo, UT 84602
MIT Sloan School of Management todd.mitton@byu.edu
100 Main Street, E52-562
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
sjohnson@mit.edu
Amir Kermani
Haas School of Business and
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
2220 Piedmont Ave
Berkeley CA 94720
amir@haas.berkeley.edu

1 Introduction
On Friday, November 21, 2008, the news leaked that Timothy Geithner — then president
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York — would be nominated by President-elect Barack
Obama to become Secretary of the Treasury of the United States. Over the next ten trading
days, financial firms with a connection to Geithner experienced a cumulative abnormal return
of about 12% (relative to other financial sector firms). When Geithner’s nomination ran into
troubleinJanuary2009, duetounexpectedtaxissues, therewasafallinthevalueofGeithner-
connected firms — although this effect is smaller and less precisely estimated than the increases
that were observed in November. How should we interpret these results?
Thispatternseemsunlikelytobeaflukeofthedataoraresultofmismeasurement. Weuse
three different ways of identifying connections between financial institutions’ executives and
Geithner: (i) executives who had meetings with Geithner during 2007—08; (ii) executives who
belonged to the same nonprofit boards and groups as Geithner; and (iii) executives of firms
located in New York City, who would be close in proximity to the New York Fed. Our results
are essentially the same across all three measures of connections (although somewhat weaker
for the New York City measure), and they are robust across a wide range of checks, including
with various size controls and when we drop outliers.
Our results are also unlikely to reflect higher than normal returns for firms most affected
by the crisis and thus more likely to benefit from the appointment of a competent Treasury
Secretary. Theresultsremainrobustwhenwecompareconnectedfirmstonon-connectedfirms
with similar size, profitability, leverage and prior stock price behavior, or when we control for:
how intensely firms were affected in the most severe phase of the crisis during September—
October 2008; how their stock price rose when capital was injected into big banks in October
2008; or how much they were exposed to troubled assets (in particular, residential mortgage-
backed securities). Episodes of purely supportive policy — such as the Bear Stearns rescue,
the AIG bailout, or the passage of the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act — did not cause
the same robust pattern of abnormal returns for Geithner-connected firms. We also examine
evidence on the market-perceived probability of bankruptcy from credit default swap spreads,
although the available sample for these data is smaller than for equities. We find the same
patterninCDSspreaddataasinequitydata—i.e.,therewasaperceivedbenefittocreditors(in
the form of lower implied default risk) when the firms’ executives were connected to Geithner.
There are at least three reasons why market participants may have expected benefits for
1

Geithner-connectedfirms. First, theymayhaveexpectedthatsomeformofexplicitcorruption
could take place. In countries with weak institutions and much policy discretion in the hands
of politicians, such as Indonesia, Malaysia, or Pakistan, potential corruption is a reasonable
interpretation of stock price movements for politically connected firms.1 But corruption is
not plausible as an explanation for what happened in the United States. Econometric results
that show large effects for political connections are typically based on data from countries
with weak institutions. In contrast, by most measures and at most times, the United States
has fairly strong institutions. Moreover, Geithner is widely regarded as an honest public
servant who is very unlikely to have acted on the basis of personal financial gain. Studies of
policymakingundertheObamaadministrationbySuskind(2011)andScheiber(2011)andfirst-
handaccountsbyBair(2012)andBarofsky(2012)—noneofwhichareparticularlysympathetic
to Geithner — contain absolutely no suggestion of corruption. Geithner has also never run for
public office and seems unlikely to ever do so, making political contributions irrelevant.2
Second, market participants may have believed that Geithner’s policy preferences were
generallyconsistentwiththeinterestsofthefinancialinstitutionswithwhichhewasconnected.
This might have represented a type of “cultural capture” of key official decision-makers and
thinkersbyWallStreet(Bhagwati(1998),JohnsonandKwak(2011)). Accordingtothistheory,
instead of favoring firms because he had connections with them, Geithner’s prior connections
had already shaped his perspectives on the financial sector and on the crisis that was still
unfolding. In particular, his close connections to large, complex, Wall Street banks might have
persuaded him that broader economic prosperity required rescuing those banks on relatively
generous terms (for shareholders, as well as executives and creditors). Our results, however,
are not based on a comparison of financial to non-financial firms or of large relative to small
financial firms.3 Rather, as already noted, they are driven by a comparison of connected to
non-connected firms of similar size. Even if Geithner took the worldview that Wall Street
1Forexample,inaseminalstudy,Fisman(2001)foundthatbeingconnectedtoPresidentSuhartoaccounted
for23percentoffirms’valueonaverageinIndonesiainthemid-1990s(wheretheeventswererumorsaboutthe
president’shealth). ForMalaysiainthelate1990s,JohnsonandMitton(2003)foundthatconnectionstoPrime
MinisterMahathiraccountedforaround20percentoffirms’totalstockmarketvalueinacrisis,wheretheevent
was the fall from power of Anwar Ibrahim, the Minister of Finance. Similar results are found in Pakistan by
Khwaja and Mian (2005), in a cross-country setting by Dinç (2005), and in Weimar Germany by Ferguson and
Voth (2008).
2Duchin and Sosyura (2012) find that politically connected firms were more likely to receive TARP funds,
and also that such firms performed worse than non-connected firms. However, they measure connections to
Congress, not to Secretary Geithner.
3Similarly, we show below that our results are not driven by Citigroup or other financial firms that are
considered by policymakers or markets as “too big to fail”. In all cases, wefind that investors considered there
to be value in being personally connected to Geithner, quite aside from any “too big to fail” issues.
2