NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MILITARY CEOS
Efraim Benmelech
Carola Frydman
Working Paper 19782
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19782
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2014
We thank Nittai Bergman, Joe Doyle, Claudia Goldin, Larry Katz, Lawrence Kryzanowski, Todd
Milbourn, Bill Schwert (the editor), Jeremy Stein, Tavneet Suri, Luigi Zingales, two anonymous
referees, and participants at the Ackerman Conference on Corporate Governance at Bar Ilan University,
Berkeley (Haas), DePaul-Chicago Fed, Harvard (Economic History and Labor) and Harvard-MIT
Organizational Economics seminar, Incentives and Risk GSU Conference, NBER Conference on
Ethics in Business, Northeastern, Stanford GSB and Yale SOM for their comments. We thank Adair
Morse for sharing with us the data on corporate fraud cases. Kayla Liebman, Andrew Marok, Tim
Ni, Carla Tokman, Moonlit Wang, Sammy Young and Anna Zhang provided great research assistance.
Benmelech is grateful for financial support from the National Science Foundation under CAREER
award SES-0847392. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Efraim Benmelech and Carola Frydman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Military CEOs
Efraim Benmelech and Carola Frydman
NBER Working Paper No. 19782
January 2014
JEL No. D23,G3,G31,G32
ABSTRACT
There is mounting evidence of the influence of personal characteristics of CEOs on corporate outcomes.
In this paper we analyze the relation between military service of CEOs and managerial decisions, financial
policies, and corporate outcomes. Exploiting exogenous variation in the propensity to serve in the
military, we show that military service is associated with conservative corporate policies and ethical
behavior. Military CEOs pursue lower corporate investment, are less likely to be involved in corporate
fraudulent activity, and perform better during industry downturns. Taken together, our results show
that military service has significant explanatory power for managerial decisions and firm outcomes.
Efraim Benmelech
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
e-benmelech@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Carola Frydman
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
cfrydman@bu.edu

“I don’t know what I’d be doing [without the military], but I wouldn’t be here. A day
doesn’t go by that I don’t use the leadership lessons I learned in the Navy. It was
absolutely vital.”
—Anthony F. Early Jr., CEO, DTE Energy
1. Introduction
CEOs with military backgrounds have been disappearing from corporate America. The
supply of executives who have served in the military and, in particular, of those with
combat experience has diminished since World War II and Korea veterans have retired.
Whereas in 1980, 59% of the CEOs of large, publicly held corporations had served in the
military, today only 6.2% of CEOs of these firms have a military background (see Fig. 1).
Instead, most current chief executives have been trained through business degrees and
executive education programs.1 Companies such as Wal-Mart and General Electric,
decrying a lack of leadership and dedication among young managers, have started
programs to recruit junior military officers who served in Iraq and Afghanistan to solve a
shortage of leadership talent (O’Keefe, 2010).
Has the disappearance of executives who served in the military from the C-suite
had a real impact on corporate America? Service in the military may alter the behavior of
servicemen and women in various ways that could affect their actions when they become
CEOs later in life. Militaries have organized, sequential training programs that combine
education with on-the-job experience and are designed to develop command skills.
Evidence from sociology and organizational behavior research suggests that individuals
1 The fraction of CEOs with a business degree has increased sharply over this period. In fact, only 16.1% of
CEOs in 1980 had an MBA degree. This percentage rose to 35.2% in 2006, and to about 40.0% by 2012.
1

may acquire hands-on leadership experience through military service that is difficult to
learn otherwise and that they may be better at making decisions under pressure or in a
crisis (Duffy, 2006). It is possible, therefore, that military CEOs may be more prepared to
make difficult decisions during periods of industry distress. Moreover, military service
emphasizes duty, dedication, and self-sacrifice. The military may thus inculcate a value
system that encourages CEOs to make ethical decisions and to be more dedicated and
loyal to the companies they run rather than pursue their own self-interest (Franke, 2001).
On the other hand, a large literature in psychology finds that military service leads
to aggressiveness, overconfidence, and increased risk-taking.2 Thus, evidence from other
disciplines does not provide clear-cut predictions on how service in the military affects
individual decision-making later in life.
We find that firms run by military CEOs invest less, have lower expenditures on
research and development (R&D), and pursue slightly lower leverage ratios than their
nonmilitary peers. We do not find effects on other variables intended to capture
investment and financial policies, such as acquisitions and dividend payments. Our
findings, therefore, are suggestive but not conclusive of an association between military
CEOs and more conservative investment and financial policies.
While the psychology and organizational behavior literature does not provide
clear guidance for the effects of military background on the aforementioned policies, it
does suggest that the military may instill a stronger sense of ethics. Consistent with the
findings in this literature, we find that CEOs with military experience are significantly
less likely to be involved in corporate fraudulent activity compared to CEOs who have
2
See, e.g., Elder (1986), Elder and Clipp (1989), and Elder, Gimbel, and Ivie (1991).
2