NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CONVENTIONAL AND UNCONVENTIONAL MONETARY POLICY WITH ENDOGENOUS
COLLATERAL CONSTRAINTS
Aloísio Araújo
Susan Schommer
Michael Woodford
Working Paper 19711
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19711
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2013
We thank Kyle Jurado and Stéphane Dupraz for research assistance, and John Geanakoplos, Steve
Williamson, and participants at presentations at IMPA, MIT, the Cowles Foundation Conference on
General Equilibrium and its Applications, the Annual Fall Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank
of St. Louis, and the NBER conference on Lessons from the Financial Crisis for Monetary Policy
for helpful comments. We also acknowledge financial support from CAPES-PNPD and IMPA (Schommer),
and the NSF under grant SES-0820438 (Woodford). The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19711.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Aloísio Araújo, Susan Schommer, and Michael Woodford. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Conventional and Unconventional Monetary Policy with Endogenous Collateral Constraints
Aloísio Araújo, Susan Schommer, and Michael Woodford
NBER Working Paper No. 19711
December 2013
JEL No. D53,E52,E58
ABSTRACT
We consider the effects of central-bank purchases of a risky asset, financed by issuing riskless nominal
liabilities (reserves), as an additional dimension of policy alongside “conventional” monetary policy
(central-bank control of the riskless nominal interest rate), in a general-equilibrium model of asset
pricing and risk sharing with endogenous collateral constraints of the kind proposed by Geanakoplos
(1997). The existence of collateral constraints allows our model to capture the common view that large
enough central-bank purchases would eventually have to affect asset prices. But even when central-bank
purchases raise the price of the asset, owing to binding collateral constraints, the effects need not be
the ones commonly assumed. We show that under some circumstances, central-bank purchases relax
financial constraints, increase aggregate demand, and may even achieve a Pareto improvement; but
in other cases, they may tighten financial constraints, reduce aggregate demand, and lower welfare.
The latter case is almost certainly the one that arises if central-bank purchases are sufficiently large.
Aloísio Araújo (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)Michael Woodford
Instituto Nacional de Matemática Pura e Aplicad(cid:3)a(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)Department of Economics
aloisioaraujo@gmail.com Columbia University
420 W. 118th Street
Susan Schommer New York, NY 10027
Instituto Nacional de Matemática Pura e Aplicad a and NBER
susan.schommer@gmail.com mw2230@columbia.edu
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19711

One ofthe morenotabledevelopments in central banking since the globalfinancial
crisis has been an increase in the diversity of types of market transactions through
which central banks have sought to influence financial conditions. Before the crisis,
it had become common to think of monetary policy as a uni-dimensional decision:
the periodic reconsideration of the central bank’s operating target for a single, short-
term (typically overnight) nominal interest rate. Over the past five years, instead, a
number of leading central banks (including the Federal Reserve, the Bank of Japan,
andtheBankofEngland)havemadealmostnochangesintheirpolicyrates—having
taken those rates to levels viewed as their effective lower bounds by the beginning
of 2009, while additional monetary easing continued to be desired — yet have been
quite active on other dimensions, making dramatic changes in both the size and
composition of their balance sheets.
While the theoretical literature on the effects of changes in interest-rate policy,
and on the way in which variations in the supply of bank reserves and adjustment of
the rate of interest paid on reserves allow central banks effective control of short-term
interest rates, is well-developed, much less is understood about the effects that should
follow from variations in the central bank’s balance sheet apart from those involved
in implementing interest-rate policy. On one traditional view, the assets held by the
central bank to “back” its issuance of monetary liabilities are of little macroeconomic
significance — only the quantity of reserves created should matter, and that only
because of its implications for the determination of short-term interest rates. There
would then be little reason to conceive of multi-dimensional monetary policy options.
On an alternative view, the asset-purchase programs recently implemented by central
banks are simply a variant of what monetary policy has always been about: central
banks exchanging one type of financial instrument for another, so as to influence
market rates of return. On this view, there are naturally multiple possible dimensions
of policy to the extent that there are multiple interest rates — as there naturally are,
given the different risk characteristics of different instruments.
Here we undertake a theoretical analysis of the effects of alternative dimensions of
monetarypolicy,inageneral-equilibriumasset-pricingframeworkinwhichassetswith
different risk characteristics co-exist and earn different rates of return in equilibrium.
We introduce a central bank with effective control over short-term nominal interest
rates, that can determine the general level of prices (of goods and services in terms of
money) through this “conventional” monetary policy; but we also allow the central to
engageinopen-market purchases andsales ofthe varioustypes ofassets withdiffering
1

risk characteristics that are traded in the marketplace, and consider the extent to
which allowing for variations in the size and composition of the balance sheet, holding
interest-rate policy fixed, provide useful additional dimensions of policy.
It is important to note that we do not here seek to model central-bank credit
policies: lending by a central bank to specific types of borrowers at below-market
rates, either because it wishes to subsidize certain activities or institutions, or be-
cause private intermediation has become highly inefficient, as during the most severe
phase of the recent financial crisis.1 The policies with which we are concerned, such
as the Fed’s asset-purchase programs since the fall of 2010, involve open-market pur-
chases of assets that are traded on highly liquid markets, and are aimed at achieving
macroeconomic goals by influencing financial conditions for the economy as a whole,
rather than at providing credit for specific borrowers or categories of borrowers. Our
model is therefore one in which financial markets are efficient, in the sense that all
traders are able to purchase the same set of assets, at prices that are independent of
the identity of the purchaser and of the quantity purchased, and that the spread be-
tween the price paid by a buyer and that received by the seller of assets is assumed to
be negligible; and all central-bank trades are assumed to occur at these well-defined
market prices.2
There is, however, one important respect in which we shall assume that financial
markets are not frictionless in the sense of Arrow and Debreu, and this is important
for the consequences of “unconventional” monetary policy: we shall assume, as in
Geanakoplos (1997)andArau´joet al. (2002), that allprivately issued financial claims
(as opposed to physical assets or government liabilities) must be collateralized. While
the collateral requirements in our model represent a friction, in the sense that some
1Many of the novel policies introduced by the Federal Reserve during the acute phase of the
globalfinancialcrisis were ofthis kind; Bernanke(2009)characterizedthe Fed’s policies during this
period as “credit easing,” to distinguish them from the “quantitative easing” of the Bank of Japan
during the period 2001-2006(which instead mainly involvedopen-marketpurchasesofhighly liquid
securities,mostlyJapanesegovernmentbonds). TheFed’smorerecentasset-purchaseprogramscan
less obviously be characterized in this way.
2ModelssuchasthoseofCu´rdiaandWoodford(2011)orGertlerandKaradi(2011,2013)instead
consider central-bank purchases of assets that many investors cannot directly purchase themselves,
because only certain specialized intermediaries (with limited capital and constraints on their access
tofinancing)havetheexpertiserequiredtoevaluatethem. Thesearemoreobviouslyappropriateas
modelsofprogramssuchasthe Fed’s“crediteasing”policiesduringthe acutephaseofthefinancial
crisis, rather than its more recent asset-purchase programs.
2