NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHEN REAL ESTATE IS THE ONLY GAME IN TOWN
Hyun-Soo Choi
Harrison Hong
Jeffrey Kubik
Jeffrey P. Thompson
Working Paper 19798
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19798
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2014
Choi acknowledges support from the Sim Kee Boon Institute, Singapore Management University.
We thank Tim Loughran, Chris Mayer, Wenlan Qian, Jeremy Stein, and seminar participants at Dartmouth,
Notre Dame, the CICF 2013 conference, and the NBER behavioural finance meeting for helpful comments.
The analysis and conclusions set forth are those of the authors and do not indicate concurrence by
other members of the research staff, the Board of Governors, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Hyun-Soo Choi, Harrison Hong, Jeffrey Kubik, and Jeffrey P. Thompson. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

When Real Estate is the Only Game in Town
Hyun-Soo Choi, Harrison Hong, Jeffrey Kubik, and Jeffrey P. Thompson
NBER Working Paper No. 19798
January 2014, Revised January 2014
JEL No. G02,G11,G12,R21,R3
ABSTRACT
Using data on household portfolios and mortgage originations, we find that households residing in
a city with few publicly traded firms headquartered there are more likely to own an investment home
nearby. Households in these areas are also less likely to own stocks. This only-game-in-town effect
is more pronounced for households living in high credit quality areas, who can access financing to
afford a second home. This effect also becomes pronounced for households living in low credit quality
areas after 2002 when securitization made it easier for these households to buy second homes. Cities
with few local stocks have in equilibrium higher price-to-rent ratios, making it more attractive to rent,
and lower (primary residence) homeownership rates.
Hyun-Soo Choi Jeffrey Kubik
Singapore Management University Maxwell School
Singapore Syracuse University
hschoi@smu.edu.sg 426 Eggers Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244
Harrison Hong jdkubik@maxwell.syr.edu
Department of Economics
Princeton University Jeffrey P. Thompson
26 Prospect Avenue Federal Reserve Board
Princeton, NJ 08540 Washington, DC
and NBER jeffrey.p.thompson@frb.gov
hhong@princeton.edu

1. Introduction
According to the National Association of Realtors’ Home Buyers Survey of 2012, investment
homes, defined as homes bought for investment as opposed to occupation by the owner,
represented around 22% of the residential sales market or around one million homes annually
between2003and2011. Investmenthomesaredistinctfromvacationhomes,wheretheowner
lives part-time. They are bought to generate rental income and typically face higher interest
rates and more stringent collateral requirements than either primary residences or vacation
homes because banks view them as speculative investments akin to stocks. Households
characterize these purchases in the same way that they describe their purchases of IBM or
Microsoft.
Investment homes are a sizeable part of the real estate market; and as can be seen in
Table 1, demand for these homes played a big role in the recent housing cycle of 2002-
2007. During the peak real estate bubble year of 2005, investment homes rose from typically
being around 17% the market for residential sales to 28%. Around 12% were vacation
homes and the remaining 60% were primary residences. Studies of this recent housing cycle,
including Chinco and Mayer (2012), Li and Gao (2013), and Haughwout, Lee, Tracy, and
van der Klaauw (2011), argue that speculative investment home purchases contributed to
the the dramatic price run-ups in certain areas like Las Vegas and Phoenix. These findings
suggest that studying the determinants of investment home or speculative purchases might
be important for understanding real estate price cycles. Yet, the focus of research in the
last twenty years in real estate economics has been on owner-occupied homes or primary
residences.1
Assuch, weundertakeastudyofthedeterminantsofinvestmenthomepurchasesinwhich
we view these purchases through the lens of investing as opposed to owner occupation. Our
1For example, hedonics such as location or other housing amenities have been used to explain the cross-
sectional variation in prices of primary homes (Glaeser (2007)). Moreover, even work on volume dynamics
in housing markets and the rent versus buy decision have typically taken the motive for home purchases as
one of owner occupation (Case and Shiller (1989), Stein (1995) and Sinai and Souleles (2005)).
1

analysis is motivated by a large literature on household finance that has greatly informed us
on how households actually make investment decisions. We build on one of the most robust
facts about household investment behavior, which is that they are locally biased. Households
do not diversify but rather hold concentrated positions in stocks headquartered within 60
miles of where they live (see, e.g., Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001), Huberman (2001)). This
local bias can be driven by familiarity bias or other informational frictions, whereby investors
have both a small radius with which they search for investment opportunities and feel most
comfortable with investments they know first hand. This local bias was originally discovered
and characterized by French and Poterba (1991) as the international home bias puzzle for
the lack of international diversification by equity investors.
Our premise is that investment homes are the ultimate locally-biased or home-biased
investment. Familiarity bias or informational friction stories that characterize stock invest-
ments are even more relevant for investment homes because the owners have the tangibility
of the home nearby. Indeed, real estate is often cast as an investment akin to gold in terms
of its feeling of safety for households in under-developed or volatile financial markets. More
concretely, one can think of some households as deriving utility from ownership, whether it
is their primary residence or an investment home which they rent out. This utility might
come from the status of ownership. Or it might come from the joys of having something
to do such as collecting rents, much like a hobby. This latter motivation then provides an
additional reason for why the local bias of investment homes is even stronger than equities
since proximity to the investment home cuts down on the transportation cost of being a
landlord.
Ourhypothesisisthatstocksheadquarterednearbycompeteforthehouseholds’attention
and lead to less ownership of investment homes. Their hobby becomes trading stocks rather
than renting out investment homes. Importantly, we view our hypothesis as not primarily
one of diversification since households tend not to diversify but one of attention and effort
in which households derive utility from owning a home and the extra utility they get from
2