NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BID TAKERS OR MARKET MAKERS? THE EFFECT OF AUCTIONEERS ON AUCTION
OUTCOMES
Nicola Lacetera
Bradley J. Larsen
Devin G. Pope
Justin R. Sydnor
Working Paper 19731
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19731
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2013
We benefited from the comments of seminar participants at UC Berkeley, Boston University, Colgate,
Cornell, MIT, Queen’s University, the University of Chicago, Toronto, Wisconsin-Madison, the Bank
of Italy, and conference participants at the 2013 IZA Workshop on Behavioral Economics, the 2013
European Behavioral Economics Meeting, the 2013 NBER Summer Institute, the 2013 Stanford Institute
for Theoretical Economics, and the 2013 FTC Microeconomics Conference. Special thanks to Eric
Budish and Tim Van Dam for helpful comments and suggestions; and to Barb Richards of the Canadian
Auction College for allowing one of the authors to attend auctioneer college classes. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Nicola Lacetera, Bradley J. Larsen, Devin G. Pope, and Justin R. Sydnor. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bid Takers or Market Makers? The Effect of Auctioneers on Auction Outcomes
Nicola Lacetera, Bradley J. Larsen, Devin G. Pope, and Justin R. Sydnor
NBER Working Paper No. 19731
December 2013
JEL No. D03,D44,J24,L62,M5
ABSTRACT
A large body of research has explored the importance of auction design and information structure for
auction outcomes. Much less work has considered the importance of the auction process. For example,
in many auctions, auctioneers are present and can impact the process of the auction by varying starting
prices, level of price adjustments, the speed of the auction, the way they interact with auction participants,
or their characteristic chant that is intended to excite buyers. We explore the importance of auction
process by testing whether auctioneers can have a systematic difference on auction outcomes. We
analyze more than 850,000 wholesale used car auctions and find large and significant differences in
outcomes (probability of sale, price, and auction speed) across auctioneers. The performance heterogeneities
are stable across time and correlate with subjective evaluations of auctioneers provided by the auction
house. Although the available data here do not allow us to conclusively isolate mechanisms, a range
of evidence suggests a role for tactics that generate excitement among bidders. Overall, these findings
illustrate the complexities of auction environments and how outcomes can be impacted by subtle changes
in process.
Nicola Lacetera Devin G. Pope
University of Toronto Booth School of Business
105 St. George Street University of Chicago
Toronto, ON M5S 2E9 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Canada Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER and NBER
nicola.lacetera@utoronto.ca devin.pope@chicagobooth.edu
Bradley J. Larsen Justin R. Sydnor
Stanford University University of Wisconsin - Madison
579 Serra Mall 975 University Avenue
Stanford, CA 94305 Madison, WI 53706
bjlarsen@stanford.edu jsydnor@bus.wisc.edu

1. Introduction
Auctions are central features of many markets, including those for radio spectrums, used industrial
machinery, livestock, used cars, antiques, government-owned property, procurement, debt instruments,
charity, and real estate. It is therefore not surprising that economists have developed a large body of
research on the functioning of auctions, including theoretical, experimental, and empirical studies. Much
of this work has focused on exploring the effects of different auction structures, comparing common
designs such as English, Dutch, first-price sealed-bid, and second-price auctions, and assessing their
revenue generation and efficiency. The literature has paid particular attention to how the performance of
different auction designs may depend on the underlying distributions of product valuations and the level
of information available to market participants.1
Although a large literature has explored the importance of auction structure to outcomes, the process
of running an auction (conditional on the auction design) has received much less attention. As some
auction theorists have noted (Klemperer, 2002; Milgrom, 2004), many auctions involve human
participants who may be misinformed or boundedly rational in some way. In these settings, the details
associated with how an auction is run may significantly influence outcomes.
An example of how auction process may vary from one auction to another is the leeway that a live
auctioneer has in choosing how to run an ascending-bid auction. Theoretical models of auctions largely
abstract from the role of the auctioneer in the auction process. In particular, Milgrom and Weber (1982)
modeled English auctions assuming that prices rise continuously from a low level and that all participants
hold down a button and can be observed dropping out of the auction at some point when the price rises
too high. Within that structure, there is no role for an auctioneer and the focus naturally becomes on the
information structure (e.g., private signals) of the bidders in the auction. But as Milgrom and Weber
themselves highlight, many real-world ascending-bid auctions involve human auctioneers who are
typically experienced professionals. These auctioneers may influence the process of an auction by
choosing opening bid amounts, changing the pace of price adjustment, and deciding when to stop the
bidding. In addition, many auctioneers (especially in the U.S.) interact with bidders and call out bids in a
fast-paced, rhythmic chant, attempting to create a sense of urgency and excitement among bidders.
In this paper, we explore whether these real-world details of the auction process are important for
understanding auction outcomes by studying whether auctioneers have a systematic impact on auction
outcomes. Although the impact of single individuals on organizational outcomes has been explored in
1 An overview of auction theory can be found in Bulow and Roberts (1989), Klemperer (2004), and Milgrom (2004).
1

other contexts (e.g. CEOs and bosses, judges, teachers, scientists, and political leaders),2 there has been
no systematic empirical analysis of the impact of auctioneers on relevant outcomes.3 We investigate this
question in the context of wholesale, used-car auctions. This market is well suited to studying the role of
auctioneers for several reasons. First, these are large markets – more than 10 million used cars are traded
in the U.S. at wholesale auctions each year (Manheim, 2011), totaling over $80 billion in sales (NAAA,
2009). Second, because both buyers and sellers are professionals and because these cars are high-value
goods, we expect all participants to have strong incentives. Third, as we will argue below, the institutional
features and data available allow us to capture the causal impact of individual auctioneers on prices, the
probability of sale, and other performance measures. Finally, the structure of these auctions is an
ascending auction (English-style) with a live auctioneer and no pre-determined time limit. There is a large
literature on English-style auctions that has to date made a great deal of traction while abstracting from
the details of auction process. Authors, such as Cassady (1967) have argued, however, that this is the
format in which the auctioneer has the most potential to influence the sale, and as such English auctions
and the role of auctioneers would seem a good place to begin to more systematically study the importance
of the details of how auctions are conducted.
Our data include over 850,000 cars auctioned by 60 auctioneers between 2007 and 2013 at the largest
location of a leading operator of used-car auctions in the U.S. The primary measure of auctioneer
performance we analyze is each auctioneer’s conversion rate (the fraction of cars that end in a sale). The
auction company and its auctioneers make it clear that the primary role of the auctioneer in this context is
to maximize the probability of each car selling. We also study two secondary performance metrics:
residual price (the difference between sales price and average market value) and speed of sale.
An obvious threat to the identification of auctioneer heterogeneity is that cars are not randomly
assigned to auctioneers. We discuss identification assumptions in detail below and argue that non-random
selection can be accounted for by controlling for important features of the auction (auction day, seller of
the car, car type, etc.). We also provide additional tests which include exploiting shift changes as a way to
identify the causal impact of auctioneers on outcomes.
We find significant dispersion in auctioneers’ fixed effects in each of the three performance measures.
In our preferred specification, a one-standard deviation increase in auctioneer performance corresponds to
2 See, for example, Abrams, Bertrand and Mullainathan (2013); Azoulay, Graff Zivin and Wang (2010); Bertrand and
Schoar (2003); Chetty, Friedman, Hilger, and Saez (2010); Hanushek (2011); Jones and Olken (2005); Lazear, Shaw, and
Stanton (2012); Malmendier and Tate (2009).
3 To our knowledge, the only two studies examining auctioneers are Capizzani (2008), who presented experimental
evidence regarding the presence of a live auctioneer whose only role was to choose the public-information structure, and
Cassady (1967), who provided a detailed qualitative description of auctions and auctioneers. Note, moreover, that much of
the literature uses the term “auctioneer” to refer to the auction house or platform (Hossain, Khali, and Shum, 2013), or, in
some cases, the seller. In this paper we reserve the term auctioneer strictly for the person calling out bids at a live auction,
and the term seller strictly for the owner of the car who brings it to the auction house.
2