NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HAVE FINANCIAL MARKETS BECOME MORE INFORMATIVE?
Jennie Bai
Thomas Philippon
Alexi Savov
Working Paper 19728
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19728
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2013
The Smith Richardson Foundation provided financial support for this project.We thank Alex Edmans,
Itay Goldstein, Harrison Hong, Wei Jiang, Liyan Yang, and Kathy Yuan, and conference and seminar
participants at EFA (Cambridge), the NBER Summer Institute Asset Pricing Workshop, the Texas
Finance Festival, the Five-Star conference, the Society for Economic Dynamics conference, the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, Columbia University, New York University, Yale University, Southern
Methodist University, the University of Texas at Dallas, Georgetown University, and Baruch college
at CUNY. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Jennie Bai, Thomas Philippon, and Alexi Savov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Have Financial Markets Become More Informative?
Jennie Bai, Thomas Philippon, and Alexi Savov
NBER Working Paper No. 19728
December 2013, Revised September 2015
JEL No. E2,G1,N2
ABSTRACT
The finance industry has grown, financial markets have become more liquid, information technology
has undergone a revolution. But have market prices become more informative? We derive a welfare-based
measure of price informativeness: the predicted variation of future cash flows from current market
prices. Since 1960, price informativeness has increased at longer horizons (three to five years). The
increase is concentrated among firms with greater institutional ownership and share turnover, firms
with traded options, and growth firms. Prices have also become a stronger predictor of investment
and investment a stronger predictor of cash flows. These results suggest increased revelatory price
efficiency.
Jennie Bai Alexi Savov
Georgetown University Stern School of Business
3700 O St. N.W. New York University
Washington DC, 20057 44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-85
jb2348@georgetown.edu New York, NY 10012
and NBER
Thomas Philippon asavov@stern.nyu.edu
New York University
Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
tphilipp@stern.nyu.edu

Fama (1970) writes, “The primary role of the capital market is allocation of ownership of
the economy’s capital stock. In general terms, the ideal is a market in which prices provide
accurate signals for resource allocation: that is, a market in which firms can make production-
investment decisions ...under the assumption that security prices at any time ‘fully reflect’
all available information.” Since these words were written, financial markets have been trans-
formed: information processing costs have plummeted, and information availability has vastly
expanded. Trading costs have fallen and liquidity has increased by orders of magnitude.1
Institutional investing has become dominant and spending on price discovery has increased.2
The financial sector’s share of GDP has doubled. To assess whether these trends have led to
progresstowardsFama’sideal, weask: Havefinancialmarketpricesbecomemoreinformative?
To answer this question, we first derive a welfare-based measure of price informativeness
and then document its evolution over time. Using U.S. stock market data from 1960 to 2014,
we find that among comparable firms price informativeness has increased at medium and
long horizons (three to five years) while remaining stable at short horizon (one year). Our
results from a number of tests support the interpretation that greater information production
in financial markets has contributed to an increase in the efficiency of capital allocation.
Our first task is to come up with the right measure of informativeness. Standard q-theory
(Tobin 1969) implies that investment is proportional to the conditional expectation of future
cash flows, making firm value convex in this expectation. Intuitively, investment is an option
on information, and firm value embeds the value of this option. It follows that aggregate
efficiency is increasing in information (Hayek 1945), which can be quantified by the predicted
variance of future cash flows (i.e. the variance of their conditional expectation). We are
particularly interested in the information content of prices, which is given by the predicted
variance of cash flows using market prices as the predictor. Our price informativeness measure
is its square root.
We construct time series of price informativeness from yearly cross-sectional regressions
of future earnings on current stock market valuation ratios (we also include current earnings
and sector controls). We focus on the one-, three-, and five-year forecasting horizons and on
1NYSE trading volume is up 103 times since 1960.
2Based on French (2008), spending on price discovery has risen from 0.3% to 1% of GDP since 1980.
2

S&P 500 firms whose stable characteristics allow for a fairly clean comparison over time. We
show that price informativeness is increasing with horizon, consistent with prices capturing
differences in growth rates across firms. Moreover, current earnings are already a good pre-
dictor of next year’s earnings, making prices more useful at longer horizon. From a capital
allocation perspective, the longer horizons are particularly important since the time-to-build
literature suggests that investment plans take over a year to implement, with the cash flows
materializing farther down the road.3
Our key result is that price informativeness has increased at the three- and five-year
horizons. The upward trend is steady throughout the fifty-year sample and its cumulative
effect is economically significant: price informativeness at the longer horizons is over 50%
higher in 2010 than in 1960, and the increase is statistically significant. Price informativeness
at the one-year horizon, which is smaller to begin with, is relatively unchanged.
The increase in price informativeness is not explained by changes in return predictability.
Since valuations are driven by either cash flows or expected returns (Campbell and Shiller
1988), a decrease in cross-sectional return predictability (e.g. a drop in the value premium)
could make price informativeness rise even if information production does not. We find that
this is not the case by putting returns on the left side of our forecasting regressions, which
shows that the predictable component of returns remains stable.4
Theory suggests that the information contained in market prices for future earnings should
also be reflected in investment decisions. We therefore look at the predicted variance of in-
vestment based on market prices. We find that market prices have become stronger predictors
of investment as measured by R&D spending (though not CAPX). The increase is already
apparent at the short one-year horizon, as one would expect given that investment precedes
earnings. Thus, when it comes to real decisions like R&D (for which market information is
3For instance, Koeva (2000) finds that “the average construction lead time for new plants is around two
years in most industries”.
4For completeness, we also calculate our price informativess measure for firms beyond the S&P 500. We
stress, however, that the composition of this sample has changed dramatically over the years (see Fama
and French 2004), making this comparison potentially misleading. This is readily apparent from trends in
observable characteristics such as idiosyncratic volatility and earnings dispersion (measures of uncertainty),
which have increased drastically. By contrast, these characteristics are remarkably stable for S&P 500 firms.
Likely as a result of the compositional shift, price informativeness for firms beyond the S&P 500 appears to
decline. Interestingly, the decline is concentrated at the short horizon so again there is relative improvement
at the long end. Above all, we view these results as motivating our focus on S&P 500 firms.
3