NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES OF LOLR FACILITIES:
THE CASE OF ILLIQUID LEVERAGE
Viral V. Acharya
Bruce Tuckman
Working Paper 19773
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19773
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2013
This paper was prepared for the IMF Economic Review Conference in Honor of Stanley Fischer. We
are grateful to Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas and Ayhan Kose (editors), Ricardo Caballero (discussant),
three anonymous referees, and participants at the International Monetary Fund’s 14th Jacques Polak
Conference in honor of Stanley Fischer on November 7-8, 2013, for helpful comments. We thank
Katherine Waldock for outstanding research assistance. All errors remain our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19773.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Viral V. Acharya and Bruce Tuckman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Unintended Consequences of LOLR Facilities: The Case of Illiquid Leverage
Viral V. Acharya and Bruce Tuckman
NBER Working Paper No. 19773
December 2013
JEL No. D62,E58,G01,G21,G24,G28
ABSTRACT
While the direct effect of lender-of-last-resort (LOLR) facilities is to forestall the default of financial
firms that lose funding liquidity, an indirect effect is to allow these firms to minimize deleveraging
sales of illiquid assets. This unintended consequence of LOLR facilities manifests itself as excess illiquid
leverage in the financial sector, can make future liquidity shortfalls more likely, and can lead to an
increase in default risks. Furthermore, this increase in default risk can occur despite the fact that the
combination of LOLR facilities and reduced asset sales raises the prices of illiquid assets.
The behavior of U.S. broker-dealers during the crisis of 2007-2009 is consistent with the unintended
consequence just described. In particular, given the Federal Reserve’s LOLR facilities, broker-dealers
could afford to try to wait out the crisis. While they did reduce traditional measures of leverage to
varying degrees, they failed to reduce sufficiently their illiquid leverage, which contributed to their
failures or near failures.
Several mechanisms that might address this unintended consequence of LOLR facili-ties are explored:
condition LOLR access and terms on the financial health of borrowers; condition LOLR access and
terms on asset sales and deleveraging; and, especially, in-stead of supporting troubled financial firms,
open LOLR facilities to financially sound, potential buyers of illiquid assets.
Viral V. Acharya
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-84
New York, NY 10012
and CEPR
and also NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu
Bruce Tuckman
44 West 4th St
New York
NY 10012, USA
btuckman@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
Since 2007, central banks worldwide have offered lender-of-last-resort (LOLR) facilities to private
financial institutions in unprecedented scope and scale. These facilities provide funding against
relatively illiquid assets in times of market stress so as to prevent downward spirals in which
balance sheet weaknesses beget asset fire sales, which beget further balance sheet weaknesses, etc.,
until the financial sector’s ruin devastates the real economy.
LOLR facilities are hardly a panacea, however. The ex-ante moral hazard of providing such
facilities in a crisis is well and widely recognized: financial institutions, knowing that authorities
will offer liquidity in a crisis, take too much liquidity risk from a societal perspective. In addition,
despite the ex-post societal benefits of LOLR facilities, the sense in which these facilities bail out
financial institutions generates considerable political fallout.
This subject of this paper is a less recognized moral hazard of LOLR facilities, which occurs
when these facilities are in operation. Consider the following exchange at Merrill Lynch’s earnings
call from the second quarter of 2008. Meredith Whitney, a well-known analyst at Oppenheimer,
asked John Thain, Chairman and CEO of Merrill Lynch, whether the firm could put its balance
sheet problems behind it by “hitting whatever cash bid... is out there” for its troubled assets. Mr.
Thain responded as follows:
We have not simply liquidated stuff at any price we could get. At some point some
of the return profiles that people want... you would not want us to sell the assets. We
will continue to sell assets but in a way that makes sense from generating returns to
our shareholders.1
Out of context, this response seems perfectly reasonable: the CEO of a financial institution
is promising to conduct asset sales so as to maximize shareholder returns. In context, however,
Mr. Thain’s statement is quite remarkable. Following the collapse of Bear Stearns in mid-March
2008, the Federal Reserve established unprecedented LOLR liquidity facilities, namely the Term
Securities Lending Facility (TSLF) and the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF), to ease the
precarious funding conditions that were perceived to threaten the very survival of broker-dealers.
1Merrill Lynch, Q2 Earnings Call, July 17, 2008
1

It would not be unreasonable to expect broker-dealers to use the respite provided by these facilities
to sell troubled assets gradually, i.e., to strengthen their balance sheets without dumping assets
in an individually and systemically harmful manner. Instead, while the Federal Reserve, and by
extension the U.S. taxpayer, stood ready to fund assets and assume whatever risks that entailed,
the CEO of a beneficiary of these LOLR facilities proclaimed that asset sales would be conducted
so as to generate returns for shareholders. Worse yet, Merrill Lynch’s delay in deleveraging its
balance sheet, made possible at least in part by LOLR facilities, was a factor contributing to its
demise as an independent firm in September 2008, a mere two months after Mr. Thain’s remarks.
The case of Merrill Lynch in July 2008 is only a single instance of a much wider phenomenon.
Whether considering the Federal Reserve’s set of LOLR programs in the U.S. during the ’07-’09
financial crisis, including traditional discount window lending, the Bank of Japan’s Funds Supply-
ing Operation in ’09-’10, or the European Central Bank’s (ECB’s) recent Long-Term Refinancing
Operations (LTRO), there is a concern that private financial institutions take advantage of central
bank funding programs by dragging their feet on deleveraging. With this motivation, this paper
argues, both theoretically and through a case study, that LOLR facilities as currently designed
can have the unintended consequence of reducing the extent to which financial firms delever and,
therefore, can actually increase these firms’ risks of default.
To establish its theoretical results, this paper constructs a model designed to capture the
plight of many banks and investment banks during the most recent crisis. In particular, a repre-
sentative bank has borrowed short term to fund the purchase of long-term and relatively illiquid
assets. Then, due to market stress, these assets sell for less than their fundamental values and
have become difficult to finance.2 The bank, consequently, needs to delever, i.e., to sell some of its
assets, despite their being undervalued, so that the firm has enough funds on hand to redeem any
maturing debt that cannot be rolled over.
The central bank steps into this setting by offering to fund the illiquid asset at better terms
than those offered by private funding markets. The direct effect of such an LOLR facility, the
2Broker-dealers normally rely on private markets to finance their positions, but these markets became severely
impaired in early 2008. Lenders of funds through repurchase agreements became increasingly cautious, worrying
both about the liquidation value of collateral and about the credit risk of counterparties. These lenders reacted by
increasinghaircuts–reducingthecashtheywerewillingtolendagainstagivenamountofcollateral–andbyrefusing
tolendatallagainstcertaintypesofcollateral. See,forexample,Copeland,MartinandWalker(2011),Gortonand
Metrick (2012), and Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Orlov (2012).
2