NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK CAPITAL AND DIVIDEND EXTERNALITIES
Viral V. Acharya
Hanh Le
Hyun Song Shin
Working Paper 19707
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19707
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2013
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Viral V. Acharya, Hanh Le, and Hyun Song Shin. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Bank Capital and Dividend Externalities
Viral V. Acharya, Hanh Le, and Hyun Song Shin
NBER Working Paper No. 19707
December 2013
JEL No. G01,G21,G24,G28,G32,G35,G38
ABSTRACT
In spite of mounting losses banks continued to pay dividends during the crisis. We present a model
that addresses this behavior. By paying out dividends, a bank transfers value to its shareholders away
from creditors, among whom are other banks. This way, one bank's dividend payout policy affects
the equity value and risk of default of other banks. When such negative externalities are strong and
bank franchise values are not too low, the private equilibrium can feature excess dividends relative
to a coordinated policy that maximizes the combined equity value of banks.
Viral V. Acharya Hyun Song Shin
Stern School of Business Department of Economics
New York University Princeton University
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-84 Princeton, NJ 08544
New York, NY 10012 and NBER
and CEPR hsshin@princeton.edu
and also NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu
Hanh Le
University of Illinois at Chicago
University Hall, Office 2427.
601 S. Morgan Street
Chicago, IL 60637
hanhle@uic.edu

1 Introduction
As the financial system’s capital was being depleted, many banks continued to pay
dividends well into the depth of the 2007-2009 financial crisis. Large bank holding
companies such as Bank of America, Citigroup and JP Morgan maintained a smooth
dividend behavior, while securities companies such as Lehman Brothers and Merrill
Lynch even increased their dividends as losses were accumulating. This behavior rep-
resents a type of risk-shifting or asset substitution that favors equity holders over debt
holders (as in the seminal work of Jensen and Meckling, 1976).
We present a simple model where, in the presence of risky debt, risk shifting in-
centives can motivate the payment of dividends as observed during the crisis. In our
model, the bank has assets in place that generate some cash flow in the current period
and some uncertain cash flow in the next period. At any given point in time, the bank
has a franchise value (say, the present value of all its future cash flows) that is largely
determined by the relationship with its customers and counterparties. The bank can
pay dividends out of the current cash flow, and carry the remaining cash to the next
period. The bank has to fulfill non-negotiable debt obligations in the next period out of
the next period’s cash flow and cash savings from the current period. If debt obligations
are not satisfied, the bank is in default. In this case, equity holders receive no value
from the next period cash flow, and furthermore, the bank’s franchise value is lost, for
example, through a disorderly liquidation or transfer to another bank or government.
Given this setup, the first best solution that maximizes the total equity and debt
value of the bank is to pay zero dividends. This is because risk shifting will decrease
1

the total value of the bank by increasing the probability that its franchise value will be
lost. Any gain from risk shifting by the bank’s equity holders is a loss to its creditors
in a zero sum game. However, we show that in practice when the dividend policy of a
bank is set to maximize its equity holders’ value, the optimal dividend policy can stray
away from the first best solution. Here, the dividend policy reflects a tradeoff between
(i) paying out to equity holders the available cash today rather than transferring it
to creditors in default states in the future; and (ii) saving the equity’s option on the
franchise value since dividend payout raises the likelihood of default and thus foregoing
this value. When debt is risky (i.e, when bank leverage is sufficiently high), the optimal
dividend policy depends on the bank’s franchise value. If the franchise value exceeds a
critical threshold, the effect in (ii) dominates and it becomes optimal for the bank not
to pay any dividends. However, if the franchise value is below the critical threshold
such that risk-shifting benefits in (i) become dominant, then the bank would pay out
all available cash as dividends.
The key question is why banks do not find mechanisms ex-ante to guard against
such ex-post agency problems, e.g, by including dividend cutoff or earnings retention
covenants in bank debt contracts. To understand this, we next introduce financial
contracts between two banks, A and B, and analyze how the dividend policy of one
bank creates externalities on the other bank. The connection between the two banks
takes the form of a contingent contract, such as an interest rate or a credit default
swap, under which, in the next period, bank A has to pay bank B an amount in one
state of the world and vice versa in the other state. We show that bank B’s dividends
2