NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCIAL DEPENDENCE AND INNOVATION:
THE CASE OF PUBLIC VERSUS PRIVATE FIRMS
Viral V. Acharya
Zhaoxia Xu
Working Paper 19708
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19708
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2013
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Viral V. Acharya and Zhaoxia Xu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Financial Dependence and Innovation: The Case of Public versus Private Firms
Viral V. Acharya and Zhaoxia Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 19708
December 2013
JEL No. G31,G32,O16,O30
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the relationship between innovation and firms' dependence on external capital
by analyzing the innovation activities of privately-held and publicly-traded firms. We find that public
firms in external finance dependent industries generate patents of higher quantity, quality, and novelty
compared to their private counterparts, while public firms in internal finance dependent industries
do not have a significantly better innovation profile than matched private firms. The results are robust
to various empirical strategies that address selection bias. The findings suggest that public listing is
beneficial to the innovation of firms in industries with a greater need for external capital.
Viral V. Acharya
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-84
New York, NY 10012
and CEPR
and also NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu
Zhaoxia Xu
Department of Finance and Risk Engineering
New York University
6 MetroTech Center,
New York, NY 11201
zhaoxiaxu@nyu.edu

1 Introduction
While innovation is crucial for businesses to gain strategic advantage over competi-
tors, financing innovation tends to be difficult because of uncertainty and information
asymmetry associated with innovative activities (Hall and Lerner (2010)). Firms with
innovative opportunities often lack capital. Stock markets can provide various benefits
as a source of external capital by reducing asymmetric information, lowering the cost
of capital, as well as enabling innovation in firms (Rajan (2012)). Given the increasing
dependence of young firms on public equity to finance their R&D (Brown et al. (2009)),
understanding the relation between innovation and a firm’s financial dependence is a
vital but under-explored research question. We fill this gap in the literature by investi-
gating how innovation depends on the access to stock market financing and the need for
external capital.
We use a firm’s public listing status to capture the access to stock markets and
investigate its impact on innovation. While firms can gain an access to a large pool
of low cost capital by trading on exchanges, they also face the pressure from myopic
investors to generate short-term profits (Stein (1989)). Therefore, we expect that the
effect of public listing on innovation will depend on the trade-off between the benefits
and costs associated with listing on stock markets, which vary across firms with different
degrees of dependence on external finance.
By analyzing the innovation activities of a large sample of private and public firms
between 1994 and 2004, we observe that public firms on average have patents of higher
quantity, quality, and novelty than private firms. After considering the need for external
1

finance, we find that only public firms in external finance dependent (EFD) industries
have a significantly better innovation profile than private firms, not firms in internal
finance dependent (IFD) industries. Industries that rely on external (internal) finance
for their investments are considered as EFD (IFD) industries.
To understand why public firms in industries with a greater need of external capital
perform better in innovation, we explore four potential explanations. One potential
explanation could be that public listing relaxes the financial constraints faced by those
firms. If this is the case, one would expect that firms with a higher propensity to
innovate will benefit more from obtaining access to stock market financing. Consistent
with this conjecture, we find that firms in more innovation intensive industries with
a greater need for external capital are more likely to go public compared to firms in
less innovation intensive industries and they are more innovative when having access to
public equity capital compared to firms without such access.
The observed difference in innovation may also be driven by the variation in firms’
ability to use R&D to generate patents. To explore this second possibility, we test
whether public and private firms differ in their innovation efficiency measured as the
natural logarithm of one plus the number of patents per dollar R&D investment. We
find a higher innovation efficiency for public firms in industries dependent on external
finance, but no significant difference for private and public firms in IFD industries.
Third, a part of the literature has argued that public firms are prone to agency
problems given the separation of ownership and control. Under the pressure of myopic
investors, managers have incentives to pursue short-term performance (Stein (1989),
2