NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IS SELL-SIDE RESEARCH MORE VALUABLE IN BAD TIMES?
Roger K. Loh
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 19778
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19778
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2014
We thank Marcin Kacperczyk, Oguzhan Karakas, Jeff Kubik, Massimo Massa, Roni Michaely, Jay
Ritter, Stijin Van Nieuwerburgh, Paola Sapienza, Siew Hong Teoh, Mitch Warachka, Kent Womack,
Frank Yu, Jialin Yu, an anonymous associate editor and two anonymous referees, participants at the
AFA 2014 Philadelphia meetings and the 2013 SMU-SUFE Summer Institute of Finance Conference,
and at a seminar at the University of Zurich for helpful comments. Brian Baugh, Andrei Gonçalves,
and David Hauw provided excellent research assistance. Roger thanks the Sing Lun Fellowship and
the Sim Kee Boon Institute for Financial Economics at Singapore Management University for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Roger K. Loh and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Is Sell-Side Research More Valuable in Bad Times?
Roger K. Loh and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 19778
January 2014, Revised November 2016
JEL No. F14,F20,F24
ABSTRACT
Because uncertainty is high in bad times, investors find it harder to assess firm prospects and, hence,
should value analyst output more. However, higher uncertainty makes analysts’ tasks harder so it is
unclear if analyst output is more valuable in bad times. We find that, in bad times, analyst revisions
have a larger stock-price impact, earnings forecast errors per unit of uncertainty fall, reports are more
frequent and longer, and the impact of analyst output increases more for harder-to-value firms. These
results are consistent with analysts working harder and investors relying more on analysts in bad times.
Roger K. Loh
Singapore Management University
Lee Kong Chian School of Business
50 Stamford Rd, #04-01
Singapore 178899
Singapore
rogerloh@smu.edu.sg
René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu

1. Introduction
Even though there is a large literature on sell-side analysts’ role as information intermediaries, this literature
mostly ignores the issue of whether the state of the economy affects the value of analyst output for investors.1
There are good reasons to believe that the usefulness and performance of sell-side analysts depend on the state
of the economy. It is well-known that in bad times such as recessions and crises, there is greater variation in
outcomes across firms and across time (see, for instance, Bloom (2009)). To the extent that the role of analysts
is to make sense of firms amidst the increased macro uncertainty, their role should be more important in bad
times and, consequently, they should work harder in bad times. At the same time, however, the increased
uncertainty may make it harder for analysts to perform their job. Further, the drop in trading volume and hence
broker profits in bad times may reduce performance rewards, leading to less motivated analysts. Hence, it is not
clear whether analyst output is more valuable in bad times than in good times. In this paper, we find that
analysts are indeed more valuable in bad times. The stock-price impact of their recommendation and earnings
forecast revisions is greater in bad times. We investigate possible explanations for this finding and conclude that
the evidence is consistent with analysts working harder and investors relying more on analysts in bad times.
We conduct our investigation using a sample of I/B/E/S Detail earnings forecasts from 1983-2014 and
recommendations from 1993-2014. We define bad times in multiple ways. The most obvious approach is to use
prominent crises that have occurred in the last two decades, such as the October 1987 crash, the LTCM crisis of
1998, and the credit crisis of 2007-2009. We also define bad times as recession periods marked by the National
Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), and as periods of high uncertainty according to the Baker, Bloom, and
Davis (2016) policy uncertainty index (from www.policyuncertainty.com). Our measure of the value of analyst
1 For example, Womack (1996), Barber, Lehavy, McNichols, and Trueman (2001), Kecskés, Michaely, and Womack
(2016) show that stock prices react to the release of analyst recommendations and a drift follows afterwards. Loh and Stulz
(2011) show that some recommendation changes exert a large noticeable change in the firm’s stock price and these
recommendations can impact the firm’s information environment. Bradley, Clarke, Lee, and Ornthanalai (2014) report that
recommendations are more likely than earnings announcements or company earnings guidance to cause jumps in intraday
stock prices. Others find that analyst coverage reduces information asymmetry, improves visibility (Kelly and Ljungqvist
(2012)), disciplines credit rating agencies (Fong, Hong, Kacperczyk, and Kubik (2014)), and affects corporate policies
(Derrien and Kecskés (2013)).
1

output is the price impact, which shows the extent to which analyst signals affect investors’ assessment of the
value of firms and hence is a measure of how analysts contribute to the information environment of firms.
Using the average two-day abnormal returns to stock recommendation changes, we find that analysts are
more impactful during bad times for both downgrades and upgrades. Further, using the definition of influential
recommendations in Loh and Stulz (2011), which effectively treats recommendation changes as influential if the
stock-price reaction is statistically significant, we find robust evidence that both upgrades and downgrades are
more likely to be influential during bad times compared to good times. We also find that the market reacts more
strongly to earnings forecast revisions during bad times. Our evidence of greater analyst impact during bad
times is robust to controls for firm and analyst characteristics, including analyst fixed effects. We conclude that
analyst output is more useful for investors in bad times in that it moves stock prices more.
We perform several robustness tests for our results. Our focus is on macro instead of firm-specific bad times
because macro bad times are economically important and because they are more likely to be exogenous to
analysts. Prior studies like Frankel, Kothari, and Weber (2006) and Loh and Stulz (2011) show that analyst
reports are more informative when firm-level uncertainty is higher. While we already control for firm-level
uncertainty in our results, we want to be sure that it is macro (i.e. market-level) uncertainty that drives our
results. We decompose a firm’s total stock return volatility into market, industry, and firm-specific components.
We find that the increased impact of recommendation changes in times of high uncertainty is most robust when
the market component is used to define high uncertainty. Second, we investigate whether the market simply
reacts more to all types of firm news in bad times (e.g., Schmalz and Zhuk (2015) find that reactions to earnings
announcements are larger in recessions). Adapting the methodology in Frankel et al. (2006), we regress a
stock’s daily absolute returns on a comprehensive set of dummy variables that represent important firm news
events, namely, recommendation changes, reiterations, earnings announcements, earnings guidance, dividend
announcements, and insider trades. Interacting these news dummies with bad times indicators, we show that not
all firm news events are associated with greater bad times impact. Importantly, the market reacts more to
recommendation changes (and reiterations) in bad times even after all other news events and their interactions
2