NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RISK AVERSION AND THE DESIRABILITY OF ATTENUATED LEGAL CHANGE
Steven Shavell
Working Paper 19879
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19879
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2014
Samuel R. Rosenthal Professor of Law and Economics, Harvard Law School. I thank Louis Kaplow,
Dean Lueck, A. Mitchell Polinsky, Kathryn Spier, Michael Trebilcock, and Abraham Wickelgren
for comments on this article, Kenneth Abraham, Tom Baker, David Bassi, Patricia Danzon, Scott
Harrington, and Micah Woolstenhulme for discussions about insurance, Edward Dumoulin, David
Geiger, Divya Subrahmanyam, and Jodie-Jane Tingle for research assistance, and the John M. Olin
Center for Law, Economics, and Business at Harvard Law School for research support. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Steven Shavell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Risk Aversion and the Desirability of Attenuated Legal Change
Steven Shavell
NBER Working Paper No. 19879
February 2014
JEL No. H8,K10,K20
ABSTRACT
This article develops two points. First, insurance against the risk of legal change is largely unavailable,
primarily because of the correlated nature of the losses that legal change generates. Second, given
the absence of insurance against legal change, it is generally desirable for legal change to be attenuated.
Specifically, in a model of uncertainty about two different types of legal change—in regulatory standards,
and in payments for harm caused—it is demonstrated that the optimal new regulatory standard is less
than the conventionally efficient standard, and that the optimal new payment for harm is less than
the harm.
Steven Shavell
Harvard Law School
1575 Massachusetts Avenue
Hauser Hall 508
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
shavell@law.harvard.edu

Risk Aversion and the Desirability of Attenuated Legal Change
Steven Shavell*
This article develops two points. First, insurance against the risk of legal change is
largely unavailable, primarily because of the correlated nature of the losses that legal change
generates. Second, given the absence of insurance against legal change, it is generally desirable
for legal change to be attenuated. Specifically, in a model of uncertainty about two different
types of legal change—in regulatory standards, and in payments for harm caused—it is
demonstrated that the optimal new regulatory standard is less than the conventionally efficient
standard, and that the optimal new payment for harm is less than the harm.
JEL codes: H8, K10, K20
1. Introduction
One of the major categories of risk facing individuals and firms is that the law may
change. Homeowners, for example, confront the prospect that the mortgage interest tax
deduction will be eliminated; firms bear the risk that new regulations concerning workplace
safety or environmental harm will be enacted; and fishermen live with the possibility that a
fishery will be declared off-limits. Such risks of legal change are inevitable, as they are a natural
byproduct of economic, technological, and political uncertainties.
A hallmark of the risk of legal change is that it is largely uninsurable. As is described in
Section 2.1, insurance against legal change is for the most part nonexistent as an empirical
matter. In contrast, insurance against property losses, medical needs, and all manner of other
adverse events is widespread.
Why is insurance coverage against legal change mainly unavailable? I suggest in Section
2.2 that the root of the explanation lies in the correlated nature of the losses usually associated
with changes in legal rules. If, for instance, the use of a fishery were barred, all fishermen
earning income from it would simultaneously suffer losses. Hence, insurers could face
substantial risks were they to sell coverage against changes in the law. However, as I also
discuss, insurers should be able to alleviate these risks in various ways, implying that a fully
satisfactory explanation of reality involves factors in addition to the correlation of losses.
In any event, because insurance against legal change is generally unavailable in fact, I
assume that such coverage cannot be purchased in a model of uncertainty about the law that I
analyze in Section 3. Under that assumption, as well as the assumption that parties subject to the
law are risk averse, the principal analytical point of the article is developed: legal change should
be attenuated, that is, legal change should be less than would be conventionally efficient
(efficient in a risk-neutral world—efficient according to the customary cost-benefit calculus).
* Samuel R. Rosenthal Professor of Law and Economics, Harvard Law School. I thank Louis Kaplow,
Dean Lueck, A. Mitchell Polinsky, Kathryn Spier, Michael Trebilcock, and Abraham Wickelgren for comments on
this article, Kenneth Abraham, Tom Baker, David Bassi, Patricia Danzon, Scott Harrington, and Micah
Woolstenhulme for discussions about insurance, Edward Dumoulin, David Geiger, Divya Subrahmanyam, and
Jodie-Jane Tingle for research assistance, and the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business at
Harvard Law School for research support.
1

To amplify, in the model, there is a risk that an activity will be discovered to be harmful
by the state. In that case, a law addressing the harmful activity will be adopted; thus there is a
risk of legal change. If the activity is found to be harmful, individuals are able to reduce the
likelihood of harm by exercising costly care (effort or investment in safety).
One type of legal change that is considered is the adoption of a regulation, under which
the state would mandate a level of care. (Regulation may also be interpreted as effective control
of care by the courts through the application of the negligence rule.) The uninsurable risk borne
by parties involved in the activity is that, if it is revealed to be harmful, a regulation will be
employed and parties will have to expend resources to meet the required level of care. For
example, gasoline service station owners might have to replace their gasoline holding tanks with
different tanks that are less likely to leak in order to satisfy new environmental regulations. In
the presence of such risks of bearing regulatory compliance costs, it is shown that the optimal
regulatory standard is less than the conventionally efficient standard.
The rationale for this basic result is, in essence, that if the stipulated standard of care were
equal to the conventionally efficient level, a marginal relaxation of the standard would leave
expected social costs essentially unchanged.1 But the slight reduction of the standard would
produce a social benefit by lowering risk-bearing for the risk-averse parties subject to the
standard. Thus, it is always socially desirable for the standard of care to be less than (and
perhaps to be much less than) the level that would be conventionally efficient.
The other type of legal change that is analyzed is the adoption of strict liability, requiring
a payment of damages to victims of harm. (Strict liability is effectively equivalent in the model
to fines or corrective taxes.) Here the risk that individuals bear concerns damages2 as well as
costs of care (for individuals will be induced to take care if the activity is found to be harmful).
It is shown that the optimal magnitude of damages is less than the harm.3 The ground for this
conclusion is similar to that for the conclusion about the desirable regulatory standard of care.
In Section 4, I make several concluding comments about the model, concerning its
generality and importance, the attenuation of legal change in reality (such as through delayed
implementation of laws and grandfathering), and a policy of government compensation for legal
change.
Before proceeding, let me comment on prior writing on which I build. The most closely
related articles to this one are by Blume and Rubinfeld (1984), who address governmental
takings, and by Masur and Nash (2010), who examine legal change generally. In both of these
articles, the authors observe that insurance against the legal risks that they consider does not
exist, and they propose that the provision of compensation by the government might be desirable
as a substitute. I consider a different policy response to the absence of insurance, namely,
1 At the conventionally efficient level of care, the marginal gain from the cost savings due to a reduction in
the level of care must equal the marginal loss from the resulting increase in expected harm.
2 More precisely, the risk is of having to pay expected damages. In particular, I assume in the model that, if
strict liability is adopted, individuals can then purchase liability insurance coverage at actuarially fair rates.
Therefore, individuals do not turn out to bear a risk of having to pay actual damages. However, individuals still face
the risk of having to pay the insurance premium for the damages coverage that they will elect to purchase.
3 This is true whether victims of harm are risk neutral or risk averse, as shown in Propositions 3 and 4. It is
also demonstrated that the optimal level of damages is zero for all harms sufficiently low; see Proposition 3.
2