NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COAL, SMOKE, AND DEATH:
BITUMINOUS COAL AND AMERICAN HOME HEATING
Alan Barreca
Karen Clay
Joel Tarr
Working Paper 19881
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19881
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2014
We thank Leila Abu-Orf, Paula Levin, and Katherine Rudolph for excellent research assistance. We
are grateful to Antonio Bento, Olivier Deschenes, Stanley Engerman, Price Fishback, Gary Libecap,
Paulina Oliva, Paul Rhode, Mel Stephens, and seminar participants at the AERE 2013 Meeting, ASSA
2013 Cliometrics Session, Cornell University, DC Area Economic History Workshop, Economic History
Association 2011 Meetings, Pittsburgh Economics Medley Conference, Stanford University, University
of California, Santa Barbara, University of Maryland, Baltimore County, and University of Michigan,
and Yale University for helpful comments. The infant birth data was digitized with financial support
from NIA grant P30-AG012810 through the NBER. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Alan Barreca, Karen Clay, and Joel Tarr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Coal, Smoke, and Death: Bituminous Coal and American Home Heating
Alan Barreca, Karen Clay, and Joel Tarr
NBER Working Paper No. 19881
February 2014
JEL No. I18,N32,N52,Q53
ABSTRACT
Air pollution was severe in many urban areas of the United States in the first half of the twentieth
century,(cid:3)in part due to the burning of bituminous coal for heat. We estimate the effects of this bituminous
coal(cid:3)consumption on mortality rates in the U.S. during the mid 20th century. Coal consumption varied
considerably(cid:3)during the 20th century due to coal-labor strikes, wartime oil and gas restrictions, and
the expansion(cid:3)of gas pipelines, among other reasons. To mitigate the influence of confounding factors,
we use a triple-differences(cid:3)identification strategy that relies on variation in coal consumption at the
state-year-season level. It(cid:3)exploits the fact that coal consumption for heating was highest in the winter
and uses within-state changes(cid:3)in mortality in non-winter months as an additional control group. Our
estimates suggest that reductions(cid:3)in the use of bituminous coal for heating between 1945 and 1960
decreased winter all-age mortality(cid:3)by 1.25 percent and winter infant mortality by 3.27 percent, saving
1,923 all age lives per winter month(cid:3)and 310 infant lives per winter month. Our estimates are likely
to be a lower bound, since they primarily(cid:3)capture short-run relationships between coal and mortality.
Alan Barreca Joel Tarr
Department of Economics Department of History
Tulane University 5000 Forbes Avenue
206 Tilton Hall Pittsburgh PA 15213
New Orleans, LA 70118 jt03@andrew.cmu.edu
and NBER
abarreca@tulane.edu
Karen Clay
Heinz College
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
kclay@andrew.cmu.edu

1. Introduction
Today, coal-related pollution is a serious concern in developing countries, especially
China and India (Almond et al 2009, Cohen et al 2004). What has largely been forgotten is that
until recently, coal-related pollution was also a significant public health problem in many
developed countries, including Britain and the United States. Thousands died in London’s most
famous fog in December 1952 (Clay and Troesken 2010). While no single American incident
rivaled the London Fog, the United States experienced severe coal-related air pollution in most
Midwestern and Eastern towns and cities in the 1930s and 1940s (Eisenbud 1978, Tarr 1996,
Tarr and Clay 2012). Examining historical periods when developed countries, like the United
States, had high levels of pollution can offer important insights into the pollution-health
relationship in countries at earlier stages of economic development.
This paper uses a triple-differences model to estimate the effects of bituminous coal
consumption for home heating on infant and all-age mortality rates in the United States during
the mid-twentieth century. We focus on the effects of bituminous coal for heating for three
reasons.1 First, bituminous coal was widely used for heating and highly polluting compared to
alternative fuels, including anthracite coal. In 1940, approximately 41 percent of United States
households and 48 percent of urban households used bituminous coal for home heating.2 Second,
bituminous coal used for heating was generally more harmful than bituminous coal that was used
1 In line with the Minerals Yearbook, we use bituminous coal to refer to lignite, sub-bituminous, and bituminous
coal. Data from the Coal Resources of the United States (1950) show that lignite and subbituminous coal were
produced in small quantities in western states. As of January 1, 1950, of all coal produced in the United States to
that point, 97 percent was bituminous, 2 percent was subbituminous, and 1 percent was lignite.
2 1940 Census of Housing Table 60, p. 101 available at
http://www2.census.gov/prod2/decennial/documents/36911485v2p1ch1.pdf. The census asked whether the
household used coal for heating, but it did not ask whether the household used bituminous or anthracite coal. Fifty-
five percent of households and 64 percent of urban households reported using coal for heating. Estimates in the mid
1920s suggest suggested that 65 percent of anthracite was being used for heating. Department of Commerce (1929),
p. 6. Taken together with data on consumption of bituminous and anthracite, this implies that 75 percent of coal
consumed for heating was bituminous.
2

for other purposes. Residential bituminous coal users were primarily located in urban areas,
burned bituminous coal at low temperatures thereby limiting the combustion of the coal, and had
low chimneys, all of which increased population exposure to pollution.3 Conversely, firms that
used bituminous coal in manufacturing and electricity generation tended to be located outside
urban areas, burned the coal at high temperatures thereby facilitating combustion, and had higher
smokestacks that allowed for dispersion of smoke across a much wider area. Third, there was
significant variation in the opportunity cost of bituminous coal during this time period. For
example, the sale and repurposing of war-related oil pipelines for natural gas after World War II
led to a decline in the relative price of natural gas. The percentage of households that used
bituminous coal for home heating fell from 41 percent in 1940 to 9 percent in 1960.
The paper investigates the effects on both all-age mortality and infant mortality.
Epidemiological evidence suggests that exposure to air pollution poses differential health risks
across the age distribution. Infants are highly sensitive to current environmental conditions, and
their outcomes almost certainly are related to recent exposure in the place in which they are
observed. For infants, pollutants can cause premature delivery, low birth weight, respiratory
disease, and cardiovascular disease.4 For adults, air-borne particulates and associated pollutants
such as carbon monoxide can cause atherosclerosis, heart arrhythmias, and pneumonia.5
There are several challenges to identifying the causal effects of burning bituminous coal
for heating using simple cross-sectional or time-series correlations. States with greater access to
bituminous coal may have different seasonal mortality patterns due to fixed differences in
climate. (States with bituminous coal deposits tended to be colder.) Coal consumption for
3 It is difficult to optimize the mix of air and coal in small stoves or boilers, and so combustion is rarely complete.
This leads to greater emissions of particulates. EPA (1995) and WHO (2012).
4 See Arceo-Gomez et al (2012), Curry and Walker (2011), Lockwood (2012), and Woodruff et al (2008).
5 See Lockwood (2012), Pope et al (2004), and DelFino et al (2005).
3