NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RECOVERY FROM FINANCIAL CRISES:
EVIDENCE FROM 100 EPISODES
Carmen M. Reinhart
Kenneth S. Rogoff
Working Paper 19823
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19823
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2014
The authors wish to acknowledge Olivier Blanchard, Max Harris, Vincent R. Reinhart and Takeshi
Tashiro for helpful comments, and National Science Foundation Grant No. 0849224 for research support.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Recovery from Financial Crises: Evidence from 100 Episodes
Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff
NBER Working Paper No. 19823
January 2014
JEL No. E32,E44,F44,G01,N10,N20
ABSTRACT
We examine the evolution of real per capita GDP around 100 systemic banking crises. Part of the costs
of these crises owes to the protracted nature of recovery. On average, it takes about eight years to reach
the pre-crisis level of income; the median is about 6 ½ years. Five to six years after the onset of crisis,
only Germany and the US (out of 12 systemic cases) have reached their 2007-2008 peaks in real income.
Forty-five percent of the episodes recorded double dips. Postwar business cycles are not the relevant
comparator for the recent crises in advanced economies.
Carmen M. Reinhart
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and CEPR
and also NBER
carmen_reinhart@harvard.edu
Kenneth S. Rogoff
Thomas D Cabot Professor of Public Policy
Economics Department
Harvard University
Littauer Center 216
Cambridge, MA 02138-3001
and NBER
krogoff@harvard.edu

Examining the evolution of real per capita GDP around 100 systemic banking crises
reveals that a significant part of the costs of these crises lies in the protracted and halting nature
of the recovery. On average it takes about eight years to reach the pre-crisis level of income; the
median is about 6 ½ years. Five to six years after the onset of the current crisis only Germany
and the US (out of 12 systemic crisis cases) have reached their 2007-2008 peaks in per capita
income. In a sample that covers 63 crises in advanced economies and 37 in larger emerging
markets, more than forty percent of the post-crisis episodes experienced double dips. The
analysis summarized here adds another dimension to an observation we have been emphasizing
on the basis of our earlier work—namely, that the subprime crisis is not an anomaly in the
context of the pre-WWII era. Postwar business cycles are not the right comparator for the severe
crises that have swept advanced economies in recent years.
In the next section, we sketch the methodology used to study the characteristics of cycles
in GDP associated with systemic financial crises. We illustrate the basic concepts by applying
these to US data. In Section II, we examine the output consequences of 100 crises spanning
nearly two centuries. The emphasis is on the most severe crises. The unfolding post-2007 crisis
in many advanced economies and how these compare to the historical norms is the focus of
Section III. We conclude by arguing that speeding up recovery may require that advanced-economy
governments adopt some of the approaches that have been relegated to the emerging markets over
the last few decades—but that advanced countries themselves once practiced vigorously.
I. Methodology
Our aim is to approximate the loss in living standards (as measured by real per capita
GDP) associated with systemic financial crises. As a preamble, we need to describe what defines
2

a systemic crisis, why we stress normalizing by population (in lieu of the more common practice
in business cycle literature of focusing on the macroeconomic aggregates), how the depth and
duration of the cycle are measured, and how we characterize the often halting nature of the post-
crisis recovery to incorporate the widespread prevalence of “double dips.” We also present a
simple composite measure of crisis severity as another summary statistic.
A. Systemic crises and per capita GDP
The distinction of financial crises (or panics) into systemic and borderline varieties has a
long tradition in this literature. In the days prior to deposit insurance, Charles Calomiris and
Gary Gorton (1991), for example, distinguish between episodes where convertibility is
suspended and more minor types of bank distress. Gerard Caprio et al. (2005) characterize
modern systemic crises as those episodes where there are bank runs, a significant share of
nonperforming assets, bank liquidations, and large-scale policy intervention to support banks.1
We anchor our analysis of the economic cycle around financial crises on real per capita
GDP for three reasons: (i) Recovery (to be defined) following financial crises is often a five-to-
ten-year process.2 As long as the population is growing, a recovery of the prior peak in real GDP
will still leave the average person worse off than prior to the crisis. (ii) We compare crises that
are decades and sometimes centuries apart. During the 1850s, US population growth peaked at
about 3.8 percent per annum, while it is less than one percent at present. (iii) There are
substantive cross-country variations that persist to this day.
B. The Ds: Depth, duration, and double dips
As our primary interest is dating long and rather infrequent cycles associated with deep
crises and going as far back as the data permit, the frequency of our study is annual. Peaks and
1 A full listing of the post-WWII advanced economy systemic and borderline episodes prior to the subprime crisis
can be found in Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2008).
2 The next section presents evidence on this as does Reinhart and Rogoff (2009).
3