NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CENTRAL CLEARING AND COLLATERAL DEMAND
Darrell Duffie
Martin Scheicher
Guillaume Vuillemey
Working Paper 19890
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19890
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2014
The views presented in the paper are those of the authors only and do not necessarily represent the
views of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), the European Central Bank, the Banque de France,
the Eurosystem, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. The authors thank the DTCC for providing
the CDS data used in the analysis for the ESRB. They thank Laurent Clerc and the members of the
ESRB Expert Group on interconnectedness for providing comments.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19890.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Darrell Duffie, Martin Scheicher, and Guillaume Vuillemey. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Central Clearing and Collateral Demand
Darrell Duffie, Martin Scheicher, and Guillaume Vuillemey
NBER Working Paper No. 19890
February 2014
JEL No. G15,G20,G28
ABSTRACT
We use an extensive data set of bilateral exposures on credit default swap (CDS) to estimate the impact
on collateral demand of new margin and clearing practices and regulations. We decompose collateral
demand for both customers and dealers into several key components, including the “velocity drag”
associated with variation margin movements. We demonstrate the impact on collateral demand of
more widespread initial margin requirements, increased novation of CDS to central clearing parties
(CCPs), an increase in the number of clearing members, the proliferation of CCPs of both specialized
and non-specialized types, and client clearing. Among other results, we show that system-wide collateral
demand is increased significantly by the application of initial margin requirements for dealers, whether
or not the CDS are cleared. Given these dealer-to-dealer initial margin requirements, however, mandatory
central clearing is shown to lower, not raise, system-wide collateral demand, provided there is no significant
proliferation of CCPs. Central clearing does, however, have significant distributional consequences
for collateral requirements across various types of market participants.
Darrell Duffie Guillaume Vuillemey
Graduate School of Business Sciences Po
Stanford University guillaume.vuillemey@sciences-po.fr
Stanford, CA 94305-7298
and NBER
duffie@stanford.edu
Martin Scheicher
European Systemic Risk Board
martin.scheicher@esrb.europa.eu

Introduction
The recent G20 reform of the over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives mar-
ket, launched in the aftermath of Lehman’s collapse (FSB, 2013), mandates
the clearing of standardized derivative contracts by central clearing par-
ties (CCPs). Central clearing aims to reduce the likelihood and severity of
contagion effects in the OTC derivatives market. A CCP steps into bilateral
trades by means of novation, becoming the buyer to every seller, and vice
versa. By taking on and subsequently mitigating counterparty credit risk,
CCPs insulate their members from default losses. CCPs lower counterparty
exposures in part through margin requirements.
We provide an empirical analysis of the collateral requirements indu-
ced by broader application of margin requirements and central clearing, for
an actual network of bilateral CDS exposures as of 2011. We demonstrate
the impact on collateral demand of more widespread initial margin requi-
rements, increased novation of CDS to CCPs, an increase in the number of
clearing members, the proliferation of CCPs of both specialized and non-
specialized types, and client clearing. Among other results, we show that
system-wide collateral demand is increased significantly by the application
of initial margin requirements for dealers, whether or not CDS are cleared.
Given the new requirement for dealer-to-dealer initial margins, mandatory
central clearing is shown to lower system-wide collateral demand, provided
there is no significant proliferation of CCPs. Central clearing does, howe-
ver, have significant distributional consequences for collateral requirements
across various types of market participants.
The increasing use of central clearing raises the importance of CCPs as
points of risk concentration. The US Financial Stability Oversight Council
hasdesignatedthreeCCPsassystemicallyimportantunderTitleVIIIofthe
Dodd-Frank Act.5 Although CCPs may provide financial stability benefits
(IMF, 2010), some, for example Singh (2010b), have questioned the extent
to which CCPs tie up large amounts of valuable collateral.
A number of authors have assessed changes in collateral demand due to
mandatory central clearing, arriving at a broad range of estimates, recently
compiled by Sidanius and Zikes (2012). We contribute to this literature in
three ways.
First, we use a novel and comprehensive dataset of CDS bilateral ex-
posures to assess the impact of various margining and clearing schemes on
collateral demand and its decomposition. Our sample, obtained from the
Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation (DTCC), covers virtually all CDS
bilateralexposureson184referenceentitiesrepresenting31.5%oftheglobal
single-name CDS market as of the end of 2011. For each referenced name,
the data base comprises counterparties at a global level. This is in contrast
5. See FSOC.
2

to the existing literature, which used aggregate bank data releases (Hel-
ler and Vause, 2012) or market-wide data (Sidanius and Zikes, 2012) at a
product-level (CDS and interest rate swaps), without capturing the effect of
thenetworkstructureofOTCmarketsandtheheterogeneityofcounterparty
portfolios. CDS are of particular interest because of their jump-to-default
risk and the correlation of credit risk with systemic risk.
Second, we study a variety of clearing schemes and market structures.
Previous work had studied only simplified market structures. As opposed to
priorresearch,ourdataenableustomodelbothdealersandtheircustomers.
We are also able to capture the impact on collateral demand of the new
regulatory requirement for dealer-to-dealer (D2D) initial margins. From two
base cases, with and without D2D margins, we analyse four effects : an
increase in novation to existing CCPs, an increase in the number of clearing
members, an increase in the number of CCPs, and client clearing. (With
“client clearing,” dealers clear the derivatives portfolio of their client end-
users.) The second and the fourth of these effects had not been examined
in the literature. Although the effect on collateral demand of increasing
the number of CCPs had been investigated by Duffie and Zhu (2011), that
study was severely limited by lack of access to bilateral exposure data. We
distinguish between the impact of adding “specialized” CCPs, as opposed to
“non-specialized” CCPs, which are shown to be substantially less efficient
in collateral use because of lost netting and diversification opportunities.
Third, we provide a fully elaborated margin model that enables us to
decompose margin demand both by trader type (customer or dealer) and by
margin type. Specifically, our margin model features portfolio-specific ini-
tial margins, a contract-specific short charge for net CDS sellers, the impact
of maintaining unencumbered assets in order to face daily variation mar-
gin calls, and the velocity drag of collateral movement within the financial
system. The last two of these components had not been examined. Velo-
city drag is shown to have a significant impact on collateral demand. Our
model captures how these components of margin demand incorporate the
effects of cross-counterparty netting and diversification, which change with
the clearing scheme.
Overall, we find that clearing more CDS leads to a much smaller change
in system-wide collateral demand than suggested by previous studies. In-
deed, assuming that initial margin is required for dealers whether or not
their positions are cleared, we find empirically that central clearing actually
lowers collateral demand through the effect of multilateral netting, provided
there is no significant proliferation of CCPs.
Weshowthatclientclearingreducessystem-widecollateraldemandpro-
vided that dealers are able to re-use a large enough share of the collateral
that they receive from their clients. The drop in collateral demand is dri-
ven by cross-counterparty netting and by diversification benefits, both for
customers and dealers, and depends on the size of each investor’s portfo-
3