NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXPORTER DYNAMICS, FIRM SIZE AND GROWTH, AND PARTIAL YEAR EFFECTS
Andrew B. Bernard
Renzo Massari
Jose-Daniel Reyes
Daria Taglioni
Working Paper 19865
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19865
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2014
Any opinions or conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily re(cid:0)ect
those of the IBRD/World Bank and its affiliated organizations, the Executive Directors of the World
Bank or the governments they represent, the NBER or any other institution to which the authors are
affiliated.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Andrew B. Bernard, Renzo Massari, Jose-Daniel Reyes, and Daria Taglioni. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Exporter Dynamics, Firm Size and Growth, and Partial Year Effects
Andrew B. Bernard, Renzo Massari, Jose-Daniel Reyes, and Daria Taglioni
NBER Working Paper No. 19865
January 2014
JEL No. C81,D22,F14,L11
ABSTRACT
Two otherwise identical firms that enter the same market in different months, one in January and one
in December, will report dramatically different annual sales for the first calendar year of operations.
This partial year effect in annual data leads to downward biased observations of the level of activity
upon entry and upward biased growth rates between the year of entry and the following year. This
paper examines the implications of partial year effects using Peruvian export data. The partial year
bias is very large: the average level of first-year exports of new exporters is understated by 65 percent
and the average growth rate between the first and second year of exporting is overstated by 112 percentage
points. This paper re-examines a number of stylized facts about firm size and growth that have motivated
rapidly expanding theoretical and empirical literatures on firm export dynamics. Correcting the partial
year effect eliminates unusually high growth rates in the first year of exporting, raises initial export
levels, and shifts 10 percent of market entrants from below to above the median size. Revisiting an
older set of facts on firm size and growth, the paper finds that correcting for partial year biases reduces
the number of small firms in the firm size distribution and weakens the negative relationship between
firm growth and firm size.
Andrew B. Bernard Jose-Daniel Reyes
Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth World Bank
100 Tuck Hall 1818 H Street, NW
Hanover, NH 03755 Washington, DC 20433
and NBER jreyes2@worldbank.org
Andrew.B.Bernard@dartmouth.edu
Daria Taglioni
Renzo Massari World Bank
World Bank 1818 H Street, NW
1818 H Street NW Washington DC 20433
Washington, DC 20433 daria.taglioni@graduateinstitute.ch
rmassari@worldbank.org

Exporter Dynamics, Firm Size and Growth, and Partial Year Effects
1 Introduction
The past two decades have seen an explosion of research on the microeconomic determinants of
exporting and the complicated relationship between participating in foreign markets and firm per-
formance. This new perspective on international trade has been fostered by access to increasingly
detailed data, starting with census data on whether or not an establishment, or firm, exports in a
given year, and continuing with panel data at the transaction level from individual customs records
with information on exports at the level of the firm-product-destination-year. The most recent
round of research is now matching individual sellers to individual buyers by destination, prod-
uct and year.1 A growing literature, both empirical and theoretical, is considering the firm-level
evolution and dynamics of exports over time by examining the process of entry and growth.
This paper focuses on one specific issue that touches on most of the existing empirical work on
export entry and performance and suggests caution when approaching the disaggregated data. The
concept is quite simple, almost trivial, yet the implications for the existing stylized facts on export
levels and growth rates are profound. Consider two otherwise identical firms that enter the same
market in different months, one in January and one in December. These two firms, starting at the
same initial size and growing at the same rate per month, will report dramatically different annual
sales for the first calendar year of operations. The January entrant will record a full 12 months
of sales and its growth rate from its first to second year will reflect the true underlying annual
growth rate of the firm in the market. The December entrant, in contrast, will only record one
month of sales for its first year so the calendar, or annual sales, of the December firm will be biased
downwards relative to its actual sales during its first year in the market. Similarly the recorded
first year growth rate of the December firm will be biased upwards as one month of sales will be
compared to as many as 12 months of sales in the second calendar year.
This “partial year” effect contaminates all the statistics about market entrants that depend on
the first year of activity. For example, the average level of exports for entering firms will contain a
downward bias, depending on the distribution of entry months over the year, and the average first
year growth rate of entrants will be biased upward. Measures that flow from these averages will,
in turn, contain the same bias. There is, of course, a comparable bias in the last year of exporting
whenthefirmtotalsarebasedoncalendaryears. Exitingfirmswillappeartohaveannualsalesthat
are lower than the total for their last 12 months of operations and their growth rates just before
exit will be biased downward.
This partial year effect in annual data has the potential to lead to large downward biased
observations of level of activity upon entry as well as to large upward biased growth rates between
theyearofentryandthefollowingyear. Thispaperexaminestheimplicationsofpartialyeareffects
1See Blum, Claro, and Horstmann (2011), Eaton, Eslava, Jinkins, Krizan, and Tybout (2012), Bernard, Moxnes,
and Ulltveit-Moe (2013), and Carballo, Ottavianio, and Martincus (2013).
1

Exporter Dynamics, Firm Size and Growth, and Partial Year Effects
using transaction-level export data on Peruvian exports from 1992-2009. The partial year bias is
found to be very large, causing the level of first-year exports of all new exporters to be understated
by 65 percent on average and overstating the average growth rate between the first and second year
of exporting by 112 percentage points. Similar partial year effects are found in the year of exit from
the market.
Empirical work using annual firm-level export data by Eaton, Eslava, Kugler, and Tybout
(2008) and others has documented a set of strong empirical regularities about the performance
of exporters over time. These regularities include the fact that new market entrants, either new
exporters or continuing exporters in new markets, have small levels of exports upon entry, a large
fraction of entrants export for only a single year before exiting the market, and surviving entrants
have extremely rapid export growth between years one and two with more modest growth rates
subsequently. These facts have been taken as evidence against models of high sunk costs of entry
into export markets as in Roberts and Tybout (1997) and have generated a growing literature on
learning and experimentation in export markets.
Correctingforthepartialyearbiasinthecalendaryearexportsofnewmarketentrantseliminates
ordramaticallymitigatesmostofthesestylizedfacts. Survivingnewentrantsstillhavesmallerinitial
levels than ongoing exporters but on average their adjusted first year sales are increased by more
than 76 percent. Surviving entrants have adjusted exports in their first year that are 160 percent
greater than those recorded in the annual data.2 Extremely rapid growth rates in the first year of
exporting, average rates well over 100 percent are typical, are completely eliminated for surviving
entrants. Growth rates in the first year are no different on average from those in subsequent years
after adjusting for the month of entry.3
In addition, we examine the implications of the partial year bias for an older set of facts on
firm size and growth that have been the focus of substantial research in industrial organization.
A large fraction of firms are new to the market in each year; from 1994 to 2007, 45.8 percent of
Peruvian exporters were new to the US market each year. New entrants are a sizable fraction of
firms even in developed economies. Over the same period, an average of 10.5 percent of active US
firms (513,000) began operations each year. Correcting for partial year biases increases the average
size of new entrants into exporting, reduces the number of small firms in the market, and shifts the
overall structure of the firm size distribution of exporters. More than 10 percent of new Peruvian
exporters move from below to above the median firm size after adjusting for the partial year bias
with commensurate adjustments to their first year growth rates. The adjustments also weaken the
negative relationships between firm growth and its variance and firm size as the level and dispersion
of growth rates for the smallest quintile of market participants are reduced.
2These results are for new exporters that survive for at least three years.
3Firm exit rates remain very high for new entrants in export markets.
2