NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REVEALED PREFERENCE, RATIONAL INATTENTION, AND COSTLY INFORMATION
ACQUISITION
Andrew Caplin
Mark Dean
Working Paper 19876
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19876
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2014
We thank Roland Benabou, Dirk Bergemann, Laurens Cherchye, Bram De Rock, Thomas Demuynck,
Federico Echenique, Andrew Ellis, Paola Manzini, Marco Mariotti, Daniel Martin, Filip Matejka,
Alisdair McKay, Stephen Morris, Pietro Ortoleva, Daphna Shohamy, Laura Veldkamp and Michael
Woodford for their constructive contributions. We also thank Samuel Brown, Severine Toussaert and
Isabel Trevino for their exceptional research assistance. An early version was circulated under the
title "Rational Inattention and State Dependent Stochastic Choice". The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Andrew Caplin and Mark Dean. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Revealed Preference, Rational Inattention, and Costly Information Acquisition
Andrew Caplin and Mark Dean
NBER Working Paper No. 19876
January 2014
JEL No. D80
ABSTRACT
We develop a revealed preference test for optimal acquisition of costly information. The test encompasses
models of rational inattention, sequential signal processing, and search. We provide limits on the extent
to which attention costs can be recovered from choice data. We experimentally elicit state dependent
stochastic choice data of the form the tests require. In simple cases, tests confirm that subjects adjust
their attention in response to incentives as the theory dictates.
Andrew Caplin
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
andrew.caplin@nyu.edu
Mark Dean
Department of Economics
Brown University
Box B
Providence, RI, 02912
mark_dean@brown.edu

Revealed Preference, Rational Inattention, and Costly
Information Acquisition
∗
Andrew Caplin and Mark Dean
† ‡
January 2014
Abstract
We develop a revealed preference test for optimal acquisition of costly information.
The test encompasses models of rational inattention, sequential signal processing, and
search. We provide limits on the extent to which attention costs can be recovered
from choice data. We experimentally elicit state dependent stochastic choice data of
the form the tests require. In simple cases, tests confirm that subjects adjust their
attention in response to incentives as the theory dictates.
1 Introduction
Modellingbehaviorwheninformationiscostlytoacquirehasbeencentraltoeconomicanaly-
sis since the seminal work of Stigler [1961]. As the importance of information constraints
have been increasingly recognized,1 so an ever wider array of information gathering tech-
nologies have been modelled. For example, McCall [1970] considered the case of sequential
We thank Roland Benabou, Dirk Bergemann, Laurens Cherchye, Bram De Rock, Thomas Demuynck,
∗
Federico Echenique, Andrew Ellis, Paola Manzini, Marco Mariotti, Daniel Martin, Filip Matejka, Alisdair
McKay, Stephen Morris, Pietro Ortoleva, Daphna Shohamy, Laura Veldkamp and Michael Woodford for
their constructive contributions. We also thank Samuel Brown, Severine Toussaert and Isabel Trevino for
their exceptional research assistance. An early version was circulated under the title “Rational Inattention
and State Dependent Stochastic Choice”.
Center for Experimental Social Science and Department of Economics, New York University. Email:
†
andrew.caplin@nyu.edu
Department of Economics, Brown University. Email: mark_dean@brown.edu
‡
1For example shoppers may buy unnecessarily expensive products due to their failure to notice whether
or not sales tax is included in stated prices (Chetty et al. [2009]), while purchasers limit their attention to a
relatively small number of websites when buying over the internet (Santos et al. [2012]).
1

search; Verrecchia [1982] the choice of variance of a normal signal; and Sims [2003] an unre-
stricted choice of information structure with costs based on Shannon entropy. Many other
alternatives have been implemented in the literature.2
The information costs faced by a decision maker are rarely known to an outside observer.
This makes it of interest to test a general model of optimal information acquisition that
makes minimal assumptions about these costs. In this paper we introduce precise behav-
ioral tests covering all standard theories of costly information acquisition, including rational
inattention theory as well as static and sequential signal acquisition theories.3 We establish
limits on what choice data can reveal about the costs of information. In an experimen-
tal implementation, we confirm that attentional adjustments are well-modeled as rationally
responsive to costs.
The purpose of our tests is to introduce non-parametric methods into the theory of infor-
mation acquisition. Just as unobservability of preferences motivated the revealed preference
approach to utility (Samuelson [1938], Afriat [1967]), so the unobservability of information
acquisition costs motivates our approach. In the revealed preference spirit, our tests can be
readily applied in practice, and fully characterize optimal behavior for an arbitrary finite
data set.
Enriched choice data plays a central role in our tests. We utilize “state dependent”
stochastic choice data, which describes the decision maker’s probability of choosing each
available action in each state of the world.4 While only recently introduced into revealed
preference analysis (see Caplin and Martin [2014], henceforth CM14), it is standard in the
econometric analysis of discrete choice. For example, Chetty et al. [2009] study how choice
distributions are impacted by an observable state: the inclusion or exclusion of sales taxes
in stated prices. They find evidence of incomplete state awareness among buyers.5
Our key theoretical insight is that the decision maker’s attention strategy is largely re-
vealed by their state dependent stochastic choice data. Using this observation, we describe
two conditions that render such data consistent with optimal acquisition of costly infor-
mation. A “no improving action switch” (NIAS) condition ensures that choices are optimal
given what was learned about the state of the world, as in CM14. A“no improving attention
cycles” (NIAC) condition ensures that total utility cannot be raised by reassigning atten-
2See, for example Reis [2006], van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp [2009] and Woodford [2012].
3Thatourconditionscharacterizesomanydistinctmicroeconomicmodelsisstriking. Itechoesthefinding
of Manzini and Mariotti [2007] that identical conditions (“weak WARP”) capture the behavioral content of
many apparently distinct procedural models of boundedly rational behavior.
4Thekeyroleofdataenrichmenthasarisenpreviouslyinouruseof“choiceprocess”datatotesttheories
of sequential search (Caplin et al. [2011]).
5The data set has a long history in psychometric research. It is essential to the formulation of the
Weber-Fechner laws on limits to perceptual discrimination (see Murray [1993]).
2