NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES GREATER INEQUALITY LEAD TO MORE HOUSEHOLD BORROWING?
NEW EVIDENCE FROM HOUSEHOLD DATA
Olivier Coibion
Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Marianna Kudlyak
John Mondragon
Working Paper 19850
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19850
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2014
We are grateful to Meta Brown and Donghoon Lee for helpful comments about the data, and seminar
participants at the Richmond Fed, St. Louis Fed, and CES-Ifo conference. The views expressed here
are those of the authors and do not reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond or the Federal
Reserve System or any other institution with which the authors are affiliated. Mondragon thanks the
Richmond Fed for their generous support while part of this paper was written. Gorodnichenko thanks
the NSF and Sloan Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Federal
Reserve Bank of Richmond or the Federal Reserve System.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Marianna Kudlyak, and John Mondragon. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

(cid:3)
Does Greater Inequality Lead to More Household Borrowing? New Evidence from Household(cid:3)Data
Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Marianna Kudlyak, and John Mondragon
NBER Working Paper No. 19850
January 2014
JEL No. D14,E21,E51,G21
ABSTRACT
One suggested hypothesis for the dramatic rise in household borrowing that preceded the financial
crisis is that low-income households increased their demand for credit to finance higher consumption
expenditures in order to “keep up” with higher-income households. Using household level data on
debt accumulation during 2001-2012, we show that low-income households in high-inequality regions
accumulated less debt relative to income than their counterparts in lower-inequality regions, which
negates the hypothesis. We argue instead that these patterns are consistent with supply-side interpretations
of debt accumulation patterns during the 2000s. We present a model in which banks use applicants’
incomes, combined with local income inequality, to infer the underlying type of the applicant, so that
banks ultimately channel more credit toward lower-income applicants in low-inequality regions than
high-inequality regions. We confirm the predictions of the model using data on individual mortgage
applications in high- and low-inequality regions over this time period.
Olivier Coibion Marianna Kudlyak
7600 Pitter Pat 701 E Byrd Str.
Austin, TX 78736 Floor 22, Research Department
and NBER Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
ocoibion@gmail.com Richmond, VA, 23219
https://sites.google.com/site/mariannakudlyak/
Yuriy Gorodnichenko mkudlyak@gmail.com
Department of Economics
530 Evans Hall #3880 John Mondragon
University of California, Berkeley 530 Evans Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880 University of California, Berkeley
and NBER Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu mondragon.john@gmail.com

1 Introduction
The financial crisis of 2008-09 was preceded by an exceptional rise in borrowing by U.S. households,
accounted for primarily by a rise in mortgage debt. This increasing mortgage debt was securitized and
ultimately played a key role in bringing down the financial system once housing prices began to decline
and the associated mortgage-backed securities fell sharply in value. Why did households take on so much
new debt in the years immediately preceding the financial crisis?
There are two main views about this process. The first view is that the rise in borrowing reflected
“credit supply” factors. Proponents point to the progress in information technology (Sanchez 2009 and
Athreya, Tam and Young 2012) and rising financialization of debt (especially mortgages) as increasing the
supply of credit to households with a disproportionally larger increase of credit to low-income and high
risk households (Drozd and Serrano-Padial, 2013). Others also point to political motivations for expanding
credit supply. For example, Rajan (2010) argues that, in response to rising income inequality, credit was
made increasingly available to lower income groups to support their consumption levels in the face of
stagnant incomes.
According to the second view (“demand for credit”), there was a rise in the demand for borrowing
on the part of U.S. households, especially low-income households. One motivation for such a rise in demand
for borrowing again stems from rising inequality in the U.S. Specifically, rising consumption on the part of
wealthy households could have generated a rise in the demand for borrowing on the part of lower-income
households in their attempts to “keep up” with their wealthier neighbors, the so-called “keeping up with the
Joneses” effect. Indeed, there is a positive correlation between income inequality in the U.S. (income share
of the top 5%) and household debt relative to GDP (Figure 1) over time. Both were stable from 1967 to
around 1980, then both measures rose gradually over the course of the 1980s as noted in Iacoviello (2008).
But while income inequality then went up sharply in the early 1990s, household debt only caught up over
the 2000s. The correlation is certainly consistent with the possibility of a causal relationship running from
inequality to household borrowing.
In this paper, we focus specifically on the link between inequality and household borrowing. In
particular, we investigate whether borrowing patterns on the part of low-, middle- and high-income
households differed depending on the level of local income inequality (where we define “local” as ranging
from as fine a geographic level as the zip code to as aggregated a level as the state). Local inequality is,
from a household’s point of view, likely to be the most relevant metric for “keeping up with Joneses”.
Furthermore, with most of the rise in income inequality in the U.S. since the 1970s reflecting a rise in
inequality within regions rather than inequality across regions, any sensitivity of borrowing to local
inequality levels could readily have translated into aggregate effects.
2

To assess whether borrowing patterns differed depending on local inequality levels, we study the
changes in debt to income ratios at the household level over the course of the 2000s and their relationship
with households’ relative standings in the income distribution and the amount of local income inequality.
We use unique data from the New York Federal Reserve Bank Consumer Credit Panel/Equifax (CCP)
which provides comprehensive debt measures for millions of U.S. households since 1999, including
detailed decompositions of debt by type (i.e. mortgage, auto, credit cards, etc.). Because this dataset does
not include a measure of household income, we use the relationship between household debt and income,
conditional on observable household characteristics, in the Survey of Consumer Finances to predict initial
household income in 2001. This imputation allows us to study the relationship between income and debt in
unprecedented detail. We then characterize the evolution of household debt levels, relative to initial income
levels, across income groups in areas with different levels of income inequality, which is akin to a
“difference-in-differences” approach across income groups and regional inequality levels.
Our main finding is that high-income households in high-inequality regions accumulated more debt
relative to their incomes than did low-income households in the same regions, or equivalently that low-
income households in high-inequality regions borrowed relatively less than similar households in low-
inequality regions. This effect is precisely the opposite of what one would have expected from “keeping up
with the Joneses” driving the rise in household debt during the 2000s. We show that this result is remarkably
robust and holds up to an extensive array of robustness checks: e.g. we find these patterns within households
with low or high credit scores, within regions which experienced either high or low home price appreciation,
within households with either low or high initial debt levels, etc. We measure inequality at the zip code,
county and state and find similar results across levels of aggregation. The fact that the baseline results are
robust to controlling for a wide range of other local factors that are correlated with inequality levels suggests
that it is indeed the level of inequality that matters rather than inequality being a stand-in for other economic
channels.
Because our data provides disaggregated information on household debt, we assess the link
between local inequality and different forms of debt: mortgage debt, auto debt, and credit card debt. We
find strong evidence that low-income households in high-inequality regions borrowed less in terms of both
mortgage and auto debt than those in low-inequality regions. A unique feature of the data is that we have
information on both credit card balances as well as credit card limits. This is particularly useful because the
latter can be interpreted as largely representing credit supply whereas the former primarily reflects the
demand for credit. We find that low-income households in high-inequality regions saw their credit limits
rise by less than those in lower inequality regions as was the case with mortgage and auto debt. At the same
time, no economically significant heterogeneity is observed in terms of credit card balances. We interpret
3