NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AND RISK MANAGEMENT AT UNPROTECTED BANKS:
NATIONAL BANKS IN THE 1890S
Charles W. Calomiris
Mark Carlson
Working Paper 19806
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19806
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2014
We thank Stijn Claessens, Luc Laeven, and seminar participants at the Board of Governors, at the
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Cleveland, and New York, at Columbia University, at Tilburg University,
at Dartmouth’s Tuck School, and at Erasmus University for comments. Ianni Drivas provided valuable
research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board, the International Monetary Fund, or their staffs. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Charles W. Calomiris and Mark Carlson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Corporate Governance and Risk Management at Unprotected Banks: National Banks in the
1890s
Charles W. Calomiris and Mark Carlson
NBER Working Paper No. 19806
January 2014
JEL No. G21,G32,N21
ABSTRACT
Managers’ incentives may conflict with those of shareholders or creditors, particularly at leveraged,
opaque banks. Bankers may abuse their control rights to give themselves excessive salaries, favored
access to credit, or to take excessive risks that benefit themselves at the expense of depositors. Banks
must design contracting and governance structures that sufficiently resolve agency problems so that
they can attract funding from outside shareholders and depositors. We examine banks from the 1890s,
a period when there were no distortions from deposit insurance or government interventions to assist
banks. We use national banks’ Examination Reports to link differences in managerial ownership to
different corporate governance policies, risk, and methods of risk management. Formal corporate governance
is lower when manager ownership shares are higher. Managerial rent seeking via salaries and insider
lending is greater when managerial ownership is higher, and lower when formal governance controls
are employed. Banks with higher managerial ownership target lower default risk. Higher managerial
ownership and less-formal governance are associated with a greater reliance on cash rather than capital
as a means of limiting risk, which we show is consistent both with higher adverse-selection costs of
raising outside equity and with greater moral-hazard with respect to risk shifting.
Charles W. Calomiris
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu
Mark Carlson
Federal Reserve Board
20th and Constitution Ave., NW
Washington, DC 20551
mark.a.carlson@frb.gov

1. Introduction
Incentives of managers may conflict with those of shareholders or creditors, particular at
highly leveraged and opaque institutions such as banks. Agency problems arise both with respect
to the outright transfer of resources (e.g., excessive salaries or subsidized access to credit), as well
as implicit transfers related to risk management practices (transfers from creditors to stockholders
through risk shifting). Bankers must design contracting and governance structures that sufficiently
resolve agency problems so that they can attract funding from minority shareholders and
depositors. Examining how banks resolve those conflicts in today’s banking environment is
complicated by government regulation of capital structure and corporate governance practices, and
by protections, such as deposit insurance, too-big-to-fail policies, and a lender of last resort, which
can distort incentives. To investigate the endogenous emergence of corporate governance
mechanisms that limit rent seeking and credibly manage risk, we look at banks from the 1890s, a
period when there was no deposit insurance, no lender of last resort, and virtually no government
interventions to save banks. We do so using national banks’ Examination Reports, a detailed but
seldom used resource that provides considerable information about banks’ ownership structures,
governance structures, tools for managing risk and levels of risk. This information allows us to link
differences in ownership structure (especially the extent of managerial ownership) to differences in
corporate governance policies, risk outcomes, and banks’ approaches to risk management.
The simplest class of agency problems revolves around the transfer of resources to insiders
who maintain operational control over the bank. Bank managers with sufficient control rights may
pay themselves excessive salaries or give themselves access to credit on subsidized terms. For a
sample of East Asian firms in the mid-1990s, Claessens, Djankov, Fan, and Lang (2002) find that
concentrated management ownership increases firm value when ownership and cash flow rights
are aligned, but in cases where managers enjoy greater control rights than cash flow rights,
managerial ownership concentration is value-destroying.
1

Control rights can also give rise to agency problems with respect to risk management. In
general, managers who have large stakes in the performance of their banks may prefer to take less
risk in order to preserve their own financial wealth or their firm-specific human capital (see the
discussion in Demsetz, Saidenberg, and Strahan 1997; Laeven and Levine 2009). In some cases,
particularly in the presence of safety net subsidies, diversified outside equity holders with sufficient
stakes in banks may seek to incentivize managers to take more risk and may employ pay schemes
that reward risk taking (see Laeven and Levine 2009; Cheng, Hong and Scheinkman 2013; Bai and
Elyasiani 2013). Anginer, Demirguc-Kunt, Huizinga and Ma (2013) study an international sample of
banks for 2003-2011 and find that stronger formal governance tends to be associated with lower
bank capital ratios, and that managers with large stakes tend to be choose higher bank
capitalization ratios.1 For samples of publicly traded firms more generally, Holderness, Kroszner
and Sheehan (1999) find that, in 1935 and 1995, higher managerial ownership is associated with
lower risk.
At the same time, the literature has found that management controlled banks may become
risk loving in some states of the world. One agency problem results from the difference in risk
preferences between equity and debt holders, which in the presence of limited liability, gives rise to
moral hazard problems. In some states of the world -- especially in the wake of losses that reduce
net worth and increase leverage -- bankers with substantial equity stakes and control rights will
prefer to increase asset risk at the expense of debtholders (this problem – modeled by Jensen and
Meckling 1976, Myers 1977, and Merton 1977 – is known as “risk shifting” or “asset substitution”).2
1 They found, however, that in 2006, the payoff of risk reversed this effect for managers with sufficiently large
stock option wealth. Like Anginer, Demirguc-Kunt, Huizinga and Ma (2013), Saunders, Strock and Travlos
(1990) find variation over time in the extent to which higher managerial ownership is associated with more
of less risk taking. Saunders et al. find that during the period 1979-1982 greater managerial ownership was
associated with higher risk, which they attribute to the deregulatory environment. Consistent with that
interpretation, Bruno and Claessens (2010) show that legal regimes that are excessively strict can be value
destroying; better corporate governance combined with more flexible legal environments can lead to
superior outcomes through the ability to undertake value-creating risk.
2 In sufficiently bad states of the world, bankers may also choose to commit fraud and abscond (Calomiris and
Kahn 1991).
2