NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECTS OF MONETARY POLICY ON STOCK MARKET BUBBLES:
SOME EVIDENCE
Jordi Gali
Luca Gambetti
Working Paper 19981
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19981
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014
We have benefited from comments by Andrea Ferrero, Mark Gertler, Refet Gürkeynak, Lucrezia Rieichlin,
and seminar and conference participants at UB, CEMFI, NYU, the Barcelona GSE Summer Forum,
the Time Series Econometric Workshop (U. Zaragoza), the Norges Bank Conference on "The Role
of Monetary Policy Revisited", the NBER Conference on "Lessons for the Financial Crisis from Monetary
Policy" and the OFCE Workshop on Empirical Monetary Economics. Galí acknowledges the European
Research Council for financial support under the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme
(FP7/2007-2013, ERC Grant agreement nº 339656). Gambetti gratefully acknowledges the financial
support of the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness through grant ECO2012-32392
and the Barcelona GSE Research Network. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19981.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Jordi Gali and Luca Gambetti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Effects of Monetary Policy on Stock Market Bubbles: Some Evidence
Jordi Gali and Luca Gambetti
NBER Working Paper No. 19981
March 2014
JEL No. E52,G12
ABSTRACT
We estimate the response of stock prices to exogenous monetary policy shocks using a vector-
autoregressive(cid:3)model with time-varying parameters. Our evidence points to protracted episodes in
which, after a short-run(cid:3)decline, stock prices increase persistently in response to an exogenous
tightening of monetary policy.(cid:3)That response is clearly at odds with the "conventional" view on the
effects of monetary policy on(cid:3)bubbles, as well as with the predictions of bubbleless models. We
also argue that it is unlikely that(cid:3)such evidence be accounted for by an endogenous response of the
equity premium to the monetary(cid:3)policy shocks.
Jordi Gali
Centre de Recerca en Economia Internacional (CREI)
Ramon Trias Fargas 25
08005 Barcelona
SPAIN
and NBER
jgali@crei.cat
Luca Gambetti
Departament d'Economia
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona
08193 Bellaterra (Barcelona) Spain
luca.gambetti@uab.cat

The economic and …nancial crisis of 2008-2009 has been associated in many countries
with a rapid decline in housing prices, following a protracted real estate boom. This has
generated a renewed interest in the link between monetary policy and asset price bubbles,
and revived the long standing debate on whether and how monetary policy should respond
to perceived deviations of asset prices from fundamentals.1
The consensus view before the crisis was that central banks should focus on stabilizing
in‡ation and the output gap, and ignore ‡uctuations in asset prices, even if the latter are
perceived to be driven by bubbles.2 The recent crisis has challenged that consensus and has
strengthened the viewpoint that central banks should pay attention and eventually respond
to developments in asset markets. Supporters of this view argue that monetary authorities
should "lean against the wind," i.e. raise the interest rate to counteract any bubble-driven
episode of asset price in‡ation, even at the cost of temporarily deviating from their in‡ation
or output gap targets. Any losses associated with these deviations, it is argued, would be
more than o¤set by the avoidance of the consequences of a future burst of the bubble.3
A central tenet of the case for "leaning against the wind" monetary policies is the
presumption that an increase in interest rates will reduce the size of an asset price bubble.
While that presumption may have become part of the received wisdom, no empirical or
theoretical support seems to have been provided by its advocates.
In recent work (Galí (2014)), one of us has challenged, on theoretical grounds, the link
betweeninterestratesandassetpricebubblesunderlyingtheconventionalview. Thereason
isthat,atleastinthecaseofrational assetpricebubbles,thebubblecomponentmustgrow,
in equilibrium, at the rate of interest. If that is the case, an interest rate increase may end
up enhancing the size of the bubble. Furthermore, and as discussed below, the theory of
rational bubbles implies that the e¤ects of monetary policy on observed asset prices should
depend on the relative size of the bubble component. More speci…cally, an increase in the
interest rate should have a negative impact on the price of an asset in periods where the
bubble component is small compared to the fundamental. The reason is that an interest
rate increase always reduces the ”fundamental”price of the asset, an e¤ect that should be
dominant in "normal" times, when the bubble component is small or non existent. But
if the relative size of the bubble is large, an interest rate hike may end up increasing the
1Throughout the paper we use the term "monetary policy" in the narrow sense of "interest rate policy."
Thus we exclude from that de…nition policies involving macroprudential instruments which are sometimes
controlled by central banks and which may also be used to stabilize asset prices.
2See, e.g. Bernanke and Gertler (1999, 2000) and Kohn (2006). Two arguments have been often pointed
to in support of that view: (i) asset price bubbles are di¢ cult to detect and measure, and (ii) interest rates
are "too blunt" an instrument to prick a bubble, and their use with that purpose may have unintended
collateral damages.
3See,e.g.,Borio and Lowe(2002)and Cecchettietal. (2000)foran early defenseof"leaning againstthe
wind" policies.
1

observed asset price over time, due to its positive e¤ect on the bubble more than o¤setting
the negative impact on the fundamental component.
In the present paper we provide evidence on the dynamic response of stock prices to
monetary policy shocks, and try to use that evidence to infer the nature of the impact of
interest rate changes on the (possible) bubble component of stock prices..Our main goal
is to assess the empirical merits of the "conventional" view. Under the latter, the size of
the bubble component of stock prices should decline in response to an exogenous increase
in interest rates. Since the fundamental component is expected to go down in response to
the same policy intervention, any evidence pointing to a positive response of observed stock
prices (i.e. of the sum of the fundamental and bubble components) to an exogenous interest
rate hike would call into question the conventional view regarding the e¤ects of monetary
policy on stock price bubbles.
Our starting point is an estimated vector-autoregression (VAR) on quarterly US data
for GDP, the GDP de‡ator, a commodity price index, dividends, the federal funds rate, and
a stock price index (S&P500). Our identi…cation of monetary policy shocks is based on the
approach of Christiano Eichenbaum and Evans (2005; henceforth, CEE), though our focus
here is on the dynamic response of stock prices to an exogenous hike in the interest rate.
Also, and in contrast with CEE, we allow for time-variation in the VAR coe¢ cients, which
results in estimates of time-varying impulse responses of stock prices to policy shocks.4 In
addition to the usual motivations for doing this (e.g. , structural change), we point to a
new one which is speci…c to the issue at hand: to the extent that changes in interest rates
have a di¤erent impact on the fundamental and bubble components, the overall e¤ect on
the observed stock price may change over time as the relative size of the bubble changes.
Under our baseline speci…cation, which assumes no contemporaneous response of mone-
tary policy to asset prices, the evidence points to protracted episodes in which stock prices
increase persistently in response to an exogenous tightening of monetary policy. That re-
sponse is clearly at odds with the "conventional" view on the e¤ects of monetary policy on
bubbles, as well as with the predictions of bubbleless models.
We assess a variety of alternative explanations for our …ndings. Thus, we argue that
it is unlikely that such evidence be accounted for by an endogenous response of the equity
premium to the monetary policy shocks.
When we allow for an endogenous contemporaneous response of interest rates to stock
prices, and calibrate the relevant coe¢ cient in the monetary policy rule according to the
…ndings in Rigobon and Sack (2003), our …ndings change dramatically: stock prices decline
substantially in response to a tightening of monetary policy, more so than our estimated
4See, e.g. Primiceri (2005) and Gali and Gambetti (2009) for some macro applications of the TVC-VAR
methodology.
2