NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIQUIDITY RISK AND THE DYNAMICS OF ARBITRAGE CAPITAL
Péter Kondor
Dimitri Vayanos
Working Paper 19931
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19931
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2014, Revised January 2017
We thank Edina Berlinger, Bruno Biais, Itamar Dreschler, Nicolae Garleanu, Pete Kyle, Stavros
Panageas, Anna Pavlova, Jean-Charles Rochet, Hongjun Yan, an anonymous associate editor and
two anonymous referees; seminar participants at Atlanta Fed, Bank of Canada, Cass, Columbia,
Copenhagen, Duke, HKU, Imperial, LBS, LSE, Minneapolis Fed, Montreal, NUS, Ohio State,
Tinbergen, UIUC, UNC, Wash U, Wharton, and Zurich; and participants at the AEA, AFA, Arne
Ryde, Cambridge INET, CRETE, EIEF Market Microstructure, ESEM, ESSFM Gerzensee,
EWFC, NBER Asset Pricing, QMUL, and SED conferences, for helpful comments. We are also
grateful to Mihail Zervos for valuable guidance and encouragement with the proofs on
differential equations. Kondor acknowledges financial support from the European Research
Council (Starting Grant #336585). Both authors acknowledge financial support from the Paul
Woolley Centre at the LSE. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Péter Kondor and Dimitri Vayanos. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Liquidity Risk and the Dynamics of Arbitrage Capital
Péter Kondor and Dimitri Vayanos
NBER Working Paper No. 19931
February 2014, Revised January 2017
JEL No. D53,G01,G11,G12
ABSTRACT
We develop a continuous-time model of liquidity provision, in which hedgers can trade multiple
risky assets with arbitrageurs. Arbitrageurs have CRRA utility, while hedgers’ asset demand is
independent of wealth. An increase in hedgers’ risk aversion can make arbitrageurs endogenously
more risk-averse. Because arbitrageurs generate endogenous risk, an increase in their wealth or a
reduction in their CRRA coefficient can raise risk premia despite Sharpe ratios declining.
Arbitrageur wealth is a priced risk factor because assets held by arbitrageurs offer high expected
returns but suffer the most when wealth drops. Aggregate illiquidity, which declines in wealth,
captures that factor.
Péter Kondor
London School of Economics and Political Science
Houghton Street
WC2A 2AE
Houghton Street
London
UK
p.kondor@lse.ac.uk
Dimitri Vayanos
Department of Finance, OLD 3.41
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UNITED KINGDOM
and CEPR
and also NBER
d.vayanos@lse.ac.uk

1 Introduction
Liquidity in financial markets is often provided by specialized agents, such as market makers,
trading desks in investment banks, and hedge funds. Adverse shocks to the capital of these agents
cause liquidity to decline and risk premia to increase. Conversely, movements in the prices of assets
held by liquidity providers feed back into these agents’ capital.1
In this paper we study the dynamics of liquidity providers’ capital, the liquidity that these
agents provide to other participants, and assets’ risk premia. We build a framework with minimal
frictions, inparticularnoasymmetricinformation orborrowingconstraints. Thecapital ofliquidity
providersmattersinourmodelonlybecauseofstandardwealtheffects. Atthesametime,wedepart
from most frictionless asset-pricing models by fixing the riskless rate and by suppressing wealth
effects for agents other than the liquidity providers. These assumptions are sensible when focusing
on shocks to the capital of liquidity providers in an asset class rather than in the entire asset
universe.
Ourcombinationofassumptionsmakesitpossibletoprovegeneralanalytical resultsonequilib-
rium prices and allocations. We characterize, in particular, how liquidity providers’ risk-appetite,
the endogenous risk that they generate, and the pricing of that risk, depend on liquidity deman-
ders’ characteristics and on liquidity providers’ capital. We also show that the capital of liquidity
providers is the single priced risk factor, and that aggregate illiquidity, which declines in capital,
captures that factor. Our results thus suggest that a priced liquidity risk factor may be arise even
with minimal frictions.
We assume a continuous-time infinite-horizon economy. There is a riskless asset with an ex-
ogenous and constant return, and multiple risky assets whose prices are determined endogenously
in equilibrium. There are two sets of competitive agents: hedgers, who receive a risky income flow
and seek to reduce their risk by participating in financial markets, and arbitrageurs, who take the
other side of the trades that hedgers initiate. Arbitrageurs can be interpreted, for example, as
speculators in futures markets. We consider two specifications for hedgers’ preferences. Hedgers
1Agrowingempiricalliteraturedocumentstherelationshipbetweenthecapitalofliquidityproviders,theliquidity
thattheseagentsprovidetootherparticipants,andassets’riskpremia. Forexample,Comerton-Forde,Hendershott,
Jones,Moulton,andSeasholes(2010)findthatbid-askspreadsquotedbyspecialistsintheNewYorkStockExchange
widen when specialists experience losses. Aragon and Strahan (2012) find that following the collapse of Lehman
Brothers in 2008, hedge funds doing business with Lehman experienced a higher probability of failure, and the
liquidity of the stocks that they were trading declined. Coval and Stafford (2007) find that stocks sold by mutual
fundsthatexperienceextremeoutflowsdropsignificantlyinpriceduringtheoutflowperiodandearnabnormallyhigh
expectedreturnsoverthenexteighteenmonths. JylhaandSuominen(2011)findthatoutflowsfromhedgefundsthat
perform the carry trade predict poor performance of that trade, with low interest-rate currencies appreciating and
high-interestrateonesdepreciating. Acharya,Lochstoer,andRamadorai(2013)findthatriskpremiaincommodity-
futures marketsare larger when broker-dealer balance sheets are shrinking.
1

can be “long-lived” and maximize constant absolute risk-aversion (CARA) utility over an infinite
consumption stream, or they can be “short-lived” and maximize a mean-variance objective over
changes in wealth in the next instant. Under both specifications, hedgers’ demand for insurance is
independent of their wealth. On the other hand, because arbitrageurs maximize constant relative
risk aversion (CRRA) utility over consumption, the supply of insurance depends on their wealth.
Arbitrageur wealth impacts equilibrium prices and allocations, and is the key state variable in
our model. Solving for equilibrium amounts to solving a system of ordinary differential equations
(ODEs) in wealth, with boundary conditions at zero and infinity. These ODEs include non-linear
terms. Yet, their structure makes it possible to prove general analytical results across the entire
parameter space, e.g., for all risk-aversion parameters of hedgers and arbitrageurs.2 In the case
where hedgers are short-lived, we show that a solution exists and we characterize how it depends
on wealth and on model parameters. Moreover, in both the short-lived and long-lived cases, we
characterize the behavior of the solution close to the boundaries.
Our analysis yields new insights on dynamic risk-sharing and asset pricing. We show that the
risk aversion of arbitrageurs is the sum of their static CRRA coefficient and of a forward-looking
component that reflects intertemporal hedging. The latter component makes the risk aversion of
arbitrageurs dependent on parameters of the economy that affect equilibrium prices. For example,
when hedgers are more risk-averse, arbitrageurs become endogenously more risk averse if their
CRRA is smaller than one. This effect can be sufficiently strong to imply that more risk-averse
hedgers may receive less insurance from arbitrageurs in equilibrium. Intuitively, when hedgers are
more risk-averse, expected returns rise steeply following declines in arbitrageur wealth. This makes
arbitrageurs with CRRA smaller than one willing to invest more conservatively, so to preserve
wealth in bad states and earn the high returns.
Ontheasset-pricingside, weshowthatarbitrageursgenerate endogenousrisk,inthesensethat
changes in their wealth affect returnvariances andcovariances throughamplification and contagion
mechanisms. Endogenous risk is small at both extremes of the wealth distribution: when wealth
is close to zero this is because arbitrageurs hold small positions and hence have a small impact
on prices, and when wealth is close to infinity this is because prices are insensitive to changes in
wealth. The dependence of endogenous risk on arbitrageur wealth can give rise to hump-shaped
patternsofvariances,covariancesandcorrelations. Itcanalsocauseriskpremia,definedasexpected
returnsin excess of the riskless asset, to increase with arbitrageur wealth for small values of wealth,
2Ruling out frictions such as borrowing constraints, and suppressing wealth effects from hedgers, seem both
important for the tractability of our ODEsystem.
2