NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
NONLINEARITIES IN SOVEREIGN RISK PRICING:
THE ROLE OF CDS INDEX CONTRACTS
Anne-Laure Delatte
Julien Fouquau
Richard Portes
Working Paper 19985
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19985
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014
Previous versions of this paper were presented at seminar in London Business School, Nanterre University,
the International Finance and Banking Society 2013 conference and the Graduate Institute Geneva.(cid:3)We
are grateful for comments from seminars participants. We would like to acknowledge helpful discussions
with Vincent Bouvatier, Isabelle Couet, Jérôme Creel, Darrell Duffie, Frédéric Malherbe, Lisa Pollack,
Hélène Rey, Giovanni Ricco and Paolo Surico. This research was partly supported by a grant from
the London Business School RAMD fund and from the European Commission under Framework Programme
7. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Anne-Laure Delatte, Julien Fouquau, and Richard Portes. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Nonlinearities in Sovereign Risk Pricing: The Role of CDS Index Contracts
Anne-Laure Delatte, Julien Fouquau, and Richard Portes
NBER Working Paper No. 19985
March 2014
JEL No. C23,E44,F34,G12,H63
ABSTRACT
Is the pricing of sovereign risk linear during bearish episodes? Or can initial shocks on economic
fundamentals(cid:3)be exacerbated by endogenous factors that create nonlinearities? We test for nonlinearities
in the sovereign(cid:3)bond market of European peripheral countries during the debt crisis and explain them.
Our estimates(cid:3)based on a panel smooth threshold regression model during January 2006 to September
2012 show(cid:3)four main findings: 1) Peripheral sovereign spreads are subject to significant nonlinear
dynamics. 2)(cid:3)The deterioration of market conditions for financial names changes the way investors
price risk of(cid:3)the sovereigns. 3) The spreads of European peripheral countries have been priced above
their historical(cid:3)values, given fundamentals, because of amplification effects. 4) Two CDS indices on
financial names(cid:3)unambiguously stand out as leading drivers of these amplification effects.
Anne-Laure Delatte Richard Portes
CNRS- Nanterre University, London Business School
OFCE, CEPR Regent's Park
69 quai d’Orsay London NW1 4SA
75007 Paris, France UNITED KINGDOM
annelaure.delatte@sciencespo.fr and NBER
rportes@london.edu
Julien Fouquau
Neoma Business School
1 Rue du Maréchal Juin BP 215
76825 Mont Saint Aignan Cedex
France
Julien.FOUQUAU@neoma-bs.fr
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19985

1 Introduction
Fromthebeginningofthesovereign debtcrisisinMay2010, thedecade-long
process of interest rate convergence in the euro-area reversed. Two distinct
categories emerged, the peripheral and the core euro-area economies. Aside
from Greece, the sharp rise of peripheral sovereign bond spreads and their
volatility are hard to reconcile with the underlying economic fundamentals:
spreads surged suddenly, while the economic conditions were deteriorating
gradually1. We consider the hypothesis that amplification dynamics have
driven sovereign risk during the crisis. Initial shocks on economic funda-
mentals may have been exacerbated by endogenous mechanisms. Is pricing
of sovereign risk linear, or can we identify endogenous factors of amplifica-
tion? The answers will help to monitor and price sovereign risk and to curb
financial fragmentation.
There is now extensive theoretical research suggesting that the pricing
of assets, including sovereign debt, may be nonlinear. Recent work stresses
the importance of nonlinear effects and amplification dynamics through the
pricemechanismduringfinancialcrises (BrunnermeierandOehmeke, 2009).
Ontheonehand,theinitialdropinassetpriceswillbeexacerbated ifittrig-
gers fire-sale liquidations driven by the deterioration of the mark-to-market
portfoliovalue. Theory suggests thatrelatively small shockscan imply large
spillover effects (Brunnermeier and Pedersen, 2009). Moreover, Brock et al.
(2009) show that proliferation of hedging instruments may produce non-
linear systems and destabilize markets. Here we test whether the credit
derivatives market has amplifed the risk instead of mitigating it.
Previous empirical work has identified non-linearity in the spread deter-
mination model for euro-area peripheral sovereigns during the crisis (Aizen-
1In Spain, for example, the public debt amounted to less than 60% of GDP even by
end 2009. The Italian primary budget surplus implied that if interest rates had stayed
low, only modest fiscal adjustment would have been necessary to service the debt. Even
invokingabroaderset of economicfundamentals seemsinsufficient toexplainthesudden
eruptionofthecrisis. Unemploymentandthetradedeficithadbeenincreasing gradually.
AndIreland’s tradebalance had been improving at thetime of thecrisis.
2

man et al. (2011), Gerlach et al. (2010), Montfort and Renne (2012),
Borgy et al. (2011), Favero and Missale (2011)). Twodifferent regimes have
beendescribed,acrisisandanon-crisisregime, withadditionalfundamental
factors important in the crisis regime. These papers usually attribute non-
linearities to the fiscal situation: they find that yield spreads have become
much more sensitive to fiscal imbalances after 2008, with a deterioration of
fiscal indicators generating a significant widening of the spreads after 2008.
But the crisis may have other than fiscal roots. Attributing nonlinear dy-
namics only to fiscal imbalances, an exogenous driver, is questionable in the
light of recent advances in macro-finance.
In this paper, we draw on recent research on financial crises to explore
the endogenous drivers of nonlinearities in the sovereign bond markets of
euro-zone peripheral countries. We explicitly test three hypotheses. First,
we hypothesize that the nexus between sovereigns and banks observed dur-
ing the crisis (Gennaioli et al., 2010, Huizinga and Demirguc-Kunt, 2010,
Acharya and Steffen, 2013) may have created a nonlinear relationship which
goes both ways and features some amplification in the sovereign risk. Sec-
ond,adverse liquidity effects on euroarea bankshavebeendocumented dur-
ing the crisis, including a significant fall of interbank loans after mid-2010
(Allen and Moessner, 2013). So we will examine the effects on sovereign
risk of a negative externality due to fire-sale liquidation of assets by test-
ing whether liquidity shocks have had self-reinforcing effects on sovereign
bonds. Third, we explore the hypothesis that derivatives produce nonlinear
systems (Brock et al. 2009, Simsek, 2013) by investigating the effects on the
sovereign price of credit default swaps (CDS), the most active credit deriva-
tive market. Delatte et al. (2012) and Palladini and Portes (2011) have
documented an adverse influence of the sovereign CDS on the underlying
bond pricing when bearish investors use these instruments to express their
views on the sovereign credit. But we know much less about the effects of
corporate CDS on sovereign risk. In a down-cycl,e however, their effect on
thecashmarketmayfeedbacktothesovereign risk. Toexplorethishypoth-
esis, we focus on synthetic CDS indices which cover default risk on various
poolsof corporateentities, becausetheir standardization and liquidity make
3