NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OPTING OUT OF GOOD GOVERNANCE
C. Fritz Foley
Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham
Jonathan Greenstein
Eric Zwick
Working Paper 19953
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19953
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014
We thank Ed Glaeser, Andrei Shleifer, and seminar participants at Harvard and MIT for helpful comments
and suggestions. Foley thanks the Division of Research of the Harvard Business School for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by C. Fritz Foley, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Jonathan Greenstein, and Eric Zwick. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Opting Out of Good Governance
C. Fritz Foley, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Jonathan Greenstein, and Eric Zwick
NBER Working Paper No. 19953
March 2014
JEL No. F21,G3,K22
ABSTRACT
Cross-listing on a U.S. exchange does not bond foreign firms to follow the corporate governance rules
of that exchange. Hand-collected data show that 80% of cross-listed firms opt out of at least one exchange
governance rule, instead committing to observe the rules of their home country. Relative to firms
that comply, firms that opt out have weaker governance practices in that they have a smaller share
of independent directors. The decision to opt out reflects the relative costs and benefits of doing so.
Cross-listed firms opt out more when coming from countries with weak corporate governance rules,
but if firms based in such countries are growing and have a need for external finance, they are more
likely to comply. Finally, opting out affects the value of cash holdings. For cross-listed firms based
in countries with weak governance rules, a dollar of cash held inside the firm is worth $1.52 if the
firm fully complies with U.S. exchange rules but just $0.32 if it is non-compliant.
C. Fritz Foley Jonathan Greenstein
Graduate School of Business Administration Yale Law School
Harvard University 127 Wall Street
Soldiers Field New Haven, CT 06511
Boston, MA 02163 jonathan.greenstein@yale.edu
and NBER
ffoley@hbs.edu Eric Zwick
Graduate School of Business Administration
Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham Harvard University
Graduate School of Business Administration Soldiers Field
Harvard University Boston, MA 02163
Soldiers Field zwick@fas.harvard.edu
Boston, MA 02163
paulgp@gmail.com

I. Introduction
Corporate governance mechanisms provide tools for suppliers of capital to control
managers. However, investor powers and protections vary widely across countries. In some
jurisdictions, corporate governance practices are weak, and insiders can enjoy private benefits at
the expense of external capital providers. As a result, outsiders discount financial claims on firms
and make it costly for firms to raise funds to pursue growth opportunities.
Firms that conduct business within a single country are typically tied to the corporate
governance practices established by their country’s legal and regulatory environment. However,
firms that cross-list shares on foreign exchanges expose themselves to alternative legal and
regulatory environments. This fact forms the basis of one prominent hypothesis for why firms
cross-list: the legal bonding hypothesis. According to this hypothesis, managers from countries
with weak corporate governance can bond themselves from extracting private benefits at the
expense of capital providers by cross-listing into a legal and regulatory environment offering
greater investor protections. For firms that have a cross-listing in the U.S., some of these
protections are a consequence of needing to comply with SEC regulations concerning disclosures
and corporate actions. Others are exchange-specific, and each of the major U.S. exchanges has
detailed listing requirements.
This paper documents the extent to which cross-listed firms choose to opt out of
exchange-specific governance regulations and explores the consequences of opting out. Existing
literature has paid little attention to the possibility that firms can opt out of governance rules,
typically assuming that foreign firms agree to comply with the same rules as U.S. firms when
they cross-list on a U.S. exchange.1 In reality, cross-listed firms can decide not to comply with
1 For instance, Reese and Weisbach (2002) state: “One way to accomplish this bonding is to cross-list on an
exchange (NYSE or Nasdaq) in the United States, whose legal system protects minority shareholder interests as well
1

exchange governance rules. Historically, these compliance choices were not well publicized, but
this changed in September 2008, when the SEC mandated that foreign firms listed on U.S.
exchanges disclose opt out choices in consolidated and concise form in their 20-F annual filings.
Exchange governance rules are organized in this paper into six categories relating to board
requirements, auditing, stock issuance, and business practices. This paper presents and analyzes
the opt out decisions disclosed in 20-F filings immediately after the SEC rule change.
Four main findings emerge. First, opting out is very common. Figure 1 displays the share
of firms that opt out of different numbers of exchange governance requirements. 80.2% of cross-
listed firms opt out of at least one category of requirements. A large fraction of firms opt out of
many types as well; 47.2% of firms opt out of three or more categories of requirements. Second,
opting out of exchange governance requirements is correlated with weaker governance practices.
While many governance practices are hard to observe directly, it is possible to measure features
of a firm’s board of directors. Analysis of the board composition of cross-listed firms reveals that
firms opting out of board independence rules, board committee rules, and audit committee rules
have significantly fewer independent board members.
Third, the decision to opt out of exchange governance requirements seems to reflect the
incentives created by insiders’ ability to consume private benefits when governance remains
weak and by managers’ desire to raise capital when growth opportunities are attractive.
Managers of firms based in countries where corporate governance is weak typically give up
larger private benefits by complying fully with U.S. exchange requirements. Consistent with this
notion, tests reveal that firms are more likely to opt out of U.S. exchange requirements if they are
as any in the world. Such a cross-listing obligates the firm to conform to generally accepted accounting principles
(US GAAP), to file reports with the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), to comply with the
requirements of the exchange on which it lists, and at least to some extent conform to US securities laws. It thus
provides a mechanism by which foreign firms can voluntarily subject themselves to some shareholders’ protections
under US securities laws.”
2