NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RATING AGENCIES
Harold Cole
Thomas F. Cooley
Working Paper 19972
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19972
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014
Please note that the second author was previously a member of the Board of Managers of Standard
& Poor's Financial Services LLC and also serves as a consultant to the company. The opinions and
views expressed in this article do not necessarily reflect the opinions and views of Standard & Poor's
Financial Services LLC. We thank Steve LeRoy, Larry White for helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Harold Cole and Thomas F. Cooley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Rating Agencies
Harold Cole and Thomas F. Cooley
NBER Working Paper No. 19972
March 2014
JEL No. G1,G24
ABSTRACT
For decades credit rating agencies were viewed as trusted arbiters of creditworthiness and their ratings
as important tools for managing risk. The common narrative is that the value of ratings was compromised
by the evolution of the industry to a form where issuers pay for ratings. In this paper we show how
credit ratings have value in equilibrium and how reputation insures that, in equilibrium, ratings will
reflect sound assessments of credit worthiness. There will always be an information distortion because
of the fact that purchasers of ratings need not reveal them. We argue that regulatory reliance on ratings
and the increasing importance of risk-weighted capital in prudential regulation have more likely contributed
to distorted ratings than the matter of who pays for them. In this respect, much of the regulatory obsession
with the conflict created by issuers paying for ratings is a distraction.
Harold Cole
Economics Department
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
160 McNeil Building
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
colehl@sas.upenn.edu
Thomas F. Cooley
Department of Economics
Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street, Room 7-88
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
tcooley@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
Credit ratings, which are described as forward looking “opinions” of the relative credit worthiness
of an entity or debt issue, are signals of the likelihood that the terms of a credit contract will be
fully honored. They are important elements in the allocation of capital in the economy because
they can influence the cost of borrowing for issuers and the rate of return for investors.1 In this
paper we study how credit signals are provided and why they have value in equilibrium.
Many commentators on the financial crisis of 2007-2009 have argued that the major credit
rating agencies – Fitch, Moody’s, and Standard & Poor’s – played a role in the crisis by assigning
unrealistically high ratings to mortgage-backed securities, in particular to the upper tranches of
collateralized debt obligations. Credit rating agencies are singled out in the Dodd-Frank Financial
ReformActasrequiringfurtherregulationandoversight. TheFinancialCrisisInquiryCommission,
which studied the root causes of the financial crisis, attributed many of the failures in financial
markets to the fact that “ ...major firms and investors blindly relied on credit rating agencies as
their arbiters of risk.“2 This view of credit ratings and the firms that provide them as villains in the
financial system represents a remarkable turnaround. For more than a century the credit rating
agencies were viewed as important and valuable agents in the system, a view that was underscored
by the fact that regulators at all levels relied on them to manage risk-taking in markets.
The ratings business began in 1909 when John Moody first began to offer ratings on corporate
bonds. He was followed in 1916 by the Poor’s Publishing Company, in 1922 by the Standard
Statistics Company and in 1924 by Fitch Publishing Co. All of these publishers initially sold their
ratings directly to investors. These credit ratings clearly had value for investors because they
provided an independent assessment of the likelihood that the terms of debt contracts would be
honored and investors continued to purchase the ratings.
Financial regulators also began to view credit ratings as a valuable tool for managing risk-
taking in financial markets. The first distinction between investment grade and non-investment
1This sentence waffles a bit because the direction of influence is not always the one anticipated– for example,
where sovereign ratings are concerned. These are essentially anomalies.
2Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, 2011
2

grade securities in regulation was made in 1931 when the Office of the Controller of the Currency
(OCC) ruled that bonds rated BBB or better could be carried on the balance sheets of banks
at book value but lower rated bonds had to be marked to market. In 1936, the Federal Reserve
Board and the OCC extended the reliance on ratings by ruling that banks could not hold bonds
that were not rated investment grade by at least two agencies. From that point on the use of the
distinction between investment grade and non-investment grade gradually spread. Throughout the
1940’s and 1950’s the insurance industry, whose companies were regulated by the states, moved
toward a system of rule-based capital requirements where ratings played the crucial role.
A major shift in the regulatory reliance on ratings occurred in 1975 when the Securities and
Exchange Commission introduced the concept of Nationally Recognized Statistical Ratings Or-
ganizations (NRSROs), initially Moodys, Standard & Poor’s, and Fitch. At the same time the
SEC imposed on broker-dealers capital requirements that relied on ratings issued by NRSROs.
Beginning in 1982 the SEC also simplified disclosure requirements for issuers of investment grade
securities. In 1974 the Employee Retirement and Income Security Act was passed and signed into
law initiating another major category of regulatory reliance on ratings. Administered by the De-
partment of Labor, ERISA began to reference ratings. ERISA has been amended several times and
since 1989 the DOL has permitted pension funds to invest in asset backed pass-through securities
provided they are rated in one of the three highest categories by at least one of the four largest
NRSROs. In 1989 the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act prohibited
Savings and Loan organizations from investing in non-investment grade securities. And in 1991
the Investment Company Act of 1940 was amended to require money market mutual funds to
limit their investments to securities that are rated in one of the two highest categories by at least
two NRSROs. There were other modifications to regulations that further increased the reliance
on ratings but the ones just cited enshrined the use of ratings by NRSROs into the regulatory
architecture in the U.S.
Although they increased the reliance on ratings steadily over time, regulators also began to
view the ratings agencies themselves as requiring regulation when the business model changed
3