NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECTIVENESS OF MANDATORY MORTGAGE COUNSELING:
CAN ONE DISSUADE BORROWERS FROM CHOOSING RISKY MORTGAGES?
Sumit Agarwal
Gene Amromin
Itzhak Ben-David
Souphala Chomsisengphet
Douglas Evanoff
Working Paper 19920
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19920
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2014
We thank Edward Zhong and Robert McMenamin for outstanding research assistance; and Dan Aaronson,
Tom Davidoff, Mark Garmaise, David Laibson, Chris Mayer, Olivia Mitchell, Anthony Murphy, Jonah
Rockoff, Philipp Schnabl, Sophie Shive, Johannes Stroebel, Peter Tufano, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen,
and seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute, CEPR/Gerzensee Summer Symposium, AEA
meetings, EFA meetings, Bocconi University, Columbia University, the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation (FDIC), Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Chicago and Cleveland, Tel-Aviv University,
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Ohio State University, University of California Berkeley,
University of California San Diego, University of Illinois at Chicago, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign,
Vanderbilt University , University of Minnesota, Penn State University, Financial Intermediation Research
Society Conference, SUERF/Bank of Finland Conference, and the 16th Mitsui Financial Symposium
at the University of Michigan for helpful comments. The authors thank the FDIC; Paolo Baffi Centre
at Bocconi University; and the Dice Center at the Fisher College of Business, The Ohio State University
for supporting this research. Ben-David acknowledges the support from the Neil Klatskin Chair in
Finance and Real Estate. The views in this paper are those of the authors and may not reflect those
of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Office of the Comptroller
of the Currency, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19920.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Sumit Agarwal, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Douglas
Evanoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effectiveness of Mandatory Mortgage Counseling: Can One Dissuade Borrowers from
Choosing Risky Mortgages?
Sumit Agarwal, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Douglas
Evanoff
NBER Working Paper No. 19920
February 2014
JEL No. D14,D18,L85,R21
ABSTRACT
We explore the effects of mandatory third-party review of mortgage contracts on consumer choice—including
the terms and demand for mortgage credit. Our study is based on a legislative pilot carried out by the
State of Illinois in a selected set of zip codes in 2006. Mortgage applicants with low FICO scores were
required to attend loan reviews by financial counselors. Applicants with high FICO scores had to attend
counseling only if they chose “risky mortgages.” We find that low-FICO applicants for whom counselor
review was mandatory did not materially change their contract choice. Conversely, applicants who
could avoid counseling by choosing less risky mortgages did so. Ironically, the ultimate goals of the
legislation (e.g., better loan terms for borrowers) were only achieved among the population that was
not counseled. We also find significant adjustments in lender behavior as a result of the counseling
program.
Sumit Agarwal Souphala Chomsisengphet
Associate Professor of Finance and Real Estate Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
NUS Business School Department of Treasury
Mochtar Raidy Building, BIZ1 Washington, DC.
15 Kent Ridge Road souphala.chomsisengphet@occ.treas.gov
Singapore, 119245
ushakri@yahoo.com Douglas Evanoff
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
Gene Amromin 230 South LaSalle Street
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Chicago, IL 60604-1413
230 South LaSalle Street devanoff@frbchi.org
Chicago, IL 60604-1413
gamromin@frbchi.org
Itzhak Ben-David
Associate professor of finance and
Neil Klatskin Chair in Finance and Real Estate
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
bendavid@fisher.osu.edu

1. Introduction
In the wake of the subprime mortgage crisis, policymakers have been urged to increase
their intervention in credit markets—see, for example, Sheila Bair’s (2007) testimony to the
House Financial Services Committee. In particular, the leading policy initiatives include
tightening oversight of lenders (Federal Truth in Lending Act, Regulation Z) and providing
mandatory financial counseling to borrowers (President Obama’s Homeownership Affordability
and Stability Plan of 2009). Although it has been shown that these programs may disrupt market
activity (Bates and Van Zandt, 2007; Agarwal et al., 2013), their effects on mortgage choice and
their effectiveness in reducing mortgage repayment problems are still debated.
In this paper, we study the effects of a legislative mandate for third-party review of
mortgage contracts implemented in a pilot program in Cook County, Illinois, on mortgage
choice. The program required “low-credit-quality” applicants and applicants for “risky”
mortgage products to submit their loan offers from state-licensed lenders for review by financial
counselors. Similar to most regulatory initiatives, the mandate created numerous conflicting
incentives for all parties—lenders, borrowers, and external reviewers. However, the empirical
setting of this legislative experiment offers a number of unique opportunities to disentangle those
effects. As described in greater detail below, the fact that the pilot applied only in certain areas at
certain times, only to certain combinations of borrowers and mortgage contracts, and only to a
specific set of lenders allows us to parse out the effects of incentives and education on mortgage
choice. The study draws on detailed loan-level data from public and proprietary sources, as well
as data provided by one of the largest counseling agencies.
The pilot program that we analyze was initiated in September 2006, and was restricted to
mortgages originated by state-licensed lenders and secured by properties in ten contiguous zip
codes on the South Side of Chicago. The program required mortgage applicants with FICO credit
scores below 621 to attend a loan review session with a counselor certified by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) irrespective of their mortgage choice.
Applicants with higher FICO scores had to attend a loan review session only if they chose “risky
2

mortgages” (as defined by the statute). The mandate required lenders to pay the $300 counseling
fee. Following a loan review, a counselor provided nonbinding recommendations regarding the
affordability of the loan, its riskiness, and its pricing. Both lenders and counselors had to record
loan details and recommendations in a state-administered database. The counseling requirement
was tightly monitored through the Cook County Recorder of Deeds: mortgages in the pilot area
could not be recorded unless borrowers provided a certificate of counseling or exemption. The
pilot program was originally intended to last for four years, but bowing to pressure from
community groups and mortgage brokers, it was discontinued in January 2007. Overall, over
1,200 mortgage applicants were counseled within a 20-week period.
Our empirical analysis utilizes a classic difference-in-differences approach that contrasts
changes in choices and outcomes in the treated sample with those in a control sample. Since
borrowers may respond to regulation in various ways, we pay particular attention to endogenous
selection of agents out of treatment, conditioning the analysis on lenders that remained active in
the pilot area.
The heterogeneity in mandate applicability within pilot zip codes allows us to sharpen the
identification of treatment effects further. In particular, we highlight the differences in treatment
effects on borrowers who could not avoid counseling and those who could. Finally, we exploit
differences in incentives of state-regulated and exempt lenders to actively steer borrowers from
risky products and, as a result, from counselor review. This allows us to differentiate between
borrowers acting on acquired information and lenders/borrowers responding to the threat of
external review.
The legislation resulted in substantial reduction in lending activity. The lenders that
remained in the treated zip codes continued offering “risky mortgages” to prospective clients.
However, we show that borrowers’ choices changed substantially, as those who could avoid
counseling by selecting less risky products did so. Put differently, the designation of certain
contracts as triggers for counseling concentrated such contracts in borrower populations exempt
from the counseling requirement. The designation of a mortgage type as being “risky” could
3