NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MATURITY RATIONING AND COLLECTIVE SHORT-TERMISM
Konstantin Milbradt
Martin Oehmke
Working Paper 19946
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19946
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2014
For helpful comments, we thank Viral Acharya, Heitor Almeida, Nittai Bergman, Markus Brunnermeier,
Patrick Bolton, Charlie Calomiris, Elena Carletti, Douglas Gale, Barney Hartman-Glaser, Zhiguo He,
Florian Heider, Peter Kondor, Christian Opp, Marcus Opp, Tano Santos, Elu von Thadden, and seminar
participants at MIT Sloan, Columbia, ESSFM Gerzensee, the 2nd Tepper-LAEF Macro Finance Conference,
the 4th meeting of the Finance Theory Group, the 2012 AEA meetings, Mannheim, Stockholm School
of Economics, ESMT Berlin, Binghamton, the 2012 OxFIT conference, the 2013 European Winter
Finance Conference, University of Minnesota, University of Calgary, the New York Fed, the NBER
symposium on Understanding the Capital Structures of Non-Financial and Financial Institutions, the
New York Fed/NYU Stern Conference on Financial Intermediation, and Princeton University. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Konstantin Milbradt and Martin Oehmke. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Maturity Rationing and Collective Short-Termism
Konstantin Milbradt and Martin Oehmke
NBER Working Paper No. 19946
February 2014
JEL No. G11,G30,G31,G32
ABSTRACT
Financing terms and investment decisions are jointly determined. This interdependence links firms’
asset and liability sides and can lead to short-termism in investment. In our model, financing frictions
increase with the investment horizon, such that financing for long-term projects is relatively expensive
and potentially rationed. In response, firms whose first-best investment opportunities are long-term
may change their investments towards second-best projects of shorter maturities. This worsens financing
terms for firms with shorter maturity projects, inducing them to change their investments as well. In
equilibrium, investment is inefficiently short-term. Equilibrium asset-side adjustments by firms can
amplify shocks and, while privately optimal, can be socially undesirable.
Konstantin Milbradt
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Rd #401
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
milbradt@northwestern.edu
Martin Oehmke
Finance and Economics Division
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 420
New York, NY 10027
moehmke@columbia.edu

1 Introduction
Financing terms affect investment decisions and investment decisions affect financing terms.
This interdependence creates an intimate link between firms’ asset and liability sides. In
particular, when financing for long-term projects is relatively expensive or impossible, firms
may adjust their investment behavior towards shorter-term projects, even when those are
less efficient.
Inthispaperwedevelopanintegratedequilibriumframeworktostudyhowfinancingfric-
tions that arise on the liability side affect investments on firms’ asset sides, and vice versa. In
our model, contracting frictions due to limited commitment are more pronounced at longer
horizons, which leads to less attractive funding terms and, ultimately, credit rationing, for
long-term investment projects. Firms with long-term investment opportunities respond by
adjusting their asset-side investments towards alternative, shorter-maturity projects, even if
those projects are second best. The central result of our paper is that these asset-side adjust-
ments are self-reinforcing: An individual firm’s asset-side decision endogenously determines
the financing terms faced by other firms, thereby influencing their investment decision—
creating an externality.
Consider a firm that seeks funding for the development of a new product that requires
substantial investment in long-term R&D. While the development of this innovative product
may be efficient from an NPV perspective, the uncertainty associated with the required long-
term R&D can make financing such a project difficult. The firm may therefore choose to
develop a product that builds on an existing technology and can be brought to market more
quickly, evenifthatproductisinferior. Orconsideraminingcompanyseekingtofundalong-
1

term exploration project, such as the development of an oil sand.1 However, the uncertainty
associated with long-term exploration makes financing such a project difficult. The mining
companymaythereforeforegothelong-termprojectandsettleforashorter-terminvestment,
for example the development of a shale gas well, even if this is an inferior investment for
this particular company.2 Importantly, in both cases the firm affects funding terms for those
firms that have efficient short-term projects, which may now be abandoned in favor of even
shorter-term investments. Or consider a financial institution in the aftermath of the Lehman
default. Increased uncertainty about the quality of banks made long-term financing hard to
come by,3 thereby pushing financial institutions with good long-term investments into less
profitable shorter-term investments.4 However, through this adjustment also shorter term
financing to banks becomes riskier, thereby encouraging other banks to shorten their assets
and liabilities as well.
The common thread in these examples is that privately optimal asset-side adjustments
lead to a cross-firm externality. Our model shows that in the presence of this externality,
the competitive equilibrium exhibits inefficient “collective” short-termism in real investment
relative to the constrained optimum. Moreover, due to their self-reinforcing nature, firms’
equilibrium asset side adjustments can amplify shocks and, while privately optimal, they can
be undesirable from a social perspective.
1Oil sand projects require large up-front investments in well pads or mines and are therefore long-term
projects.
2Shale gas properties, on the other hand, tend to produce out in a few years and are thus shorter-term
projects.
3Krishnamurthy (2010) shows that maturities in the commercial paper market, a significant source of
funding for financial institutions, shortened significantly after the Lehman default. Kuo et al. (2013) use
FedWiredatatoshowthatasimilarshorteningofmaturitiesoccurredintheinterbanklendingmarket,with
a particularly sharp decline in the fraction of loans with a maturity of at least three months.
4For example, a financial institution with a comparative advantage in making long-term loans may shift
its loan portfolio to shorter maturities, where it has less of an advantage. In addition, the shortening of the
financial institution’s loans may distort the real decisions of the firms funded through these loans.
2