NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
USING BANKRUPTCY TO REDUCE FORECLOSURES:
DOES STRIP-DOWN OF MORTGAGES AFFECT THE SUPPLY OF MORTGAGE CREDIT?
Wenli Li
Ishani Tewari
Michelle J. White
Working Paper 19952
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19952
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014
The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, or the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Wenli Li, Ishani Tewari, and Michelle J. White. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Using Bankruptcy to Reduce Foreclosures: Does Strip-down of Mortgages Affect the Supply
of Mortgage Credit?
Wenli Li, Ishani Tewari, and Michelle J. White
NBER Working Paper No. 19952
March 2014
JEL No. G21,K2,K35
ABSTRACT
We assess the credit market impact of allowing mortgage “strip-down”—that is, reducing the principal
of underwater residential mortgages to the current market value of the property for homeowners in
Chapter 13 bankruptcy. Our identification is provided by a series of U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals
decisions in the early 1990’s that introduced mortgage strip-down in parts of the U.S., followed by
a 1993 Supreme Court ruling that abolished it all over the U.S. We find that the Supreme Court decision
led to a short-term reduction of 3% in mortgage interest rates and a short-term increase of 1% in mortgage
approval rates, but only the approval rate effect persists in longer sample periods. In contrast, the
circuit court decisions to allow strip-down did not have consistent effects on mortgage terms. We
also show that strip-down had little effect on default rates by homeowners with existing mortgages.
Taken together, these results suggest that mortgage lenders responded weakly to both the adoption
and abolition of strip-down because strip-down had little effect on their profits from mortgage lending.
According to these findings, re-introducing strip-down of mortgages in bankruptcy as a foreclosure-
prevention program would have only small and transient effects on the supply of mortgage loans.
Wenli Li Michelle J. White
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Department of Economics
wenli.li@phil.frb.org University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
Ishani Tewari and NBER
Yale School of Management miwhite@ucsd.edu
135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06511
ishani.tewari@yale.edu

Since the mortgage crisis began in 2008, an unprecedented 4.2 million home foreclosures
have been completed in the U.S.—an average of 850,000 per year compared to 250,000 per year
during the period 2000 to 2006 (CoreLogic, 2013).2 The number of foreclosures has also been
very high in other countries such as Spain that experienced housing crises, even though
homeowners there remain liable to repay their mortgages in full even after giving up their homes
(Daley, 2010). Governments have tried various measures to reduce the number of foreclosures.
In the U.S., Federal government programs under the Bush and Obama Administrations offered
compensation to lenders if they modified underwater mortgages by reducing homeowners’
monthly payments; but these programs were unsuccessful because few lenders were willing to
allow modifications.3 4
In this paper, we study an alternative approach to reducing foreclosures—called mortgage
strip-down or cramdown, which would allow bankruptcy judges to reduce the principle owed on
underwater mortgages to the current market value of the home for homeowners who file for
Chapter 13 bankruptcy. This approach has the advantage that underwater mortgages can be
modified regardless of whether lenders consent, so that homeowners with underwater
mortgages would have a bankruptcy alternative to defaulting and moving out of their homes.
The Obama Administration proposed legislation in 2009 to allow strip-down of residential
mortgages in Chapter 13, but Congress did not enact it due to heavy lobbying by mortgage
lenders.5 Our analysis is also relevant to another recent proposal for dealing with underwater
2 Completed foreclosures are those in which title to the property passes to the mortgage lender and the
homeowner either moves out or becomes a tenant.
3 The Bush and Obama Administration programs to reduce foreclosures were, respectively, “Hope for
Homeowners” and the “Making Home Affordable Plan.” The latter program required participating
lenders to lower homeowners’ monthly payments to 38% of their gross income; the government then paid
the cost of lowering monthly payments to 31% of gross income. Neither program aided more than a few
thousand homeowners. See Bajaj (2008), Bernard (2009), and Stolberg and Andrews (2009).
4 Various reasons have been proposed for why lenders refused to modify mortgages; these include the fact
that doing so would force them to recognize their accounting losses, the fact that mortgage servicers were
sometimes prevented from modifying mortgage terms by the terms of mortgage securitizations, the fact
that servicers were incentivized to foreclose rather than to modify mortgages, and the fact that lenders
expected some homeowners who defaulted to “self-cure”. For discussion, see Adelino et al (2009) and
Mayer et al (2009).
5 The proposed bills were the “Helping Families Save Their Homes Act of 2009” (H.R. 1106, 111th Cong.
(2009)), introduced in the House, and the “Helping Families Save Their Homes in Bankruptcy Act of
2009” (S. 61, 111th Cong. (2009)), introduced in the Senate.
2

mortgages: that local governments use eminent domain to take underwater mortgages within
their jurisdictions, compensate lenders for the mortgages based on the amount they would
receive if they foreclosed, and give homeowners new mortgages with the principle reduced to
current market value.6
Whether allowing strip-down of underwater home mortgages would improve economic
efficiency is theoretically ambiguous. Allowing strip-down is beneficial since homeowners often
default on their mortgages and move out when their mortgages are underwater, but lenders fail
to maintain the vacant homes during the foreclosure process—the result is “zombie homes” that
fall into disrepair, cause neighborhood blight, lower values of nearby homes, and deprive local
governments of property tax revenue. The fact that borrowers and lenders do not bear the full
cost of mortgage default and foreclosure means that too many foreclosures occur.7 However,
allowing strip-down has the drawback that it erodes creditor protection by forcing lenders to give
up some of their contractual remedies for default. This may reduce the supply of credit—the
Mortgage Bankers Association argued that allowing strip-down would raise mortgage interest
rates by at least 1½ percentage points.8
In this paper, we assess the link between the strength of protection provided to mortgage
lenders and the terms of mortgage loans, using a quasi-experimental setting in which four of the
eleven U.S. Courts of Appeal (circuit courts) decided between 1989 and 1992 to allow strip-
down of residential mortgages in Chapter 13 bankruptcy and the U.S. Supreme Court decided in
1993 to abolish strip-down all over the U.S. The timing of these court decisions is plausibly
exogenous to market conditions, since circuit courts can only decide legal questions when they
receive an appeal of a case involving the question and, similarly, the Supreme Court only decides
legal questions when it receives an appeal from a circuit court involving the question (although
the Supreme Court—unlike the circuits—can either accept or reject appeals). We use a
difference-in-difference approach that compares changes in mortgage approval rates, mortgage
size, and interest rates in affected versus unaffected regions following each court decision.
6 See Hockett (2013) and Dewan (2013) for discussion.
7 Campbell et al (2011) find that homes located 1/20 of a mile away from a foreclosure lose 1% of their
value, using residential sale data from Massachusetts in the 1990’s. The Center for Responsible Lending
(2013) found that each foreclosure results in nearby homes losing a total of $23,000 in value. See Craig
(2014) for discussion of “zombie homes”.
8 For testimony against the bills in Congress by a representative of the Mortgage Bankers Association, see
Kittle (2007). See www.mortgagebankers.org/NewsandMedia/PressCenter/59343.htm for a press
release by the Mortgage Bankers Association on the bills.
3