NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY DO BANKS PRACTICE REGULATORY ARBITRAGE? EVIDENCE FROM
USAGE OF TRUST PREFERRED SECURITIES
Nicole M. Boyson
Rüdiger Fahlenbrach
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 19984
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19984
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014
Boyson is from Northeastern University. Fahlenbrach is from Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
and is affiliated with the Swiss Finance Institute. Stulz is Everett D. Reese Chair of Banking and Monetary
Economics, Fisher College of Business, Ohio State University, and is affiliated with NBER, ECGI
and Wharton Financial Institutions Center. We thank Wolfgang Bühler, Jan Krahnen, Christian Leuz,
Sascha Steffen, Elu von Thadden, and seminar participants at Bentley University, Bristol University,
European School of Management and Technology, Goethe Universität Frankfurt, HEC Paris, Universität
Mannheim, Universität St. Gallen, University of Oxford, and the University of Massachusetts at Amherst
for helpful comments and suggestions. Brian Baugh and Andrei Goncalves provided valuable research
assistance. René Stulz serves on the board of a bank that is affected by capital requirements and consults
and provides expert testimony for financial institutions. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Nicole M. Boyson, Rüdiger Fahlenbrach, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Why Do Banks Practice Regulatory Arbitrage? Evidence from Usage of Trust Preferred Securities
Nicole M. Boyson, Rüdiger Fahlenbrach, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 19984
March 2014
JEL No. G01,G21
ABSTRACT
We propose a theory of regulatory arbitrage by banks and test it using trust preferred securities (TPS)
issuance. From 1996 to 2007, U.S. banks in the aggregate increased their regulatory capital through
issuance of TPS while their net issuance of common stock was negative due to repurchases. We assume
that, in the absence of capital requirements, a bank has an optimal capital structure that depends on
its business model. Capital requirements can impose constraints on bank decisions. If a bank’s optimal
capital structure also meets regulatory capital requirements with a sufficient buffer, the bank is unconstrained
by these requirements. We expect that unconstrained banks will not issue TPS, that constrained banks
will issue TPS and engage in other forms of regulatory arbitrage, and that banks with TPS will be riskier
than other banks with the same amount of regulatory capital, and therefore, more adversely affected
by the credit crisis. Our empirical evidence supports these predictions.
Nicole M. Boyson René M. Stulz
Northeastern University The Ohio State University
College of Business Administration Fisher College of Business
413C Hayden Hall 806A Fisher Hall
Boston, MA 02115-5000 Columbus, OH 43210-1144
n.boyson@neu.edu and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu
Rüdiger Fahlenbrach
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
Quartier UNIL-Dorigny Bâtiment Extranef, # 211
1015 Lausanne
Switzerland
ruediger.fahlenbrach@epfl.ch

1. Introduction
Among academics, regulators, and bankers, much attention is devoted to the appropriate level of bank
capital (see Thakor (2013) for a review). Following the credit crisis, many have argued that regulatory
capital requirements should be increased substantially. Banks can choose the composition of their capital
within regulatory limits. The assets used in the computation of the main regulatory capital ratio are risk-
weighted and ignore a wide range of off-balance-sheet exposures. It is well known that many banks
optimize their balance sheets and the composition of their capital to minimize the impact of capital
requirements on their activities. This practice is often called regulatory arbitrage. While it is known that
many banks engage in regulatory arbitrage, the existing literature does not explain why some banks do
not. In this paper, we develop a theory of why banks engage in regulatory arbitrage and test the theory
using banks’ issuance of trust preferred securities (TPS) in the U.S. Our theory explains why some banks
did not participate in regulatory arbitrage by issuing TPS.
In October 1996, the Federal Reserve Board authorized bank holding companies to include trust
preferred securities (TPS) as Tier 1 regulatory capital up to a threshold level. As shown in Figure 1, U.S.
bank holding companies raised regulatory capital in the aggregate through TPS and were net repurchasers
of common stock from 1996 to 2007. TPS are a form of so-called hybrid capital. They are cumulative
non-perpetual preferred securities issued by subsidiaries of bank holding companies whose sole asset is
junior subordinated debt issued by the bank holding company. As with other debt, interest on TPS is tax-
deductible to the bank holding company. Interest paid to the trust on the debt is used to pay quarterly
dividends to TPS investors. Interest payments are deferrable for up to 20 quarters without triggering
default. Using TPS instead of equity to meet regulatory capital requirements provides a bank with a
weaker cushion in the event of an adverse shock, as TPS are effectively a mix of equity and debt. Hence,
if two banks have exactly the same Tier 1 capital ratios, but one includes some TPS and the other includes
only common equity, the all-equity bank is less likely to default given an adverse shock. Post-crisis
regulatory changes eliminated the option for banks to increase regulatory capital through TPS issuance.
1

We propose a simple theory of regulatory arbitrage. The theory is neoclassical in that it ignores
agency problems. We assume that regulatory capital requirements impose a constraint on a bank’s
leverage and asset choices. Whether this constraint is binding depends crucially on the bank’s optimal
leverage in the absence of regulation. We assume that without capital requirements each bank has an
optimal level of risk that depends on its business model. To achieve its target level of risk, the bank
chooses an asset mix and a capital structure. We assume that the target level of risk can be represented by
the bank’s target probability of default. This assumption matches the economic capital approach used by
large banks since these banks select their levels of economic capital to achieve a desired credit rating,
which corresponds to a probability of default (see, for instance, Matten (2000)). In this simple world, a
bank can have a target probability of default low enough that it is not constrained by regulatory capital
requirements. By contrast, these regulatory requirements force some banks to be less risky than they
would otherwise prefer. These constrained banks will practice regulatory arbitrage to come as close as
possible to their target level of risk.
We assume that only two forms of capital are available to meet regulatory requirements: equity and
TPS. We predict that an unconstrained bank will not issue TPS because TPS are effectively subordinated
debt. Therefore, using TPS instead of equity would increase a bank’s probability of default, which is
suboptimal for an unconstrained bank already at its optimal level of risk. In contrast, for constrained
banks, TPS create a valuable regulatory arbitrage opportunity. A constrained bank will issue TPS instead
of equity because using TPS allows the bank to bring its probability of default closer to its target level,
yet still satisfy regulatory capital requirements.
To test our theory, we have to determine whether or not a bank is constrained by capital requirements.
We use two proxies for whether a bank is constrained. The first proxy is a bank’s franchise value. An
important finding in the banking literature is that banks with higher franchise value hold more capital
because these banks have more to lose if they fail (see, for instance, Marcus (1983), Marcus (1984),
Keeley (1990), and Demsetz, Saidenberg, and Strahan (1996)). High franchise value could arise from a
number of factors, such as valuable relationships, a profitable deposit base, and so on. From our theory,
2