NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PATENTS AS QUALITY SIGNALS? THE IMPLICATIONS FOR FINANCING CONSTRAINTS
ON R&D
Dirk Czarnitzki
Bronwyn H. Hall
Hanna Hottenrott
Working Paper 19947
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19947
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2014
The authors thank Thorsten Doherr for help with retrieving the patent data and participants at the CONCORDi
2013 (Seville, Spain) for helpful comments. Hottenrott appreciated research funding from the Flemish
Science Foundation (FWO). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19947.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Dirk Czarnitzki, Bronwyn H. Hall, and Hanna Hottenrott. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Patents as Quality Signals? The Implications for Financing Constraints on R&D
Dirk Czarnitzki, Bronwyn H. Hall, and Hanna Hottenrott
NBER Working Paper No. 19947
February 2014, Revised February 2015
JEL No. G32,O31,O32,O38
ABSTRACT
Information about the success of a new technology is usually held asymmetrically between the research
and development (R&D)-performing firm and potential lenders and investors. This raises the cost
of capital for financing R&D externally, resulting in financing constraints on R&D especially for firms
with limited internal resources. Previous literature provided evidence for start-up firms on the role
of patents as signals to investors, in particular to Venture Capitalists. This study adds to previous insights
by studying the effects of firms’ patenting activity on the degree of financing constraints on R&D
for a panel of established firms. The results show that patents do indeed attenuate financing constraints
for small firms where information asymmetries may be particularly high and collateral value is low.
Larger firms are not only less subject to financing constraints, but also do not seem to benefit from
a patent quality signal.
Dirk Czarnitzki Hanna Hottenrott
K.U. Leuven Düsseldorf Institute for Competition Economics
Department of Managerial Economics (DICE)
Strategy and Innovation Heinrich Heine University
Naamsestraat 69, 3000 Leuven Universitätsstrasse 1
Belgium 40225 Düsseldorf
dirk.czarnitzki@econ.kuleuven.ac.be Germany
hottenrott@dice.hhu.de
Bronwyn H. Hall
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
bhhall@nber.org

1 Introduction
A view widely held by economists and entrepreneurs is that investments in research
and development (R&D) are discouraged by imperfections in capital markets. The
main reason is that information about the success of a new technology is usually held
asymmetrically between the R&D performer and potential lenders and investors,
making it difficult for these outsiders to judge the R&D-performing firms’ quality
(Arrow 1962). This raises the cost of external capital and makes it in some cases
impossible to obtain financing for projects that would have a positive expected net
present value if normal interest rates or the cost of internal funds (if available) were
used to estimate value. In the light of this phenomenon, an increasing number of
academic studies have attempted to understand, identify, and explain the occurrence
of financing constraints for R&D and innovation.1
Drawing on the concept of job market signals (Spence 1973), several studies have
suggested that patents provide signals to external investors that mitigate such
financing constraints. As lenders may be able to derive probabilities for the success of
R&D-active firms across certain industries, but usually have difficulties assessing the
value of R&D activities of individual firms, the role of quality signals thus lies in their
potential to reduce information asymmetries by providing a “sorting mechanism”. Signals
thus help outsiders to derive expectations about the quality of the firm that cannot be
directly observed, such as R&D success. Due to the inherent characteristics of the R&D
process, when evaluating R&D-intensive firms external lenders and investors therefore
usually have to rely on observable firm characteristics which are presumably correlated
with characteristics directly related to the R&D project(s) and their success, which are not
easily observable. Long (2002) was among the first to argue that patents are an
effective instrument for reducing information asymmetries between the patenting firm
and outside investors. Patents have properties that may make them ideal candidates as
proxies for the quality assessment of R&D-active firms: they are costly to obtain,
easily observable and verifiable by outsiders. If lenders believe that patents correlate
with other, less easily observable firm characteristics which are not necessarily directly
1 See Hubbard (1998), Hall and Lerner (2010) and Czarnitzki and Hottenrott (2010) for surveys of the
literature.
1

related to the inventions, patent applications or grants may function as signals for
otherwise unobservable or difficult-to-measure attributes, such as knowledge capital or
the productivity of R&D spending. Moreover, the patenting process may help to reveal
information about technological discoveries and their potential value that otherwise
would be more difficult to convey to lenders and investors. The ability to convey
information credibly to outsiders at relatively low cost may therefore be a highly
valuable certification function of patents (Long, 2002, Arora et al. 2001).
Previous research that has studied the signaling value of patents has focused mainly
on start-up firms in high-tech industries. This literature usually finds a positive
relationship between patents and Venture Capital (VC) financing (e.g. MacMillan
1985; Baum and Silverman 2004; Mann and Sager 2007, Haeussler et al. 2009; Conti et
al. 2013, Hsu and Ziedonis 2013). While the evidence for patents as a quality signal for
attracting VC financing concludes that they do indeed function that way, the evidence
for the impact of patents on obtaining later stage financing, such as for the success of
initial public offerings (IPOs), is rather mixed (Deeds et al. 1997; Stuart et al. 1999;
Heeley et al. 2007).
This paper contributes to the existing literature by providing panel data evidence for a
large sample of established, R&D-active firms. To our knowledge, it is the first to
look at established firms rather than start-ups. Recent research stressed that not only
firms’ age (young firms are usually also small), but also size among older firms
matters for access to financing (Czarnitzki and Hottenrott 2011a; Fort et al. 2013).
The following analysis will therefore study the certification effect of patents taking
size heterogeneity among the firms into account. Moreover, it is among the first
papers to study the relationship using patents filed at the European Patent Office
rather than the US Patent and Trademark Office. We further employ a methodology
that allows studying financing constraints in the market for bank finance as bank
loans constitute the major external financing source for firms in most European
countries.
More precisely, the study adds to previous research on the topic by investigating a
large sample of R&D-active firms from the Flemish part of the OECD R&D survey in
a broad range of industries comprising both small and large firms. We estimate panel
data models for the period 2000 to 2009 that allow us to control for unobserved firm-
specific effects. However, due to the unbalanced nature of the panel and the fact that
2