NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LEVERAGE AND BELIEFS:
PERSONAL EXPERIENCE AND RISK TAKING IN MARGIN LENDING
Peter Koudijs
Hans-Joachim Voth
Working Paper 19957
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19957
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014
We thank seminar participants at Caltech, CREI Barcelona, Northwestern, Stanford, UC Berkeley,
University of British Columbia, the NBER Corporate Finance meeting (Fall 2013), the SITE Asset
Pricing meeting (Summer 2013), and the BGSE 2013 Summer Forum for feedback. We are grateful
to Ran Abramitzky, Paul Beaudry, Effi Benmelech, Markus Brunnermeier, Vicente Cuñat, Ian Dew-Becker,
Darrell Duffie, Patrick Francois, William Fuchs, Carola Frydman (discussant), Mariassunta Giannetti,
Francisco Perez Gonzales, Gary Gorton (discussant), Filippo Ippolitto, Dirk Jenter, Gregor Matvos,
Chris Meissner (discussant), Stefan Nagel, Marco Pagano, Luigi Pascali, Enrico Perrotti, Jose Luis
Peydro, Giacomo Ponzetto, Josh Rauh, Michael Roberts, David Romer, Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, and
Amit Seru for valuable comments and suggestions. Daphne Acoca, Tim Kooijmans, Dmitry Orlov,
Inken Töwe and Victor Westrupp provided outstanding research assistance. All errors are our own.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Peter Koudijs and Hans-Joachim Voth. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Leverage and Beliefs: Personal Experience and Risk Taking in Margin Lending
Peter Koudijs and Hans-Joachim Voth
NBER Working Paper No. 19957
March 2014, Revised October 2015
JEL No. G01,G02,G12,G21,G32,N2
ABSTRACT
What determines risk-bearing capacity and the amount of leverage in financial markets? Using unique
archival data on collateralized lending, we show that personal experience can affect individual risk-taking
and aggregate leverage. When an investor syndicate speculating in Amsterdam in 1772 went bankrupt,
many lenders were exposed. In the end, none of them actually lost money. Nonetheless, only those
at risk of losing money changed their behavior markedly – they lent with much higher haircuts. The
rest continued largely as before. The differential change is remarkable since the distress was public
knowledge. Overall leverage in the Amsterdam stock market declined as a result.
Peter Koudijs
Stanford Graduate School of Business
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
koudijs@stanford.edu
Hans-Joachim Voth
University of Zurich
Department of Economics
Schönberggasse 1
CH-8001 Zurich
and CREI
voth@econ.uzh.ch
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19957

Leverage in financial markets is not constant over time. Lending is typically pro-cyclical –
high and increasing in good times, and much lower when asset prices fall (Adrian and Shin
2010). For example, when the stock market crashed after Lehman’s bankruptcy in 2008,
“haircuts”1 increased sharply and the volume of collateralized lending collapsed (Gorton and
Metrick 2012; Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Orlov 2012). Pro-cyclical “leverage cycles” affect
the risk-bearing capacity of financial intermediaries and can contribute to large changes in
asset prices (He and Krishnamurthy 2013).2 The source of these important changes is less
clear.3
We argue that changes in beliefs on the part of lenders can explain shifts in market-
wide leverage, and that personal experience is an important determinant of these changes.
Our argument is related to a literature examining the effects of individual experience on
behavior in financial markets. Malmendier and Nagel (2011) demonstrate that individuals
who lived through the Great Depression invested systematically less in equities, even after
controlling for age, gender, and income. Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2011) show that
during the recent financial crisis, Italian investors became markedly more risk averse. In an
experimental setting, inducing fear can lead to lower risk-taking (Cohn et al. 2015). Key
challenges in this literature are to show that changes in attitudes can affect aggregate risk-
bearing capacity, even in markets with sophisticated participants, and that changes in
behavior are not simply a reflection of lower wealth.4
In this paper, we show that adverse experiences can change beliefs, leading to large
increases in haircuts in a sophisticated and liquid loan market, creating pro-cyclical leverage
in the aggregate. Importantly, lenders’ personal willingness to take risks declined even
without individual losses. Using hand-collected data from notary archives, we focus on
margin loans in the 18th-century Amsterdam stock market. This setting has two key
advantages. First, loans were collateralized with securities that had readily observed market
prices, and leverage can easily be measured by the haircuts imposed. Second, because loan
1 The difference between the asset’s market value and the loan amount, the reciprocal of leverage.
2 Resulting changes in asset prices are observationally equivalent to changes in risk aversion, which contribute
importantly to price swings in the aggregate (Campbell and Cochrane 1995; Cochrane 2011).
3 Regulatory and technical constraints – such as VAR limits –can help to rationalize large shifts in credit
provided to financial markets (Adrian and Shin 2010; Geanakoplos 2010). Several contributions to the literature
on pro-cyclical leverage argue that volatility of asset prices is greater in bad states of the world (Brunnermeier
and Pedersen 2005; Vayanos 2004). Fostel and Geanakoplos (2008) rationalize this finding in a setting with
heterogeneous agents.
4 Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2011) find no correlation with wealth, consumption patterns, or other sources of
risk. Brunnermeier and Nagel (2008) conclude that wealth fluctuations only have minor effects on risk tolerance.
2

contracts were negotiated in an over-the-counter (OTC) market, we can identify the impact of
differences in lenders’ personal experience on the cross-section of haircuts. We focus on one
particular episode of financial distress around Christmas 1772. The Seppenwolde syndicate
speculated in East India Company stock. Lenders exposed to the syndicate were at risk of
significant financial losses, but escaped unharmed. Uncertainty was resolved within a matter
of weeks. Financiers who had lent to the syndicate before became more conservative. Before
the crisis, collateral requirements of exposed lenders were indistinguishable from the rest of
the market. Suddenly, after the Seppenwolde bankruptcy, lenders involved with the syndicate
only extended loans with markedly higher haircuts (Figure 1, Panel A). Their average “down
payment” rose from 20 to almost 30% within six months. Other lenders – not at risk of
personal losses – conducted business as usual.
Major lenders to the stricken syndicate changed their behavior, influencing aggregate
market conditions. The tightening of collateral requirements in the Amsterdam secured
lending market after Christmas 1772 is fully explained by former financiers of the syndicate
lending with higher haircuts. At the same time, interest rates on loans extended by both
groups of lenders remained unchanged (Figure 1, Panel B), and exposed lenders did not exit
the sample at a higher rate. Other margins of adjustment point towards lower risk-taking:
Affected lenders reduced their volume of margin lending overall and started to lend to less
risky borrowers. Importantly, although haircuts of exposed and non-exposed lenders
eventually began to converge (after a year), the effect remains visible for as long as we have
data – a one-off, large shock changed the behavior of major players substantially and for an
extended period.
Why did borrowers not simply shift towards lenders that were not affected by the
Seppenwolde bankruptcy? There was no centralized exchange for loans and borrowers had to
search for potential lenders. Who they matched with depended on who happened to have
liquidity available at the right moment. Our identification therefore relies on the accidental
timing of liquidity needs.After Christmas 1772, unaffected lenders were generally in short
supply; and borrowers had to settle for higher haircuts if their funding need happened to
coincide with available funds in the hands of an exposed lender. In other words, the
differential response of haircuts is observable because of the search-and-matching process
between lenders and borrowers. We rationalize these changes in an OTC market version of
Geanakoplos’ (2003) repo lending model, emphasizing investor heterogeneity. Optimists
borrow to buy a risky asset while pessimists lend. In equilibrium, speculation in risky
securities is financed by contracts involving minimal risk to the lenders; the cost of risky
3