NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SUICIDE AND PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INDIA
Siwan Anderson
Garance Genicot
Working Paper 19978
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19978
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014
Genicot is grateful to the Development Research Group of the World Bank for their warm hospitality
during the writing of a first draft of this paper. Javier Torres's research assistance was appreciated. We
thank Patrick Francois, Eliana La Ferrara and Debraj Ray for comments, as well as seminar participants
at Bocconi University, the IIES, the Maryland Population Research Center, the World Bank DECRG
and IFPRI. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Siwan Anderson and Garance Genicot. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Suicide and Property Rights in India
Siwan Anderson and Garance Genicot
NBER Working Paper No. 19978
March 2014
JEL No. D1,K36,O1
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the impact of female property rights on male and female suicide rates in India. Using
state level variation in legal changes to women's property rights, we show that better property rights
for women are associated with a decrease in the difference between female and male suicide rates,
but an increase in both male and female suicides. We conjecture that increasing female property rights
increased conflict within household and this increased conflict resulted in more suicides among both
men and women in India. Using individual level data on domestic violence we find evidence that increased
property rights for women did increase the incidence of wife beating in India. A model of intra-household
bargaining with asymmetric information and costly conflict is consistent with these ˝findings.
Siwan Anderson
UBC
siwander@interchange.ubc.ca
Garance Genicot
Department of Economics
Georgetown University
ICC 570
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
gg58@georgetown.edu

1 Introduction
Suicide rates in India have increased steadily over the last few decades.1 The WHO estimates that
there were 190,000 adult suicide deaths in India in 2010 alone. Suicide has become the second
leading cause of death among young Indians - it is the cause of twice as many deaths as HIV/AIDS
and almost the same number as maternal deaths in young women (Patel et. al. 2012).2 This paper
studies the impact of female property rights on male and female suicide rates in India.3 Using
state level variation in legal changes to women’s property rights, we show that better property
rights for women are associated with a decrease in the difference between female and male suicide
rates, but an increase in both male and female suicides.4 The large majority of suicide victims in
India are married and the broad class of ‘family problems’ is the main reported cause of suicide
for both men and women. Using a simple model of intra-household bargaining with asymmetry
of information, we show how strengthening women’s inheritance rights can raise intra-household
conflict an increase suicide rates.
In line with the recent literature on the economics of the family, our theoretical model assumes
thatcooperationinamarriagecangeneratesomegainsandthatspousesbargainovertheallocation
ofconsumptionsinthehouseholdunderthethreatofseparation(divorceor‘separatespheresmodel’
a la Lundberg and Pollak (1993)). To this basic framework, we add two elements: asymmetry of
information and costly conflict. Private information can generate delays and bargaining failure.
Hence, we follow Bloch and Rao (2002) and assume that husbands and wives derive some private
value of their union that is not known to their spouse.5 Moreover, we aim to capture the idea
that conflict is an integral part of the bargaining process. When an offer (regarding the division of
resources) is rejected, conflict ensues. Threatening separation does create an atmosphere of discord
within the household that comes at a cost, and separation cannot be achieved instantaneously. At
any point though, individuals may instead choose the ultimate exit and commit suicide. Hence,
separations and suicides are predicted by the model.6 We show that a pro-women redistribution of
1Theestimatedrateofincreaseismorethan40percent. Moredetailedverbalautopsystudiessuggestthatannual
suicide rates could be six to nine times these official rates (refer to Vijayakumar 2010).
2India is second only to China in terms of total number of suicides. Relative female to male mortality rates from
this cause are high in both these countries compared to other regions. Refer to Anderson and Ray (2010) for an
analysis of excess female mortality at different ages by cause of death in China and India.
3Refer to Doepke et. a. (2012) for an overview on the economics of female property rights.
4These results are obtained while controlling for state and year fixed effects, socio-economic controls and robust
to using political variables as instruments for pro-women legislative changes.
5See also Friedberg and Stern (2010) and Bobonis (2013).
6In Ligon et al (2004)’s dynamic model of bargaining, where divorce and suicide can occur, a key assumption
1

resources often increases the likelihood of conflict between husband and wives, in which case male
suicide increases and the ratio of female to male suicide rates decreases.
Consistently, we provide suggestive evidence that marital discord may be the main channel
through which improving female property rights raised suicides. We show that the state changes
thatstrengthenfemalepropertyrightsforwomenareassociatedwithanincreaseinthesuiciderate
fromfamilyproblemsbuthavenosignificantimpactonsuicidesfromothercauses. Moreover, using
alternative individual level data, which contains measures of domestic violence, we find evidence
that increased property rights for women did increase the incidence of wife beating in India. This
is consistent with our hypothesis that increasing female property rights increased conflict within
household and it is this increased conflict which resulted in more suicides among both men and
women in India.
Thereisalargesociologicalliteratureinsociology,followingDurkheim’s(1897)groundbreaking
work, studying empirically the relationship between marriage and suicides has been much, though
the topic has been mostly ignored in economics.7 This sociological literature has long recognized
the tendency for higher suicide rates, for both men and women, to be associated with increased
equality across the sexes. It emphasizes how increased opportunities for women can accentuate
tensions and marital discord within households, by challenging traditional roles, increasing the
importance of negotiation and raising the potential for conflict. There are numerous empirical
accounts investigating the possible consequences of female empowerment on suicides. For example,
intheUnitedStates,Stack(1987)foundapositiverelationshipbetweenthelaborforceparticipation
of wives and both the male and female suicide rates over the period 1948-1963, when antipathy
towardsfemalelaborparticipationprevailed;andasmaller,butstillpositiverelationship,withmale
suicideratesoverthe1964-1980periodwhenfemalelaborparticipationwasmorewidelyaccepted.8
Similarly, cross-country studies find a concave effect of female labor participation on the female to
male suicide ratio and a positive correlation between the UNDP’s Gender Empowerment Measure
(a measure of women’s access to social, political, and economic power) and suicide rates for both
women and men (Pampel 1998).9 In China, the marriage law in 1950 that granted women the right
is that there is a strong advantage to being the one leaving the other that can create a prisoner dilemma type of
situation. When the marriage surplus is small (due to a shock), this preemptive advantage can make it impossible
for the couple to stay together. If now one of the party prefers committing suicide than staying alone, suicide would
result. However, it is not clear that such a preemptive advantage exists in the case of India.
7Ligon et al. (2004) and Stevenson and Wolfers (2006) being two exceptions.
8Similar relationships are found for Canada (Trovato and Vos 1992).
9Mayer(2003)findssimilarcorrelationsinIndiausingstate-widevariationingender-relateddevelopmentindexes.
2