NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ONE FUNDAMENTAL AND TWO TAXES:
WHEN DOES A TOBIN TAX REDUCE FINANCIAL PRICE VOLATILITY?
Yongheng Deng
Xin Liu
Shang-Jin Wei
Working Paper 19974
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19974
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014
We thank Geert Bekaert, Charles Jones, Wei Xiong, and participants in seminars at Columbia University,
UCLA Anderson School, University of Hong Kong, the World Bank finance group, the Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco, and the 2013 Econometric Society Far Eastern meeting in Singapore for helpful
comments, and Ellen Lin and Joy Glazener for proofreading. All errors are our responsibilities. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Yongheng Deng, Xin Liu, and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

One Fundamental and Two Taxes: ¸˛When Does a Tobin Tax Reduce Financial Price Volatility?
Yongheng Deng, Xin Liu, and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 19974
March 2014
JEL No. G1,G14
ABSTRACT
We aim to make two contributions to the literature on the effects of transaction costs on financial price
volatility. First, by using a research design with three ingredients (a common set of companies simultaneously
listed on two stock exchanges; binding capital controls; different timing of changes in transaction costs),
we obtain a control group that has identical corporate fundamentals as the treatment group and is therefore
far cleaner than any in the existing literature. We apply the research design to Chinese stocks that are
cross-listed in Hong Kong and Mainland. Second, we entertain the possibility that a given transaction
cost can have different effects in immature and mature markets. In an immature market where trading
is dominated by retail investors with little knowledge of accounting and finance, a Tobin tax should
have the best chance of generating its intended effect. In a more mature market, higher transaction
costs may also discourage sophisticated investors, hence impeding timely incorporation of fundamental
information into prices. We find a significantly negative relation in the Chinese market, on average,
between stamp duty increase and price volatility. However, this average effect masks some important
heterogeneity. In particular, when institutional investors have become a significant part of traders’
pool, we find an opposite effect. This suggests that a Tobin tax may work in an immature market but
can backfire in a more developed market.
Yongheng Deng Shang-Jin Wei
Institute of Real Estate Studies Graduate School of Business
National University of Singapore Columbia University
Singapore Uris Hall 619
ydeng@nus.edu.sg 3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6902
Xin Liu and NBER
National University of Singapore shangjin.wei@columbia.edu
Kent Ridge Road
Republic of Singapore
liux@nus.edu.sg

1. Introduction
One of the Economics Nobel Prize recipients in 2013 (Robert Shiller) is known for his
pioneering work that questions whether financial prices are excessively volatile. The
possibility of excessive volatility has motivated some to advocate the use of a transaction
tax to dampen short-term speculation and to reduce such volatility. Prominent proponents
of such an approach include Tobin (1978, 1984), Stiglitz (1989), and Summers and
Summers (1989). In contrast, opponents argue that security transaction taxes (also known
as a Tobin tax) could discourage fundamental-based traders more than they do noise
traders, resulting in higher, not lower, volatility in the financial market (e.g. Grundfest
(1990), Grundfest and Shoven (1991), and Kupiec (1996)). Interestingly, a large number
of empirical papers that have investigated this question have not resolved this debate
because some find a negative effect while others find a positive effect, and the
conclusions do not appear to be converging in more recent publications.
We aim to make two main contributions to research on the effect of transaction taxes
on price volatility. The first is methodological in nature; we argue that our research
design offers us much sharper identification than any on the topic in the literature. One
key challenge for event studies is to have a proper counterfactual: what would have
happened to price volatility had the transaction tax not changed? Some of the papers in
the literature use a before-and-after analysis, with the implicit assumption that the “before”
scenario is the right counterfactual. This is vulnerable to the problem of confounding
effects from other factors that may change market volatility for reasons unrelated to
transaction costs. The best papers in the literature use a double difference research
design with a treatment and a control group together with a before-and-after comparison.
But the control and treatment group are not identical. Even if one can verify that the two
groups are similar on observable dimensions, one cannot rule out the possibility that the
two are different on unobserved dimensions in ways that could cause them to move
differently around the event dates. For example, the paper with the best publication outlet
on the topic is Jones and Seguin (1997) in the American Economic Review, which
studies the event of a sharp reduction in the commission fee in 1975 for stocks traded on
the NYSE/AMEX (their treatment group). Their control group is the set of stocks traded
on NASDAQ. The control and treatment groups are similar in many dimensions but not
2

identical, and their volatility could in principle move in different directions for
unobserved reasons that are not related to the transaction cost event itself. This possibility
cannot be easily checked especially when only a single event is studied in the paper.
Our research design has three key ingredients. (A) The treatment and control groups
are the same set of firms with identical corporate fundamentals (i.e., identical dividend
flows and voting rights) but are simultaneously listed on two separate stock exchanges.
(B) Binding capital controls exist that prevent arbitrage activities from closing the gap
between the price movements in the two markets1. (C) There are different timings of
changes in the transaction costs in the two markets. The combination of the three
ingredients offers sharp identification for the relationship between changes in the tax and
changes in the volatility. To our knowledge, this is the first paper that uses this research
design to study this question.
We apply this research design to a sample of Chinese stocks that are simultaneously
listed in Mainland China and Hong Kong and thus face different transaction costs. The
treatment group is the Mainland listed shares (known as A shares), and the control group
is their corresponding Hong Kong listed shares (known as H shares). The treatment and
control groups share identical corporate fundamentals as they have identical cash flow
and control rights. Due to Chinese capital controls, the two markets are segmented. In
particular, only Chinese residents can register a stock account to trade A shares listed on
the Mainland exchanges. Foreign exchange controls during the sample period means it is
not practical for Mainland residents to buy or sell H shares in Hong Kong. Even though
Hong Kong does not practice capital controls, Chinese capital controls prevent Hong
Kong residents (and international investors in general) from buying and selling A shares
listed in the Mainland. One clear sign of the binding capital controls and segmentation of
the two stock markets is the price disparity of the same companies in the two stock
exchanges. Hong Kong listed H shares are often traded at a discount relative to their
Siamese twins listed in the Mainland (see Fernald and Rogers (2002) for a documentation
of the evidence and an explanation). Of course, the pools of investors in the two markets
are different and the transaction costs faced by the two sets of investors are also different.
1 For example, stocks cross-listed in New York and London cannot be used as valid treatment and
control groups for this research question. Without binding capital controls, arbitrage would limit the range
of disparity in price volatility of the same firms across markets.
3