NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RARE BOOMS AND DISASTERS IN A MULTI-SECTOR ENDOWMENT ECONOMY
Jerry Tsai
Jessica A. Wachter
Working Paper 20062
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20062
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2014
We thank Jonathan Berk, Adlai Fisher, Joao Gomes, Leonid Kogan, Nikolai Roussanov, Harald Uhlig
and seminar participants at Boston University, McGill University, Stan- ford University, University
of Miami, University of Pennsylvania, at the American Finance Association Meetings and at the UBC
Summer Finance Conference for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Jerry Tsai and Jessica A. Wachter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Rare Booms and Disasters in a Multi-sector Endowment Economy
Jerry Tsai and Jessica A. Wachter
NBER Working Paper No. 20062
April 2014, Revised September 2015
JEL No. G12
ABSTRACT
Why do value stocks have higher average returns than growth stocks, despite having lower risk? Why
do these stocks exhibit positive abnormal performance while growth stocks exhibit negative abnormal
performance? This paper offers a rare-events based explanation that can also account for the high equity
premium and volatility of the aggregate market. The model explains other puzzling aspects of the data
such as joint patterns in time series predictablity of aggregate market and value and growth returns,
long periods in which growth outperforms value, and the association between positive skewness and
low realized returns.
Jerry Tsai
Department of Economics
University of Oxford
Manor Road Building
Oxford, OX1 3UQ
U.K.
jerry.tsai@economics.ox.ac.uk
Jessica A. Wachter
Department of Finance
2300 SH-DH
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
jwachter@wharton.upenn.edu

1 Introduction
Among the myriad facts that characterize the cross-section of stock returns, the value
premium stands out both for its empirical robustness and the problem it poses for theory.
The value premium is the finding that stocks with high book-to-market ratios (value)
have higher expected returns than stocks with low book-to-market ratios (growth). By
itself, this finding would not constitute a puzzle, for it could be that value firms are more
risky. Such firms would then have high expected returns in equilibrium, which would
simultaneously explain both their high realized returns and their low valuations. The
problem with this otherwise appealing explanation is that value stocks are not riskier
according to conventional measures. Over the postwar period, which is long enough to
measure second moments, value stocks have lower covariance with the market, and lower
standarddeviations. Andwhileonecouldarguethatneitherdefinitionofriskisappropriate
in a complex world, the challenge still remains to find a measure of risk that does not, in
equilibrium, essentially amount to covariance or standard deviation. Over a decade of
theoretical research on the value premium demonstrates that this is a significant challenge
indeed.
This paper proposes an explanation of the value premium that is not risk-based but
rather based on rare events. We introduce a representative-agent asset pricing model in
which the endowment is subject to positive and negative events that are much larger than
what would be expected under a normal distribution. One of our theoretical contributions
is to show an asymmetry in how disasters and booms affect average returns. The possibility
of a disaster raises risk premia. While realized returns are lower in samples with disasters
than in those without, these two types of samples are similar in that, in both of them,
an econometrician would calculate a positive disaster premium. The possibility of a boom
also raises risk premia, because it too is a source of risk. Samples with and without booms
look different, however. The econometrician would calculate a positive boom premium in
the first type of sample but a negative boom premium in the second. We use this simple
1

theoretical observation to account for the value premium. In our model, the growth sector
consists of stocks that capture the benefits of a large consumption boom. We show that a
a value premium will be observed if booms were expected but did not occur.
What is the source of the asymmetry between disasters and booms? Why, in other
words, is the measured premium for bearing boom risk positive in population but negative
in samples without rare events? Consider first the case of a risk-neutral investor, and
assume (reasonably) that asset prices rise in booms and fall in disasters. In order to hold
an asset exposed to disasters, the risk-neutral investor must be compensated by higher
realized returns in the event a disaster does not occur. Likewise, when holding an asset
exposed to booms, he is willing to tolerate lower returns in the event the boom does
not occur. If returns were also higher when booms did not occur, no-arbitrage would be
violated.
Now consider the more realistic case of a risk-averse investor. This investor requires a
premium to hold assets exposed to disasters. We would thus expect such assets to have
higher returns, even in samples that contain the “correct” number of disasters. In samples
that, ex post, have no disasters, we would expect these assets to have yet higher returns
because of the no-arbitrage effect discussed in the previous paragraph. As a result, the
econometrician would measure a positive disaster premium in both types of samples: the
true premium is positive, and the observed premium in no-disaster samples is also positive.
As in the case of disasters, the risk-averse investor requires a positive risk premium
to hold assets exposed to booms. However, by no-arbitrage, these assets must have lower
returnsinsampleswhereboomsdonotoccur. Howcanthesetwostatementsbereconciled?
It must be that the higher returns due to the risk premium come about when the boom itself
is realized. Samples with and without booms look qualitatively different: assets exposed
to booms have higher true expected returns, but, on average, lower realized returns when
booms do not occur.
This reasoning explains why one should expect to observe a negative premium for boom
risk in samples without rare events. However, it says nothing about the magnitude of the
2