NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE FLIGHT FROM MATURITY
Gary B. Gorton
Andrew Metrick
Lei Xie
Working Paper 20027
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20027
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2014
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Gorton was a consultant to AIG Financial Products during
1996-2008.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Gary B. Gorton, Andrew Metrick, and Lei Xie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Flight from Maturity
Gary B. Gorton, Andrew Metrick, and Lei Xie
NBER Working Paper No. 20027
April 2014
JEL No. E32,E42,E44,G01
ABSTRACT
Why did the failure of Lehman Brothers make the financial crisis dramatically worse? The financial
crisis was a process of a build-up of risk during the crisis prior to the Lehman failure. Market participants
tried to preserve an option or exit by shortening maturities – the “flight from maturity”. With increasingly
short maturities, lenders created the possibility of fast exit. The failure of Lehman Brothers was the
tipping point of this build-up of systemic fragility. We produce a chronology of the crisis which formalizes
the dynamics of the crisis. A crisis is a dynamic process in which “tail risk” is endogenous.
Gary B. Gorton Lei Xie
Yale School of Management AQR Capital
135 Prospect Street 2 Greenwich Plaza
P.O. Box 208200 Greenwich, CT 06830
New Haven, CT 06520-8200 lei.xie@aqr.com
and NBER
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu
Andrew Metrick
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
metrick@yale.edu

1
“The Lehman episode was not just a disaster for Lehman. It was a disaster for our
country. And like any calamity, it should be subjected to careful, independent scrutiny.”
Timothy Geithner, written testimony before the House Financial Services Committee,
April 20, 2010.
1. Introduction
Why did the failure of Lehman Brothers make the financial crisis dramatically worse? We argue that the
financial system became increasingly fragile during the crisis, so that even a small shock would have led
to a large response at that point in the crisis. During the crisis lenders in the money markets sought to
shorten the maturities of their loans while borrowing banks sought to lengthen the maturities. Lenders
wanted to be able to exit quickly while banks sought to avoid roll risk, which would force them to sell
assets at fire sale prices. The desperate maturity struggle between lenders and borrowers manifests
itself in the term structures of money market spreads becoming positively sloped, and increasingly so,
finally culminating in a sudden massive exit at a sign of trouble – Lehman. We empirically produce a
narrative of the crisis that documents the dynamic process of the build-up of fragility during the crisis.
We show that a “crisis” is not just a “shock.” The run on Lehman was the result of an endogenous
buildup of risk.
Our argument, that fragility is endogenous, conflicts with the standard “two shock” view of the recent
crisis. In this view, a “crisis” corresponds to a “large shock.” As expressed for recent events, the financial
crisis of 2007-2008 involved two distinct phases, corresponding to two distinct shocks, the “subprime
shock” and the “Lehman shock,” e.g. Mishkin (2011). First, there was the period from August 2007 to
August 2008 which started with a shock to subprime residential mortgages due to house price declines
and a disruption in financial markets, but real GDP continued to rise. Some economists predicted a mild
recession.1 But, in mid-September 2008, the failure of Lehman Brothers caused a much more virulent
global financial crisis—“the imminent collapse of the global financial system” (Bernanke, 2009). Thus,
the widespread view of the crisis is that it was caused by the disorderly liquidation of Lehman Brothers,
1 Lucas (2009, p. 67) wrote that, “Until the Lehman failure the recession was pretty typical of the modest
downturns of the post-war period . . . After Lehman collapsed and the potential for crisis had become a reality, the
situation was completely altered.” And, according to Blinder (2009), “everything fell apart after Lehman . . . After
Lehman went over the cliff, no financial institution seemed safe. So lending froze, and the economy sank like a
stone. It was a colossal error, and many people said so at the time” (Blinder 2009).

2
the view that informs the Dodd-Frank legislation. Some economists attributed this to policy failure: the
Fed should not have let Lehman fail.2
In this paper, we argue that this two shock view of the crisis is not accurate. Rather, the crisis was an
ongoing build-up of fragility as the maturities of money market instruments shortened, starting around
August 2007 and continuing, finally resulting in the Lehman failure, in effect caused by this build-up of
fragility. In order for Lehman to fail suddenly, enough creditors had to be in the position to not renew
their loans, i.e., a very large amount of Lehman financing had to be in the form of, say, overnight sale
and repurchase agreements (“repo”). 3 The shock to subprime starts things off—the economy becomes
anxious-- and then the situation evolves into a crisis. The build-up of fragility was protracted, involving
spreads increasing, maturities shortening, and repo haircuts increasing.4 Finally, this buildup culminates
in the run on Lehman. Thus, a crisis is a dynamic process in which the effect of a “shock” is essentially
endogenous.5
Understanding the dynamics of the crisis requires determining the timing of important events. To set
ideas we provide a small model of the money market which shows the timing of events: spreads rise,
maturities shorten, the term structure of spreads increases, and lastly lenders exit by not rolling over
their loans (i.e., haircuts rise, possibly to 100%). In the model loans are collateralized, as in repo. Lenders
want to lend short when a shock has occurred, and banks want to borrow long. Banks offer a higher
spread for longer loans and a lower spread for shorter loans. The economy can become fragile when
lenders lend a sufficient amount short so as to be able to force the bank into bankruptcy early if there is
a need to exit.
We document the model chronology, by showing that it matches an empirical chronology of the crisis.
The empirical chronology is based on locating the dates of structural breaks in panel data sets, based on
2 For example, Taylor (2009) and Meltzer (2009) have articulated this view.
3 “Repo” is short for sale and repurchase agreement. Under a repo contract the lender deposits (i.e., lends) money
to the borrower (the bank) for a short period of time at interest and receives bonds as collateral to ensure the
safety of the deposit. The collateral is marked-to-market. The return on the bonds used as collateral accrues to the
borrowing bank. Repo was central to the crisis; see Gorton (2010), and Gorton and Metrick (2012).
4 Suppose a bank which wants to finance assets worth V with repo debt (D) and equity (E), so V=D+E. A haircut is
defined as follows: which implies that the amount lent to the bank by the lender, where the collateral
is V, is D=V(1-H). Substituting this into the balance sheet identity (V=D+E) shows that E=HV, which is the amount of
equity that the bank would have to raise to back the assets. If the haircut is zero, then with respect to these
assets, the entire amount can be repo-financed, for example.
5 This is the viewpoint of Gorton and Ordoñez (2014) who show that a credit boom can result in a crisis due to a
“small shock”, one that would not have caused a crisis had there been no credit boom.