NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GETTING BETTER OR FEELING BETTER? HOW EQUITY INVESTORS RESPOND
TO INVESTMENT EXPERIENCE
John Y. Campbell
Tarun Ramadorai
Benjamin Ranish
Working Paper 20000
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20000
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014
The first version of this paper was circulated under the title "Getting Better: Learning to Invest in an
Emerging Stock Market''. We gratefully acknowledge NSDL and SEBI for providing us with access
to the data, the Sloan Foundation for financial support, and the use of the University of Oxford Advanced
Research Computing (ARC) facility. We thank Samar Banwat, Chandrashekhar Bhave, Gavin Boyle,
Stefano Della Vigna, Luigi Guiso, Michael Haliassos, Matti Keloharju, Ralph Koijen, Stefan Nagel,
Nagendar Parakh, Prabhakar Patil, Gagan Rai, G V Nageswara Rao, Enrichetta Ravina, Renuka Sane,
Manoj Sathe, Ajay Shah, Tyler Shumway, U.K. Sinha, Jayesh Sule, seminar participants at NSDL,
SEBI, NIPFP, NSE, the Einaudi Institute, EDHEC, the Oxford-Man Institute, the IGIDR Emerging
Markets Finance Conference, the NBER Household Finance and Behavioural Economics Groups,
and the Sloan-Russell Sage Working Group on Behavioral Economics and Consumer Finance for many
useful comments, and Vimal Balasubramaniam and Sushant Vale for excellent and dedicated research
assistance.˛The opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the Board of Governors, other employees of the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20000.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by John Y. Campbell, Tarun Ramadorai, and Benjamin Ranish. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Getting Better or Feeling Better? How Equity Investors Respond to Investment Experience
John Y. Campbell, Tarun Ramadorai, and Benjamin Ranish
NBER Working Paper No. 20000
March 2014
JEL No. G11
ABSTRACT
Using a large representative sample of Indian retail equity investors, many of them new to the stock
market, we show that both years of investment experience and feedback from investment returns have
significant effects on investor behavior, favored stock styles, and performance. We identify two channels
of feedback: performance relative to the market, and the directly experienced returns to behavior and
styles of stock. Both of these vary across investors at a point in time because investors are imperfectly
diversified and receive idiosyncratic returns. We find that experienced investors generally behave
in a manner more consistent with the recommendations of finance theory, although this tendency is
weakened by strong investment performance. High trading profits increase turnover, while high returns
to equity styles have a short-term negative and a longer-term positive effect on investors' style demands,
possibly reflecting the offsetting effects of disposition bias and style chasing. We document high returns
on a portfolio of stocks held by experienced investors, and on individual Indian stocks with an experienced
and low-turnover investor base.
John Y. Campbell Benjamin Ranish
Morton L. and Carole S. Federal Reserve Board of Governors
Olshan Professor of Economics Washington, DC 20006
Department of Economics ben.ranish@frb.gov
Harvard University
Littauer Center 213
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
john_campbell@harvard.edu
Tarun Ramadorai
University of Oxford
Said Business School
Park End St.
Oxford OX1 1HP
United Kingdom
tarun.ramadorai@sbs.ox.ac.uk
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20000

It’s a little better all the time. (It can’t get no worse.)
Lennon and McCartney, “Getting Better,”1967.
1 Introduction
In this paper, using comprehensive data on the holdings, trades, and returns of Indian
stock market participants, we analyze how retail investors respond to the investment experi-
ence they gain from participation. This experience a¤ects investment behavior, speci…cally
underdiversi…cation, turnover, and disposition bias; demands for small-cap, value, and mo-
mentum equity styles; and investor performance. We measure experience not only from
the time since investors …rst begin participating in the equity market, but also by exploiting
cross-sectional variation in directly experienced feedback that investors receive from the per-
formance of their overall portfolios and of speci…c behaviors and styles. The latter source
of identi…cation is novel, exploiting the imperfect diversi…cation of retail investor portfolios
and the resulting idiosyncratic variation in experienced returns. Using these identi…cation
strategies, we …nd that strong overall investment performance encourages aggressive behav-
iors with potentially deleterious consequences in the longer run, while strong performance of
style-representative stocks within investors’portfolios induces short-run decumulation and
longer-run accumulation of these styles. These results may re‡ect reinforcement learning,
with investors “feeling better”after positive feedback and repeating behaviors they associate
with the feedback. Despite these consequences of positive feedback, we …nd that more ex-
perienced Indian retail investors generally behave more in line with the recommendations of
…nance theory, “getting better”at investing over time.
Equity investing is an important task for households accumulating …nancial assets. Be-
cause stocks have historically o¤ered a risk premium, households with no initial exposure to
the asset class can bene…t from holding at least some stocks. The optimal equity allocation
depends on market conditions, the equity premium, and many details of the household’s
…nancial situation, including the household’s risk aversion and other risk exposures, but typ-
ical normative calibrations suggest it is substantial –at least for households with su¢ cient
1

wealth to justify paying the …xed cost of equity market participation (Campbell and Viceira
2002, Campbell 2006, Siegel 2007, Gomes and Michaelides 2008). Investing in stocks is
not straightforward, however, and households can lose much of the bene…t of stock mar-
ket participation if they engage in certain investment behaviors that appear to be quite
prevalent.
Three such investment behaviors can be costly even in a market where all individual
stockshavethesameriskandthesameexpectedreturn. First, underdiversi…cation increases
portfolio risk without increasing return (Blume and Friend 1975, Kelly 1995, Calvet et al.
2007). Second, high turnover of an equity portfolio leads to high trading costs (Odean 1999,
Barber and Odean 2000). Third, selling stocks that have appreciated while holding those
that have depreciated—a tendency known as the disposition e¤ect—increases the present
value of tax obligations by accelerating the realization of capital gains and deferring the
realization of o¤setting losses (Shefrin and Statman 1985, Odean 1998). In a market where
expected returns di¤er across stocks, it is also possible for households to lose by picking
underperforming stocks. They may do this by taking risk exposures that are negatively
compensated, for example by holding growth stocks in a market with a value premium, or
by adopting a short-term contrarian investment strategy (perhaps driven by the disposition
e¤ect) inamarket withmomentumwhere outperformingstocks continue tooutperformfora
period of time. If these style tilts do not o¤set other risks of the household, they are welfare
reducing.2 Alternatively, households may lose by trading with informed counterparties in
a market that is not strong-form e¢ cient, and thus rewards investors who possess private
information (Grossman and Stiglitz 1980, O’Hara 2003).
One response to the challenges of direct equity investing is for households to hold mutual
funds, thereby gaining equity exposure without trading stocks directly. This, however, may
result in trade-o¤s between households’tendencies to engage in suboptimal behaviors, the
2This is true whether risk prices are driven by fundamentals or by investor sentiment (the preferences
of unsophisticated investors for certain types of stocks). In a market where fundamentals determine risk
prices it may be more likely that households’non-equity risk exposures justify equity positions with low
expected returns, but if this is not the case such positions still reduce household welfare just as they would
in a sentiment-driven model.
2