NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAN TAXES SHAPE AN INDUSTRY? EVIDENCE FROM THE IMPLEMENTATION
OF THE “AMAZON TAX”
Brian Baugh
Itzhak Ben-David
Hoonsuk Park
Working Paper 20052
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20052
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2014, Revised January 2018
Previously circulated as "The 'Amazon Tax': Empirical Evidence from Amazon and Main Street
Retailers." We thank the financial institution for providing the data set. We thank Raj Chetty,
René Stulz, and participants at the Industrial Organization Conference at Tel-Aviv University, the
NBER Entrepreneurship and Economic Growth Conference, the NBER Public Economics
Conference, the NBER Universities Research Conference, and the AEA Conference for helpful
comments. We are grateful for the financial support of the NBER Household Finance Grant. Ben-
David’s research is supported by the Dice Center at the Fisher College of Business and by the
Neil Klatskin Chair in Finance and Real Estate. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Brian Baugh, Itzhak Ben-David, and Hoonsuk Park. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Can Taxes Shape an Industry? Evidence from the Implementation of the “Amazon Tax”
Brian Baugh, Itzhak Ben-David, and Hoonsuk Park
NBER Working Paper No. 20052
April 2014, Revised January 2018
JEL No. D12,D40,L51
ABSTRACT
For years, online retailers have maintained a price advantage over brick-and-mortar retailers by
not collecting sales tax at the time of sale. Recently, several states have required that online
retailer Amazon collect sales tax during checkout. Using transaction-level data, we document that
households living in these states reduced Amazon purchases by 9.4% after sales tax laws were
implemented, implying elasticities ranging from –1.2 to –1.4. The effect is more pronounced for
large purchases, for which we estimate a reduction of 29.1% in purchases, corresponding to an
elasticity of –3.9. Studying competitors in the electronics field, we detect some evidence of
substitution toward competing retailers.
Brian Baugh Hoonsuk Park
Fisher College of Business Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University Ohio State University
baugh.41@osu.edu park_1458@fisher.osu.edu
Itzhak Ben-David
Department of Finance
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
bendavid@fisher.osu.edu

1 Introduction
Over the past decade, online retail transactions have increased dramatically in volume.
According to the U.S. Census, online sales constituted 2.5% of retail sales in 2006 and 7.7% of
retail sales in 2016 (corresponding to $354 billion over the four quarters from 2015Q2 to
2016Q1).1 Many factors have contributed to the growth in online sales, one of which is that out-
of-state online retailers do not charge sales tax, which has generally given them a price
advantage over retailers with a presence in the state. This sales tax collection loophole has not
gone unnoticed by state governments or by competing retailers. State governments are concerned
that these online sales depress local employment and erode tax revenues. Over the last decade,
many states responded by requiring that Amazon, the largest online retailer, begin to collect sales
tax at checkout. Collectively, these laws are called the “Amazon Tax.” Despite the importance of
understanding the effects of imposing sales tax on online commerce, only a few studies have
explored how the imposition of sales tax affects consumer behavior and online and brick-and-
mortar retailers. In addition, no previous systematic study has looked at the Amazon Tax.
This study fills this gap in the literature by examining how collecting sales taxes on
online transactions affects consumers’ purchasing decisions. Online retailers that are not required
to collect sales tax, including Amazon, enjoy a price advantage. Thus, we hypothesize that the
introduction of the Amazon Tax will lead to a decline in Amazon’s sales and substitution to
alternative retailers. With effective sales tax rates as high as 10% in some jurisdictions (after
accounting for state, county, and city taxes), this price advantage can be sizable. Gene DeFelice,
vice president of Barnes and Noble, the largest book retailer in the United States, summarized
the issue succinctly: “We are at a serious competitive disadvantage against out-of-state, online
1 www.census.gov/retail/index.html#ecommerce
1

retailers who pay no taxes.”2 An additional factor that is likely to facilitate customer migration
from Amazon to alternative outlets is the low search cost of online shopping.
State governments have begun paying increased attention to the issue of sales tax
collection in light of the Great Recession and the recent growth in online retail volume. General
sales taxes represent an important part of state revenue: For example, in 2011, general sales tax
constituted 10.4% of revenues. Figure 1 shows that the importance of this tax varies considerably
by state, ranging from 0% of revenues in states without sales tax (such as Oregon and Alaska) to
as high as 21.0% of state revenues for Washington.3 Recently, the issue has also received federal
attention. The Marketplace Fairness Acts of 2013 and 2015 were attempts by lawmakers to
enable all states to force retailers to collect sales tax on purchases made by out-of-state
customers, but neither act has been adopted into law.4 Proponents of such online sales tax
collection bills often tout the elimination of the Internet retailer sales tax advantage as “leveling
the playing field” and helping to restore business and jobs to local economies.
A recent trend in state legislatures is to enforce the collection of sales tax on Internet
retailers, particularly on Amazon, the largest online retailer. To date, there has been little
evaluation of far-reaching and permanent sales tax policies on retail, competition, and
consumers. Between 2012 and 2015, 19 states began implementing laws requiring Amazon.com
to collect sales tax from its customers. These laws provide an ideal setting for examining the
effects of sales tax collection on consumer behavior and the consequences to related firms.
Our analysis of the effects of the Amazon Tax on purchasing behavior uses data from an
online financial account aggregator. This financial service enables subscribers to concentrate all
2 http://articles.latimes.com/2011/jan/20/business/la-fi-internet-tax-20110120
3 2011 US Census Annual Survey of State & Local Government Finance: www.census.gov/govs/local/
4 The text and status of the bill are found here: www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/113/s743,
www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/114/s698
2