NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNDERSTANDING CORPORATE GOVERNANCE THROUGH LEARNING MODELS
OF MANAGERIAL COMPETENCE
Benjamin E. Hermalin
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 20028
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20028
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2014
The authors thank Jongha Lim, Berk Sensoy, Yihui Pan, and Tracy Wang for helpful comments on
an earlier draft, and Shan Ge for excellent research assistance. Hermalin gratefully acknowledges
the financial support of the Thomas & Alison Schneider Distinguished Professorship in Finance and
the hospitality of Nuffield College, Oxford. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Benjamin E. Hermalin and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Understanding Corporate Governance Through Learning Models of Managerial Competence
Benjamin E. Hermalin and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 20028
April 2014
JEL No. D81,D83,G34,M12
ABSTRACT
A manager’s shareholders, board of directors, and potential future employers are continually assessing
his ability. A rich literature has documented that this insight has profound implications for corporate
governance because assessment generates incentives (good and bad), introduces assorted risks, and
affects the various battles that rage among the relevant actors for corporate control. Consequently,
assessment (or learning) is a key perspective from which to study, evaluate, and possibly even regulate
corporate governance. Moreover, because learning is a behavior notoriously subject to systematic
biases, this perspective is a natural avenue through which to introduce behavioral and psychological
insights into the study of corporate governance.
Benjamin E. Hermalin
Walter Haas School of Business
545 Student Services Building, #1900
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-0001
hermalin@haas.berkeley.edu
Michael S. Weisbach
Department of Finance
Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University
2100 Neil Ave.
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
weisbach.2@osu.edu

1. Introduction
Within economics, corporate governance has long been viewed through the lens of agency: the
fear that a firm’s managers are inclined to behave at odds with the desires of its principals
(typically, the firm’s shareholders).1 Yet, without minimizing the importance of agency
problems, there is another key aspect to governance that has received much less attention,
namely the way in which managers are assessed with respect to their intrinsic ability,
competency, and match with their employer, and the effects such assessments have on the
behavior of the relevant actors.
Making inferences about attributes, such as ability, from various correlates, such as firm
profits, might, at first, seem like a relatively straightforward, and thus unexciting, statistical
exercise. However, as has long been known in the physical sciences, the act of observation can
directly affect the phenomenon being observed. As recognized initially by Fama (1980) and
Holmstrom (1982), this insight has implications for incentive provision and corporate
governance.2 Moreover, unlike a sub-atomic particle or an animal in the wild, a manager
understands the consequences of being observed. In particular, because the outcome of an
assessment is unknown in advance, the act of observation exposes the manager to risk—for
which he or she will demand compensation—with the amount of risk and, thus, compensation
being dependent on the assessment protocol. Furthermore, also unlike a particle or an animal, a
manager is a strategic player, who can, therefore, be expected to try to influence how he or she is
1
Smith (1776, p. 700): “The directors of [joint stock] companies, however, being the managers rather of other
people’s money than of their own, it cannot well be expected, that they should watch over it with the same anxious
vigilance [as owners] … Negligence and profusion, therefore, must always prevail, more of less, in the management
of the affairs of such a company.” In the modern era, there was a revived interest in agency problems and their
relation to governance led by Berle and Means (1932), Williamson (1963), and Jensen and Meckling (1976), among
others. See Becht et al. (2003) and Hermalin (2013) for recent surveys of the relevant literature.
2 Holmstrom’s paper was originally published in 1982, in a hard to find festschrift for Lars Wahlbeck. In the pre-
PDF 1980s, a photocopy of the working-paper version of the paper was a treasured belonging of students and
scholars interested in contract theory and governance. In 1999, the Review of Economic Studies wisely reprinted the
paper (Holmstrom, 1999).
1

observed and by whom. In short, assessment—learning—profoundly affects corporate
governance by generating incentives (some good, some bad); by creating a tradeoff between the
accuracy of the assessment and the risk that imposes on the manager; and by creating an impetus
for the manager to try to affect by whom he is observed (and governed).
The way in which the relevant parties learn about managerial ability can explain a
number of factors related to firms’ governance. First, the managerial labor market’s assessment
of a manager’s ability can provide him incentives to perform well, because such assessment
affects his future wages. However, such incentives are unlikely to be optimal, often being
weaker than ideal, but in some instances being too strong. Worse, they can potentially have
perverse effects, such as distorting managers’ investment decisions. Second, assessment is a
critical part of the process by which managers are chosen and fired. Consequently, management
turnover is naturally studied through a learning framework. Third, what will be learned is
unknown ex ante; hence, things that are functions of what is learned, such as future
compensation and job retention, are necessarily uncertain ex ante, which means learning and
assessment expose managers to risk. Exposure to such risk will affect their compensation
demands, as well as their behavior more generally. Fourth, a manager judged to be better than
average becomes a “rare commodity,” which gives him or her bargaining power. This too affects
compensation; but it also puts the manager in position to bargain for more control over the board
of directors, leading to problems of entrenchment. Finally, learning about the ability of a firm’s
top management will cause a rational stock market to update its assessment of its future profits;
hence, systematic relationships should exist between learning and stock return volatility. In this
article, we draw from the theoretical and empirical literatures to elaborate these points, and argue
that they are of first-order importance for both normative and positive analyses of governance.
2