NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SYSTEMIC AND IDIOSYNCRATIC SOVEREIGN DEBT CRISES
Graciela L. Kaminsky
Pablo Vega-García
Working Paper 20042
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20042
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2014
Graciela Kaminsky gratefully acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation (Award
No 1023681) and the Institute for New Economic Thinking (Grant No INO14-00009). We thank Michael
Bordo, Luis Cãtao, Gerardo de la Paollera, Jeffrey Frankel, Christopher Meissner, Carmen Reinhart,
Christoph Trebesch, Carlos Végh, Eugene White, and participants at the CREI XV Workshop in International
Economics and Finance, Barcelona, Spain, the NBER Sovereign Debt and Financial Crisis Conference,
the European Historical Economic Society Conference, London, Great Britain, the LACEA Meeting,
Mexico City, Mexico, the 4th International Conference on Economics of the Turkish Economic Association,
Antalya, Turkey, and seminars at the European Central Bank, the IMF Research Department, Istanbul
Kemerburgaz (cid:0)niversitesi, Johns Hopkins University (SAIS), Rutgers University, and University of
California, Davis for very useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Graciela L. Kaminsky and Pablo Vega-García. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Systemic and Idiosyncratic Sovereign Debt Crises
Graciela L. Kaminsky and Pablo Vega-García
NBER Working Paper No. 20042
April 2014, Revised August 2015
JEL No. F3,F34
ABSTRACT
The theoretical literature on sovereign defaults has focused on adverse shocks to debtors’ economies,
suggesting that defaults are of an idiosyncratic nature. Still, sovereign debt crises are also of a systemic
nature, clustered around panics in the financial center such as the European Sovereign Debt Crisis
in the aftermath of the U.S. Subprime Crisis in 2008. Crises in the financial centers are rare disasters
and thus, their effects on the periphery can only be captured by examining long episodes. This paper
examines sovereign defaults from 1820 to the Great Depression, with a focus on Latin America. We
find that 63% of the crises are of a systemic nature. These crises are different. Both the international
collapse of liquidity and the growth slowdown in the financial centers are at their core. These global
shocks trigger longer default spells and larger investors’ losses.
Graciela L. Kaminsky
Department of Economics
George Washington University
Washington, DC 20052
and NBER
graciela@gwu.edu
Pablo Vega-García
George Washington University
pvega@gwmail.gwu.edu

1. Introduction
Pervasive sovereign defaults in the early 1980s triggered a flourishing theoretical
literature on sovereign debt crises. As stressed in Eaton and Gersovitz’s (1981) seminal paper, in
this literature, defaults occur following adverse shocks to the economy of the borrowing country.
In this model, with lack of debtors’ commitment, payment is enforced by the threat of financial
autarky.
With calmer international capital markets in the late 1980s and early 1990s, interest in
this literature languished. The bailout packages to Mexico in 1995 and the Asian countries in
1997, the Russian default in 1998, Argentina’s default in 2001, and especially the Euro crisis in
2010 have, however, rekindled interest in the topic. While the theoretical literature still focuses
on adverse shocks to the debtor’s economy as the trigger of defaults, the center of attention of
this recent literature has shifted in two directions. The first branch of this literature examines
what type of shocks can explain the frequency of sovereign debt crises and the countercyclical
behavior of interest rates in emerging markets. For example, the calibration exercise in Aguiar
and Gopinath (2006) shows that while sovereign defaults occur in bad times, adverse transitory
shocks to economic activity rarely trigger defaults. Only permanent adverse shocks to output
can explain the frequency of defaults observed in the data. The second branch of this literature
examines the debt restructuring process, including the default spells and the losses of investors
once an agreement is reached. Again, the focus of attention is on country-specific shocks to the
debtor’s economy. As examined in this literature, delays in debt restructuring can be beneficial.
Restructuring when the debtor economy recovers allows the sovereign to allocate more resources
to service the debt and regain access to capital markets. During upturns in the debtor’s economy,
investors are able to recover a larger part of their assets (see Bi, 2008). Moreover, once
recoveries start, the debtor will be more likely to comply with the terms of the debt restructuring,
generating a higher surplus for both creditors and debtors (see Benjamin and Wright, 2009).
Still, both old and new models have only country-specific shocks to the debtor’s
economy at the core of defaults and restructurings despite the fact that many of these crises are
of a systemic nature such as the Debt Crisis in the early 1930s following the financial crises in
New York and London in 1929 and the European Sovereign Debt Crisis in 2010 following the
Subprime Crisis in the United States in 2008. With just country-specific factors, these models
cannot explain clusters of crises. There is one essential ingredient missing. In these models,
1

international investors are always ready to lend to countries at risk free rates if they evaluate that
the sovereigns are committed to repay their debt and at higher rates if creditors think the
sovereigns might not honor their contracts. None of these models have paid attention to
fragilities in the financial centers despite the fact that many sovereign defaults in the periphery
are clustered around panics and crises in the financial center. It is at those times that
international liquidity disappears and even non-defaulters cannot borrow. When world capital
markets are in disruption, sovereigns will have more incentives to default since, even if they do
not default, they will not be able to borrow. If persistent, this crash in liquidity will lead to
longer default spells. The bargaining power of investors will decline since they cannot offer new
credit. If an agreement is reached, this loss of bargaining power of investors will impact
adversely on debt recovery rates.1
The systemic nature of sovereign debt crises is ubiquitous and spanning two centuries as
the Standard & Poor’s reports on sovereign defaults show. Still, most empirical literature has
ignored the waves of systemic crises. Notable exceptions are Reinhart and Rogoff (2011) who
study serial defaults over a period of about two centuries and bring to the attention the bunching
of defaults as well as banking and currency crises. Also, economic historians have identified
episodes of systemic crises. See, for example, the important chronology of crises in Bordo and
Murshid (2000) as well as studies by Bordo and Eichengreen (1999), Eichengreen and Portes
(1986), and Marichal (1989) among others.
In this paper, we aim to fill this void in the literature and examine the role of panics in the
financial center on sovereign debt crises in the periphery. Importantly, while sovereign debt
crises in the periphery happen fairly often, crises in the financial center are rare disasters. Only
longer episodes can help us understand the scope of a systemic crisis such as the current
European Debt Crisis. As we will examine later, systemic crises come on the heels of
international capital flow bonanzas, thus, our study is just confined to episodes of financial
globalization. This study examines the evidence from the first episode of financial globalization
1 All models of default include positive shocks to world interest rates (a global shock) as a trigger of defaults in the
periphery. However, this research does not incorporate disruptions in international capital markets following panics
in the financial center and persistent liquidity crashes. These models do not shed light on what explains the
historical waves of defaults. A recent exception is Arellano and Bai (2013) who develop a multi-country model in
which default in one country triggers default in other countries. Countries are linked to one another by borrowing
from and renegotiating with common lenders. In this model, a foreign default increases incentives to default at
home because it makes new borrowing more expensive and defaulting less costly.
2