NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECT OF EFFECTIVENESS:
DONOR RESPONSE TO AID EFFECTIVENESS IN A DIRECT MAIL FUNDRAISING EXPERIMENT
Dean Karlan
Daniel H. Wood
Working Paper 20047
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20047
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2014
The authors thank Freedom from Hunger for conducting these experiments, and for undertaking the
original project on business training which underlies this project. They thank Michael Kremer for many
conversations and inputs into this project. Karlan thanks the National Science Foundation for support,
and the Henry E. Niles Foundation for funding for the business training research. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Dean Karlan and Daniel H. Wood. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Effect of Effectiveness: Donor Response to Aid Effectiveness in a Direct Mail Fundraising
Experiment
Dean Karlan and Daniel H. Wood
NBER Working Paper No. 20047
April 2014, Revised July 2015
JEL No. D64,H41,L31,O12
ABSTRACT
We test how donors respond to new information about a charity's effectiveness. Freedom from Hunger
implemented a test of its direct marketing solicitations, varying letters by whether they include a discussion
of their program's impact as measured by scientific research. The base script, used for both treatment
and control, included a standard qualitative story about an individual beneficiary. Adding scientific
impact information has no effect on whether someone donates, or how much, in the full sample. However,
we find that amongst recent prior donors (those we posit more likely to open the mail and thus notice
the treatment), large prior donors increase the likelihood of giving in response to information on aid
effectiveness, whereas small prior donors decrease their giving. We motivate the analysis and experiment
with a theoretical model that highlights two predictions. First, larger gift amounts, holding education
and income constant, is a proxy for altruism giving (as it is associated with giving more to fewer charities)
versus warm glow giving (giving less to more charities). Second, those motivated by altruism will
respond positively to appeals based on evidence, whereas those motivated by warm glow may respond
negatively to appeals based on evidence as it turns off the emotional trigger for giving, or highlights
uncertainty in aid effectiveness.
Dean Karlan
Department of Economics
Yale University
P.O. Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520-8629
and CEPR
and also NBER
dean.karlan@yale.edu
Daniel H. Wood
222 Sirrine Hall
John E. Walker Department of Economics
Clemson University
Clemson, SC 29634
dhwood@gmail.com

1. Introduction
Understanding why people choose to donate to charity is difficult; people give for
different and multiple reasons. However, if asked, donors typically like the idea of giving
to effective charities. Are such statements cheap talk, or are donors’ behaviors consistent
with this stated preference? Organizations that believe donors will not respond favorably
may underinvestment in impact assessment (Pritchett 2002). Here we put forward
evidence, albeit on a small scale, that some donors respond favorably to evidence from
randomized trials whereas others respond negatively. This behavior is consistent with
large and small donors giving for different reasons.
We collaborated with Freedom from Hunger (FFH) to conduct two waves of
direct-mail marketing to prior donors. FFH is a US-based nonprofit organization that
provides technical advisory services to microfinance institutions (MFIs) in developing
countries. In the first wave, the control group received an emotional appeal focused on a
specific beneficiary, along with a narrative explaining how FFH ultimately helped the
individual. The treatment group received a similar emotional appeal (trimmed by one
paragraph), with an added paragraph about scientific research on FFH’s impact. The
second wave was similar in design, except that the treatment group narrative included
more details on the research, including a brief discussion about the benefits of
randomized trials.
We find that average donation behavior does not change when previous donors
are presented with evidence of the charity’s effectiveness in achieving its goals.
However, we find that the aggregate effect masks different responses by small and large
prior donors: larger prior donors, as measured by the amount given in the last donation
before the experiment, donate more and small prior donors donate less in response to
being told about the scientifically-measured effectiveness of the charity.
The positive response of large donors is consistent with altruism aimed at
effectively supporting the goals of FFH, but the small donor response is more puzzling. It
has long been recognized that altruism cannot be the entire explanation for charitable
giving, though, as it would lead to complete crowd-out of donations in response to other
funding sources, which is not borne out by most estimates of crowd-out (Andreoni 2006).
2

Many researchers have suggested other motives less tied to public good production, such
as the warm glow of giving (Andreoni 1990).
Recent experiments provide more direct evidence on the warm-glow motives that
are part of our model below. Null (2011) looks at how members of service clubs divided
$100 among three charities. Most participants in Null (2011) reveal warm glow motives
by giving to multiple charities, which is incompatible with risk-neutral altruism (risk
neutral altruists would give the entire $100 to the charity with the highest expected
impact). In another direct test of warm-glow preferences, Crumpler and Grossman (2008)
observes that most subjects gave to a charity even though their donation crowded-out
one-for-one a donation by the experimenters.
Some prior research also finds differences in charitable giving between small and
large donors. Using a panel data set on charitable donations, Reinstein (2011) finds that
larger donors have more “expenditure substitution” in charitable giving. He finds that a
temporary shock such as a personal appeal that increases donations to one charity
decreases donations to other charities for large donors but has little effect on other
donation decisions by small donors. Reinstein suggests that small donors are responding
primarily to temporary shocks or personal appeals, while large donors have other
motives.
DellaVigna, List, and Malmendier (2012) also provides evidence, from a field
experiment, that small donors have different motivations than large donors, in this case
focusing on social pressure. Individual donations were observed during a door-to-door
fund-raising campaign. One-third of addresses were simply visited by fund-raisers, while
another third were informed the day before the visit that the visit would occur, and a final
third were informed and given a check-box form that they could use to opt out of the
visit. Allowing subjects to avoid the fundraisers reduced the share of subjects answering
the door and also reduced giving by small donors, but not larger donations. Their
interpretation is that small donors in this context are primarily motivated by social
pressure or avoidance of an annoyance. Although we examine the distinction as well
between small and large donors as well, there are two notable differences in our setting:
first, our respondents had previously given to the charity, thus expressed some preference
for supporting them and less likely to give merely out of social pressure; second, as a
3