NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOLDUP BY JUNIOR CLAIMHOLDERS:
EVIDENCE FROM THE MORTGAGE MARKET
Sumit Agarwal
Gene Amromin
Itzhak Ben-David
Souphala Chomsisengphet
Yan Zhang
Working Paper 20015
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20015
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014, Revised November 2017
Previously circulated as "Second Liens and the Holdup Problem in Mortgage Renegotiation." The
authors would like to thank Fredrik Andersson, Gadi Barlevy, Ted Durant, Ronel Elul, Karen
Furst, Dennis Glennon, Bruce Krueger, Mark Levonian, Amit Seru, and seminar participants at
the OCC, FIRS, and AREUEA (Chicago) for helpful comments and suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research, the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, or the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Sumit Agarwal, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and
Yan Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Holdup by Junior Claimholders: Evidence from the Mortgage Market
Sumit Agarwal, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Yan Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 20015
March 2014, Revised November 2017
JEL No. G21
ABSTRACT
When borrowers are delinquent, senior debtholders prefer liquidation whereas junior debtholders
prefer to maintain their option value by delaying resolution or modifying the loan. In the
mortgage market, a conflict of interest (“holdup”) arises when servicers of securitized senior liens
are also the owners of the junior liens on the same property. We show that holdup servicers are
able to delay action on the first-lien mortgage. When they do act, servicers are more likely to
choose resolutions that maintain their option value, favoring modification and soft foreclosures
over outright foreclosures. Holdup behavior is more likely to result in borrower self-curing.
Sumit Agarwal Souphala Chomsisengphet
McDonough School of Business Economics Department
Room 427 Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
Georgetown University 400 7th Street SW
3700 O Street NW Washington, DC 20219
Washington, DC 20057 souphala.chomsisengphet@occ.treas.gov
ushakri@yahoo.com
Yan Zhang
Gene Amromin Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 250 E Street, SW
230 South LaSalle Street Washington D.C. 20219
Chicago, IL 60604-1413 Yan.Zhang@occ.treas.gov
gamromin@frbchi.org
Itzhak Ben-David
Department of Finance
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
bendavid@fisher.osu.edu

1 Introduction
Conflicts between claimholders at times of borrower delinquency are an important problem
in corporate finance. In its simplest form, senior debt holders enjoy the absolute priority rule and
are typically quick to liquidate assets because their upside in renegotiating the debt is limited. By
contrast, junior debt and equity holders are interested in restructuring obligations of a delinquent
borrower because they can benefit from the option value embedded in borrower’s continued
operations (Warner 1977, White 1983, Bolton and Scharfstein 1996, Ivashina, Iverson, and Smith
2016, among others). The recent boom and bust of the housing market, with its wave of
delinquencies, led to similar conflicts in the mortgage market. Many properties in recent years
have been mortgaged by two loans, often held by two different institutions,1 allowing for different
incentives for liquidation and renegotiations for the first- and second-lien holders.
Addressing delinquent mortgages has been the key component in restoring the health of
the U.S. housing market following the Global Financial Crisis. However, the crisis and its
aftermath exposed substantial deficiencies in loss mitigation practices on the institutional,
practical, and policy-making levels. Despite the importance of such conflicts of interest, few
studies have attempted to provide direct empirical evidence of the existence and quantitative
impact of servicer conflicts related to junior-lien ownership. Both policymakers and mortgage
investors, therefore, would benefit from understanding the potential impact of servicer conflicts of
interest on resolutions of delinquent loans. This information could be used in designing near-term
policy initiatives as well as forward-looking servicing market reforms. For private investors,
assessing these conflicts could help refine the contractual covenants that govern servicer
relationships.
1 The second-lien home equity market rose from less than $200 billion at the beginning of 2000 to a peak of well over
$1 trillion in 2008 (Lee, Mayer, and Tracy 2012). Goodman et al. (2010) report that more than 50% of first-lien
mortgages that have been securitized in the private-label market have at least one junior lien attached to them.
2

While in general first-lien holders have absolute priority over the decision whether to
liquidate a delinquent mortgage, holdup problems may arise in the mortgage market in two main
cases. The first situation occurs in some U.S. states that allow the older lien to have priority. In
those states, refinancing the first lien loan makes it a more recent (younger) loan and thereby makes
it dependent on the willingness of the junior lien loan (that becomes the older lien) to go along
with the refinancing. Consequently, the junior lien (older) can hold up the decision of the more
senior (newer lien). The effects of these laws are studied in Bond, Elul, Garyn, and Musto (2017).
The second holdup scenario, which we study here, arises when the first lien is securitized
but the owner of the second-lien loan services the first-lien mortgage on behalf of the investors.
This ownership and servicing structure is prevalent in about half of our universe of securitized
loans (see also evidence in Engel and McCoy 2011). Since mortgage servicer makes decisions for
the first-lien holder, this structure gives substantial power to junior-lien holders (servicers) to
decide how to mitigate losses on the senior loan (a variant of the classic “holdup problem”).2 Mayer
et al. (2009a), Goodman (2011, 2017), Cordell et al. (2011), and Bond et al. (2017) have all raised
questions about this potential conflict of interest. The issue has received considerable media
coverage and has led to several legislative proposals aimed at disallowing servicing of first-lien
mortgages by entities that own second liens secured by the same property, although none have
been passed.3
Our paper tests for the existence and effects of holdup in the loss resolution process. In
broad terms, “holdup” is defined as any action that benefits a junior-lien holder at the expense of
the more senior claimant. We evaluate the claim that servicers who own second-lien mortgages
2 On one hand, the pooling and servicing agreement (PSA) requires the servicer to act for the benefit of the investors
who own the first lien. On the other hand, some actions that are optimal from the first-lien owners’ perspective may
be suboptimal to the servicer when that servicer is the owner of the second-lien loan.
3 See, for example, Gretchen Morgenson, “In This Play, One Role is Enough,” New York Times, August 14, 2010, and
Alex Ulam, “Why Second-lien Loans Remain a Worry,” American Banker, May 2, 2011.
3