NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CREDIT RISK IN THE EURO AREA
Simon Gilchrist
Benoît Mojon
Working Paper 20041
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20041
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2014
We are particularly grateful to Beatrice Saes-Escorbiac, Jocelyne Tanguy and Aurelie Touchais for
their excellent research assistance. We also thank Viral Acharya, Marcus Brunnermeier, Christina
Romer, David Romer, Richard Portes, Pierre Sicsic and participants to Banque de France, Banco de
Espagna and LBS seminars and the NBER Summer Institute. The opinions expressed in the paper
are those of the authors and do not reflect the views of the Banque de France or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Simon Gilchrist and Benoît Mojon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Credit Risk in the Euro Area
Simon Gilchrist and Benoît Mojon
NBER Working Paper No. 20041
April 2014
JEL No. E32,E44,G12
ABSTRACT
We construct credit risk indicators for euro area banks and non-financial corporations. These are the
average spreads on the yield of euro area private sector bonds relative to the yield on German federal
government securities of matched maturities. The indicators are also constructed at the country level
for Germany, France, Italy and Spain. These indicators reveal that the financial crisis of 2008 has dramatically
increased the cost of market funding for both banks and non-financial firms. In contrast, the prior recession
following the 2000 U.S. dot-com bust led to widening credit spreads of non-financial firms but had
no effect on the credit spreads of financial firms. The 2008 financial crisis also led to a systematic
divergence in credit spreads for financial firms across national boundaries. This divergence in cross-country
credit risk increased further as the European debt crisis has unfolded since 2010. Since that time, credit
spreads for both non-financial and financial firms increasingly reflect national rather than euro area
financial conditions. Consistent with this view, credit spreads provide substantial predictive content
for a variety of real activity and lending measures for the euro area as a whole and for individual countries.
VAR analysis implies that disruptions in corporate credit markets lead to sizable contractions in output,
increases in unemployment, and declines in inflation across the euro area.
Simon Gilchrist
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
sgilchri@bu.edu
Benoît Mojon
Banque de France
31 rue Croix des Petits Champs
DGEI-DEMFI-POMONE 41-1422
75049 Paris Cedex 01
benoit.mojon@banque-france.fr

1 Introduction
The euro area has become the epicenter of world financial stress since the post-Lehman
recession escalated into a sovereign debt crisis that began in 2010. The fear of a sovereign
default and the possible break up of the euro has resulted in diverging financial conditions
for debt issuers across countries within the euro area. This divergence of financial conditions
within the Eurosystem has been among the main motivations for a series of non-conventional
monetary policy measures taken by the ECB since May 2010. In particular, the launch of the
OMT in the late summer of 2012 was motivated by the need to “restore” the transmission
mechanism, i.e. the uniqueness of financial conditions within the euro area.
Although policy makers remain concerned about the fragmentation of the European
financial system, gauging the extent of financial distress for countries within the euro area
remains a considerable challenge. There are very few reliable indicators of credit risk in
the euro area and across euro area countries. Most statistics on euro area interest rates are
either sovereign interest rates or bank retail interest rates. In principle, the latter reflect the
effective cost of external finance for a large proportion of the population of euro area firms
and for households. In practice, retail bank interest rates are based on surveys rather than
market-based indicators. In addition, bank retail interest rates reflect compositional changes
among borrowers as well as the varying degree of competition between banks.
Market interest rates arguably provide better indicators of credit risk as they reflect, in
real time, the beliefs of many investors. Although market-based indices of an average of
corporate bond yields are commercially available, these are frequently constructed from ar-
bitrary samples of firms whose characteristics evolve over time in a non-transparent manner.
Furthermore, thelackofinformationregardingtheunderlyingstructureoftheportfolioleads
to a maturity mismatch when constructing credit spreads as the difference in yields between
corporate bonds and sovereign bonds. This maturity mismatch confounds measurement by
not properly distinguishing between credit risk and term premia.
Thispaperintroducesnewindicesofcreditrisksintheeuroarea. Theseindicesaggregate
the information obtained from thousands of corporate bonds and hundreds of thousands of
monthly observations on the yield to maturity of such bonds since the launch of the euro
in January 1999. Following Gilchrist et al. (2009) and Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012b),
we construct a credit spread at the bond level as the difference between the corporate bond
yield and the yield of a German Bund zero coupon bond of the same maturity. By construct-
2

ing credit spreads at the bond-issuance level we thus avoid confounding credit risk premia
with term premia. We then aggregate these bond-level credit spreads to obtain indices of
credit risk for two sectors, banks and non-financial corporations (NFC thereafter) for the
four largest euro area countries: Germany, France, Italy and Spain. By aggregating this
information across countries, we are also able to construct credit spreads for the euro area
as a whole.
Our credit spreads reveal that the financial crisis of 2008 dramatically increased the cost
of market funding for both financial and non-financial firms in the euro area. Furthermore,
since the summer of 2010, there is a strong divergence in corporate credit spreads across
countries similar to the one observed for sovereign spreads. The credit spreads of both
financial and non-financial corporations in Italy and Spain widened dramatically during this
time period. Although not as pronounced, we further document a deterioration in the credit
spreads of financial institutions in France and Germany during the post 2010 period. In
contrast, the credit spreads of non-financial firms in France and Germany remain below
their 2009 peak.
In addition to documenting the evolution of credit spreads across countries within the
euro area, we also analyze the information content of these credit spreads by examining
their ability to predict commonly used indicators of economic activity, inflation and bank
lending. These results imply that both financial and non-financial credit spread indices are
highly robust leading indicators for economic activity and the growth in bank lending. In
terms of aggregate spending components, we find that both bank and NFC credit spreads
are particularly informative about the future growth in non-residential investment both in
the euro area and at the country level. In contrast, only bank credit spreads appear to be
robust predictors of the future growth in consumption spending.
In order to characterize the response of economic activity to disruptions in credit markets
wealsoestimateaFactor-AugmentedVectorAutoregression(FAVAR)andstudytheimpulse
response of euro area and country-specific measures of economic activity to shocks to credit
spreads that are orthogonal to information contained in both real activity series and other
assetprices. Consistentwiththefindingsthatcreditspreadspredictfutureeconomicactivity,
theFAVARresultsimplythatdisruptionsincreditmarketsleadtoasharpreductioninstock
returns, significant declines in output and inflation, and increases in unemployment across
the euro area and within each of the four countries.
3