NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MONETARY POLICY AND REAL BORROWING COSTS AT THE ZERO LOWER
BOUND
Simon Gilchrist
David López-Salido
Egon Zakrajšek
Working Paper 20094
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20094
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014
We are grateful to Jim Hamilton (our discussant), John Leahy (Editor), and an anonymous referee
for numerous helpful comments. We also thank Stefania D’Amico, Bob Barbera, Mark Gertler, Shane
Sherlund, Eric Swanson, Min Wei, Jonathan Wright, and participants at the NBER conference on “Lessons
from the Financial Crisis for Monetary Policy” and the Joint Central Bankers Conference at the Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland for useful suggestions. Jane Brittingham, Holly Dykstra, and George Fenton
provided superb research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are solely the responsibility
of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, anyone else associated with the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Simon Gilchrist, David López-Salido, and Egon Zakrajšek. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Monetary Policy and Real Borrowing Costs at the Zero Lower Bound
Simon Gilchrist, David López-Salido, and Egon Zakrajšek
NBER Working Paper No. 20094
May 2014
JEL No. E43,E52
ABSTRACT
This paper compares the effects of conventional monetary policy on real borrowing costs with those
of the unconventional measures employed after the target federal funds rate hit the zero lower bound
(ZLB). For the ZLB period, we identify two policy surprises: changes in the 2-year Treasury yield
around policy announcements and changes in the 10-year Treasury yield that are orthogonal to those
in the 2-year yield. The efficacy of unconventional policy in lowering real borrowing costs is comparable
to that of conventional policy, in that it implies a complete pass-through of policy-induced movements
in Treasury yields to comparable-maturity private yields.
Simon Gilchrist Egon Zakrajšek
Department of Economics Division of Monetary Affairs
Boston University Federal Reserve Board
270 Bay State Road 20th Street & Constitution Avenue, NW
Boston, MA 02215 Washington, D.C. 20551
and NBER egon.zakrajsek@frb.gov
sgilchri@bu.edu
David López-Salido
Federal Reserve Board
20th and C Streets, N.W.
Washington, DC 20551
david.j.lopez-salido@frb.gov

1 Introduction
For the better part of the past 35 years, the Federal Reserve attempted to achieve its statutory
objectives for monetary policy—maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term
interest rates—by manipulating short-term nominal interest rates in an effort to influence the
real borrowing costs faced by businesses and households.1 Under this so-called dual mandate,
policymakers respond to a slowdown in economic activity by lowering short-term nominal interest
rates, thereby inducing a decline in real borrowing costs. According to a textbook description of
the monetary transmission mechanism, businesses respond by boosting capital expenditures, while
households increase purchases of durable goods and real estate assets, expansionary demand effects
that then lead to rising employment and output.2
The ability of the Federal Reserve to influence real borrowing costs, however, is indirect.
Conventional monetary policy works through open market operations, which directly affect the
overnight federal funds rate. As shown by Gu¨rkaynak et al. (2005a), policy actions affect not only
the current target rate, but also its expected future trajectory. Through its influence on expecta-
tions, a policy easing lowers interest rates throughout the term structure, and, to the extent that
prices do not adjust fully, it also reduces longer-term real interest rates, the key determinant of
real borrowing costs. In addition to influencing the expected path of short-term nominal interest
rates, monetary policy may also affect term premia associated with longer-term financial assets.
If assets across different maturities are imperfect substitutes, altering the mix of assets available
to investors directly influences the premium associated with holding long- rather than short-term
investments.
In the wake of the extraordinary events associated with the height of the financial crisis in
the latter part of 2008, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) lowered the target federal
funds rate to its effective lower bound. With short-term nominal interest rates constrained by the
zero lower bound (ZLB), the effectiveness of monetary policy depends entirely on its ability to
influence the expected path of future short-term rates or to affect term premia directly through
asset-substitution mechanisms, the two prongs of the unconventional monetary policy strategy
employed by the FOMC since the funds rate hit the ZLB in December 2008 (see D’Amico et al.,
2012).
In this paper, we study the effects of monetary policy actions—both conventional and
unconventional—on the nominal and real Treasury yields and on the real borrowing costs faced
by businesses and households. To compare the efficacy of conventional and unconventional pol-
icy measures, our empirical approach builds on Hanson and Stein (2012) and Gertler and Karadi
(2013) and uses daily changes in the 2-year nominal Treasury yield on policy announcement days
as a common instrument across the two policy regimes. In contrast to the above two papers, we
1The Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of 1978—more commonly known as the Humprey-Hawkins
Act—established price stability and full employment as national economic policy objectives.
2See,forinstance,Mishkin(1995)andBernanke and Gertler(1995)fordetaileddescriptionofthevariouschannels
through which monetary policy can affect macroeconomic outcomes.
1

rely on movements in the 2-year Treasury yield within a narrow window surrounding FOMC and
other policy announcements to identify unanticipated policy actions.3
Measuringthestanceofmonetarypolicyduringtheunconventionalpolicyregimeiscomplicated
by the fact that the Federal Reserve implemented different forms of forward guidance regarding
the future path of the federal funds rate, as well as a number of Large-Scale Asset Purchase
programs (LSAPs), the primary goal of which was to influence longer-term yields on Treasury and
MBS securities through direct purchases of those assets. These policy actions were introduced
to the public via announcements, either following the regularly-scheduled FOMC meetings or in
special announcements outside the regular FOMC schedule.4 During the unconventional policy
regime, therefore, we attempt to distinguish between monetary policy actions that include direct
information about the LSAPs versus actions that provided little or no such information.
Because many of these unconventional policy measures were intended to directly influence
longer-term interest rates, changes in the 2-year Treasury yield around policy announcements dur-
ingtheZLBperiodareinsufficienttofullysummarizetheimpactofunconventionalmonetarypolicy
on asset prices. To provide a more complete accounting of the effects of unconventional monetary
policy on real borrowing costs, we adopt an identification scheme that allows for an additional
unanticipated component of policy, a component that has an independent effect on longer-term in-
terest rates. We do so by decomposing the observed change in the 10-year nominal Treasury yield
over anarrow window surrounding apolicyannouncement into two components: (1) ananticipated
component that reflects the effects of changes in the 2-year Treasury yield on longer-term yields
within that narrow window; and (2) a surprise component that is orthogonal to the changes in
the 2-year Treasury yield within the narrow window and is intended to capture the direct effect of
unconventional policy measures on longer-term interest rates.5
Our results indicate that during the conventional policy regime, an unanticipated easing of
monetary policy steepens the yield curve but, nonetheless, has a pronounced effect on longer-
term real interest rates. In particular, an unanticipated easing of monetary policy that lowers
the 2-year nominal Treasury yield 10 basis points induces a 4 basis point decline in the 10-year
nominal Treasury yield. This policy easing has very little effect on inflation compensation (i.e.,
breakeven inflation rates) as measured by TIPS. Consequently, such a policy easing leads to a
3As discussed more fully below, this approach allows us to rule out the potential reverse causality, a situation
in which the daily changes in the 2-year Treasury yield—even on policy announcement days—may not reflect solely
changes in the stance of monetary policy, but also the endogenous response of policy to changes in the economic
outlookorothercommonshocks. Inessence,theidentifyingassumptionunderlyingourapproachisthatmovements
inTreasuryyieldsinanarrowwindowsurroundingapolicyannouncementarepredominantlyduetotheunanticipated
changes in the stance of monetary policy or communication regarding the path for policy going forward.
4Incontrasttothestandardevent-styleanalysis,ourresultsarebestthoughtofascapturingtheaverageeffectof
unconventional monetary policy on real borrowing costs.
5AsshownbySwanson and Williams(2013),yieldsonnominalTreasurysecuritieswithayearormoretomaturity
respondedtoeconomicnewsthroughoutthe2008–10period,indicatingthatmonetarypolicywaslikelytohavebeen
about as effective as usual during this period. By the end of 2011, however, the 2-year Treasury yield has largely
stopped responding to news as result of the binding ZLB constraint. The 10-year Treasury yield, in contrast, has
continued to respond to news after that, suggesting a significant scope for monetary policy to affect real borrowing
costs by directly influencing the long-end of the yield curve.
2