NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CORRUPTION IN CHINESE PRIVATIZATIONS
Raymond Fisman
Yongxiang Wang
Working Paper 20090
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20090
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014
We would like to thank Loren Brandt, Charles Calomiris, Harry DeAngelo, Nandini Gupta, Amit
Khandelwal, John Matsusaka, Adair Morse, Kevin Murphy, Richard Roll, Philipp Schnabl, Catherine
Thomas, Shang-Jin Wei, Julie Wulf, Jialin Yu, and seminar participants at AFA, Berkeley, Indiana
University (Kelly), Maryland, NBER China Conference, Yale, University of International Business
and Economics, and USC-UCLA Finance Day for helpful comments. Jin Xie and Huifeng Yin provide
able RA support. We also thank a senior officer at the State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration
Commission of the State Council (SASAC), Feihu Long, Kui Zeng and Zhichao Fang for providing
institutional details on state asset transfers. Financial support from CIBER at Columbia Business School
is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Raymond Fisman and Yongxiang Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Corruption in Chinese Privatizations
Raymond Fisman and Yongxiang Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 20090
May 2014
JEL No. D73,G30,L33
ABSTRACT
We document evidence of corruption in Chinese state asset sales. These sales involved stakes in partially
privatized firms, providing a benchmark – the price of publicly traded shares – to measure underpricing.
Underpricing is correlated with deal attributes associated with misgovernance and corruption. Sales
by “disguised” owners that misrepresent their state ownership to elude regulatory scrutiny are discounted
5-7 percentage points more than sales by other owners; related party transactions are similarly discounted.
Analysis of subsequent operating performance provides suggestive evidence that aggregate ownership
transfers improve profitability, though not in cases where the transfers themselves were corrupted.
Raymond Fisman
School of Business
Columbia University
605b Uris Hall
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
rf250@columbia.edu
Yongxiang Wang
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089
Yongxiang.Wang@marshall.usc.edu

1. Introduction
Governments around the world have sold state assets over the past few decades with the twin
rationales of raising revenues and improving operating efficiency. The broad consensus among
economists is that the net effect has been positive: post-privatization, companies increase sales,
invest more, and earn higher profits (see Megginson and Netter, 2001, for the most recent
survey).
Yet privatization’s history is hardly unblemished. Notoriously, corruption in Russian
voucher privatizations led to the theft of state assets on a very large scale, undermining in large
part the revenue generation rationale for shedding state assets, and at the same time resulted in
increased ownership concentration. Further, the subsequent performance of privatized companies
in Russia has been mixed. While Russian government ownership was inefficient, there were
widespread reports of asset stripping and mismanagement of privatized firms. For example,
Gazprom, a partially privatized gas and oil company, had a market valuation of $0.05 per barrel
of hydrocarbon reserves in 2000 (Exxon Mobile’s value was $13.68 per barrel), implying an
astronomical rate of inefficiency and misgovernance (MacMillan and Twiss, 2002). This post-
privatization underperformance is, on some level, unsurprising: a buyer that is willing and able to
pay off officials in state-run companies in exchange for share price discounts may also have the
means and inclination to subsequently tunnel value out of companies at the expense of minority
shareholders. Understanding the causes and consequences of corruption in state asset sales can
improve our understanding of privatization in the face of weak public and private sector
governance, and may thus also help to guide policy for future privatizations.
We study these issues in the context of Chinese asset transfers by examining the
correlates of underpricing of state assets, as well as operating performance of firms following
1

asset transfers. A number of aspects of the Chinese setting are useful for analyzing these issues.
First, at least on an anecdotal level there have been widespread concerns of corruption and self-
dealing in Chinese privatizations. Wedeman (2012), for example, recounts instances of steeply
discounted sales of state assets to connected parties, along with details of the subsequent
exploitation of privatized companies by their new owners.
The particular structure of Chinese privatization also lends itself to our analysis. Many
Chinese companies were partially privatized in the early 1990s through share issue privatizations,
yet the government maintained very substantial (usually majority) holdings in most firms via
unlisted state-owned firms. For the most part, government shares of publicly listed firms were
non-tradable, and could only change hands through privately negotiated sales subject to
regulatory approval. Since shares with the same cash flow rights as these government holdings
were freely traded in parallel in the stock market, we have a credible benchmark to assess the
extent of underpricing. Figure 1 illustrates the structure of such a deal. In general, three firms are
involved in an ownership transfer: There is a publicly traded company, A, whose (non-tradable)
block of shares are transferred via private sale, from seller B1 – generally an unlisted firm or
government entity – to buyer D, also generally an unlisted firm. Note that the company will also
generally have other non-tradable shareholders (B2,…), and also tradable shareholders (C1,
C2,…) – usually individuals or mutual funds.
We begin by documenting extent of transfer underpricing. We find that negotiated
transfers of non-traded shares occur at very steep discounts (73% on average) relative to the
benchmark of the publicly traded share price. We argue that part of this discount can be
explained by a principal-agent problem where insiders at the selling firm (not the listed firm
itself but rather an unlisted state company that owns the non-tradable shares) do not bear the cost
2