NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNCERTAINTY, FINANCIAL FRICTIONS, AND INVESTMENT DYNAMICS
Simon Gilchrist
Jae W. Sim
Egon Zakrajšek
Working Paper 20038
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20038
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2014
We are grateful to Jeff Campbell, Martin Ellison, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, Frank Smets, Dino Palazzo, and
Neng Wang for helpful comments. We also thank seminar and conference participants at the Federal
Reserve Board; the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Dallas, and San Francisco;
the European Central Bank; De Nederlandsche Bank; the Bank of England; the 2009 LAEF conference;
the 2010 Winter Meeting of the Econometric Society; the 2010 Meeting of the Society for Economic
Dynamics; the 2010 and 2013 NBER Summer Institute; the 2010 MNBCEPR workshop; the 2011
and 2012 EABCN meetings; Bilkent University; Georgetown; Iowa State; Johns Hopkins; Michigan;
Nottingham; NYU; Princeton; Rochester; Rutgers; and Yale. Jane Brittingham, Samuel Haltenhof,
Robert Kurtzman, and Oren Ziv provided outstanding research assistance at various stages of the project.
All errors and omissions are our own responsibility alone. The views expressed in this paper are solely
the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, anyone else associated with the Federal Reserve System,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Simon Gilchrist, Jae W. Sim, and Egon Zakrajšek. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Uncertainty, Financial Frictions, and Investment Dynamics
Simon Gilchrist, Jae W. Sim, and Egon Zakrajšek
NBER Working Paper No. 20038
April 2014
JEL No. E22,E32,G31
ABSTRACT
Micro- and macro-level evidence indicates that fluctuations in idiosyncratic uncertainty have a large
effect on investment; the impact of uncertainty on investment occurs primarily through changes in
credit spreads; and innovations in credit spreads have a strong effect on investment, irrespective of
the level of uncertainty. These findings raise a question regarding the economic significance of the
traditional “wait-and-see” effect of uncertainty shocks and point to financial distortions as the main
mechanism through which fluctuations in uncertainty affect macroeconomic outcomes. The relative
importance of these two mechanisms is analyzed within a quantitative general equilibrium model,
featuring heterogeneous firms that face time-varying idiosyncratic uncertainty, irreversibility, nonconvex
capital adjustment costs, and financial frictions. The model successfully replicates the stylized facts
concerning the macroeconomic implications of uncertainty and financial shocks. By influencing the
effective supply of credit, both types of shocks exert a powerful effect on investment and generate
countercyclical credit spreads and procyclical leverage, dynamics consistent with the data and counter
to those implied by the technology-driven real business cycle models.
Simon Gilchrist Egon Zakrajšek
Department of Economics Division of Monetary Affairs
Boston University Federal Reserve Board
270 Bay State Road 20th Street & Constitution Avenue, NW
Boston, MA 02215 Washington, D.C. 20551
and NBER egon.zakrajsek@frb.gov
sgilchri@bu.edu
Jae W. Sim
Division of Research & Statistics
Federal Reserve Board
20th Street & Constitution Avenue, NW
Washington, D.C. 20551
jae.w.sim@frb.gov

1 Introduction
Macroeconomists have made a convincing argument that the well-documented countercyclical be-
havior of the cross-sectional dispersion of economic variables such as labor income, business prof-
its, productivity, and stock returns reflects fluctuations in the volatility of the underlying eco-
nomic shocks—that is, swings in economic uncertainty.1 How such uncertainty fluctuations in-
fluence business cycle dynamics has traditionally been analyzed within the framework of irre-
versibleinvestment(seeBernanke,1983;Bertola and Caballero,1994;Abel and Eberly,1994,1996;
Caballero and Pindyck, 1996; Bloom, 2009; Bloom et al., 2011; Bachmann and Bayer, 2009, 2013).
This approach to corporate resource allocation treats the firm’s future investment opportunities as
“realoptions”andemphasizestheimportanceofwaitingandstagingflexibilitywhenmakinginvest-
ment decisions—in response to increased uncertainty, firms should wait and see until uncertainty
is resolved and the project is more clearly successful.2
Spurred by the surge in asset price volatility and the blowout in credit spreads during the
2007–09 financial crisis, an emergent literature has pointed to financial market frictions as an
additional channel through which volatility fluctuations can affect macroeconomic outcomes (see
Arellano et al., 2012; Christiano et al., 2014). According to the canonical framework used to price
risky debt, the return on levered equity resembles—under limited liability—the payoff of a call
option, whereas the bondholders face the payoff structure that mimics that of an investor writing
a put option. An increase in the riskiness of the firm’s assets thus benefits equity holders at the
expenseofbondholders, implyingariseincreditspreadstocompensatebondholdersforheightened
uncertainty. To the extent that external finance—both through the debt and equity markets—is
subject to agency and/or moral hazard problems, an increase in uncertainty will raise the user cost
of capital, inducing a decline in investment spending.
Given these two complementary channels of how changes in uncertainty can affect the real
economy, this paper seeks to answer the following question: How much of the impact of fluc-
tuations in uncertainty on aggregate investment reflects capital adjustment frictions associated
with irreversibility—the traditional wait-and-see effect—and how much of it can be attributed to
distortions in financial markets? We answer this question by developing a quantitative business
cycle model that allows us to analyze the effect of fluctuations in uncertainty on investment dy-
namics in a general equilibrium setting featuring partial irreversibility and frictions in both the
debt and equity markets. Specifically, we formulate a capital accumulation problem, in which het-
1See Campbell and Taksler (2003), Storesletten et al. (2004), Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006), Bloom (2009), and
Bloom et al.(2011)forargumentsandevidence. Itisworthemphasizing,however,thatthereisnoobjectivemeasure
of time-varying economic uncertainty. In addition to the uncertainty proxies noted above, this burgeoning litera-
ture has employed indexes based on the frequency of “uncertainty-related” words or phrases that occur across a
large number of news sources (Baker et al., 2013), the cross-sectional dispersion of survey-based business forecasts
(Bachmann et al.,2013b),andthecommonvariationintheunforecastablecomponentofalargenumberofeconomic
indicators (Jurado et al., 2013) to infer fluctuations in uncertainty.
2Despite its intuitive appeal, the effect of uncertainty on investment in the presence of irreversibilities can be
theoreticallyambiguous. Asshown,forexample,byAbel(1983)andVeracierto(2002),theeffectdependsimportantly
on the assumptions regarding the initial accumulation of capital, market structure, and the equilibrium setting.
1

erogeneous firms employ a decreasing returns-to-scale production technology that is subject to a
persistent idiosyncratic shock, the variance of which is allowed to vary over time according to a
stochastic law of motion. The capital accumulation problem is subject to partial irreversibility
and fixed adjustment costs, two forms of adjustment frictions emphasized in the influential work of
Abel and Eberly (1994, 1996), Caballero et al. (1995), Doms and Dunne (1998), Caballero (1999),
Cooper et al. (1999), Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006), and Bachmann et al. (2013a).
On the financial side, firms make investment decisions subject to a full range of choices regard-
ing their capital structure—internal funds, debt, and equity financing—in an environment where
external funds are costly because of agency problems in financial markets. The partial investment
irreversibility plays two roles in our model. First, it creates the option value of waiting. In re-
sponse to increased uncertainty, the investment inaction region expands, which causes some firms
to delay exercising their growth options—that is, they adopt a wait-and-see posture. Second, the
greater downside risk limits the firms’ debt capacity because heightened uncertainty—under lim-
ited liability—favors the firm’s shareholders over its bondholders, thereby inducing a decline in
the market value of debt claims. Thus, the model provides a unified quantitative framework for
analyzing the implications of the interaction between the capital and debt overhang problems for
business cycle dynamics.3
Our analysis of the interaction between uncertainty and financial conditions is informed im-
portantly by new empirical evidence that highlights the strong relationship between uncertainty,
investment, and credit spreads on corporate bonds, a commonly used indicator of the degree of fi-
nancial market frictions.4 Specifically, we construct a new proxy for idiosyncratic uncertainty using
high-frequency firm-level stock market data, a measure that arguably reflects exogenous changes
in uncertainty, rather than the endogenous effects of informational and contractual frictions that
have been theoretically linked to the countercyclical dispersion in economic returns. For a subset
of large corporations, we match this estimate of uncertainty to the firms’ income and balance sheet
statements and, most importantly, to prices of their individual corporate bonds trading in the
secondary market.
Using this novel micro-level data set, we find that conditional on the firm’s leverage, prof-
itability, and other indicators of creditworthiness, idiosyncratic volatility is an important determi-
nant of credit spreads on the firm’s outstanding bonds. We also show that conditional on invest-
ment fundamentals—that is, proxies for the marginal product of capital—increases in idiosyncratic
volatility are associated with a substantial decline in the rate of capital formation. However, once
theinformationcontentofcreditspreadsistakenintoaccount,theimpactofuncertaintyonbusiness
3Earlier theoretical explorations of this interaction can be found in Shleifer and Vishny (1992), Eisfeldt (2004),
and Manso (2008).
4Thefactthatthelevelofcreditspreadsprovidesausefulmetricforgaugingthetightnessoffinancialconditions
intheeconomyandthustheimplieddegreeofdeparturefromtheModigliani–Millerparadigmoffrictionlessfinancial
markets is supported by considerable empirical evidence showing that corporate bond credit spreads form the most
informative and reliable class of financial indicators for future economic activity and that shocks to credit spreads
leadtoadversemacroeconomicoutcomes(seeGertler and Lown,1999;Gilchrist et al.,2009;Gilchrist and Zakrajˇsek,
2012; Faust et al., 2013).
2