NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEBT, TAXES, AND LIQUIDITY
Patrick Bolton
Hui Chen
Neng Wang
Working Paper 20009
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20009
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014
We thank Phil Dybvig, Wei Jiang, Hong Liu, Gustavo Manso, Jonathan Parker, Steve Ross, and seminar
participants at MIT Sloan, Stanford, UC Berkeley Haas, Washington University, University of Wisconsin-
Madison, TCFA 2013, and WFA 2013 for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Patrick Bolton, Hui Chen, and Neng Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Debt, Taxes, and Liquidity
Patrick Bolton, Hui Chen, and Neng Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 20009
March 2014
JEL No. E22,G32,G35,H24,H25
ABSTRACT
We analyze a model of optimal capital structure and liquidity choice based on a dynamic tradeoff theory
for financially constrained firms. In addition to the classical tradeoff between the expected tax advantages
of debt and bankruptcy costs, we introduce a cost of external financing for the firm, which generates
a precautionary demand for liquidity and an optimal liquidity management policy for the firm. An
important new cost of debt financing in this context is an endogenous debt servicing cost: debt payments
drain the firm's valuable liquidity reserves and thus impose higher expected external financing costs
on the firm. The precautionary demand for liquidity also means that realized earnings are separated
in time from payouts to shareholders, implying that the classical Miller-formula for the net tax benefits
of debt no longer holds. Our model offers a novel perspective for the "debt conservatism puzzle" by
showing that financially constrained firms choose to limit debt usages in order to preserve their liquidity.
In some cases, they may not even exhaust their risk-free debt capacity.
Patrick Bolton Neng Wang
Columbia Business School Columbia Business School
804 Uris Hall 3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 812
New York, NY 10027 New York, NY 10027
and NBER and NBER
pb2208@columbia.edu nw2128@columbia.edu
Hui Chen
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-637
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
huichen@mit.edu

1 Introduction
We develop a dynamic tradeoff theory for financially constrained firms by integrating
classical tax versus bankruptcy cost considerations into a dynamic framework in which
firms face external financing costs. As in Bolton, Chen, and Wang (2011, 2013), these
financing costs generate a precautionary demand for holding liquid assets and retaining
earnings.1 Financially constrained firms incur an additional endogenous debt servicing cost
arising from the cash drain associated with interest payments. Given that firms face this
endogenous debt servicing cost, our model predicts lower optimal debt levels than those
obtained for unconstrained firms with no precautionary cash buffers. We thus provide a
novel perspective on the “debt conservatism puzzle” documented in the empirical capital
structure literature (see Graham (2000, 2003)).
The precautionary savings motive for financially constrained firms introduces another
novel dimension to the standard tradeoff theory: personal tax capitalization and the
changes this capitalization brings to the net tax benefit of debt when the firm chooses
to retain its net earnings (after interest and corporate tax payments) rather than pay
them out to shareholders. As Harris and Kemsley (1999), Collins and Kemsley (2000),
and Frank, Singh, and Wang (2010) have pointed out, when firms choose to build up
corporate savings, personal taxes on future expected payouts must be capitalized, and
this tax capitalization changes both the market value of equity and the net tax benefit
calculation for debt. In our model, the standard Miller formula for the net tax benefit of
debt only holds when the firm is at the endogenous payout boundary. When the firm is
away from this payout boundary, and therefore strictly prefers to retain earnings, the net
tax benefits of debt are lower than the ones implied by the Miller formula. As we show,
the tax benefits can even become substantially negative when the firm is at risk of running
out of cash. Importantly, this is not just a conceptual observation, it is also quantitatively
important as the firm is almost always in the liquidity-hoarding region.
Our dynamic model of financially constrained firms also have new predictions on
1CorporatecashholdingsofU.S.publiclytradednon-financialcorporationshavebeensteadilyincreasing
over the past twenty years and represent a substantial fraction of corporate assets, as Bates, Kahle, and
Stulz (2009) have shown.
1

the effects of changes in depreciation tax allowances on capital structure and liquidity
management. Unlike the standard result in the static tradeoff theory by DeAngelo and
Masulis (1980) that depreciation tax shields are a substitute for debt tax shields, and
therefore that an increase in depreciation tax allowances lowers leverage, for a financially
constrained firm depreciation tax allowances are a complement to debt tax shields. That
is, an increase in depreciation tax allowances induces the financially constrained firm to
issue more debt and hold more cash. The reason is that the firm’s debt servicing costs are
reduced when the firm can retain a higher fraction of its EBITDA and therefore the firm
responds by taking on more debt and holding more cash.
Another important change introduced by external financing costs and precautionary
savings is that the conventional assumption that cash is negative debt is no longer valid, as
Acharya, Almeida, and Campello (2007) have emphasized.2 In our model, drawing down
debt by depleting the firm’s cash stock involves an opportunity cost for the financially
constrained firm, which is not accounted for when cash is treated as negative debt. As a
result, standard net debt calculations tend to underestimate the value of cash. The flaw
in treating cash as negative debt becomes apparent in situations where the firm chooses
not even to exhaust its risk-free debt capacity given the endogenous debt servicing costs
involved and the scarcity of internal funds. In addition, we show that net debt is a poor
measure of credit risk, as the same value for net debt can be associated with two distinct
levels of credit risk (a high credit risk with low debt value and low cash, and a low credit
risk with high debt value and high cash).
The tradeoff theory of capital structure is often pitted against the pecking order theory,
with numerous empirical studies seeking to test them either in isolation or in a horse race
(see Fama and French (2012) for a recent example). The empirical status of the tradeoff
theory has been and remains a hotly debated question. Some scholars, most notably Myers
(1984), have claimed that they “know of no study clearly demonstrating that a firm’s tax
2Acharya, Almeida, and Campello (2007) observe that issuing debt and hoarding the proceeds in cash
isnotequivalenttopreservingdebtcapacityforthefuture. Intheirmodel,riskydebtisdisproportionately
a claim on high cash-flow states, while cash savings are equally available in all future cash-flow states.
Therefore, preserving debt capacity or saving cash has different implications for future investment by a
financially constrained firm.
2