NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HAS THE FINANCIAL CRISIS PERMANENTLY CHANGED THE PRACTICE OF
MONETARY POLICY? HAS IT CHANGED THE THEORY OF MONETARY POLICY?
Benjamin M. Friedman
Working Paper 20128
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20128
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Benjamin M. Friedman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Has the Financial Crisis Permanently Changed the Practice of Monetary Policy? Has It Changed
the Theory of Monetary Policy?
Benjamin M. Friedman
NBER Working Paper No. 20128
May 2014
JEL No. E52,E58
ABSTRACT
I argue in this paper that one of the two forms of hitherto unconventional monetary policy that many
central banks have implemented in response to the 2007 financial crisis – large-scale asset purchases,
or to put the matter more generically, use of the central bank’s balance sheet as a distinct tool of monetary
policy – is likely to become part of the standard toolkit of monetary policymaking in normal times
as well. As intended, these purchases have lowered long-term interest rates relative to short-term
rates, and lowered interest rates on more-risky compared to less-risky obligations. Moreover, their
introduction fills a conceptual vacuum that has long stood at the heart of monetary policy analysis
and implementation.
By contrast, forward guidance on the future trajectory of monetary policy has been less successful.
Public statements by central banks about their actions and intentions will no doubt continue, but
transparency for the sake of transparency is not the same as the deliberate attempt to shape market
expectations for purposes of achieving specific monetary policy objectives.
Finally, there is a conceptual component to all this as well. In contrast to the last century or more
of monetary theory, which has focused on central banks’ liabilities, the basis for the effectiveness of
central bank asset purchases turns on the role of the asset side of the central bank’s balance sheet.
The implications for monetary theory are profound.
Benjamin M. Friedman
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 127
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bfriedman@harvard.edu

! 1!
Revised
April, 2014
HAS THE FINANCIAL CRISIS PERMANENTLY CHANGED THE PRACTICE OF
MONETARY POLICY? HAS IT CHANGED THE THEORY OF MONETARY
POLICY?*
Benjamin M. Friedman
William Joseph Maier Professor of Political Economy
Harvard University
The global financial crisis of 2007-9, together with the economic downturn that it
triggered in much of the advanced industrial and post-industrial world, has constituted one of the
most significant economic events since World War II. In many countries the decline in
production and the associated loss of jobs and incomes and profits have exceeded what occurred
in any prior post-war fluctuation. In some countries output and employment have yet to regain
their pre-crisis levels. In the financial arena the collapse of major firms, the decline of asset
values and consequent destruction of notional wealth, the interruption of credit flows, the loss of
confidence both in firms and in credit market instruments, and the fear of default even by well
known counterparties likewise represented an experience unseen since the 1930s.
It is no surprise that these events presented particular challenges, and therefore elicited
extraordinary responses, from economic policy. Most immediately, governments and central
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
* This lecture was prepared for the conference on Monetary Analysis and Monetary Policy
Frameworks organized by Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, April 9-10, 2014. In part it draws
on some of my recent work, including especially Friedman and Kuttner (2011) and Friedman
(2013).

2!!
!
banks undertook rescue operations of hitherto unprecedented scope as well as scale. In many
countries the government, or the central bank, or both, extended extraordinary credits to banks
and other key firms, created new facilities for directed lending and for purchasing new (for the
central bank) classes of assets, recapitalized banks, and even acquired majority ownership of
some banks as well as firms in financial lines of business well removed from banking –
insurance, for example. The U.K. government took an 81 percent share in Royal Bank of
Scotland. At the peak, the U.S. government owned more than one-third of the equity in
Citigroup, and more than 90 percent of that in AIG. Nor did governments limit these bail-out
operations to financial firms. Most prominently, the U.S. Government rescued from failure two
of the three large American automobile manufacturers. Which among these diverse actions
qualify as classic “lender-of-last-resort” policy will no doubt be the subject of debate for years to
come.
The crisis and the ensuing economic downturn placed demands on conventional
macroeconomic policies as well. Here, however, significant impediments emerged. In many
countries the latitude (or at least the perceived latitude) to use fiscal policy was constrained by
what had already been large government borrowing in the years before the downturn. Once
incomes and profits began to decline, shrinking tax revenues along the way, concern over rising
levels of government debt relative to national income therefore limited the willingness to expand
government spending or cut taxes even further.
Moreover, by 2007 the discretionary use of fiscal policy for purposes of damping
fluctuations in output and employment had been in more general disrepute for some decades.
One practical reason was simply the awareness of lags: lags in recognizing that fiscal stimulus
was appropriate in light of current economic conditions, lags in enacting legislation and