NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MATCHING CAPITAL AND LABOR
Jonathan B. Berk
Jules H. van Binsbergen
Binying Liu
Working Paper 20138
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20138
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014
We thank Anat Admati, Peter DeMarzo, Francisco Perez-Gonzalez, Paul Pfleiderer, Anamaria Pieschacon
and Michael Roberts for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Jonathan B. Berk, Jules H. van Binsbergen, and Binying Liu. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Matching Capital and Labor
Jonathan B. Berk, Jules H. van Binsbergen, and Binying Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 20138
May 2014, Revised October 2014
JEL No. D22,G11,G12,G2,G20,G3,G30,J01,J24,L22,L23,L25
ABSTRACT
We establish an important role for the firm by studying capital reallocation decisions of mutual fund
firms. At least 30% of the value mutual fund managers add can be attributed to the firm's role in efficiently
allocating capital amongst its mutual fund managers. We find no evidence of a similar effect when
a firm hires managers from another firm. We conclude that an important reason why firms exist is
the private information that derives from the firm's ability to better assess the skill of its own employees.
Jonathan B. Berk Binying Liu
Stanford University Northwestern University
Graduate School of Business Kellogg School of Management
655 Knight Way 2001 Sheridan Road
Stanford, CA 94306 Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER b-liu@kellogg.northwestern.edu
jonathan.b.berk@gmail.com
Jules H. van Binsbergen
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
julesv@wharton.upenn.edu

We demonstrate, empirically, that an important role of a firm in the mutual fund
sector is to efficiently match capital to skill. In a world with perfectly rational players,
no information asymmetries and no other frictions, the role of a mutual fund firm would
be irrelevant because investors themselves would efficiently allocate their own capital
amongst managers. In reality, what we find, is that mutual fund executives play a very
important role in capital allocation. Mutual fund firms appear to add substantial value by
intermediating between investors and managers and thereby efficiently matching capital
to skill.
A decision to increase a portfolio manager’s responsibility by assigning an additional
fund to that manager (that is, a decision to increase the manager’s assets under man-
agement, hereafter AUM), leads to an increase in the manager’s subsequent value added.
Similarly, we find that decisions to reduce managers’ responsibilities by taking away a
fund also lead to increases in subsequent value added. We find that at a minimum, the
decision to reallocate capital to a manager adds, on average, $715,000 per manager per
month, implying that the firm is responsible for at least 30% of the total value added of
the average manager.
We show that investors are unable to match the firm’s capital reallocation decision
themselves. Wehypothesizethatthereasonwhyderivesfromthesignificantinformational
advantage mutual fund executives have relative to investors. We provide supporting evi-
dence in favor of this hypothesis: (1) external hires that involve a change in AUM do not
lead to a detectable change in future value added and (2) while past performance does
explain investor flows, it has very little explanatory power over firm capital reallocation
decisions. We also find that the capital reallocation decisions add more value for young
managers, supporting the hypothesis that the firm’s advantage derives from its access
to better information about managerial ability. These facts are consistent with the hy-
pothesis, first theorized by Alchian and Demsetz (1972), that firm executives use factors
that are not easily observable to people outside the firm to make their capital allocation
decisions.
Many of the questions pertaining to the economics of organizations are difficult to
study because it is often hard to measure employee output directly. The advantage
of the mutual fund sector is that because the performance of a mutual fund is public
information, employee output is directly observable. That is, a mutual fund manager
has one task — to invest capital on behalf of investors. The return he generates, as well
as the amount of capital invested, is public information. So is the investor’s next best
1

alternative investment opportunity, an investment in passively managed index funds. By
comparing the manager’s performance against this alternative, we can directly calculate
an individual manager’s output, that is, the value she adds. We are then able to infer at
least part of the firm’s role in creating value by looking at how firm decisions affect the
manager’s value added.
The mutual fund sector is comprised of firms that own little physical capital. Con-
sequently, it provides an ideal place to study the importance of theories of the firm.
Although in some sense the industry is actually very capital intensive (the business is,
after all, about investing financial capital), what distinguishes this industry from other
capital intensive industries is that the firm does not own its capital. Instead, the cus-
tomers of mutual fund companies, that is, mutual fund investors, retain all ownership
rights to their capital and in most cases can call it back at any time. Thus, unlike a
typical firm, the value of a mutual fund firm does not include the value of the capital
it needs to operate. Thus ownership rights to capital cannot play an important role in
why mutual fund companies exist or are valuable. Yet the industry is dominated by large
firms. As of January 2011, the 5 largest mutual fund firms manage 46% of all assets while
making up only 1% of all firms in the industry. In this paper we identify an economically
important role for firms: they intermediate between investors and managers, efficiently
matching capital and labor. The main implication of our results is that while ownership
rights to capital undoubtably play an important role in firm value, other factors, such as
the informational role of the firm, potentially play just as important a role.
1 Background
The literature on the economics of organizations has raised several important questions
related to the role of firms. What makes a firm successful? Is it a characteristic of the
firm itself, or is it simply that a successful firm is a collection of particularly talented
employees? Why do people choose to work for firms rather than for themselves? Are
employees more productive when they work as part of a larger group? Clearly the firm
plays an important role in sharing risk, but does it have a role beyond that?
There is now a large theoretical literature designed to answer these questions (see Hart
and Moore (1990), Holmstrom and Tirole (1989), Hart (1995) and Rajan and Zingales
(1998)). A key aspect of modern theories of the firm is the concept of ownership. In a
world with incomplete contracting, incomplete information and bounded rationality, ex
2