NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IMPACT OF PREMIUM SUBSIDIES ON THE TAKE-UP OF HEALTH INSURANCE:
EVIDENCE FROM THE 2009 AMERICAN RECOVERY AND REINVESTMENT ACT (ARRA)
Asako S. Moriya
Kosali Simon
Working Paper 20196
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20196
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.¸˛
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Asako S. Moriya and Kosali Simon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Impact of Premium Subsidies on the Take-up of Health Insurance: Evidence from the 2009
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA)
Asako S. Moriya and Kosali Simon
NBER Working Paper No. 20196
June 2014, Revised August 2015
JEL No. I13,J64
ABSTRACT
We study the coverage impacts of a 65-percent health insurance premium subsidy which targeted employer-insured
workers who lost their jobs between September 2008 and May 2010. Our research represents the first
econometric analysis of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) COBRA subsidy
and contributes to a better understanding of consumer responses to government subsidized private
health insurance and discussions surrounding Affordable Care Act (ACA) policies. Using data from
the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) and a difference-in-differences estimation
strategy, we find that the subsidy is associated with a substantial increase in own-name employer coverage
among the targeted group. We estimate a -0.38 to -0.27 price elasticity of demand for health insurance,
depending on the specification. This suggests that consumers are somewhat more price sensitive than
previously thought, although there are caveats to generalizing from past settings to individuals affected
by ACA subsidies. We also find that part of the increase in subsidized coverage was offset by a decrease
in unsubsidized non-group insurance.
Asako S. Moriya
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)
540 Gaither Road
Rockville, MD 20850
Asako.Moriya@ahrq.hhs.gov
Kosali Simon
School of Public and Environmental Affairs
Indiana University
Rm 443
1315 East Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN 47405-1701
and NBER
simonkos@indiana.edu

1. INTRODUCTION
As private health insurance is historically closely tied to employment in the U.S., with almost 70
percent of non-elderly employees being covered by employer plans in 2010,1 job separations have led to
high rates of uninsurance (Gruber and Madrian, 1997). To bridge coverage gaps between jobs, the
Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) of 1985 requires most employers to offer
coverage to formerly-insured employees for up to 18 months after job termination. But few unemployed
workers take up continuation coverage, likely due to its high cost, as COBRA does not require any
employer contribution (Lambrew, 2001).
Despite several policy attempts to add health insurance assistance to unemployment benefits, no
comprehensive COBRA subsidy was available until the American Recovery and Reconstruction Act
(ARRA) of February 2009. Under the ARRA, employer-insured workers who lost their jobs involuntarily
between September 2008 and May 2010 could qualify for a 65-percent premium subsidy for up to 15
months.2 This subsidy reduced the cost of COBRA considerably; on average, the subsidy totaled about
$724 per month for family coverage and $261 per month for single coverage.3 The amount is well within
the range of subsidies provided through Affordable Care Act (ACA) Health Insurance Marketplaces,
which gives a family of four earning 250 percent of the Federal Poverty Level (FPL) a 65- percent
premium subsidy (Fernandez and Gabe, 2012).4
We estimate the impact of the ARRA subsidy on health insurance take-up by comparing changes
in own-name employer coverage (which is often called just ‘COBRA’ when offered by a former
employer) in periods when the subsidy is in effect to periods when the subsidy is absent, among the
treatment group (former workers eligible for COBRA) relative to the changes among the control group
1 These are author calculations using the 2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) panel.
2 PL 111-5, American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (2009).
3 These numbers are based on average monthly total premiums for employer-sponsored insurance (ESI) in 2009
($1,115 for family coverage and $402 for single coverage) (Kaiser/HRET, 2009).
4 The individual mandate, which imposes a fine for being uninsured, acts to further reduce the price of health
insurance. However, individual reactions to fines may be non-symmetric relative to subsidies (CBO, 2010; Baicker
et al., 2012).
2

(former workers ineligible for COBRA). We supplement this analysis by investigating the effect of the
subsidy on uninsurance, and relatedly, whether there are spillover effects onto other forms of insurance.
The use of a control group that also experienced involuntary job loss but was ineligible for COBRA (and
thus ineligible for the subsidy) helps to account for contemporaneous trends in insurance coverage before
and after the policy changes through a difference-in-differences (DD) estimation strategy; we test before-
hand whether insurance coverage of the control and treatment groups have trended similarly in periods
when the subsidy is unavailable, and we also explore the use of alternative control groups. We conduct
our empirical analysis using data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), a
nationally representative panel study of households with detailed information on insurance status and
labor market characteristics that is uniquely suited for our analysis.
We find that the 65-percent premium subsidy is associated with a substantial increase in own-
name employer coverage by those eligible for the subsidy, implying a price elasticity estimate of between
-0.38 to -0.27, depending on the specification. This finding is somewhat higher than the elasticity
estimates in the existing literature both for employer insurance as well as more recent non-group health
insurance studies, although the literature has produced a wide range of estimates. We find evidence that
the majority of this subsidy-induced take-up translated into a reduction in uninsurance but that the
increase in own-name employer coverage was also partially offset by a decrease in non-group insurance.
The generous 2009 ARRA subsidy provides contemporary evidence on the price elasticity of
demand for health insurance to inform ongoing policy discussions. Other than the extension of the tax
deduction for health insurance to the self-employed (Gruber and Poterba, 1994), the ARRA was the only
instance of a government premium subsidy for the individual purchase of health insurance prior to the
ACA.5 ACA Marketplaces provide subsidies of about $15 billion annually towards the purchase of non-
group coverage for approximately 8 million Americans in 2014 (CBO, 2015; ASPE, 2015). Although
research establishing the price responsiveness to current ACA subsidies will take time to evolve, debates
5 An exception is a very limited subsidy through the Trade Adjustment Assistance Reform Act (TAARA) of 2002
PL 107-210.
3