NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A MODEL OF MONETARY POLICY AND RISK PREMIA
Itamar Drechsler
Alexi Savov
Philipp Schnabl
Working Paper 20141
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20141
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014
We thank Viral Acharya, Xavier Gabaix, John Geanakoplos, Valentin Haddad, Matteo Maggiori, Alan
Moreira, Stefan Nagel, Francisco Palomino, Cecilia Parlatore, participants at the 2012 CITE conference
at the Becker Friedman Institute, the 2013 Kellogg Junior Macro conference, the Princeton Finance
Seminar, the 2013 Five-Star Conference at NYU, the 2014 UBC Winter Finance Conference, the 2014
Cowles GE Conference at Yale, Harvard Business School, the 2014 Woolley Centre conference at
LSE, the Minneapolis Fed, and the 2015 AFA Meetings for their comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Itamar Drechsler, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Model of Monetary Policy and Risk Premia
Itamar Drechsler, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl
NBER Working Paper No. 20141
May 2014, Revised August 2015
JEL No. E52,E58,G12,G21
ABSTRACT
We develop a dynamic asset pricing model in which monetary policy affects the risk premium component
of the cost of capital. Risk-tolerant agents (banks) borrow from risk-averse agents (i.e. take deposits)
to fund levered investments. Leverage exposes banks to funding risk, which they insure by holding
liquidity buffers. By changing the nominal rate the central bank influences the liquidity premium in
financial markets, and hence the cost of taking leverage. Lower nominal rates make liquidity cheaper
and raise leverage, resulting in lower risk premia and higher asset prices, volatility, investment, and
growth. We analyze forward guidance, a "Greenspan put", and the yield curve.
Itamar Drechsler Philipp Schnabl
Stern School of Business Stern School of Business
New York University New York University
44 West Fourth Street, 9-120 4 4 West Fourth Street
New York, NY 10012 N ew York, NY 10012
and NBER and NBER
itamar.drechsler@stern.nyu.edu schnabl@stern.nyu.edu
Alexi Savov
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-85
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
asavov@stern.nyu.edu

I. Introduction
In textbook models (e.g. Woodford, 2003), monetary policy works by changing the real
interest rate. Yet a growing body of empirical evidence shows that monetary policy also
has a large impact on the risk premium component of the cost of capital.1 Moreover, many
central bank interventions can be usefully interpreted as targeting risk premia. For instance,
a “Greenspan put” in the 1990s and low interest rates in the mid 2000s arguably led to
excessive leverage and compressed spreads.2 During the financial crisis, large-scale asset
purchases, equity injections, and asset guarantees were all explicitly aimed at supporting
risky asset prices (see Bernanke, 2013, for a discussion). In subsequent years, with spreads
near historic lows, an important debate centers on whether low interest rates fuel “reaching
for yield” and hence pose a threat to financial stability (Stein, 2014). These observations
point to an underlying risk premium channel of monetary policy.
In this paper, we develop a dynamic asset pricing model of the risk premium channel
of monetary policy. In the model, taking leverage exposes financial institutions to funding
shocks that require them to liquidate assets. To avoid engaging in costly fire sales, they hold
buffers of liquid securities, which can be sold rapidly at full value. Consequently, the cost
of taking leverage depends on the cost of holding liquid securities, the liquidity premium.
The central bank governs this liquidity premium by varying the nominal interest rate. A low
nominal rate leads to a low liquidity premium, a relationship with strong empirical support.
Alowliquiditypremiumdecreasesthecostoftakingleverageandhenceincreasesrisktaking,
which reduces risk premia and the cost of capital in the economy.
Our model features an economy populated by two types of agents who differ in their risk
aversion. We think of the more risk tolerant agents as pooling their wealth into the net worth
(equitycapital)offinancialinstitutions,orbanksforshort. Inequilibrium,bankstakelevered
positions in risky assets by borrowing from the more risk averse agents using short-term risk-
free claims, which we think of as taking deposits. Our view of banks as levered risk-takers
is purposely simplified, abstracting from other functions such as screening and monitoring
in order to focus on risk taking and risk premia. It has the advantage of accommodating a
diverse set of financial institutions, including commercial banks, broker-dealers, and hedge
funds, whose unifying characteristic is that they take leverage using short-term debt.
Taking deposits exposes banks to funding (rollover) risk (e.g. Allen and Gale, 1994).
When hit by a funding shock, banks are forced to redeem a fraction of their deposits. To do
1Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) show that monetary policy surprises have a large impact on stock prices
and that this impact primarily reflects changes in risk premia. Hanson and Stein (2014), and Gertler and
Karadi (2014) find parallel results for long-term bond yields and credit spreads. Gilchrist and Zakrajˇsek
(2012) find that changes in risk premia have a strong influence on the macroeconomy.
2See for example Blinder and Reis (2005), Rajan (2011), and Yellen (2011).
1

so, they must immediately liquidate some of their assets. Liquidating risky assets rapidly is
costlybecauseitleadstofiresales. Toavoidthis, banksholdbufferstocksofliquidsecurities,
which can be liquidated rapidly at full value. Thus, to insure against losses in the event of
a funding shock, banks set aside a fraction of each deposit dollar they raise and hold it in
liquid securities. In this way, the risk of funding shocks creates a complementarity between
holding liquidity and taking leverage.
We model two types of liquid securities: central bank reserves, which have the highest
level of liquidity, and government bonds. Banks’ demand for liquidity buffers causes liquid
securities to command a premium in equilibrium. This liquidity premium depends on the
nominal interest rate. The liquidity premium of reserves equals the nominal rate because
that is the opportunity cost of holding them. The liquidity premium of government bonds
is likewise proportional to the nominal rate because government bonds and reserves are
substitutable sources of liquidity. Therefore, by changing the nominal rate, the central bank
changes the cost of holding all liquid securities.3
Figure 1 examines this prediction empirically. It plots the fed funds rate, a measure of
the nominal interest rate, against the spread between the fed funds rate and the three-month
T-bill rate, a measure of the liquidity premium on government bonds, from 1955 to 2010.
As the figure shows, the relationship between these two series, a rate and a spread, is very
strong. Their correlation is 78%, and they exhibit tight comovement both in the cycle and
in the trend, consistent with the transmission of the nominal rate to the liquidity premium
that we model.
Thecentralbank’sabilitytoinfluencerisktakingworksthroughthistransmissionmecha-
nism. When the central bank raises the nominal rate, the higher liquidity premium increases
banks’ cost of taking leverage and so reduces their risk taking. The result is a decrease in
the overall demand for risk taking in the economy, an increase in the effective aggregate risk
aversion, and ultimately a rise in risk premia.
Monetary policy in our model takes the form of a nominal interest rate rule which is a
function of the single state variable, the share of banks’ net worth of the total wealth in the
economy. We consider a number of interest rate rules and analyze their positive implications
for equilibrium prices and quantities.4
3Recently, interest on reserves has attracted significant attention. When reserves pay interest, reserves’
liquidity premium equals the difference between the nominal rate and their rate of interest. In this case,
the central bank targets this difference rather than the full level of the nominal rate. Section IV.B provides
further discussion.
4Wedonottakeastanceonoptimalitybecausedoingsorequiresmakingtwostrongassumptions. Thefirst
isthechoiceofwelfarecriterion,whichisdifficultinourincomplete-marketsheterogeneous-agentsetup. The
second, and more important assumption, requires choosing among the numerous frictions that the literature
has argued create a need for regulating leverage, including moral hazard arising from deposit insurance (e.g.
Keeley, 1990), pecuniary externalities due to financial constraints (e.g. Stein, 2012), and spillover effects to
the oeconomy (e.g. Farhi and Werning, 2013). To preserve the model’s wide applicability and transparency,
2