NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES FINANCING SPUR SMALL BUSINESS PRODUCTIVITY? EVIDENCE FROM
A NATURAL EXPERIMENT
Karthik Krishnan
Debarshi Nandy
Manju Puri
Working Paper 20149
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20149
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014
We would like to thank seminar participants at the 2013 Boston Area Finance Symposium, the 2013
CAFRAL Conference on Contemporary Issues in Banking and Finance, the 2013 FIRS annual meetings,
the 2013 NBER Productivity, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship meetings, the 2013 SFS Cavalcade,
Brandeis University, Duke University, Northeastern University, and Virginia Tech. Karthik Krishnan
gratefully acknowledges summer research support provided by the D’Amore-McKim School of Business.
The research presented in this paper was conducted while the authors were Special Sworn Status Researchers
at the Boston Research Data Center (RDC) of the U.S. Census Bureau. The research results and conclusions
expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily indicate concurrence of the U.S. Census Bureau
or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All results in this paper have been reviewed to ensure
that no confidential information is disclosed. Any errors and omissions are the responsibility of the
authors.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Karthik Krishnan, Debarshi Nandy, and Manju Puri. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Financing Spur Small Business Productivity? Evidence from a Natural Experiment
Karthik Krishnan, Debarshi Nandy, and Manju Puri
NBER Working Paper No. 20149
May 2014
JEL No. G21
ABSTRACT
We analyze how increased access to financing affects firm total factor productivity (TFP) by exploiting
a natural experiment following interstate banking deregulations which increased access to bank financing.
We find that firms' TFP increases after their states implement these deregulations. Using a regression
discontinuity approach based on Small Business Administration’s funding eligibility criteria, we show
that TFP increases following the deregulations are significantly greater for financially constrained
firms. Our results suggest that greater access to financing allows financially constrained firms to invest
in productive projects that may otherwise not be taken up.
Karthik Krishnan Manju Puri
Northeastern University Fuqua School of Business
D'Amore-McKim School of Business Duke University
Hayden 413, 360 Huntington Avenue 1 Towerview Drive, Box 90120
Boston, MA 02115 Durham, NC 27708-0120
k.krishnan@neu.edu and NBER
mpuri@duke.edu
Debarshi Nandy
International Business School
Brandeis University
415 South Street
Waltham, MA, 02454
dnandy@brandeis.edu

Does Financing Spur Small Business Productivity? Evidence from
a Natural Experiment
1 Introduction
Access to adequate …nancing is an important issue for …rms, particularly for younger and smaller
entrepreneurial …rms. Given the important role that small businesses and entrepreneurial …rms
play in the process of creative destruction - it is not surprising that alleviating …nancial constraints
for entrepreneurial start-ups and small business is an important policy concern across the world.
Morerecently, the…nancialcrisisof2008clearlydemonstratedhowcriticalaccesstobank…nancing
is, at both the …rm and economy-wide levels. While prior studies have shown how availability of
…nancing a¤ects entrepreneurial …rm starts and closures (e.g., Black and Strahan (2002), Kerr and
Nanda (2009)), no study has directly analyzed the link between increased access to bank …nancing
and …rm productivity, particularly for smaller …rms where access to …nancing is critical. This is
important given the result in a recent paper by Robb and Robinson (2013) that, counter to existing
wisdom, most start-ups rely heavily on some form of bank-debt …nancing.
There are two important limitations that studies relating increased bank …nancing to …rm pro-
ductivity need to overcome. First, bank …nancing is considerably more important for private …rms,
and data on the performance of such …rms is not easily accessible. Second, reverse causality and
endogeneityissueshinderproperinterpretationofregressioncoe¢ cientsrelatingincreasedaccessof
bank …nancing to …rm productivity. A positive relation between increased access to bank …nancing
and productivity can be interpreted in di¤erent ways. One interpretation is that more productive
…rms seek additional bank …nancing. Another interpretation is that increased access to bank …-
nancing can enhance productivity of …rms. Yet another alternative interpretation is that there are
potentially unobservable factors which might a¤ect both access to …nancing and productivity. Dis-
entangling these e¤ects requires a natural experiment setting where one can consider an exogenous
shift in the availability of bank …nancing.
Inthispaper, weexploitsuchanaturalexperimentandcontributebyanalyzinghowanincrease
inaccesstobank…nancingfollowinginterstatebankbranchingderegulationsa¤ectstheproductivity
of…rmsintheUnitedStates. Weovercomethedataavailabilityissuedescribedabovebyusingdata
1

on private and public manufacturing …rms from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Research
Database (LRD). This database contains detailed data for small and large manufacturing …rms in
the U.S. over a long time-series from 1976 to 2005, which allows us to calculate productivity and
performance measures at the …rm level. We deal with the reverse causality concern by exploiting
an exogenous shift in …rms’access to bank …nancing as a result of interstate bank branching
deregulations. In particular, over the 1990s, U.S. states began allowing out-of-state banks to set up
andacquirelocalbank branches. This shiftled toan overallincreaseininterstatebanking andthus
allowed greater access to …nancing for …rms. Consistent with the prior literature (e.g., Rice and
Strahan(2010)), whichhasshownthatthesederegulationswereexogenous, wealsoshowthatthese
deregulations were not driven by the prior productivity of …rms. In our main analyses, we utilize
a regression discontinuity (RD) framework that distinguishes between …nancially constrained and
unconstrained …rms. We argue that private …rms that are just above or just below the threshold
for …nancial support from the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) are similar in all respects
except for the degree of …nancial constraint they face. Since …rms that are just above the threshold
are not eligible for SBA funding, they are more …nancially constrained relative to those just below
the threshold. This allows us to analyze the causal impact of …rm …nancial constraints on the
relation between access to …nancing and productivity.
Rice and Strahan (2010) suggest that the interstate banking deregulations in the U.S. reduced
the cost of …nancing. A natural question that follows is whether this increased access to cheaper
bank …nancing following the deregulations is dissipated by …rms taking on unproductive or less
productive pet projects or whether this increases …rms’ability to undertake additional productive
projectsthattheywereunabletotakeonpriortothederegulation.1 Weusetotalfactorproductivity
(TFP) of …rms as our metric of analysis to address this question. Since our measure of total factor
productivity re‡ects the di¤erence between expected output, given the technology in place, and
the actual output produced by the …rm, gains in productivity as a result of increased access to
…nancing is not simply a result of increase in the scale of operations, but rather the result of access
to additional productive projects that allows a …rm to become more e¢ cient. Thus, increased
access to …nancing should therefore lead to the highest increase in productivity for those …rms that
1Notethatthroughtthispaper,increasedaccessto…nancingreferstobothaccesstogreatervolumeofbankloans
as well as bank …nancing at more favorable terms.
2