NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTEREST RATES AND MONEY IN THE MEASUREMENT OF MONETARY POLICY
Michael T. Belongia
Peter N. Ireland
Working Paper 20134
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20134
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014
The authors would like to thank Nicolas Groshenny, Josh Hendrickson, David Laidler, and Ed Nelson
for extremely helpful comments on previous drafts and Richard Anderson, William Barnett, and Barry
Jones for useful conversations and for their patience in answering questions about the construction
of their series for the Divisia monetary aggregates. Dekuwmini Mornah provided able research assistance.
Neither author received external support for, or has any financial interest that relates to, the research
described in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Michael T. Belongia and Peter N. Ireland. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Interest Rates and Money in the Measurement of Monetary Policy
Michael T. Belongia and Peter N. Ireland
NBER Working Paper No. 20134
May 2014
JEL No. E51,E52,E58
ABSTRACT
Over the last twenty-five years, a set of influential studies has placed interest rates at the heart of
analyses that interpret and evaluate monetary policies. In light of this work, the Federal Reserve’s
recent policy of “quantitative easing,” with its goal of affecting the supply of liquid assets, appears to
be a radical break from standard practice. Alternatively, one could posit that the monetary aggregates,
when measured properly, never lost their ability to explain aggregate fluctuations and, for this reason,
represent an important omission from standard models and policy discussions. In this context,
the new policy initiatives can be characterized simply as conventional attempts to increase money
growth. This view is supported by evidence that superlative (Divisia) measures of money often
help in forecasting movements in key macroeconomic variables. Moreover, the statistical fit of a
structural vector autoregression deteriorates significantly if such measures of money are excluded
when identifying monetary policy shocks. These results cast doubt on the adequacy of conventional
models that focus on interest rates alone. They also highlight that all monetary disturbances have
an important “quantitative” component, which is captured by movements in a properly measured
monetary aggregate.
Michael T. Belongia
University of Mississippi
Department of Economics
Box 1848
University, MS 38677
mtbelong@olemiss.edu
Peter N. Ireland
Boston College
Department of Economics
140 Commonwealth Ave.
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3859
and NBER
irelandp@bc.edu

1. INTRODUCTION
More than twenty-five years ago, Bernanke and Blinder (1988) compactly summarized
the choice facing a central bank. After modifying a standard, Keynesian IS curve to account for
shocks to the financial sector, their analysis reached two clear and straightforward conclusions:
“But suppose the demand for money increases (line 2), which sends a contractionary
impulse to GNP. Since this shock raises M, a monetarist central bank would contract reserves in
an effort to stabilize money, which would destabilize GNP. This, of course, is the familiar
Achilles heel of monetarism. Notice, however, that this same shock would make credit contract.
So a central bank trying to stabilize credit would expand reserves. In this case, a credit-based
policy is superior to a money-based policy.
The opposite is true, however, when there are credit-demand shocks. Line 4 tells us that
a contractionary (for GNP) credit-demand shock lowers the money supply but raises credit.
Hence a monetarist central bank would turn expansionary, as it should, while a creditist central
bank would turn contractionary, which it should not.
We therefore reach a conclusion similar to that reached in discussing indicators: If
money-demand shocks are more important than credit-demand shocks, then a policy of targeting
credit is probably better than a policy of targeting money.” (p. 438)
The authors then investigated whether the demand for money or credit was relatively more stable
and found evidence to conclude that the demand for credit, especially since 1980, was more
stable; the implication was that, on the basis of this evidence, monetary policy would have better
success in stabilizing GNP if it stabilized credit rather than variations in money.
The question posed by Bernanke and Blinder in 1988 was important then and, in view of
the large shocks to credit demand that have occurred since 2007, it still is correct to ask a similar
question of central banks today: If the stabilization of nominal spending (which encompasses the
Federal Reserve’s dual mandate of goals for price stability and real output) is to be achieved,
which intermediate targeting strategy will accomplish this most effectively? The modern
literature, however, contains relatively little of this discussion. Instead, the intervening years
have narrowed the focus almost entirely to interest rate rules of the type proposed by Taylor
1

(1993) or some alternative guide to setting the federal funds rate. The monetary aggregates have
all but disappeared from the discussion.
In what follows, we briefly review the context in which the original Bernanke and
Blinder paper was written and the events that led to scuttling monetary aggregates both from
modern mainstream models and, by extension, from discussions of policy options. We then offer
some counter-arguments to this consensus that suggest the role of the aggregates, as information
variables or intermediate targets, may have been mistakenly closed. With this as backdrop, we
propose that the Federal Reserve’s recent “experiments” with “quantitative easing” might
usefully be viewed not as a radical break from the past necessitated by the zero lower bound on
the federal funds rate, but as an extension of policies that have led, systematically, to movements
in monetary aggregates that have been followed, first, by movements in real GDP and, later, by
movements in nominal prices. This real-world experiment illustrates both the dangers of a
monetary policy strategy that focuses solely on targeting interest rates and the limitations of an
intellectual framework that fails to account for the important role that always has, and still is,
played by variations in the growth rate of the aggregate quantity of money.
2. HISTORICAL CONTEXT
When Bernanke and Blinder (1988) appeared, the debate about choosing money or the
federal funds rate as an intermediate target was anything but closed. Only a year after this article
was published, the working-paper (1989) version of Hallman, Porter, and Small (1991) outlined
their influential P-star model, which linked M2 to the price level and had explicit Quantity
Theory foundations. Moreover, only recently, both Meltzer (1987) and McCallum (1988) had
presented monetary policy rules that used the monetary base to control variations in nominal
2