NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW DOES MACROPRUDENTIAL REGULATION CHANGE BANK CREDIT
SUPPLY?
Anil K Kashyap
Dimitrios P. Tsomocos
Alexandros P. Vardoulakis
Working Paper 20165
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20165
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014
We are grateful to John Geanakoplos, Frank Smets and seminar participants at the Norges Bank, Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve, Wisconsin School of Business, Chicago Booth, the International
Monetary Fund, the Bank of England and the 10th Annual GE Cowles conference for comments. Kashyap
thanks the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business and
the National Science Foundation for a grant administered by the National Bureau of Economic Research
for research support. Kashyap’s disclosures of his outside compensated activities are available on his
web page. All errors herein are ours. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and
do not necessarily represent those of Federal Reserve Board of Governors, anyone in the Federal Reserve
System, any of the institutions with which we are affiliated, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Anil K Kashyap, Dimitrios P. Tsomocos, and Alexandros P. Vardoulakis. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How does macroprudential regulation change bank credit supply?
Anil K Kashyap, Dimitrios P. Tsomocos, and Alexandros P. Vardoulakis
NBER Working Paper No. 20165
May 2014
JEL No. E44,G01,G21,G28
ABSTRACT
We analyze a variant of the Diamond-Dybvig (1983) model of banking in which savers can use a bank
to invest in a risky project operated by an entrepreneur. The savers can buy equity in the bank and
save via deposits. The bank chooses to invest in a safe asset or to fund the entrepreneur. The bank
and the entrepreneur face limited liability and there is a probability of a run which is governed by the
bank’s leverage and its mix of safe and risky assets. The possibility of the run reduces the incentive
to lend and take risk, while limited liability pushes for excessive lending and risk-taking. We explore
how capital regulation, liquidity regulation, deposit insurance, loan to value limits, and dividend taxes
interact to offset these frictions. We compare agents welfare in the decentralized equilibrium absent
regulation with welfare in equilibria that prevail with various regulations that are optimally chosen.
In general, regulation can lead to Pareto improvements but fully correcting both distortions requires
more than one regulation.
Anil K Kashyap Alexandros P. Vardoulakis
Booth School of Business Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
University of Chicago alexandros.vardoulakis@frb.gov
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
anil.kashyap@chicagobooth.edu
Dimitrios P. Tsomocos
Saïd Business School and St. Edmund Hall
University of Oxford
Dimitrios.Tsomocos@sbs.ox.ac.uk
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20165

1 Introduction
InthispaperweexpandtheDiamondandDybvig(1983)modelofbankinginfivewaystomakeit
conducivetoexploringvariousmacroprudentialregulationsthathavebeendiscussedinthewakeof
therecentGlobalFinancialCrisis(GFC).Thefirstchangeistointroduce3typesofagents: savers,
bankers, and entrepreneurs. A second change is that the entrepreneurs operate a risky technology.
The third change is that savers face a portfolio decision in which they can directly invest in a safe
asset or invest in the bank in the form of either deposits or equity. Fourth, we posit that banks
and the entrepreneurs are subject to limited liability. Finally, we modify the model in the spirit of
GoldsteinandPauzner(2005)sothatwhetherornotarunoccursistiedtothefundingstructureand
lendingchoicesofthebank.
These modifications mean that banks play three roles in the economy. First, they help provide
liquidity insurance for savers. Second, they improve the risk sharing opportunities for savers (rel-
ativetothecase wheredirectlendingtoborrowerswas required). Third, because ofthebetterrisk
sharing, they expand the amount of funding available to borrowers. These are the three leading
functionsthatvarioustheoriessupposethatbanksplay.
Furthermore, the model not only succinctly nests competing visions of the causes of the GFC,
butalsocanbeusedtoexplorepotentialregulatorytoolsthatarecurrentlybeingproposedtoprevent
futurecrises. Inparticular,AdmatiandHellwig(2013)andmanyotherobserversarguethattheGFC
waslargelyduetoexcessiverisk-takingbyunder-capitalizedbankswhichwereexploitingtaxpayer
support. Thelimitedliabilityassumptioncombinedwiththeoptionforentrepreneurstoinvestina
riskytechnologyinsuresthatthisforceispresentinthemodel. Inisolation,thesefeatureswilllead
toover-investmentandexcessiverisk-taking.
Asecondview,reflectedintheFrenchetal.(2010)andelsewhere,holdsthatthecentralproblem
exposedbytheGFCwasfundingvulnerabilitiesinthefinancialsystemandthatrunsdebilitatedthe
abilityofthefinancialsystemtointermediate. TheDiamond-Dybvigframeworkisdesignedtostudy
thispossibility. Thefactthatsaversmaydemandtheirmoneybackbeforeloanswouldnormallybe
repaidmakesbankscautiousintheirlending. Ifarundoesoccuritisdestructivebecauseloansmust
berecalledtoservicedepositsandbothsavers,whomaynotberepaid,andborrowersareworseoff.
Thisaspectofthemodelcreatesaforceforunder-investment(orequivalentlytoolittlelending).
Bygivingsaversandthebanksaportfoliochoicethemodelissuitableforstudyingmanytypes
of regulations including capital regulation, liquidity regulation, deposit insurance, loan to value
limits, and dividend taxes. Because we do a full general equilibrium analysis in which agents
choose when to default and when to run on the bank, we can study not only the direct effects that
resultfromtheseregulations,butalsothosethatarisethroughgeneralequilibriumpriceeffects.
Wereachthreemainconclusionsfromanalyzingacalibratedversionofthismodel. First,when
a run occurs it is sufficiently debilitating that preventing it via regulation can lead all agents in the
model to be better off than in a decentralized equilibrium with no regulation. In other words, the
decentralized(orequivalentlycompetitive)equilibriuminthemodelisconstrainedParetoinefficient
2

andcanbeimproveduponbyvariousregulatoryinterventions.1
Intheanalysiswecomparethedecentralizedallocationstotwotypesofotherequilibria. Onein-
volvesacentralplannerwhocandirectlychooseallocationsandinternalizesallgeneralequilibrium
effects,butisconstrainedbytheexistingmarketstructure. Wecallthisthesecondbestbenchmark
andincomputingitwedonotworryabouthowtheplannerwouldhavetodecentralizethesolution.
We also study other equilibria where a planner allows agents to choose allocations, but inter-
venes by imposing limits on certain quantities (e.g. bank capital ratios) or prices (e.g. a dividend
tax) to affect the agents’ marginal decisions. We dub these equilibria "dual planning" outcomes.
The more precise statement of the first result is that Pareto improvements over the competitive
equilibriumarepossibleeveniftheplannerconsidersonlydualplanningoutcomes.
In the original Diamond-Dybvig model a bank run occurs randomly. We assume instead that
whenthebanksubstitutesequityfinancingfordepositfinancingitlowerstheriskofarun. Similarly,
whenitholdsmoreofthesafeassetandmakesfewloansitlowerstheriskofarun. Ourassumptions
are consistent with the analysis of Goldstein and Pauzner (2005) variant of the Diamond-Dybvig
model.
Our second result is that various regulatory tools can alleviate the run risk in very different
waysbecauseoncearegulationisimposedthebankandsaverswillendogenouslyaltertheirother
portfoliochoices. Forinstance,raisingcapitalrequirementsforcesthebanktoadjustdepositinterest
rates to attract more equity funding (and less deposit funding) from the savers. On its own this
change will lower the risk of a run. But, in response the bank may choose to take more risk on
the asset side of its balance sheet by reducing its holding of safe assets and making more loans.
Depositinsurancealwayscreatesanincentivetodomorelending. Soitispossiblethatregulations
thatmoderatetheriskofarunexacerbatetheproblemscausedbylimitedliability.
The last result is that once a single regulatory tool has been used to alleviate the risk of a
run, further Pareto improvements are not possible. The problem comes because the entrepreneurs
naturallywanttotakemorerisktoexploittheprotectionoflimitedliability. Oncetheentrepreneurs
no longer worry that the run risk is present, there are no further interventions that can improve
their welfare. Hence, additional regulation only makes sense to impose because of the desire to
redistributeincome.
Depending on how a social planner compares the importance of the bankers, savers and en-
trepreneursadditionalregulationmayormaynotbeattractive. Acorollarytothisconclusionisthat
whetherornotoptimalregulationlowersorraisesinvestmentalsodependsontheplanner’sweights
on the different agents. We characterize the combinations of regulations that can be used to most
1InamodelwithDiamond-Dybvigpreferencesandcompleteassetmarketsforaggregaterisk,AllenandGale(2004)
showthatequilibriumallocationsunderfinancialintermediationareconstrainedefficient.Inourframework,thepresence
of incomplete markets and limited liability makes the capital structure of banks matter for equilibrium outcomes and
bank-runrisk. Theoptimalityconditionsofaconstrainedplannerwilldifferfromthoseinthecompetitiveeconomyand
welfareimprovementsarepossible.SeeStiglitz(1982),GeanakoplosandPolemarchakis(1986)andCitanaetal.(1998)
foradiscussionandrigorousproofofconstrainedParetosuboptimality. SeeBrunnermeierandSannikov(2012)fora
relatedmodelinwhichbanksplayallthreerolesthatweposit,butnotethattheydonotallowforlimitedliabilityand
bank-runswhichwillbeimportantinoursetup.
3