NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
“SELLING OUT” AND THE IMPACT OF MUSIC PIRACY ON ARTIST ENTRY
Joshua S. Gans
Working Paper 20162
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20162
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014
During the course of this research I worked at Microsoft Research (2011). Microsoft did not contract
for or require pre-approval for the publication of this working paper. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Joshua S. Gans. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

“Selling Out” and the Impact of Music Piracy on Artist Entry
Joshua S. Gans
NBER Working Paper No. 20162
May 2014
JEL No. D03,K11,L82
ABSTRACT
There is a puzzle arising from empirical analyses of the impact of music piracy that this has caused
declines in music revenue without a consequential decline, and perhaps even an increase, in the entry
of artists and the supply of high quality music. There have been numerous explanations posited and
this paper adds a novel one: that artists are time inconsistent and hence, tend to underweight fame
over fortune when making future choices; i.e., the degree to which they will ‘sell out.’ Regardless
of whether selling out is anticipated or not, the puzzle is resolved. When selling out is not anticipated,
future expectations of piracy are not a concern as these impact on monetary awards that are not driving
entry. When selling out is anticipated, piracy actually constrains the degree to which artists sell out,
and assured of that, raises entry returns. Implications and the role of publisher contracts are also explored.
Joshua S. Gans
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto ON M5S 3E6
and NBER
joshua.gans@gmail.com

2
“I hate to sound like an old man now, but I am, and you mark my words, in a generation
from now people are going to say: ‘What happened?’ Steve Jobs is personally
responsible for killing the music business.”
Jon Bon Jovi
1 Introduction
Digitisation of music has brought with it new challenges for copyright owners,
publishers and, in particular, artists to monetise their creative work. In particular,
unauthorised copying – or in the popular parlance, piracy – means that it is increasingly
easy for consumers to own music without paying for it. A host of recent empirical
research1 has reached the overall conclusion that revenue from music sold has declined as
result of digital technologies – such as Napster and its later followers – although there has
been an increase in units consumed2 and a documented increase in concert sales.3
However, as Waldfogel (2013) shows, this decline in revenue may be associated with a
decline in costs as well as a diminished role for publishers. Consequently, the relevant
welfare issue is whether there has been a reduction in the supply of quality music or the
entry of artists. To this end, Waldfogel (2011, 2012) provides a careful empirical analysis
that suggests that quality and entry have not diminished in the ‘post-Napster era’ and,
indeed, in some categories, these have increased.
The precise mechanism whereby music revenues can decline while the incentives
to enter the music industry, at least on the part of artists, increase is not clear. It is a
puzzle from the perspective of usual economic analyses precisely because it is usually
predicted that, unless supply is perfectly elastic, a reduction in the reward from an
activity will lead to a reduction in quantity supplied – in this case, of artistic inputs.
There are several candidate explanations for this puzzle that have been suggested
thusfar. One is that piracy can allow sampling and better music discovery4 although this
should have a positive impact on revenues. Another is that artists can make up revenue on
things other than music sales (Mortimer, Nosko and Sorenson, 2012) although losing a
1 See Rob and Waldfogel (2006), Zentner (2006) and Leibowitz (2006) for prominent examples.
2 See Oberholzer-Gee and Strumpf (2007); Handke (2006, 2010).
3 See Mortimer, Nosko and Sorenson (2012).
4 See Takeyama (1994) and Peitz and Waelbroeck (2006). Zhang (2013) provides an empirical analysis.
See King and Lampe (2003) for a critique.

3
revenue source is a constraint. Finally, there is a notion that the incidence of piracy (and
digitisation) falls more on incumbent publishers than artists (Waldfogel, 2013).
The purpose of this paper is not to suggest the primacy of one of these
mechanisms over the other but to suggest a novel one that can be placed alongside them
and may be of relevance for those empirical researchers exploring the mechanisms that
drive creative artist entry. It is motivated by the puzzle and also by an additional set of
anecdotes that successful artists (particularly those of a now older generation) have
lamented the impact of piracy on music revenues. Bon Jovi quoted above illustrates some
frustration but his colleague Richie Sambora singled out piracy as a cause for the music
industry’s troubles.5 Meanwhile, former KISS guitarist, Gene Simmons has been very
vocal against piracy and is actively engaged in legal action to prevent it (Lasar, 2010).
This suggests that, once artists become successful, no matter what their prior beliefs were
regarding making money from music, they become very concerned about it. In the
impression of some, they ‘sell out.’
This potential story motivates me to explicitly consider (a) artists’ choices
regarding selling out or not – in particular a trade-off between emphasising fame over
fortune and (b) that they may have time inconsistent preferences regarding this trade-off.
In particular, using a model of hyperbolic discounting standard in behavioural economics,
I demonstrate how artists may change as they become successful from a trade-off that
emphasises fame (and hence, low prices to increase their fan base) to one that emphasises
fortune (raising prices when they are older). Consequently, when they are starting out,
time inconsistent artists, when choosing whether to enter or not, do not place weight on
the notion that, in the future, they might sell out and so, in the face of expected piracy, are
not concerned about the loss of music revenues that might result. Time consistent agents,
on the other hand, forecast correctly these attitudes but also can commit to the trade-off
they desire ex ante. For them, a reduction in music revenue constrains them and reduces
their returns to entry. Thus, I demonstrate here that the existence of time inconsistent
artists may provide an explanation for the combination of a loss in music revenues and no
or even higher artist entry in the face of piracy. Moreover, this model is consistent with a
view that older artists may strongly lament a loss in music revenue even when their
5 See the 2014 interview here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=brxyw2dTN5s.