NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ACCOUNTING AND ACTUARIAL SMOOTHING OF RETIREMENT PAYOUTS
IN PARTICIPATING LIFE ANNUITIES
Raimond Maurer
Olivia S. Mitchell
Ralph Rogalla
Ivonne Siegelin
Working Paper 20124
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20124
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014
The authors are grateful for research support provided by the TIAA-CREF Research Institute, the German
Investment and Asset Management Association (BVI), the Pension Research Council/Boettner Center
at The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania; and the Metzler Exchange Professor program.
They also thank without implicating Benny Goodman, Michael Heller, Catherine Schrand, and Jochen
Zimmermann, for comments. This research is part of the NBER programs on Aging, Public Economics,
and Labor Studies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20124.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Raimond Maurer, Olivia S. Mitchell, Ralph Rogalla, and Ivonne Siegelin. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Accounting and Actuarial Smoothing of Retirement Payouts in Participating Life Annuities
Raimond Maurer, Olivia S. Mitchell, Ralph Rogalla, and Ivonne Siegelin
NBER Working Paper No. 20124
May 2014
JEL No. G22,J14,J32,M41
ABSTRACT
Life insurers use accounting and actuarial techniques to smooth reporting of firm assets and liabilities,
seeking to transfer surpluses in good years to cover benefit payouts in bad years. Nevertheless, these
techniques been criticized as they make it difficult to assess insurers’ true financial status. We develop
stylized and realistically-calibrated models of participating lifetime annuities, an insurance product
that pays retirees guaranteed lifelong benefits along with variable non-guaranteed surplus. Our goal
is to illustrate how accounting and actuarial techniques for this type of financial contract shape policyholder
wellbeing, along with insurer profitability and stability. Smoothing adds value to both the annuitant
and the insurer, so curtailing smoothing could undermine the market for long-term retirement payout
products.
Raimond Maurer Ralph Rogalla
Goethe University Finance Department
Finance Department Goethe University
Grüneburgplatz 1 (Uni-PF. H 23) Grüneburgplatz 1 (Uni-PF. H 23)
60323 Frankfurt am Main Germany Frankfurt am Main
maurer@finance.uni-frankfurt.de Germany
rogalla@finance.uni-frankfurt.de
Olivia S. Mitchell
University of Pennsylvania Ivonne Siegelin
Wharton School Finance Department, Goethe University
3620 Locust Walk, St 3000 SH-DH Grueneburgplatz 1 (Uni-PF. H 23)
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302 Frankfurt am Main, Germany
and NBER ivonne.siegelin@hof.uni-frankfurt.de
mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu

1
Accounting and Actuarial Smoothing of Retirement Payouts
in Participating Life Annuities
Life is a short affair; we should try to make it smooth, and free from strife.
Euripides
1. Introduction
Life insurers are permitted to employ both accounting and actuarial techniques to smooth
surpluses earned in good years, in order to support benefit payouts to policyholders in bad years. To
this end, insurers have a long history of reporting asset values at historical costs rather than fair
market values in their financial statements, and assessing their liabilities using an actuarial rather
than an alternative approach. Yet such smoothing techniques have come under fire of late, in part
due to life insurers’ difficulties in the present low interest rate environment (Ng and Schism, 2010).
Additionally, smoothing has been criticized for being nontransparent, making it difficult for
shareholders, policyholders, and regulators to assess insurers’ financial status (Jorgensen 2004). In
fact, based on their study of a Danish pension saving product, Guillen, Jorgensen, and Nielsen (2006)
concluded that “smoothing is an illusion,” providing no value to policyholders. Their result,
however, was limited to a product that provided no payouts until maturity; that is, benefits depended
on the contract’s terminal value, but not on the particular return trajectory that led to this value.
This paper explores how these smoothing techniques affect financial contracts known as
lifetime payout annuities offered by life insurance companies and purchased by retirees to provide a
steady stream of lifetime income. The predominant form of these payout products is with-profit or
participating payout life annuities (PLAs), which provide retirees with a guaranteed benefit for life
along with variable non-guaranteed payments that depend on investment returns and mortality
experiences of the insurance pool (Maurer, Rogalla, and Siegelin 2013). Accordingly, the particular
return trajectory has immediate consequences for the benefit stream provided by the annuity. Such
products with variable payouts are one of the most rapidly growing financial products over the last
few decades: in 2012, these products held $1.64 trillion of assets under management in the U.S. and
sales accounted for $145 billion, or two-thirds of all annuity sales (IRI 2013). Our goal is to examine
how the smoothing techniques employed by actuaries and accountants shape the risk and return
profiles of PLA payout streams, as well as insurer profitability and solvency.

2
Accounting smoothing in the insurance context values assets at historical cost rather than at
fair market value; this practice helps shield insurer balance sheets and income statements against
capital market volatility. Additionally, surpluses to be shared with policyholders are conventionally
computed using realized gains and losses. By contrast, those pressing for fair market valuation of
insurer assets seek to determine and distribute surpluses generated by unrealized as well as realized
gains and losses. Of course this introduces additional volatility into the insurer’s balance sheet,
which could undermine insurer profitability and erase the appeal of retirement annuities. In addition
to the accounting-related asset return smoothing, actuaries regularly smooth surplus payouts using a
buffer fund on the liability side of the life insurer’s balance sheet, known as the contingency reserve
position.
For firms outside the insurance sector, international and general US accounting standards
have moved from historical cost to fair market valuation, requiring that firms’ financial statements
report both liabilities and assets at market values. According to US Financial Accounting Standard
FAS 157, fair market values are measured as quoted prices from orderly transactions of identical
assets in active markets, or on a mark-to-model approach.1 When assets are recorded at fair market
values, unrealized gains and losses influence company balance sheets and can also impact their
income statements. FMV proponents contend that mark-to-market prices improve transparency since
they reflect current market conditions, depict the true financial status of the insurer, and provide an
effective early warning mechanism for investors, creditors, and regulators (Bleck and Liu 2007).
This allows capital providers to evaluate the ex-ante risk and return profile of a potential investment
in the firm and to monitor the use of its capital by managers ex post (c.f., Beyer, Cohen, Lys, and
Walther 2010). Opponents argue that FMV can be misleading for assets held to maturity, may not be
reliable if based on model prices, and could lead to undesirable firm actions. In the context of banks,
Allen and Carletti (2008) and Sapra (2008) argue that mark-to-market valuation of illiquid assets can
result in fire sales, downward spirals, as well as contagion between financial institutions in a
1 A similar definition is used according to International Accounting Standards (IAS).