NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PRODUCTIVITY AND POTENTIAL OUTPUT BEFORE, DURING, AND AFTER
THE GREAT RECESSION
John Fernald
Working Paper 20248
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20248
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014
Forthcoming, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014. This is a substantially revised and updated version
of a paper that first circulated in 2012. I thank Erik Brynjolfsson, Susanto Basu, Mary Daly, Charles
Fleischman, Fred Furlong, Robert Gordon, Bob Hall, Bart Hobijn, Chad Jones, Òscar Jordà, Liz Laderman,
Zheng Liu, Steve Oliner, Nick Oulton, Jonathan Parker, Bob Shackleton, Dan Sichel, John Williams,
and Dan Wilson for helpful comments and conversations. I also thank seminar participants at several
institutions, as well as other colleagues at the San Francisco Fed. I thank Titan Alon, Kuni Natsuki
and Bing Wang for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco, or the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by John Fernald. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Productivity and Potential Output Before, During, and After the Great Recession
John Fernald
NBER Working Paper No. 20248
June 2014
JEL No. E23,E32,O41,O47
ABSTRACT
U.S. labor and total-factor productivity growth slowed prior to the Great Recession. The timing rules
out explanations that focus on disruptions during or since the recession, and industry and state data
rule out “bubble economy” stories related to housing or finance. The slowdown is located in industries
that produce information technology (IT) or that use IT intensively, consistent with a return to normal
productivity growth after nearly a decade of exceptional IT-fueled gains. A calibrated growth model
suggests trend productivity growth has returned close to its 1973-1995 pace. Slower underlying productivity
growth implies less economic slack than recently estimated by the Congressional Budget Office. As
of 2013, about ¾ of the shortfall of actual output from (overly optimistic) pre-recession trends reflects
a reduction in the level of potential.
John Fernald
Research Department, Mail Stop 1130
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
101 Market St
San Francisco, CA 94105
john.fernald@sf.frb.org
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20248

1. Introduction
Whenwe look back at the 1990s, from the perspective of say 2010,…[w]e may conceivably
conclude…that, at the turn of the millennium, the American economy was experiencing a once-
in-a-century acceleration of innovation….Alternatively, that 2010 retrospective might well
conclude that a good deal of what we are currently experiencing was just one of the many
euphoric speculative bubbles that have dotted human history.
Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan(2000)
Disappointing productivity growth…mustbe added to the list of reasons that economic growth
has been slower than hoped….
Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke(2014).
The past two decades have seen the rise and fall of exceptional U.S. productivity growth. This
paper argues that labor and total-factor-productivity (TFP) growth slowed prior to the Great Recession.
It marked a retreat from theexceptional, but temporary, information-technology (IT)-fueled pace from
the mid-1990s to the early 2000s. Thisretreat implies slower output growth going forward as well as a
narrower output gap than recentlyestimated by the Congressional Budget Office (CBO, 2014a).
Industry and state data show that thepre-Great-Recessionproductivity slowdown was in sectors
that produceinformation technology (IT) or that useIT intensively. Sectors that were obviously unusual
or “euphoric” in the 2000s—including housing and finance—were not thesource.
Figure 1illustrates that the mid-1990s surge in productivity growth ended prior to the Great
Recession. The surge in labor-productivity growth,shown by the height of the bars, came after several
decades of slower growth.1 But in the decade endingin 2013:Q4, growth has returned close to its 1973-
95 pace. The figure shows that the slower pace of growth in both labor productivity and TFP was
similar inthe four years prior to the onset of the Great Recession as in the six years since.
That the slowdown predated the Great Recession rules out causal stories from the recession
itself. Theory and previous empirical literature (discussedin Section 2.4)provides only limited support
for the view that the Great Recession should have changed the underlying path of TFP. And Figure 1
suggests no evidence that productivity was slower (ormuch faster) from 2007-2013than in the several
years before that. The evidence here complements Kahn and Rich’s (2013) finding in a regime-
1The appendix discusses data sources for the figure and the rest of the paper. Section 2.2 definesand
discussesthe growth-accounting decomposition.

3
switching model that, by early 2005—i.e., well before the Great Recession—the probability reached
nearly unity that the economy was in a low-growth regime.
Anatural hypothesis is that the slowdown was the flip side of the mid-1990s speedup.
Considerable evidence, discussed in Section 3.1.1,links the TFP speedup to the exceptional contribution
of IT—computers, communications equipment, software, and the Internet. IT has had a broad-based
and pervasive effect through its role as a general purpose technology (GPT) that fosterscomplementary
innovations, such as business reorganization.
Industry TFPdata provide evidence in favor of the IThypothesisversusalternatives.Notably,
the euphoric, “bubble” sectors of housing, finance, and natural resourcesdo not explain the slowdown.
Rather, the slowdownis in the remaining ¾ of the economy,and is concentrated in industries that
produce IT or that use IT intensively. IT users saw a sizeable bulge in TFPgrowth in the early 2000s,
even as IT spending itself slowed. That pattern is consistent withthe view that benefiting from IT takes
substantial intangible organizational investments that, with a lag, raise measured productivity. By the
mid-2000s, the low-hanging fruit of IT had been plucked.
State data on GDP per worker rule out indirect channels through which the housing bubble and
bust might have mattered. States differ in how much house prices ran up in early 2000s and collapsed
after 2006. Those differences could have influenced innovation through net-worth channels. But there
is little evidence that housing dynamics contributedmuch to the dynamics of the productivity
slowdown. Rather, it is the common cross-state slowdown in IT-intensive industries that predominates.
I then turn to two implications of the mid-2000s productivity slowdown. First, a multi-sector
neoclassical growth model implies steady-state business-sector labor-productivity growth of about 1.9
percent, as shown at the far right of Figure 1. Prior to the Great Recession, typicalestimates were
notably higher. Usingdemographic estimates from the CBO(2014a),my benchmark estimate implies
longer-term growth in GDP of about 2.1percentper year. As Figure 1shows, three out of the past four
decades have shown this slower pace of productivity growth. That pace, rather than the exceptional
1995-2003 pace, appears normal.
Second, by 2013, the output gap, defined as the difference between actual and a production-
function measure of potential output, is narrower than estimated by CBO (2014a). I decompose CBO’s
gap into a “utilization gap” that reflects cyclical mismeasurement of TFPas well as an“hours gap.”
CBOestimates that the utilization gap in 2013 was as deep as any time in history other than 1982 and