NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
"STICKER SHOCK" IN INDIVIDUAL INSURANCE UNDER HEALTH REFORM
Mark Pauly
Scott Harrington
Adam Leive
Working Paper 20223
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20223
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Mark Pauly, Scott Harrington, and Adam Leive. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

"Sticker Shock" in Individual Insurance under Health Reform
Mark Pauly, Scott Harrington, and Adam Leive
NBER Working Paper No. 20223
June 2014
JEL No. I11,I13
ABSTRACT
This paper provides estimates of the changes in premiums, average or expected out of pocket payments,
and the sum of premiums and out of pocket payments (total expected price) for a sample of consumers
who bought individual insurance in 2010 to 2012, comparing total expected prices before the Affordable
Care Act with estimates of total expected prices if they were to purchase silver or bronze coverage
after reform, before the effects of any premium subsidies. We provide comparisons for purchasers
of self only coverage in California and in 23 states with minimal prior state premium regulation before
the ACA now using federally managed exchanges. Using data from the Current Population Survey,
we find that the average prices increased by 14 to 28 percent, with similar changes in California and
the federal exchange states; we attribute the increase primarily to higher premiums in exchanges associated
with insurer expectations of a higher risk population being enrolled. The increase in total expected
price is similar for age-gender population subgroups except for a larger than average increases for
older women. A welfare calculation of the change in risk premium associated with moving from coverage
that prevailed before reform to bronze or silver coverage finds small changes.
Mark Pauly Adam Leive
Health Care Management Department Health Care Management Department
The Wharton School The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania University of Pennsylvania
208 Colonial Penn Center 204 Colonial Penn Center
3641 Locust Walk 3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218 Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER leive@wharton.upenn.edu
pauly@wharton.upenn.edu
Scott Harrington
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
206 Colonial Penn Center
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19014-6218
harring@wharton.upenn.edu
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20223

I. Introduction
A major part of the “Affordable Care Act” (ACA) is a change in the market for insurance non-elderly
people buy as individuals, using a combination of new subsidies and new federal regulatory rules. The
reason for focus on this market is not its pre-ACA quantitative importance—while “millions” bought
coverage in this way, it covered only 5% of the under-65 population—but rather because it is to be the
vehicle by which the bulk of the currently uninsured will obtain insurance. That insurance will discharge
their obligation to have coverage under the individual mandate. Moreover, the only channel for
obtaining federal tax credit subsidies for insurance purchase in the individual market is through the
exchanges or marketplaces.
Although some of the ACA’s changes can be interpreted as efforts to improve the apparently low
efficiency, broadly defined, of this part of the insurance market (compared to group health insurance),
they also are intended to achieve social goals of improved health and equity in health and financial
outcomes across potential insurance buyers by age, sex, income, and indicators of risk. While we have
raised questions about both the appropriateness of these broad goals and about whether the ACA’s
provisions achieve them in the most efficient way (Pauly, 2010; Harrington, 2009), in this paper our main
objective is to assemble information that answers the question of whether the “price” (yet to be defined
and before any premium subsidies) of health insurance and health care for people who previously used
the individual market is affected by the way these changes are being implemented, and on whether
(compared to the starting point) there would be an improvement in welfare without considering the
effects of premium subsidies. This pre-subsidy price analysis is relevant for the majority of previous
buyers who are eligible for little or no subsidy and for providing insight into the effects of the law on the
overall cost of coverage, including the direct cost of premium subsidies. We use data from California
and from 23 states that will have federally run exchanges and which had minimal prior state insurance
2

premium regulation. We chose California because of its population size and because its new and
aggressive program stimulated the most initial interest. Then we look at the larger population using
federal exchanges as a larger sample which should be reasonably homogeneous in terms of prior
regulation and in terms of exchange procedures and operations.
Specifically, we are interested in whether changes due to the ACA impact the price and financial
circumstances (averaged over some relevant population) for individuals obtaining ACA-compliant
insurance on exchanges (compared to levels paid before reform), and whether there are significant price
changes around this average for different identifiable population subgroups. We also explore how these
changes in average financial outcomes correspond to changes in welfare for risk averse individuals,
using benchmark external parameters for risk aversion. Another potential adjustment to provide an
accurate measure of welfare change would be to adjust for premium changes due to moral hazard.
However, as will be shown, the change in average levels of coverage for former purchasers from prior
coverage to the bronze and silver plan benchmarks we explore is modest. We therefore only comment
on moral hazard effects but do not provide estimates of incremental welfare effects.
We first show that there are serious challenges and limitations in scope to previous attempts to make
before-and-after “sticker shock” comparisons using only premium data (of whatever quality). In
addition to imperfect data on posted or estimated premiums in the pre-ACA period, precise measures of
the generosity and form of coverage are also lacking, leading to an “apples to oranges” comparison
problem with specific plans to be offered on exchanges. Obviously, the quoted premium for a very high
deductible catastrophic policy will be lower than that for a very comprehensive policy with minimal cost
sharing. While compelling some people to buy more comprehensive coverage than they would choose
voluntarily would necessarily cause them to pay higher premiums, any analysis of the change in
premiums should at least recognize that more comprehensive coverage pays for more medical costs,
3