NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ESCAPING THE GREAT RECESSION
Francesco Bianchi
Leonardo Melosi
Working Paper 20238
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20238
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014
We are grateful to Gadi Barlevy, Dario Caldara, Jeff Campbell, Gauti Eggertsson, Marty
Eichenbaum, Martin Ellison, Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde, Jonas Fisher, Alejandro Justiniano,
Christian Matthes, Maurice Obstfeld, Giorgio Primiceri, Ricardo Reis, David Romer, Chris Sims,
Martin Uribe, Mike Woodford, and seminar participants at the NBER Monetary Economics
group, Princeton University, University of Chicago, Stanford University, Northwestern
University, and numerous other institutions for useful comments and suggestions. The views in
this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting
the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, any other person associated with the Federal
Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Francesco Bianchi and Leonardo Melosi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Escaping the Great Recession
Francesco Bianchi and Leonardo Melosi
NBER Working Paper No. 20238
June 2014, Revised January 2017
JEL No. D83,E31,E52,E62,E63
ABSTRACT
We show that policy uncertainty about how the rising public debt will be stabilized accounts for
the lack of deflation in the US economy at the zero lower bound. We first estimate a Markov-
switching VAR to highlight that a zero-lower-bound regime captures most of the comovements
during the Great Recession: a deep recession, no deflation, and large fiscal imbalances. We then
show that a micro-founded model that features policy uncertainty accounts for these stylized
facts. Finally, we highlight that policy uncertainty arises at the zero lower bound because of a
trade-off between mitigating the recession and preserving long-run macroeconomic stability.
Francesco Bianchi
Social Sciences Building, 201B
Department of Economics
Duke University
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708-0097
and CEPR
and also NBER
francesco.bianchi@duke.edu
Leonardo Melosi
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 S. LaSalle street
Chicago, IL 60604
lmelosi@frbchi.org

1 Introduction
Therecent…nancialcrisisandthedeeprecessionthatfollowedhaveledtoasub-
stantial change in the conduct of monetary policy, with interest rates stuck at
the zero lower bound for the past eight years. A key prediction of the New Key-
nesian paradigm is that, in this situation, we should have observed de‡ation.
However, this prediction has not materialized. Following Hall’s Presidential
Address to the American Economic Association, some researchers have labeled
this observation “Hall’s puzzle”(Hall 2011). Simultaneously, the crisis has trig-
gered a vibrant debate about the best way to deal with the zero lower bound.
Two polar views have emerged. The …rst one advocates a robust …scal stimulus
sometimes even accompanied by a reduced emphasis on in‡ation stabilization
(Romer 2009, Sims 2010a). The second one strongly opposes the idea of aban-
doningpoliciesthatworkedinthepast(Plosser2012). Thisdebatehasoccurred
againstabackgroundofacute…scalstrain. In2009, theUSde…cit-to-GDPratio
was the highest since the Korean war. Furthermore, by 2012 the debt-to-GDP
ratiohadreachedlevelsunprecedentedsincetheendofWorldWarIIand, based
on the Congressional Budget O¢ ce projections, is expected to continue increas-
ing for the foreseeable future (CBO 2016). It is conceivable that this debate
and the severe …scal imbalance have led to a rise in uncertainty about how debt
will be stabilized. In this paper, we show that policy uncertainty can account
for the absence of de‡ation that characterized the Great Recession.
We …rst establish a series of stylized facts by …tting a Markov-switching
VAR to post-World War II data. We include in‡ation, GDP growth, the federal
funds rate, and the de…cit-to-debt ratio. The model identi…es three distinct
regimes. The movements between the …rst two regimes capture a low frequency
relation between the de…cit-to-debt ratio and in‡ation. During the 1960s and
1970s, when Regime 1 is in place, real interest rates are low, the de…cit-to-debt
ratio trends up, and so does in‡ation. These dynamics revert once the economy
moves to Regime 2 in the early 1980s: Real interest rates increase, in‡ation
falls, and so does the de…cit-to-debt ratio. Instead, the third regime captures
the bulk of the dynamics during the Great Recession: a large contraction in
real activity, a short lasting drop in in‡ation, a jump in primary de…cits, and
1

the zero lower bound. During this zero-lower-bound regime, …scal shocks have
large e¤ects on in‡ation, providing evidence that …scal imbalances play a role
in explaining in‡ation dynamics during the Great Recession.
These …ndings suggest that the following are desirable properties of a struc-
tural model whose objective is to study the Great Recession. First, the model
should feature three policy regimes in line with the VAR evidence. Second,
the model should ideally capture the large in‡ationary consequences of …scal
imbalances during the zero-lower-bound regime. At the same time, this zero-
lower-bound regime should also be inherently di¤erent from any other regime
to the extent that a policy change is triggered by a large contractionary shock.
Third, a successful model should be able to capture the core of the macroeco-
nomic comovements during the Great Recession as the result of this single large
initial shock and the associated change in policymakers’behavior.
We construct and estimate a dynamic general equilibrium model that re-
‡ects these …ndings and captures a key policy trade-o¤ that arises at the zero
lower bound: choosing between mitigating a large recession and preserving a
reputation for …scal discipline. In the model, when the zero lower bound is
not binding, policymakers’behavior is characterized by two very distinct pol-
icy combinations. Under the monetary-led policy mix, the central bank reacts
strongly to deviations of in‡ation from its target, whereas the …scal authority
passively accommodates the behavior of the monetary authority by adjusting
primary surpluses to keep debt on a stable path. If agents expect this regime
to prevail for a long time, any …scal imbalance is backed by future …scal adjust-
ments and the economy is largely insulated with respect to these disturbances.
Under the …scally-led policy mix, the …scal authority does not react strongly
enough to debt ‡uctuations. It is now the monetary authority that passively
accommodates the behavior of the …scal authority by allowing in‡ation and real
activity to move so as to stabilize debt.1 Finally, the economy is occasionally
hit by a large demand shock that forces policymakers into a zero-lower-bound
regime in which the central bank sets the interest rate to zero and the …scal
1InthelanguageofLeeper(1991)themonetary-ledregimecorrespondstoactivemonetary
policy and passive …scal policy, whereas the …scally-led regime is associated with passive
monetary policy and active …scal policy.
2