NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE SHORTING PREMIUM AND ASSET PRICING ANOMALIES
Itamar Drechsler
Qingyi Freda Drechsler
Working Paper 20282
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20282
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2014
We thank Malcolm Baker, Rabih Moussawi, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Wenlan Qian, Alexi Savov,
Robert Whitelaw, and seminar participants at Cubist Systematic Strategies for their comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Itamar Drechsler and Qingyi Freda Drechsler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Shorting Premium and Asset Pricing Anomalies
Itamar Drechsler and Qingyi Freda Drechsler
NBER Working Paper No. 20282
July 2014
JEL No. G1,G11,G12,G14,G23
ABSTRACT
Short-rebate fees are a strong predictor of the cross-section of stock returns, both gross and net of fees.
We document a large "shorting premium": the cheap-minus-expensive-to-short (CME) portfolio of
stocks has a monthly average gross return of 1.43%, a net return of 0.91%, and a 1.53% four-factor
alpha. We show that short fees interact strongly with the returns to eight of the largest and most well-known
cross-sectional anomalies. The anomalies effectively disappear within the 80% of stocks that have
low short fees, but are greatly amplified among those with high fees. We propose a joint explanation
for these findings: the shorting premium is compensation for the concentrated short risk borne by the
small fraction of investors who do most shorting. Because it is on the short side, it raises prices rather
than lowers them. We proxy for this short risk using the CME portfolio return and demonstrate that
a Fama-French + CME factor model largely captures the anomaly returns among both high- and low-fee
stocks.
Itamar Drechsler
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street, 9-120
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
itamar.drechsler@stern.nyu.edu
Qingyi Freda Drechsler
Wharton Research Data Services
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3819 Chestnut Street Suite 300A
Philadelphia PA 19104
qsong@wharton.upenn.edu

1 Introduction
Asset pricing theory has long recognized that if an asset cannot be sold short then it may
become overpriced, because investors who think it is overvalued are prevented from selling
it (Miller, 1977). However, in practice U.S. equities are not typically subject to short-sales
prohibitions. Arbitrageurs can sell shares short by borrowing them in the stock loan market.
The price for doing so is a fee, or rebate, paid by the borrower to the lender (henceforth
the “shorting fee”). There are at least two reasons why the shorting fee should contain
information about the returns on the stock. The first is straightforward: the fee represents a
payment stream that the stock owner can earn by lending the stock. The second is indirect:
the shorting fee embeds information about the underlying demand to short the stock, a
potentially important determinant of the stock’s expected return.
In this paper, we demonstrate that shorting fees are highly predictive of the cross-section
of stock returns. Our analysis is presented in two parts. In the first part, we show that
low short-fee stocks earn much higher returns than high short-fee stocks. This is true for
returns measured both gross and net of shorting fees. Moreover, the difference in returns is
not explained by exposures to conventional risk factors. We call this difference in average
returns the “shorting premium”, because it represents the extra return earned by investors
for shorting high short-fee stocks.
In the second part of the paper we show that there is a strong interaction between
shorting fees and the returns to eight well-known, large cross-sectional return anomalies.
Specifically, we show that these anomalies effectively disappear or are dramatically weakened
among low-fee stocks, which represent 80% of all stocks and a higher fraction still of total
market capitalization. In contrast, the anomalies are highly amplified among high-fee stocks,
generating long-short portfolio returns that are very large even by the standards of the
anomaly literature. Our findings show that shorting fees are instrumental to understanding
the structure of these anomalies’ returns.
We propose an explanation of these findings in which shorting high-fee stocks earns a
large return because the risk involved in this is concentrated among a narrow subgroup of
investors, an assumption that appears to be met in practice. Consistent with the theory, we
demonstrate that augmenting the conventional four-factor model with a shorting risk factor,
a portfolio long low-fee stocks and short high-fee stocks, allows it to explain much of, and
in many cases all of, the average returns to these anomalies among both low- and high-fee
1

stocks.
We begin by examining the distribution of short fees across stocks and the stock charac-
teristicsassociatedwithhighshort-fees. Previousstudiesutilizingshortingfeeshavetypically
depended on datasets obtained from an individual participating institution in the stock loan
market (D’Avolio (2002), Geczy, Musto and Reed (2002), Ofek, Richardson, and Whitelaw
(2004), Cohen, Diether, and Malloy (2007)), and were consequently limited in terms of time
series and cross-sectional coverage.1 We make use of a new database that aggregates data
from a large number of participants in the stock loan market and covers over 95% of US eq-
uities in the CRSP database. Moreover, compared to earlier studies our sample is quite long,
spanning 2004-2012, which gives us enough power to study differences in expected returns.
We sort stocks into deciles based on their shorting fee at the end of each month. For
each of the top eight deciles the average shorting fee is below 32 bps per annum, indicating
that 80% of stocks are quite cheap to short. The stocks in the ninth decile are moderately
expensive to short (75 bps per annum on average), while those in the tenth decile are quite
expensive to short, with an average fee of 568 per annum. The aggregate market capitaliza-
tions of the expensive-to-short stocks are economically large: the average total market caps
of the ninth and tenth deciles are roughly $1.1 trillion and $435 billion over the sample.
We examine the average returns on these decile portfolios over the following month. The
average returns are flat across the eight cheap-to-short deciles, but drop precipitously in the
ninth and tenth deciles. The average return on the tenth decile is -0.68% per month! The
average return on a portfolio long the stocks in the first decile and short the stocks in the
tenth decile–the cheap-minus-expensive (CME) portfolio–is a whopping 1.43% per month,
andhighlysignificant(t-stat4.99)despitetheshortsample. Thislargeaveragereturncannot
be explained by differential exposures to the conventional four Fama-French factors, as the
CME portfolio’s four-factor (FF4) alpha is 1.53% (t-stat 7.06). The return difference is
even larger for the upper half of stocks in the decile ten portfolio (the “10b” portfolio): the
cheap-minus-10b portfolio has a mean return of 2.14% per month and a 2.28% alpha.
The difference in returns is not accounted for by the shorting fees themselves. We doc-
ument that the difference in net returns, while clearly smaller, remains very large. The
average net return on the decile 10 stocks is -0.16% per month, the average net return of the
CME portfolio is a highly significant 0.91% per month, and the cheap-minus-10b portfolio’s
1TheUSstockloanmarketisdecentralizedandover-the-counter,whichmakesdatacollectionachallenge.
2