NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE LIQUIDITY PREMIUM OF NEAR-MONEY ASSETS
Stefan Nagel
Working Paper 20265
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20265
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014
I am grateful for comments to Arvind Krishnamurthy, Francis Longstaff, Paolo Pasquariello, Jose-Luis
Peydro, seminar participants at HEC Paris, Michigan, Stanford, Toulouse and participants at the American
Economic Association Meetings and the LBS Safe Assets Conference. Mike Schwert and Yesol Huh
provided excellent research assistance. I thank Henning Bohn, Daniel Hanson, Allan Mendelowitz,
and Paolo Pasquariello for providing data. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Stefan Nagel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Liquidity Premium of Near-Money Assets
Stefan Nagel
NBER Working Paper No. 20265
June 2014
JEL No. E41,E43,G12
ABSTRACT
Treasury bills and other near-money assets provide owners with liquidity service benefits that are reflected
in prices in the form of a liquidity premium. I relate time variation in this liquidity premium to changes
in the opportunity cost of money: The liquidity service benefits of near-money assets are more valuable
when short-term interest rates are high and hence the opportunity cost of holding money is high. Consistent
with this prediction, the liquidity premium of T-bills and other near-money assets is strongly positively
correlated with the level of short-term interest rates. Once short-term interest rates are controlled for,
Treasury security supply variables lose their explanatory power for the liquidity premium. I argue
that an analysis of scarcity and price of near-money assets is incomplete without taking into account
the substitution relationship with money and its supply by the central bank. Payment of interest on
reserves (IOR) could potentially reduce liquidity premia because IOR reduces the opportunity cost
of at least one type of money (reserves). In the UK and Canada, however, the introduction of IOR
did not shrink liquidity premia. Apparently, the reduction in banks' opportunity cost of money did
not result in a broader fall in the opportunity costs of money for non-bank market participants.
Stefan Nagel
Ross School of Business and
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
stenagel@umich.edu

I Introduction
Investors pay a premium for the liquidity service flow provided by near-money assets such as
Treasury bills and recently issued (“on-the-run”) US Treasury Bonds. What determines the
magnitude of this liquidity premium? Does it vary over time? If so, why?
Inthepastdecade,muchattentionhasbeenfocusedoninvestigatingwhyliquiditypremia
riseduringtimesofcrises(Longstaff2004; Vayanos2004; Brunnermeier2009; Krishnamurthy
2010; Musto, Nini, and Schwarz (2014)), but little is known about the economic forces that
pin down this premium outside of these episodes. Recent work that tackles this question has
emphasizedanassetsupplychannel: Bansal, Coleman, andLundblad(2010), Krishnamurthy
andVissing-Jorgensen(2012),KrishnamurthyandVissing-Jorgensen(2013),andGreenwood,
Hanson, and Stein (2014) argue that the liquidity premium varies with changes in the supply
of Treasury securities.
Yet this asset-supply perspective neglects the substitution relationship between near-
money assets and money. A reduction in the supply of near-money assets should result in
a rise in the demand for money. If the central bank elastically supplies money to keep the
nominal interest rate at a target level, the reduction in Treasury supply may not have any
effect on the liquidity premium. By the same token, if the central bank changes the nominal
short-term interest rate, this changes the opportunity cost of holding money, which should
affect the premium that market participants are willing to pay for near-money assets. From
this perspective, it is the opportunity cost of money rather than the supply of near-money
assets that determines the liquidity premium.
Toworkouttherelationshipbetweentheopportunitycostofmoneyandliquiditypremia,
I present a model in which households obtain liquidity service flow from non-interest bearing
deposits and Treasury bills. Deposits and Treasury bills are perfect substitutes, but they
have different liquidity multipliers: one unit of deposits provides more liquidity service flow
than one unit of Treasury bills. The banking sector supplies these deposits, but requires
some reserve holdings at the central bank as a liquidity buffer. In this model, the level of
1

0.7
0.5
0.3
0.1
−0.1
Jun1990 Mar1993 Dec1995 Sep1998 May2001 Feb2004 Nov2006 Aug2009 May2012
daerps
lliB−T/opeR
CG
16
12
8
4
0
Jun1990 Mar1993 Dec1995 Sep1998 May2001 Feb2004 Nov2006 Aug2009 May2012
daerps
tisoped/etar
sdnuf
deF
Fed funds rate 3m GC Repo/3m T−Bill spread
Figure 1: Spread between 3-month General Collateral Repo Rate and 3-month Treasury Bill
yield
short-term interest rates represents households’ opportunity costs of holding money (in the
form of deposits). The liquidity premium of Treasury bills is proportional to the the level of
short-term interest rates. This prediction is the focus of the empirical analysis in this paper.
Figure 1 illustrates the key empirical finding. The solid line shows the difference between
the interest rate on three-month general collateral repurchase agreements (GC repo, a form
of collateralized interbank lending) and the yield on three-month US T-bills. The GC repo
term loan is illiquid, as the money lent is locked in for three months. In contrast, a T-
bill investment can easily be liquidated in a deep market with minuscule bid/ask spreads.
Consistent with this difference in liquidity, the GC repo rate is typically higher than T-bill
yields. This yield spread reflects the premium that market participants are willing to pay
for the non-pecuniary liquidity benefits provided by T-bills. As the figure shows, there is
2