NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EFFECTS OF UNCONVENTIONAL MONETARY POLICY ON FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
Gabriel Chodorow-Reich
Working Paper 20230
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20230
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014
Revised draft of paper prepared for the spring 2014 Brookings Panel on Economic Activity. I am grateful
to Markus Brunnermeier, Joshua Hausman, Nellie Liang, Atif Mian, Hyun Song Shin, David Sraer,
seminar participants at Arizona State, Duke, and Princeton, participants at the Brookings conference,
and especially to the editors David Romer and Justin Wolfers and my discussants Annette Vissing-Jorgensen
and Deborah Lucas for discussions and comments. Matthieu Gomez provided superb research assistance.
This work was completed while I was visiting the Julis-Rabinowitz Center at Princeton University.
I also acknowledge financial support from the Brookings Institution. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Gabriel Chodorow-Reich. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy on Financial Institutions
Gabriel Chodorow-Reich
NBER Working Paper No. 20230
June 2014
JEL No. E44,E52,G20
ABSTRACT
Monetary policy affects the real economy in part through its effects on financial institutions. High
frequency event studies show the introduction of unconventional monetary policy in the winter of
2008-09 had a strong, beneficial impact on banks and especially on life insurance companies. I interpret
the positive effects on life insurers as expansionary policy recapitalizing the sector by raising the value
of legacy assets. Expansionary policy had small positive or neutral effects on banks and life insurers
through 2013. The interaction of low nominal interest rates and administrative costs forced money
market funds to waive fees, producing a possible incentive to reach for yield to reduce waivers. I show
money market funds with higher costs reached for higher returns in 2009-11, but not thereafter. Some
private defined benefit pension funds increased their risk taking beginning in 2009, but again such
behavior largely dissipated by 2012. In sum, unconventional monetary policy helped to stabilize some
sectors and provoked modest additional risk taking in others. I do not find evidence that the financial
institutions studied formented a tradeoff between expansionary policy and financial stability at the
end of 2013.
Gabriel Chodorow-Reich
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
chodorowreich@fas.harvard.edu

1. Introduction
Inthewinterof2008,theFederalReserve’sFederalOpenMarketCommittee(FOMC)began
using a mix of policy instruments unprecedented in its history. These expanded to include a
target federal funds rate of essentially zero, purchases of Treasury bonds, Agency (Fannie
Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae) mortgage-backed securities, Agency bonds, and explicit
guidance concerning the future path of the federal funds rate. I refer to these instruments
as unconventional monetary policy. The FOMC introduced these policies with the intention
of reducing long-term real interest rates, which it believed would lead to a stronger economic
recovery.1 A number of studies have confirmed the policies’ success in reducing long-term
rates (Gagnon et al., 2010; Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2011; Campbell et al., 2012;
Wright, 2012).
Theintroductionofnewtreatmentsraisestheconcernofsideeffects. Intheaftermathofone
of the worst financial crises in history, a possibly acute one involves the effect of unconventional
policy on the health and stability of the financial sector. Indeed, numerous FOMC participants
have cited increased risk taking by financial institutions as a potential constraint on their
policy choices (Bernanke, 2013; Stein, 2013a; Fisher, 2014). Alternatively, an improving real
economy spurred in part by unconventional policy may have helped to stabilize some financial
institutions.
I discuss four channels through which unconventional monetary policy affects the financial
sector. First, reducing the risk free rate lowers the hurdle rate for risky investment projects.
This leads to increased new spending on projects with either lower mean returns or higher
1See for example the FOMC statement announcing a new round of asset purchases in September 2012 (http:
//www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20120913a.htm).
1

variances. Depending on the distribution of newly-funded projects, the optimal level of real risk
in the economy may change. Financial institutions carry exposure to real project risk through
their role as intermediaries between borrowers and savers. Second, unconventional policy may
lead some financial institutions to seek higher returns due to institutional dissatisfaction with
low yields. By definition, such “reaching for yield” constitutes an increase in risk taking beyond
whattheendholdersoftheriskwouldprefer. Third, bypromotingrecoveryintherealeconomy,
unconventional policy lowers delinquency and default rates, raises profits, and possibly lowers
risk aversion. Higher probability of payoff, higher profits, and less risk aversion together raise
the prices of legacy assets – financial assets already on financial institutions’ balance sheets
– improving solvency. These general equilibrium effects may also benefit financial companies
that sell products with a positive income elasticity. Fourth, low interest rates reduce the
opportunity cost of holding reserves or collateral. This may generate larger balance sheets and
higher leverage at institutions facing binding collateral or reserve requirements, such as banks.
I then turn to evidence on four classes of financial institutions. I use high frequency event
studies to measure the response of credit default swap (CDS) spreads, bond yields, and equity
prices of life insurers and bank holding companies in narrow windows surrounding surprise
announcements of policy changes. I study bank holding companies because of their importance
to the financial system. For life insurers, the combination of long-term fixed income liabilities
and shorter duration assets may generate a compressed or even negative interest spread at
low rates and prompt reaching for yield behavior. On the other hand, many life insurers
faced solvency crises in early 2009, and the legacy corporate and mortgage bonds on their
balance sheets would have benefited from expansionary policy. In the event, the initial round
2