NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE AGGLOMERATION OF BANKRUPTCY
Efraim Benmelech
Nittai Bergman
Anna Milanez
Vladimir Mukharlyamov
Working Paper 20254
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20254
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014
We thank Douglas Baird, Bo Becker, Shikma Benmelech, John Campbell, Shawn Cole, Jennifer Dlugosz,
Richard Frankel, Jerry Green, Yaniv Grinstein, Barney Hartman-Gleser, Ben Iverson, Steve Kaplan,
Prasad Krishnamurthy, Kai Li (discussant), Anup Malani, David Matsa, Roni Michaely, Ed Morrison,
Boris Nikolov (discussant), Randy Picker, Andrei Shleifer, Matthew Spiegel, David Sraer (discussant),
Jeremy Stein and seminar participants at Aalto University, Adam Smith Workshop for Corporate Finance
2014, City University Hong Kong Finance Conference, Edinburgh Corporate Finance Conference,
The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Harvard University, Koc University, The University of British
Columbia, The University of Chicago Law and Economics 2013 seminar, The University of Chicago
Booth School of Business, IDC Herzliya 2013 Summer Conference, Northwestern University (Kellogg),
University of Alberta, UCLA (Anderson), University of Maryland (Smith), University of North Carolina
(Kenan- Flagler), Washington University, Yale School of Management, and Yeshiva University (Syms
School of Business) for very helpful comments. Savita Barrowes, David Choi and Sammy Young
provided excellent research assistance. Benmelech is grateful for financial support from the Guthrie
Center for Real Estate Research at the Kellogg School of Management and from the National Science
Foundation under CAREER award SES-0847392. All errors are our own.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Efraim Benmelech, Nittai Bergman, Anna Milanez, and Vladimir Mukharlyamov. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Agglomeration of Bankruptcy
Efraim Benmelech, Nittai Bergman, Anna Milanez, and Vladimir Mukharlyamov
NBER Working Paper No. 20254
June 2014, Revised October 2014
JEL No. G33,G34,R12,R32,R33
ABSTRACT
This paper identifies a new channel through which bankrupt firms impose negative externalities
on non-bankrupt peers. The bankruptcy and liquidation of a retail chain weakens the economies of
agglomeration in any given local area, reducing the attractiveness of retail centers for remaining
stores leading to contagion of financial distress. We find that companies with greater geographic
exposure to bankrupt retailers are more likely to close stores in affected areas. We further show that
the effect of these externalities on non-bankrupt peers is higher when the affected stores are smaller
and are operated by firms with poor financial health.
Efraim Benmelech Anna Milanez
Kellogg School of Management Deloitte Consulting LLP(cid:0)
Northwestern University amilanez@deloitte.com
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208 Vladimir Mukharlyamov
and NBER Harvard University
e-benmelech@kellogg.northwestern.edu Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Nittai Bergman Cambridge, MA 02138
MIT Sloan School of Management mukharly@fas.harvard.edu
100 Main Street, E62-632
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
nbergman@mit.edu

I. Introduction
Howdoesbankruptcyspread? Whileresearchonbankruptcyandfinancialdistresshasdocumented
how bankruptcy reorganizations affect firms that file for Chapter-11 themselves, there is limited
evidence on the effect of bankruptcies and financial distress on competitors and industry peers.
In this paper, we identify a new channel by which bankrupt firms impose negative externalities
on their non-bankrupt competitors, namely, through their impact on peer firm sales and on the
propensity to close stores.
Research in industrial organization has argued that the geographic concentration of stores and
the existence of clusters of stores can be explained by consumers’ imperfect information and their
need to search the market (Wolinsky (1983)). Indeed, both practitioners and academics argue that
economies of agglomeration exist in retail since some stores – those of national name-brands or
anchor department stores, in particular – draw customer traffic not only to their own stores but
alsotonearbystores. Asaresult, storelevelsalesmaydependonthesalesofneighboringstoresfor
reasons that are unrelated to local economic conditions (Gould and Pashigian (1998) and Gould,
Pashigian and Prendergast (2005)).
We conjecture that the externalities that exist between neighboring stores, and the economies
of agglomeration they create, can be detrimental during downturns, propagating and amplifying
the negative effects of financial distress and bankruptcies among firms in the same locality. Our
main prediction is that, due to agglomeration economies, retail stores in distress impose negative
externalities on their neighboring peers: store sales tend to decrease with the reduction in sales,
and ultimately the closure, of neighboring stores. If such negative externalities are sufficiently
strong, bankruptcies, and the store closure they involve, will lead to additional store closures and
bankruptcies, propagating within a given area.
Identifying a causal link, however, from the bankruptcy and financial distress of one retailer
to the sales and closure decisions of its neighboring retailers is made difficult by the fact that
bankruptcy filings and financial distress are correlated with local economic conditions. Correlation
in sales among stores in the same vicinity may therefore simply reflect weak demand in an area.
Similarly, thefactthatstoreclosurestendtoclusterlocallymayoftenbetheoutcomeofunderlying
difficulties in the local economy, rather than the effect of negative externalities among stores. Local
economicconditionswillnaturallydriveacorrelationinoutcomesamongstoreslocatedinthesame
1

area.
Using a novel and detailed dataset of all national chain store locations and closures across
the United States from 2005 to 2010, we provide empirical evidence that supports the view that
bankruptcies of retail companies impose negative externalities on neighboring stores owned by sol-
ventcompanies. OuridentificationstrategyconsistsofanalyzingtheeffectofChapter11bankrupt-
ciesoflargenationalretailers, suchasCircuitCityandLinensnThings, wholiquidatedtheirentire
storechainduringthesampleperiod. UsingChapter11bankruptciesofnationalretailersalleviates
the concern that local economic conditions led to the demise of the company: it is unlikely that a
large retail chain will suffer major financial difficulties because of a localized economic downturn in
one of its many locations. Supporting this identification assumption, we show that stores of retail
chains that eventually end up in Chapter 11 bankruptcy are not located in areas that are worse
than the location of stores operated by chains that do not end up in bankruptcy, along a host of
economic characteristics.
We then show that stores located in proximity to stores of national chains that are liquidated
are more likely to close themselves. Importantly, we find that this effect is stronger for stores in the
same industry of the liquidating national chain as compared to stores in industries different from
that of the liquidating chain. For example, focusing on stores located in the same address (usually
mall locations), the probability that a store will close in the year following the closure of a store
belonging to a liquidating national chain is approximately two times larger when operating in the
same industry as compared to when the stores operate in different industries.
Finally, we study the interaction between the geographical effect of store closures and the
financialhealthofsolventownersofneighboringstores. Wehypothesizethattheimpactofnational
chain store liquidations will be stronger on firms in weaker financial health, as these stores are
expected to suffer more from the reduction in customer traffic. Focusing on stores owned by a
parent company, and measuring financial health using the profitability of the parent, we find that,
consistent with our hypothesis, the geographical effect of store closures on neighboring stores is
indeed more pronounced in financially weaker firms. For example, when located within a 50 meter
radius of a closing national chain store, stores belonging to parent firms in the 25th percentile of
profitability are between 16.9 and 22.2 percent more likely to close. In contrast, if the parent firm
is in the 75th percentile of profitability there is no statistical significant effect on the likelihood of
store closure. Along the same lines, we also find that larger stores are more resilient to the closure
2