NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIQUIDITY RISK AND U.S. BANK LENDING AT HOME AND ABROAD
Ricardo Correa
Linda S. Goldberg
Tara Rice
Working Paper 20285
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20285
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2014
The authors thank Jason Goldrosen for excellent research assistance, as well as Claudia Buch, Ben
Craig, Katheryn Russ, Charles Thomas, and participants at the International Banking Research Network
workshops in Potsdam and Paris for thoughtful suggestions. The views expressed in this paper are
solely those of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the view of the Board of Governors,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the staff of the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Ricardo Correa, Linda S. Goldberg, and Tara Rice. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Liquidity Risk and U.S. Bank Lending at Home and Abroad
Ricardo Correa, Linda S. Goldberg, and Tara Rice
NBER Working Paper No. 20285
July 2014
JEL No. F3,G21,G38
ABSTRACT
While the balance sheet structure of U.S. banks influences how they respond to liquidity risks, the
mechanisms for the effects on and consequences for lending vary widely across banks. We demonstrate
fundamental differences across banks without foreign affiliates versus those with foreign affiliates.
Among the nonglobal banks (those without a foreign affiliate), cross-sectional differences in response
to liquidity risk depend on the banks’ shares of core deposit funding. By contrast, differences across
global banks (those with foreign affiliates) are associated with ex ante liquidity management strategies
as reflected in internal borrowing across the global organization. This intra-firm borrowing by banks
serves as a shock absorber and affects lending patterns to domestic and foreign customers. The use
of official-sector emergency liquidity facilities by global and nonglobal banks in response to market
liquidity risks tends to reduce the importance of ex ante differences in balance sheets as drivers of
cross-sectional differences in lending.
Ricardo Correa Tara Rice
Board of Governors of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System Federal Reserve System
Division of International Finance Division of International Finance
Washington DC 20551 Washington DC 20551
ricardo.correa@frb.gov tara.n.rice@frb.gov
Linda S. Goldberg
Federal Reserve Bank-New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER
linda.goldberg@ny.frb.org

1. Introduction
The recent financial crisis underscored the importance of understanding the ways in which
liquidity conditions influence credit extension to domestic and foreign customers. We
investigate the distinctions between responses to liquidity risks across two types of large U.S.
banks, those that are domestically oriented and those that are more global in the sense of having
affiliates in foreign countries. As these banks have widely different business models, the
channels and magnitude of transmission of shocks into bank lending should differ significantly
by bank type. Small domestic banks have been shown to have relatively strong lending
responses to liquidity shocks (Kashyap and Stein 2000). Banks with foreign affiliates,
particularly large banks, have been shown to actively move funds across their organizations in
response to such shocks, potentially insulating lending in their home markets but transmitting
shocks abroad (Cetorelli and Goldberg 2012a). For both types of banks, changes in market
liquidity conditions are likely to influence lending differently in crisis periods than in normal (or
non-crisis) periods, in part due to their willingness to use liquidity provided through official
sector facilities.
The extant literature shows that changing liquidity conditions alter the loan growth rates
and liquid asset mix within U.S. banks, and that differences documented within groups of large
and small U.S. banks relate to their ex ante balance sheet compositions (Cornett, McNutt,
Strahan and Tehranian 2011).1 However, the links between liquidity risk and banks’ activities
warrant additional consideration in (at least) three ways. First, banks have distinct channels
through which they may adjust their balance sheets in response to liquidity strains. Loan growth
effects may differ across domestic and foreign customers. Also, for global banks, loan activity
within the organization and across affiliated banks may adjust, providing an extra margin of
response than can change the incidence of effects on domestic versus foreign customers
(Cetorelli and Goldberg 2012a).
1 There is a growing literature on the link between liquidity shocks and bank lending using micro data. The prime
example is Khwaja and Mian (2008), who focus on the effect of changes in banks’ access to funding on their
domestic lending. Schnabl (2012) adds to this literature by exploring the differential effect of funding shocks on
banks affiliated with global institutions and those that are purely domestic but that rely on foreign financing.
Cetorelli and Goldberg (2012b) and Correa, Sapriza, and Zlate (2013) have studied the transmission of liquidity
shocks across borders through the activities of branches of global banks. However, none of these studies have
analyzed the effect of funding shocks and bank balance sheet characteristics on the international activities of global
banks.
1

Second, these effects hitting the parent bank are not likely to transmit to the same degree
across all the foreign countries they interact with: global banks differentiate across countries
when they adjust their international exposures after a liquidity shock. The magnitude and
direction of adjustments depend on the business models of the respective banks (Cetorelli and
Goldberg 2012b). Some affiliate locations are more important for the investment strategies of
the whole organization, while other locations are more important for funding the organization.
Third, the effects of liquidity risk on lending will differ during non-crisis and crisis
periods. The effects of the price of liquidity are likely to depend importantly on whether public
(or official) sector sources of liquidity are a competitively priced option for financial firms. As
Buch and Goldberg (2014) show, empirical studies of the effects of liquidity risk on bank
adjustments should control both for bank characteristics and the use of official sector liquidity
facilities. As market liquidity conditions deteriorate, weaker banks initially face the tightest
constraints from private sector funding sources. As banks turn to publically-provided liquidity,
this relieves some of the adjustment pressures associated with the elevated cost of liquidity from
private sources. These points need to be addressed, if possible, in econometric specifications.
All these themes motivate, and are addressed by, the analysis of the present paper on the
experiences of U.S. banks. Our study is part of a broader initiative, described in Buch and
Goldberg (2014), in which researchers in eleven countries participating in the International
Banking Research Network (IBRN) independently analyze the effects of liquidity risk through
the cross-section of banks operating in their own countries.2 The teams of researchers use
confidential data from regulatory reports filed within their countries, and then apply a common
empirical methodology that follows closely on two building blocks. The first methodological
building block is Cornett, McNutt, Strahan and Tehranian (2011, hereafter CMST2011) who
examine the role of ex ante bank balance sheet composition in explaining the ex post differences
across U.S. banks in their adjustment to liquidity risk conditions. Our paper is closest to that
building block as we also focus on the sample of U.S. banks, albeit using a longer period of time
for the analysis (from 2006 through 2012, instead of through 2009). However, our work is
distinguished in a number of substantive dimensions. We concentrate only on the large U.S.
banks, distinguish between those banks without versus those with foreign affiliates, and we focus
2 Related studies were conducted by teams from Austria, Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Ireland,
Italy, Poland, and the United Kingdom.
2