NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAPITAL CONTROLS AND RECOVERY FROM THE FINANCIAL CRISIS OF
THE 1930S
Kris James Mitchener
Kirsten Wandschneider
Working Paper 20220
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20220
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014
We thank conference and seminar participants at Oxford University, UC Davis, and the Bank of Norway-
Graduate Institute of International Studies Conference for useful suggestions. Melissa Daniel and Rose
York provided invaluable research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Kris James Mitchener and Kirsten Wandschneider. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Capital Controls and Recovery from the Financial Crisis of the 1930s
Kris James Mitchener and Kirsten Wandschneider
NBER Working Paper No. 20220
June 2014
JEL No. E61,F32,F33,F41,G15,N1,N2
ABSTRACT
We examine the first widespread use of capital controls in response to a global or regional financial
crisis. In particular, we analyze whether capital controls mitigated capital flight in the 1930s and assess
their causal effects on macroeconomic recovery from the Great Depression. We find evidence that
they stemmed gold outflows in the year following their imposition; however, time-shifted, difference-in-
differences (DD) estimates of industrial production, prices, and exports suggest that exchange controls
did not accelerate macroeconomic recovery relative to countries that went off gold and floated. Countries
imposing capital controls also appear to perform similar to the gold bloc countries once the latter group
of countries finally abandoned gold. Time series analysis suggests that countries imposing capital
controls refrained from fully utilizing their newly acquired monetary policy autonomy.
Kris James Mitchener
Department of Economics
Leavey School of Business
Santa Clara University
Santa Clara, CA 95053
and NBER
kmitchener@scu.edu
Kirsten Wandschneider
Department of Economics
Occidental College
1600 Campus Rd
Los Angeles, CA 90041, U.S.A.
kirsten@oxy.edu

Capital Controls and Recovery from the Financial Crisis of the 1930s
1. Introduction
In 2010, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) revised its stand against capital controls,
recognizing that sudden capital surges can pose risk for some countries, and acknowledging that
controls on capital inflows may be part of a toolkit that countries use to ward off financial crises
(Ostry et al, 2010). This change in policy reversed the previous IMF position favoring the free
movement of capital.1 Nevertheless, the use of capital controls as a policy tool, especially as a
stopgap to ward off financial crises, remains controversial. For example, in 1998, Malaysia was
castigated by policymakers and financial markets for imposing capital controls in response to the
East Asian financial crisis.
Since capital controls have been used in response to exchange rate crises, understanding
their macroeconomic effects relative to other policies is an important agenda for research. On the
one hand, capital controls bottle up inflows, which could potentially drive new investment
spending and fuel a recovery in the wake of a crisis. On the other, their imposition could provide
central banks with room for maneuver; in particular, central banks can maintain fixed exchange
rates, but pursue expansionary monetary policy in the short run to stimulate output and return to
long-run policy objectives. Research on the 1997-8 East Asian financial crisis has suggested that
restrictions on the movement of capital may have produced a faster economic recovery in
comparison to countries that relied on help from the IMF (Kaplan and Rodrik, 2002).
Determining the relative benefits and costs of capital controls for economic recovery is
ultimately an empirical question, and the Great Depression offers a potentially fertile testing
ground for shedding light on this issue. Deflation spread globally after 1929, and as production
and incomes fell, countries found it increasingly difficult to maintain pegged exchanged rates.
By the mid-1930s, most had abandoned the gold-exchange standard and were seeking refuge in a
variety of alternative exchange-rate arrangements, including capital controls. The abandonment
of gold, however, was carried out in a haphazard manner, with some countries following
England off gold in 1931 and others steadfastly staying on gold until after 1933 (Eichengreen,
1 For example, in 1998, in its World Economic Outlook, the IMF was critical of Malaysia’s use of capital controls in
response to the East Asian financial crisis (IMF, 1998, p.4). By 2011, deputy managing Director Nemat Shafik
suggested that that Iceland keep its capital controls in place in response to the 2008-9 financial crisis (IMF, 2011).
1

1992, Kindleberger, 1986). Some countries chose to re-peg at lower rates to particular
currencies, such as the pound sterling, others floated their currencies, and many imposed
exchange controls (i.e., the common name for capital controls in that era) in order to shield their
economies from the effects of short-term capital flows (“hot money”) and balance-of-payments
pressures.2
The Depression was the first financial crisis in the era of modern economic growth in
which a large number of countries responded to balance-of-payments pressures by imposing
restrictions on the movement of capital. Few, if any, financial crisis since the Depression have
rivaled its severity and global impact, and few have witnessed so many countries responding by
imposing capital controls, perhaps in part because many subsequent crises have been regional in
nature (Glick and Rose, 1999). Previous research has found that de-linking from gold sped up
recovery from the Great Depression (Choudhri and Kochin, 1980, Eichengreen and Sachs, 1985,
Campa, 1990) and that imposing capital controls appears to have offered some relief from
“golden fetters” (Obstfeld and Taylor, 1998). Extant studies, however, have yet to analyze
systematically how countries imposing exchange controls performed relative to countries that
stayed on gold (the so-called “gold bloc”) and how countries imposing exchange controls
performed relative to countries that exited gold and floated their currencies after abandoning the
gold standard. For example, imposing capital controls might have prevented short-run capital
flight and, under the “policy trilemma” framework, enabled policymakers more room to aid
ailing banking systems using monetary policy. Moreover, imposing capital controls while
maintaining a fixed exchange rate might have reduced the possibility that a dramatic decline in
the value of the currency would further increase the probability of a banking crisis. On the other
hand, if capital control countries kept their exchange rates pegged (perhaps due to a “fear of
floating”) or delayed an adjustment in their parity, then the scope to engage in a competitive
devaluation to boost the domestic production of exports might be more limited relative to
floaters.
2 We use the terms capital controls and exchange controls synonymously throughout the paper. While the modern
economics literature uses the term capital controls, the writings of the 1930s uniformly use the term exchange
controls. This term referred to the original purpose of controls, restrictions on purchases and sales of foreign and
domestic currency at market rates, but interwar controls on the movement of capital quickly grew to include
restrictions on trade, travel, and the repatriation of capital gains, and hence why we use them interchangeably
throughout.
2