NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANKS AS PATIENT FIXED-INCOME INVESTORS
Samuel G. Hanson
Andrei Shleifer
Jeremy C. Stein
Robert W. Vishny
Working Paper 20288
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20288
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2014
We are grateful to seminar participants at the 2014 NBER Corporate Finance Meeting and Harvard
University for helpful comments, as well as to Malcolm Baker, John Campbell, Eduardo Dávila, Harry
DeAngelo, Doug Diamond, Mihir Desai, Gary Gorton, Robin Greenwood, Arvind Krishnamurthy,
David Scharfstein, René Stulz, Adi Sunderam, Paul Tucker, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, and Yao Zeng
for valuable suggestions. We also thank Yueran Ma for excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20288.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Samuel G. Hanson, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy C. Stein, and Robert W. Vishny. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Banks as Patient Fixed-Income Investors
Samuel G. Hanson, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy C. Stein, and Robert W. Vishny
NBER Working Paper No. 20288
July 2014
JEL No. G2,G21,G23
ABSTRACT
We examine the business model of traditional commercial banks in the context of their co-existence
with shadow banks. While both types of intermediaries create safe “money-like” claims, they go about
this in different ways. Traditional banks create safe claims by relying on deposit insurance, supported
by costly equity capital. This structure allows bank depositors to remain “sleepy”: they do not have
to pay attention to transient fluctuations in the mark-to-market value of bank assets. In contrast, shadow
banks create safe claims by giving their investors an early exit option that allows them to seize collateral
and liquidate it at the first sign of trouble. Thus traditional banks have a stable source of funding, while
shadow banks are subject to runs and fire-sale losses. These different funding models in turn influence
the kinds of assets that traditional banks and shadow banks hold in equilibrium: traditional banks have
a comparative advantage at holding fixed-income assets that have only modest fundamental risk, but
are relatively illiquid and have substantial transitory price volatility.
Samuel G. Hanson Jeremy C. Stein
Harvard Business School Department of Economics
Baker Library 361 Harvard University
Soldiers Field Littauer 209
Boston, MA 02163 Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER jeremy_stein@harvard.edu
shanson@hbs.edu
Robert W. Vishny
Andrei Shleifer Booth School of Business
Department of Economics The University of Chicago
Harvard University 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Littauer Center M-9 Chicago, IL 60637
Cambridge, MA 02138 and NBER
and NBER Rvishny@gmail.com
ashleifer@harvard.edu

I. Introduction
What is the business of banking? Do banks primarily create value on the liability side of the
balance sheet as in theories of banking emphasizing liquidity creation? Does the essence of banking
reside on the asset side as in theories emphasizing banks’ ability to monitor borrowers? Or does the
special nature of banks derive from some synergy between their assets and liabilities? And what
defines the role played by traditional banks in a modern financial system where they compete with
market-based intermediaries such as “shadow banks”?
To address these questions, we present a model in which traditional and shadow banks co-
exist in the marketplace. We begin with the premise that a primary function of both types of
intermediaries is to create safe, “money-like” claims that are of value to households because they
are useful for transactions purposes. However, traditional banks and shadow banks go about this
task in different ways. Traditional banks create safe claims by relying on deposit insurance and
other aspects of the government safety net, including the lender-of-last resort function. This
government insurance comes at a cost, since, e.g., it requires banks to comply with capital
requirements and other forms of regulation as well as incur bricks and mortar costs associated with
attracting retail depositors. But it also allows their depositors to remain “sleepy”: depositors do not
have to pay attention to transient fluctuations in the mark-to-market value of bank assets. In
contrast, when shadow banks—including broker-dealers and hedge funds—create money-like
claims such as repurchase agreements, they rely less on the government safety net, and hence can
economize on costly equity capital. However, manufacturing safety instead means that shadow
banks have to hold assets that can be easily liquidated at the first sign of trouble by investors who
must remain vigilant.
A central feature of our model is that such liquidations by shadow banks create fire-sale
effects, in that they temporarily push asset prices below fundamental value. So, on the one hand,
traditional banks’ more stable deposit funding structure has an advantage, in that it gives them the
ability to hold investments to maturity, riding out transitory valuation shocks until prices revert to
fundamental values. On the other hand, this stability comes at a cost. Because the endogenous fire-
sale discount is greater when shadow banks hold more of an asset, this tradeoff pins down the
equilibrium holdings of any given asset category across intermediary types. In particular, in an
interior equilibrium, the relative holdings of banks and shadow banks must be such that the
expected loss to a shadow bank from liquidating an asset at a temporary discount to fundamental
value is just balanced by the added cost that a traditional bank pays to obtain more stable funding.
1

Alternatively, for some types of assets we can have corner solutions, in which case the model
speaks to the specialization of traditional and shadow banks in asset holdings.
This logic leads to our main finding: for traditional banks there is a critical synergy between
the asset and liability sides of the balance sheet. Issuing stable money-like claims is complementary
with investing in fixed-income assets that have only modest fundamental risk, but that are relatively
illiquid and may have substantial exposure to interim fire-sale risk and the accompanying transitory
price volatility. In our view, this synergy between funding structure and asset choice is at the heart
of the business of commercial banking, and is what fundamentally distinguishes traditional banks
from shadow banks: traditional banks are patient investors that can invest in illiquid fixed-income
assets with little risk of being interrupted before maturity.
While our formal model emphasizes fire sales (Shleifer and Vishny 1992), our message
would also emerge in other models in which early liquidation can occur at prices below
fundamental value. For example, early liquidation can be costly in models that combine noise trader
shocks with limited arbitrageur risk-bearing capacity (DeLong et al 1990, Shleifer and Vishny
1997).1 The general point is that we view transitory non-fundamental movements in asset prices as
central to understanding financial intermediation, and especially the connection between the asset
and liability sides of intermediary balance sheets. A stable funding structure is an important source
of comparative advantage for holding assets that are vulnerable to transitory price movements.
After developing the model, we use the Financial Accounts of the United States (formerly
the Flow of Funds) to provide some simple aggregate evidence consistent with the model’s key
predictions. Specifically, looking across fixed income asset classes, traditional banks have a larger
market share in more illiquid assets, be they loans or securities. Similarly, looking across financial
intermediary types, intermediaries with more stable funding such as traditional banks have asset
portfolios that are more illiquid. In this way, our model yields a novel synthesis of several aggregate
facts about the structure of financial intermediation.
There is a vast literature on the economic role of banks. Our work connects most closely to
two strands of this literature. One strand, formalized first by Gorton and Pennacchi (1990), focuses
on the deposit-taking function of banks, and stresses their role in the creation of liabilities which,
precisely because of their safety and immunity from adverse-selection problems, are useful as a
1 Alternatively, the mechanism could be liquidation costs that stem from asset specificity or adverse selection.
2