NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PHARMACEUTICAL PROFITS AND THE SOCIAL VALUE OF INNOVATION
David Dranove
Craig Garthwaite
Manuel Hermosilla
Working Paper 20212
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20212
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014
We thank Ernst Berndt, Jen Brown, Amitabh Chandra, Rena Conti, Amy Finkelstein, Jon Skinner,
Ariel Dora Stern, and Heidi Williams for helpful suggestions. All errors remain our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by David Dranove, Craig Garthwaite, and Manuel Hermosilla. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Pharmaceutical Profits and the Social Value of Innovation
David Dranove, Craig Garthwaite, and Manuel Hermosilla
NBER Working Paper No. 20212
June 2014
JEL No. H0,I1,I18
ABSTRACT
Prior research has shown that exogenous shocks to the demand for medical products spur additional
product development. These studies do not distinguish between breakthrough products and those that
largely duplicate the performance of existing products. In this paper, we use a novel data set to explore
the impact of the introduction of Medicare Part D on the development of new biotechnology products.
We find that the law spurred development of products targeting illnesses that affect the elderly, but
most of this effect is concentrated among products aimed at diseases that already have multiple existing
treatments. Moreover, we find no increase in products targeting orphan disease or those receiving
either fast track or priority review status from the FDA. This suggests that marginal changes in demand
may have little effect on the development of products with large welfare benefits.
David Dranove Manuel Hermosilla
Department of Management and Strategy Carey Business School
Kellogg School of Management Johns Hopkins University
Northwestern University 100 International Dr
2001 Sheridan Road Baltimore, MD 21202
Evanston, IL 60208 mh@jhu.edu
d-dranove@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Craig Garthwaite
Department of Management and Strategy
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
c-garthwaite@kellogg.northwestern.edu

1. INTRODUCTION
The profits of pharmaceutical firms receive a large amount of attention and have caused many
in the popular press and policymaking community to propose various policies to limit them (e.g.
Rome, 2013). Critics claim that firms selling branded drugs under patent protection set prices at many
multiples of marginal costs, excessively exploiting both their monopoly power and the inelastic
demand for these often life-saving products. Industry defenders counter that high prices are necessary
to offset expensive and uncertain research and development, and that if profits were to fall, incentives
for future innovation would suffer. Danzon (2000) provides the quintessential defense of the industry:
“[a]ny form of price regulation, including the setting of uniform prices within the United States or
cross-nationally, would discourage innovation.” Similarly, discussing the re-importation of low-price
pharmaceuticals to the United States, Bast (2004) wrote “increasing importation means cutting off the
stream of investment that makes this system sustainable. It means fewer new lifesaving drugs.”
Many studies bolster the arguments of pharmaceutical industry supporters by documenting a
causal relationship between expected profitability, primarily from changes in market size, and new
products. Some of these studies find a link between demand and research activity (Ward and Dranove,
1997; Kyle and McGahan, 2012; Blume-Kohut and Sood, 2013; Finkelstein, 2004) while others find
that higher expected profits result in a greater number of products actually reaching market (Acemoglu
and Linn, 2004; Finkelstein, 2004; Cerda 2007; Dubois et al., 2014).
Industry critics counter that most recently approved new drugs are little more than slightly
modified versions of existing products whose development costs far outstrip any benefits (e.g. Spector,
2005; Angell, 2012). Marcia Angell, former editor of the New England Journal of Medicine, has been an
outspoken critic stating “[i]n fact, the big drug companies now concentrate mainly on … producing
variations of top-selling drugs already on the market (emphasis added) —called ‘me-too’ drugs. There is very
little innovative research in the modern pharmaceutical industry, despite its claims to the contrary”
1

(Angell, 2010). According to Angell and other industry critics, restrictions on industry prices and
profits will not harm welfare even if they deter new product development, because they will largely
affect this “me-too” innovation.
Prior research connecting demand and research investments does little to address the concerns
of these industry critics because the studies generally fail to determine whether the marginal products
are actually “innovative,” i.e. they make positive contributions to social value, or simply represent rent-
seeking by private firms. For example, Acemoglu and Linn (2004) found an increase in new molecular
entities targeting conditions with growing patient populations which they suggest represents new
innovation. However, they do not distinguish between new molecular entities that represent genuine
welfare-improving therapeutic breakthroughs and those that are simply “variations of top-selling drugs
already on the market.” As an illustration of this point, consider the first anti-cholesterol statin drug
Lovostatin. This product uses a radically different biochemical pathway which makes it far more
effective than prior cholesterol reducing drugs and might be considered more innovative, and offer a
larger increase in welfare, than the subsequent ten statin drugs to reach the market, all of which
effectively use the same pathway.1 Since each subsequent statin was a new chemical entity, Acemoglu
and Linn’s classification would broadly consider each to be equally innovative.
We contribute to this debate by examining how biotechnology firms responded to the creation
of Medicare Part D (hereafter Part D) – a large expansion of pharmaceutical insurance coverage for
elderly Americans. Blume-Kohut and Sood (BKS; 2013) found that Part D increased research
investments in the overall pharmaceutical sector. However, much like the previous literature, BKS did
not distinguish between the type of firm (i.e. traditional pharmaceutical or biotechnology), the type of
pharmaceutical (i.e. small molecule or biologic), or any other measure of the potential welfare
1 These drugs inhibit the enzyme HMG-CoA reductase, which is a key building block for cholesterol. We recognize that
several early statin drugs were in development at the same time; it is difficult to say that any one of these was more
innovative than the others. But the ongoing “patent racing” may have involved greater expenditures in drug development
than was socially optimal. New statin drugs more closely fit the model of research described by Angell.
2