NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GOVERNANCE, RISK MANAGEMENT, AND RISK-TAKING IN BANKS
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 20274
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20274
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014
I am grateful for comments to Rich Apostolik, Brian Baugh, Harry DeAngelo, Rudiger Fahlenbrach,
Andrei Goncalves, Hamid Mehran, Victor Ng, Jill Popadak, Anthony Santomero, Anjan Thakor, and
Rohan Williamson. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Governance, Risk Management, and Risk-Taking in Banks
René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 20274
June 2014
JEL No. G21,G32
ABSTRACT
This paper examines how governance and risk management affect risk-taking in banks. It distinguishes
between good risks, which are risks that have an ex ante private reward for the bank on a stand-alone
basis, and bad risks, which do not have such a reward. A well-governed bank takes the amount of risk
that maximizes shareholder wealth subject to constraints imposed by laws and regulators. In general,
this involves eliminating or mitigating all bad risks to the extent that it is cost effective to do so. The
role of risk management in such a bank is not to reduce the bank’s total risk per se. It is to identify
and measure the risks the bank is taking, aggregate these risks in a measure of the bank’s total risk,
enable the bank to eliminate, mitigate and avoid bad risks, and ensure that its risk level is consistent
with its risk appetite. Organizing the risk management function so that it plays that role is challenging
because there are limitations in measuring risk and because, while more detailed rules can prevent
destructive risk-taking, they also limit the flexibility of an institution in taking advantage of opportunities
that increase firm value. Limitations of risk measurement and the decentralized nature of risk-taking
imply that setting appropriate incentives for risk-takers and promoting an appropriate risk culture are
essential to the success of risk management in performing its function.
René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu

1. Introduction
The Oxford Dictionary defines risk as a situation that involves exposure to danger. It also states that
the word comes from the Italian word risco, which means danger. We call risks that are only danger bad
risks. Banks – and any firm for that matter – also have opportunities to take risks that have an ex ante
reward on a stand-alone basis. We call such risks good risks.1 One might be tempted to conclude that
good risk management reduces the exposure to danger. However, such a view of risk management ignores
that banks cannot succeed without taking risks that are ex ante profitable. Consequently, taking actions
that reduce risk can be costly for shareholders when lower risk means avoiding valuable investments and
activities that have higher risk. Therefore, from the perspective of shareholders, better risk management
cannot mean risk management that is more effective at reducing risk in general since reducing risk in
general would mean not taking valuable projects. If good risk management does not mean low risk, then
what does it mean? How is it implemented? What are its limitations? What can be done to make it more
effective? In this article, I provide a framework to understand the role, the organization, and the
limitations of risk management in banks when it is designed from the perspective of increasing the value
of the bank for its shareholders.
In corporate finance, the well-known Modigliani-Miller theorem of leverage irrelevance implies that
the value of a firm does not depend on its leverage. For the theorem to hold, markets have to be
frictionless, so that there cannot be transaction costs of any kind. As has been stressed by modern banking
research, there are no reasons for banks to exist if the conditions of the Modigliani-Miller theorem of
leverage irrelevance hold. With the Modigliani-Miller theorem, a bank has the same value if it is mostly
financed by debt or mostly financed by equity. Hence, the value of a bank is the same irrespective of its
risk of default or distress if the Modigliani-Miller theorem of leverage irrelevance applies to banks. It
follows that if the conditions for the Modigliani-Miller theorem apply, a bank has no reason to manage its
risk of default or its risk of financial distress (e.g., Stulz (2003)).
1 For a related useful taxonomy, see Kaplan and Mikes (2012). They distinguish between preventable, strategic, and
external risks and show that the role of risk management differs across these types of risk.
1

When the Modigliani-Miller theorem of leverage irrelevance does not apply, the most compelling
argument for managing risk is that adverse outcomes can lead to financial distress and financial distress is
costly (Smith and Stulz (1985)). When a firm is distressed, it loses its ability to implement its strategy
effectively and finds it more difficult and expensive to conduct its business. As a result, the value of a
firm’s equity is reduced by the present value of future costs of financial distress. When a firm manages
risk so that it reduces the present value of these future costs of distress while incurring costs in doing so
that are lower than the amount by which this present value is reduced, firm value is increased for
shareholders. Banks differ from firms in general because they create value for shareholders through their
liabilities as well. Banks produce liquid claims and the value of a bank depends on its success at
producing such claims. For instance, the value of a bank depends on its deposit franchise. A bank’s
ability to issue claims that are valued because of their liquidity depends on its risk, so that risk
management is intrinsic to the business model of banks in a way that it is not for non-financial firms
(DeAngelo and Stulz (2014)).
Since an increase in risk can enable a bank to invest in assets and projects that are valuable but can
also lead to a loss in value because of an adverse impact on its risk of financial distress and its ability to
create value through liabilities, there is an optimal amount of risk for a bank from the perspective of its
shareholders. A well-governed bank will have processes in place to identify this optimal amount of risk
and make sure that its risk does not differ too much from this optimal amount. Theoretically, the bank’s
problem is simple: it should take any project that increases its value, taking into account the costs
associated with the impact of the project on the bank’s total risk. Practically, the bank’s problem is
difficult because risk-taking decisions are made all the time throughout the bank and each decision affects
its probability of financial distress to some degree. As a result, risk-taking decisions cannot be evaluated
in isolation but must be assessed in terms of their impact on the overall risk of the bank.
In principle, if there is an optimal level of risk for a bank, the cost of taking on a new risk that
increases the bank’s total risk should be traded off against the potential gain from taking the risk.
However, ignoring hedges, it would never make sense for a bank to take a risk that destroys value as a
2