NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXTERNAL EQUITY FINANCING SHOCKS, FINANCIAL FLOWS, AND ASSET
PRICES
Frederico Belo
Xiaoji Lin
Fan Yang
Working Paper 20210
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20210
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014
We thank Kenneth Ahern, Hengjie Ai, Hang Bai, Juliane Begeneau, Jonathan B. Cohn, Andrea Eisfeldt,
Wayne Ferson, Murray Frank, John Graham, Gerard Hoberg, Jarrad Harford, Kewei Hou, Christian
Julliard, Erik Loualiche (WFA discussant), Paulo Maio, Daniel Paravisini, Vincenzo Quadrini, Michael
Roberts, Juliana Salomao, Amit Seru, Raj Singh, Ken Singleton, Rene Stulz, Andrea Tamoni, Sheridan
Titman, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh (Macro-Finance Society Workshop discussant), Neng Wang, Mike
Weisbach, Jianfeng Yu, Harold Zhang, and Lu Zhang for their comments. We also thank seminar participants
at the BI Norwegian Business School, Aalto University and Hanken School of Economics, Ohio State
University, University of British Columbia, University of Minnesota, University of Southern California,
University of Texas at Austin, University of Texas at Dallas, University of Toronto, China International
Conference in Finance (2014), Macro-Finance Society Workshop (2014), SED (2014), and WFA (2014).
We thank Jarrad Harford, Ryan Israelsen, and Vincenzo Quadrini, for providing us the data on firms’
cash held abroad, collateral constraint shocks, and quality-adjusted investment prices, respectively.
Fan Yang acknowledges the financial support from a GRF grant from Research Grants Council of
Hong Kong (Project No.755612). All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Frederico Belo, Xiaoji Lin, and Fan Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

External Equity Financing Shocks, Financial Flows, and Asset Prices
Frederico Belo, Xiaoji Lin, and Fan Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 20210
June 2014, Revised December 2014
JEL No. E23,E44,G12
ABSTRACT
The ability of corporations to raise external equity finance varies with macroeconomic conditions,
suggesting that the cost of equity issuance is time-varying. Using cross sectional data on U.S. publicly
traded firms, we construct an empirical proxy of an aggregate shock to the cost of equity issuance,
which we interpret as a financial shock. We show that this shock captures systematic risk, and that
exposure to this shock helps price the cross section of stock returns including book-to-market, investment,
and size portfolios. We propose a dynamic investment-based model with stochastic equity issuance
costs and a collateral constraint to interpret the empirical findings. Our central finding is that time
variation in external equity financing costs is important for the model to quantitatively capture the
joint dynamics of firms’ asset prices, real quantities, and financing flows. In the model, growth firms,
high investment firms, and large firms, can substitute more easily debt financing for equity financing
when it becomes more costly to raise external equity, hence these firms are less risky in equilibrium.
The model also replicates the failure of the unconditional CAPM in pricing the cross section of stock
returns.
Frederico Belo Fan Yang
Carlson School of Management The University of Hong Kong
University of Minnesota Suite 908
321 19th Avenue South K. K. Leung Building
Minneapolis, MN 55455 Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong
and NBER fanyang@hku.hk
fbelo@umn.edu
Xiaoji Lin
Department of Finance
Ohio State University
2100 Neil Ave, Columbus, OH, 43210
Tel: 614-292-4318
Fax: 614-292-7062
lin.1376@osu.edu

1 Introduction
The recent financial crisis in 2007-2008 is fresh evidence that shocks in the financial sector
can be an important source of business cycle fluctuations, and that the impact of the financial
shocks on the availability of firms’ external finance can be substantial. In this paper, we study
the impact of an aggregate shock to the cost of firms’ external equity finance– a particular form
of financial shocks– on asset prices, real quantities, and financing flows in the cross section of
U.S. firms. We show both empirically as well as through the lens of an investment-based model
with financial frictions, that time-variation in the availability of external equity funds has a
significant impact on equilibrium risk premiums in the cross section.
Building on Eisfeldt and Muir (2014), we use firm-level cross sectional data to construct
an empirical proxy of the aggregate shock to the cost of equity issuance in the U.S. economy.
Different from Eisfeldt and Muir (2014), however, we focus explicitly on the cost of issuing
equity, not on the general cost of external (debt and equity) finance, a distinction we show to
be empirically important for our results.1 Specifically, for each year, we compute the fraction of
firms issuing equity in the cross section, and we then extract the time-series of the innovations
in this fraction using a vector autoregressive (VAR) model that includes aggregate productivity
as a state variable to control for the effect of time-varying growth opportunities on firms’ equity
issuance decisions. We refer to the innovations in the VAR as an (equity) issuance cost shock
(ICS). A positive realization of the ICS is associated with an increase in firms’ equity issuance
beyond what aggregate market conditions, as captured by the level of aggregate productivity,
would predict. As such, this positive shock reveals, at least partially, a low (marginal) cost of
equity issuance, and vice versa. We also show that our simple procedure to extract issuance
cost shocks with a VAR is robust to the inclusion of several other control variables known to
explain equity issuance decisions by firms.
Our empirical approach is consistent with the view that external equity is costly and that
thesecostsvaryovertime, asin,forexample, Bolton,Chen, andWang(2013). TheICScaptures
the systematic (aggregate) component driving the time-variation of the equity issuance costs.
While we do not study the causes of the changes in external equity financing conditions, the
source of its time variation could be due to the impact of changes in information asymmetries
and agency frictions, changes in investors’ sentiment, time-varying aggregate liquidity, time-
varying risk aversion of financial intermediaries, among other effects, on investors’ willingness
to supply equity capital to firms. We review the related literature in Section 2.
Empirically, we show that the ICS captures systematic risk in the economy. Controlling for
1When we use a similar approach to extract debt (not equity) issuance cost shocks, we find that firms’
differential exposure to these shocks do not appear to capture crosssectionalvariationin systematic risk in the
cross section, which is the focus of our study.
2

the aggregate market factor, firms’ exposure to ICS helps explain cross-sectional variation in
the average returns of portfolios sorted by book-to-market (value premium), investment rate
(investment spread), and market equity (size spread). In addition, we document that investors
require a higher risk premium for holding assets that are more positively exposed to the ICS,
that is, assets that do poorly when it is more costly to issue equity (low ICS). Because value
firms, low investment firms, and small firms have a relatively higher exposure (covariance) to
ICS, these firms are riskier and thus, have higher returns in equilibrium. Augmenting the
standard capital asset pricing model (CAPM) with ICS as an additional factor, we show that
the two-factor model significantly outperforms the CAPM in pricing the cross section of stock
returns of these portfolios.
We propose a dynamic investment-based model with financial frictions to understand the
economic mechanism driving the empirical findings. The model features a large cross section of
firms that invest in physical capital, issue equity and debt or save using cash, to maximize
the value of the firm for existing shareholders. Cross-sectional heterogeneity is driven by
idiosyncratic productivity shocks. The key features of the model are: (i) debt issuance is
limited by a (standard) collateral constraint; and (ii) equity issuance is costly and this cost is
stochastic, varying over time due to an aggregate issuing cost shock. This equity issuance cost
shock acts as an additional source of aggregate economic fluctuations (financial shocks) that
is independent of aggregate productivity shocks, and affects investor’s marginal utility (with
a positive price of risk), consistent with the empirical evidence reported here. We interpret a
negative issuance cost shock as a disruption in the financial sector, with no initial disruptions
in the nonfinancial sector, which is the sector of the economy that we model here.2 This
disruption implies that fewer funds can be channeled from equity holders to firms. This leads
to insufficient external financing available to firms, which in turn affects firms’ investment,
dividends, and market value of equity.
The cross sectional variation in expected stock returns arises endogenously in the model
due to the interaction between firms’ productivity, investment, equity issuance cost shocks,
and the collateral constraint. The economic mechanism emphasizes that the firms’ ability (or
inability) to substitute between different marginal sources of external financing (equity and
debt) during bad economic times is an important determinant of equilibrium risk premiums.
Because growth firms, high investment firms, and large firms, can substitute more easily debt
financing for equity financing when it becomes more costly to raise external equity, these firms
are less risky in equilibrium.
2Most of the existing literature in macroeconomics has focussed on the amplification mechanism generated
by financial frictions (Bernanke and Gertler 1989, Kiyotaki and Moore 1997, Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist
1999). Inthosemodels,financialfrictionsserveto exacerbatethe negativeshocksfromthe nonfinancialsectors,
but not to cause economic fluctuations.
3