NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE
Jianjun Miao
Pengfei Wang
Tao Zha
Working Paper 20377
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20377
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014
We thank Mark Bils, Larry Christiano, Marty Eichenbaum, Jordi Gali, Lars Hansen, Simon Gilchrist,
Pat Higgins, Lee Ohanian, Sergio Rebelo, Richard Rogerson, Giorgio Valente, Gianluca Violante,
Wei Xiong, and seminar participants at University of Pennsylvania, University of North Carolina,
the NBER Summer Institute, the AFR Summer Institute of Economics and Finance, the PBC Finance
School of Tsinghua University, Hong Kong Monetary Authority, University of Toronto, Vanderbilt
University, and University of Rochester for helpful discussions. The research is supported in part by
the National Science Foundation Grant SES 1558486 through the NBER and by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China Research Grants (71473168, 71473169, and 71633003). The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta or the Federal Reserve System or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20377.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Jianjun Miao, Pengfei Wang, and Tao Zha. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Discount Shock, Price-Rent Dynamics, and the Business Cycle
Jianjun Miao, Pengfei Wang, and Tao Zha
NBER Working Paper No. 20377
August 2014, Revised January 2020
JEL No. E22,E32,E44
ABSTRACT
The price-rent ratio is highly volatile and predicts future returns for commercial real estate. Price-rent
variations in commercial real estate also tend to comove with investment and output. We develop a
general equilibrium model that explicitly introduces a rental market and incorporates collateral constraints
on production as a key ingredient. Our estimation identifies discount-rate shocks as the most important
factor in (1) driving price-rent variations, (2) producing the long-horizon predictability of real estate
returns, and (3) linking the dynamics in commercial real estate to those in the production sector.
Jianjun Miao Tao Zha
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Boston University Emory University
270 Bay State Road Rich Memorial Building
Boston, MA 02215 1602 Fishburne Drive
miaoj@bu.edu Atlanta, GA 30322-2240
and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
and also NBER
tzha@emory.edu
Pengfei Wang
Department of Economics
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Hong Kong
and HSBC Business School
Peking University
Shenzhen, China
pfwang@phbs.pku.edu.cn

DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE 1
I. Introduction
The rise and fall of real estate prices in the past decades and the 2008 financial crisis
triggered by the collapse of real estate prices have generated a great deal of research on the
impact of real estate prices on the macroeconomy. Most research has focused on consumers’
behavior and the residential real estate market. When we study firms’ investment dynamics,
it is often the commercial real estate market that becomes relevant. In a recent paper,
Chaney, Sraer, and Thesmar (2012) provide micro evidence that links the commercial real
estate price to investment. They estimate that a $1 increase in a representative U.S. firm’s
value of real estate raises its investment by $0.06. At the aggregate level, however, the link
between commercial real estate prices and investment dynamics has been largely unexplored.
In this paper we develop a medium-size dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE)
model and show that this model is capable of reproducing quantitatively a variety of stylized
facts about the commercial real estate price and the business cycle if one incorporates two
key ingredients: shocks to households’ discount rate and collateral constraints on firms’ pro-
duction. We confront our model with financial and macroeconomic time series and estimate
the model using the Bayesian method to account for the following facts:
(1) Volatility: Commercial real estate price fluctuates much more than rent and output
do. Over the past 20 years, while the volatility (measured by the standard deviation
of quarterly changes) is 1.245% for rent and 0.697% for output, the volatility of real
estate prices is 4.171%.
(2) Long-horizon predictability: Price-rent variation predicts long-horizon real estate re-
turns.1 Simple ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of real estate returns at
different horizons on the rent-price ratio (the valuation ratio) show that the slope
coefficients are significantly positive and they increase with the horizon and that the
fit measure, R2, also increases with the horizon. Figure 1 plots the contemporaneous
price-rent ratio against real estate returns of the subsequent five years to capture the
key fact: high prices relative to rents have preceded many years of low returns and
low prices have preceded high returns.
(3) Comovement: The price-rent ratio tends to comove with output as demonstrated by
Figure 2. The contemporaneous correlation between output and price-rent ratio is
0.83 for log level and 0.48 for year-over-year growth.2
Howto reproduceall these macro-financefacts within onestructural framework hasbeen a
central but challenging task in the macro-finance literature. Our model builds on the DSGE
1See Ghysels, Plazzi, Torous, and Valkanov (2012) for an extensive survey of this literature.
2When output and the price-rent ratio are log-linearly detrended, the correlation is 0.47. When these
series are hp-filtered, the correlation is 0.63.

DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE 2
literature with a combination of two distinctive features: we introduce a rental market
of commercial real estate and assume that firms face collateral constraints when financing
working capital. Without modeling the rental market explicitly, the existing macroeconomic
models (Iacoviello, 2005;IacovielloandNeri, 2010;Liu, Wang, andZha,2013; Liu, Miao, and
Zha, 2016, for example) show that real estate price and rent move in comparable magnitude
so that there is little price-rent variation in comparison to the data. But price-rent variation
is central to both the long-horizon predictability of real estate returns (Cochrane, 2011;
Ghysels, Plazzi, Torous, and Valkanov, 2013) and the business cycle (Figure 2).
By controlling for an array of commonly used shocks such as technology and labor supply
shocks, we find that shocks to the discount rate are the key to generating the data dynamics
that quantitatively reproduce stylized facts (1)-(3). The key intuition is that the rental price
of commercial real estate is determined by the marginal product of the real estate property
in firms’ production, but the real estate price is a forward looking variable, equal to the
discounted present value of future rents. Shocks to such a discount are intertemporal and
affect future appreciations of the price; they do not directly affect the current rent.
The discount-rate shock is a parsimonious way of modeling the variation in discount rates
stressed by Hansen and Jagannathan (1991), Campbell and Ammer (1993) and Cochrane
(2011) and can sometimes be interpreted as a sentiment shock as in Barberis, Shleifer, and
Vishny (1998) and Dumas, Kurshev, and Uppal (2009). In the macroeconomic literature
(Smets and Wouters, 2003; Primiceri, Schaumburg, and Tambalotti, 2006; Gal´ı, 2015, for
example), thediscount-rateshockiscalleda“preference”shocktocaptureshiftsinaggregate
demand; itsassetpricingimplicationswerefirstdiscussedbyAlbuquerque,Eichenbaum,Luo,
and Rebelo (2016), who construct a general equilibrium model of an endowment economy to
show that discount-rate shocks can generate the observed risk premium and weak correlation
between consumption growth and stock returns. In their model, however, these shocks do
not affect macroeconomic movements or generate the long-horizon predictability of excess
stock returns.
We follow Albuquerque, Eichenbaum, Luo, and Rebelo (2016) by introducing discount-
rate shocks and extend their model to a production economy with an emphasis on the
implications of commercial real estate prices on investment and the business cycle. One key
contribution of our paper is to show that in our production economy model, discount-rate
shocks can generate price-rent fluctuations over the business cycle. Because firms’ collateral
assets provide the collateral (liquidity) premium, discount-rate shocks can also generate the
long-horizon predictability of excess real estate returns. These discoveries are important
for several reasons. First, the long-horizon predictability is prevalent in the asset pricing
literature in general and the real estate literature in particular. Which shock in general
equilibrium models can generate the data dynamics reproducing the predictability result has