NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HISTORY OF AMERICAN CORPORATE GOVERNANCE:
LAW, INSTITUTIONS, AND POLITICS
Eric Hilt
Working Paper 20356
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20356
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2014
I would like to thank Carola Frydman, David Robinson, Naomi Lamoreaux, Antoinette Schoar, and
Marc Weidenmier for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Eric Hilt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

History of American Corporate Governance: Law, Institutions, and Politics
Eric Hilt
NBER Working Paper No. 20356
July 2014
JEL No. G3,N21,N81
ABSTRACT
This paper presents an overview of the history of corporate governance in the United States, emphasizing
the period before the advent of federal securities laws and the Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC). Recent research has overturned many widely accepted beliefs about corporate governance
during this period. In particular, the evolution of American corporate governance has not followed
a simple, linear trajectory, beginning with small, well-governed firms and ending with large, poorly
governed ones. Over time, economic and institutional changes have given rise to successive generations
of corporations with their own governance problems and their own mechanisms to address those problems.
When existing governance mechanisms failed, the United States experienced corporate governance
crises—episodes that shattered investors’ faith in corporate management and the legal institutions
intended to protect their rights. The resolutions of these crises have sometimes been found in legal
innovations, and in other cases, in institutional or market-based solutions.
Eric Hilt
Wellesley College
Department of Economics
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
ehilt@wellesley.edu

1. Introduction: History and the American Corporation
Across the world today, there is a striking relationship between legal institutions
and financial development. Countries with legal systems that offer robust protections for
minority shareholders have larger equity markets, and firms in those countries make
greater use of outside finance (La Porta et al. 1997). The United States in particular
offers relatively strong legal protections to investors and possesses deep capital markets.
Its corporations’ ownership structures are also distinctive: America’s public companies
are usually not dominated by controlling investors, and in particular family business
groups, pyramidal structures, ownership by banks, and dual-class shares that allocate
control to minority owners are all uncommon. Widely dispersed ownership is more
typical of American public corporations than those of most other countries (La Porta et
al. 1999).
When did this distinctive style of corporate ownership, and the legal institutions
that support it, emerge in the United States? Did American corporate ownership and
governance once resemble those of other countries, or was it always relatively unique? If
it evolved over time, what accounts for this evolution? Answers to these questions can
help evaluate competing explanations of the ownership patterns of American
companies, such as those suggesting that populist politics has restrained financial
institutions and large investors (Roe 1994) or that strong legal protections for investors,
originating in the common law, have made dispersed ownership possible (La Porta et al.
1998). Moreover, they can shed light on the level and nature of the investor protections
offered in the United States when it was an emerging market---which is in some ways
the relevant comparison to today’s developing countries (see Morck 2011 for an
overview).
This article presents an overview of the history of corporate governance in the
United States, emphasizing the period before the advent of federal securities laws and
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) in the 1930s. The legal and institutional
protections of investors, and their evolution, are analyzed, and data on the ownership
structures of corporations at different points in time are presented. The discussion
emphasizes large, publicly traded corporations, the historical equivalents of the modern
enterprises that are the focus of the literature on corporate governance today. The
1

ownership data presented include New York Stock Exchange (NYSE)-traded firms in the
1820s, which mostly consisted of banks and insurance companies; Boston Stock
Exchange--traded industrials and utilities in the 1870s, when the Boston Stock
Exchange was the premier market for industrials in the United States (Atack and
Rousseau 1999); and finally, NYSE-traded railroads in 1910, when railroads were the
largest American business enterprises.
Until relatively recently, the early history of the corporation in America has been
a somewhat neglected subject. In part, this reflects the influence of a literature on the
evolution of business enterprise that has mostly ignored issues relating to the law or to
the internal governance of corporations (for example, Chandler 1977). But it also reflects
the frustrating complexity of early legal history. Corporation law in the United States is
state law, and early enterprises could only incorporate in their home states (see
Henderson 1918). Studying the history of the corporation requires analyzing many
states’ early laws, and any existing data on early corporate ownership likely resides in
the archives of state governments. The early nineteenth century is a statistical dark age,
particularly for business records (David 1967).
Among the literature that does exist on the topic, Berle and Means’ (1932) work is
the most important and influential. They argue that the separation of ownership from
control was a recent development and that that in the early nineteenth century, it had
not occurred. Berle and Means (1932, p. 135, footnote 14) claim that for early American
corporations, “the number of shareholders was few; they could and did attend meetings;
they were business-men; and their vote meant something.” They then argue that legal,
organizational, and technological developments in the late-nineteenth and early-
twentieth centuries led to the emergence of large, diffusely held enterprises controlled
by professional managers or by minority interests. Much of the scholarship on corporate
governance that has been produced since Berle and Means has accepted their
characterization of the history of American corporations (see, e.g., Dodd 1938,
Hovenkamp 1991, and Coffee 2001; an important exception is Werner 1986). But the
early history of American corporations has not been well documented, and the
arguments of Berle and Means may have been accepted simply because they seemed
2