NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
POSITIVE EXTERNALITIES OF SOCIAL INSURANCE:
UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE AND CONSUMER CREDIT
Joanne W. Hsu
David A. Matsa
Brian T. Melzer
Working Paper 20353
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20353
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2014
We thank Jesse Davis, Naveen Gohndi, Eric Kennedy, Jake Krimmel, and Paolina Medina-Palma
for research assistance. For helpful comments and suggestions, we are grateful to Gene Amromin,
Marieke Bos, Tal Gross, Jeanne Lafortune, Andreas Mueller, Matthew Notowidigdo, Jonathan Parker,
Janneke Ratcliffe, Amit Seru, Roine Vestman and seminar participants at the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau, DePaul-Chicago Fed, New York University, Northwestern University, Sveriges
Riksbank, University of Arizona, University of California–Los Angeles, University of California–San
Diego, University of Illinois–Chicago, University of Indiana, University of Mannheim, University
of North Carolina, Boulder Summer Conference on Consumer Financial Decision Making, Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland Policy Summit, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Credit and Payments
Conference, Finance UC Conference at Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile, IBEFA Summer
Meeting, NBER Conference on Poverty, Social Policy, and Inequality, NBER Summer Institute (Economics
of Real Estate & Local Public Finance), and Norges Bank Workshop on Household Finance. The analysis
and conclusions set forth in this paper are those of the authors and do not indicate concurrence by
other members of the Federal Reserve research staff or the Board of Governors. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Joanne W. Hsu, David A. Matsa, and Brian T. Melzer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Positive Externalities of Social Insurance: Unemployment Insurance and Consumer Credit
Joanne W. Hsu, David A. Matsa, and Brian T. Melzer
NBER Working Paper No. 20353
July 2014
JEL No. D14,G21,H31,R28
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the impact of unemployment insurance (UI) on consumer credit markets. Exploiting
heterogeneity in UI generosity across U.S. states and over time, we find that UI helps the unemployed
avoid defaulting on their mortgage debt. We estimate that UI expansions during the Great Recession
prevented about 1.4 million foreclosures. Lenders respond to this decline in default risk by expanding
credit access and reducing interest rates for low-income households at risk of being laid off. Our findings
call attention to two benefits of unemployment insurance not previously highlighted: reducing deadweight
losses from loan default and expanding access to credit.
Joanne W. Hsu Brian T. Melzer
Board of Governors of the Kellogg School of Management
Federal Reserve System Northwestern University
20th and C Streets NW 2001 Sheridan Road
Washington, DC 20551 Evanston, IL 60208
joanne.w.hsu@frb.gov b-melzer@kellogg.northwestern.edu
David A. Matsa
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
dmatsa@kellogg.northwestern.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
Throughout the Great Recession, as home values declined and foreclosures proliferated,
housing policy was forefront in debates on economic policy. A key motivation for policy
intervention was to avoid deadweight costs of foreclosure borne by borrowers, lenders, and even
those in the surrounding community (Posner and Zingales 2009; Federal Reserve Board of
Governors 2012). Despite general agreement on the motives to intervene, policymakers struggled
to design and implement effective policies. Debate centered on whether foreclosures were caused
by job loss, payment shocks or underwater borrowers’ incentive to “strategically default,” and
accordingly whether programs should focus on improving borrowers’ ability or incentive to
repay. In this paper, we explore the role of unemployment benefits in consumer credit markets,
and show that unemployment insurance, which improves borrowers’ ability to repay their debt, is
effective in reducing mortgage delinquency and improving access to credit.
In theory, the effect of unemployment insurance on borrower default risk is ambiguous.
Although increasing UI generosity improves households’ ability to make loan payments, various
forms of moral hazard might lead borrowers to default more often. First, weaker incentives to
search for new work slows reemployment (Moffitt 1985; Meyer 1990) and increases long-term
unemployment risk (Schmeider et al. 2012), reducing the resources available to meet credit
obligations over time.1 Second, more complete social insurance might embolden households to
take greater risk (Gormley, Liu and Zhou 2010), including borrowing more. Third, if the number
of unemployed individuals grows with UI generosity (Topel 1983), then aggregate loan
delinquency might rise as well.
We evaluate the net impact of unemployment insurance on loan default by exploiting
variation in UI generosity across states and over time. States differ substantially in benefit
1 Households’ incentive to avoid default mitigates this effect (Chetty and Szeidl 2007; Chetty 2008).
1

generosity, both in the cross-section and in how they adjust regular benefits over time.2 During
the recent recession, additional differences emerged across states as unemployed workers
became eligible for supplemental benefits though the Extended Benefits (EB) and Emergency
Unemployment Compensation (EUC) programs.
Our analysis begins by examining time-series variation in regular UI benefits (excluding
the supplemental EB and EUC programs) between 1991 and 2011. We use household data on
mortgage delinquency from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) in a
repeated cross-sectional research design, and identify the effect of UI generosity by comparing
trends in loan delinquencies among employed and unemployed households to state-level changes
in maximum UI benefits. We show that increases in UI generosity alleviate mortgage
delinquency, specifically for unemployed homeowners. To gauge the magnitude, consider the
effect of a $3,600 increase in a state’s maximum regular UI benefits, which was the cross-state
standard deviation of maximum benefits in 2010. We find that a $3,600 increase in benefits
reduces the likelihood of mortgage delinquency among displaced workers by 90 basis points,
thereby preventing 15% of the average layoff-related rise in delinquency. State benefit caps bind
for only about half of UI recipients in our sample. Consistent with this fact, the sensitivity of
mortgage delinquency to UI benefits roughly doubles when the maximum benefit is measured at
the individual level, conditional on workers’ past earnings: an additional $3,600 in maximum
benefits reduces delinquency by 170 basis points. As a falsification test, we confirm that
delinquency is unrelated to a state’s UI generosity among homeowners who are not laid off and
therefore do not receive UI benefits.
The effect appears to be long term, as UI benefits not only mitigate loan delinquency, but
also reduce homeowner relocations and evictions. We find that an additional $3,600 in a state’s
2 In 2011, for example, a laid-off worker could collect up to about $28,000 in regular benefits in
Massachusetts but only about $6,000 in Mississippi. Similarly, between 1991 and 2011, maximum UI
benefits grew by only 22% in Florida but by 174% in New Mexico.
2