NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE MACROECONOMICS OF SHADOW BANKING
Alan Moreira
Alexi Savov
Working Paper 20335
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20335
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2014
We thank Markus Brunnermeier, Douglas Diamond, Gary Gorton, Valentin Haddad, Zhiguo He, Arvind
Krishnamurthy, Matteo Maggiori, Andrew Metrick, Tyler Muir, Cecilia Parlatore Siritto, Thomas
Philippon, and Michael Woodford for feedback. We also thank seminar participants at Yale School
of Management, New York University Stern School of Business, Kellogg School of Management,
Wisconsin Business School, and Princeton University, and conference participants at the Kellogg Junior
Finance Conference, the NBER Monetary Economics Program Meeting, the Safe Assets and the Macroeconomy
Conference at LBS, and the annual meetings of the WFA and SED. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Alan Moreira and Alexi Savov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Macroeconomics of Shadow Banking
Alan Moreira and Alexi Savov
NBER Working Paper No. 20335
July 2014
JEL No. E44,E52,G01,G21,G23
ABSTRACT
We build a macroeconomic model that centers on liquidity transformation in the financial sector. Intermediaries
maximize liquidity creation by issuing securities that are money-like in normal times but become illiquid
in a crash when collateral is scarce. We call this process shadow banking. A rise in uncertainty raises
demand for crash-proof liquidity, forcing intermediaries to delever and substitute toward safe, collateral-
intensive liabilities. Shadow banking shrinks, causing the liquidity supply to contract, discount rates
and collateral premia spike, prices and investment fall. The model produces slow recoveries, collateral
runs, and flight to quality and it provides a framework for analyzing unconventional monetary policy
and regulatory reform proposals.
Alan Moreira
Yale School of Management
Yale University
46 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06511
alan.moreira@yale.edu
Alexi Savov
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-85
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
asavov@stern.nyu.edu

Economic performance over the past ten years is the story of a boom, a bust, and a
slow recovery. Recent work (He and Krishnamurthy, 2013; Brunnermeier and Sannikov,
2014b) shows how a scarcity of capital in the financial sector amplifies the bust. At the
sametime,thereisanunderstandingthattheconnectionbetweenfinanceandmacroalso
runs through the liabilities of financial institutions: The ups and downs of the recent
cycle closely track the rise and fall of the shadow banking sector, whose liabilities are an
importantsourceofliquidityinthefinancialsystem.1 Thecapitalscarcityviewprevalent
in the macro finance literature does not offer an interpretation of shadow banking that
canbeusedtodrawthisconnection.
We interpret shadow banking as liquidity transformation: issuing safe liquid liabil-
ities against risky illiquid assets. We build a dynamic macro finance model that puts
this process at the center. In doing so, it joins the macroeconomic cycle to the liquidity
transformationcycleinthefinancialsector.
Here is how it works. Households demand liquidity to insure against shocks. Inter-
mediaries supply liquidity by tranching illiquid assets, subject to a collateral constraint
due to crash risk; issuing equity is costless. In quiet times, intermediaries lever up the
collateral valueof their assets, expandingthe quantity butalso the fragility ofliquidity, a
shadowbankingboom. Overtime,investmentinriskycapitalcreatesaneconomicboom,
butitalsobuildsupeconomicfragility.
A rise in uncertainty causes households to demand crash-proof, fully-collateralized
liquid securities. Intermediaries delever to meet this demand. Shadow banking shuts
down, contracting the liquidity supply and driving up discount rates. Asset prices fall,
amplified by endogenous collateral runs (rising haircuts reinforce falling prices). Invest-
ment and economic growth also fall. A flight to quality effect pushes up the prices of
safe assets, causing intermediaries to shift investment to storage-like capital. This sets
up a slow recovery once uncertainty recedes. Recovery is further slowed by a “collateral
decelarator”inwhichhaircutsriseasexposuretouncertaintyonceagainpicksup.
Attheheartofourmodelliesthedistinctionbetweenliquidityandwealth. Securities
1FromBernanke(2013): “Shadowbanking...wasanimportantsourceofinstabilityduringthecrisis....
Shadowbankingincludesvehiclesforcreditintermediation,maturitytransformation,liquidityprovision,
andrisksharing. Suchvehiclesaretypicallyfundedonalargelyshort-termbasisfromwholesalesources.
In the run-up to the crisis, the shadow banking sector involved a high degree of maturity transformation
and leverage. Illiquid loans to households and businesses were securitized, and the tranches of the se-
curitizations with the highest credit ratings were funded by very short-term debt, such as asset-backed
commercial paper and repurchase agreements (repos). The short-term funding was in turn provided by
institutions, suchasmoneymarketfunds, whoseinvestorsexpectedpaymentinfullondemandandhad
littletoleranceforrisktoprincipal....Wheninvestorslostconfidenceinthequalityoftheassets...theyran.
Theirflightcreatedseriousfundingpressuresthroughoutthefinancialsystem,threatenedthesolvencyof
manyfirms,andinflictedseriousdamageonthebroadereconomy.”
1

areliquidonlytotheextentthattheyarebackedbysufficientcollateraltomaketheirpay-
offsinsensitivetoprivateinformation. Weshowthatintermediariescanprovideliquidity
efficiently by tranching the economy’s capital assets. This is the source of their economic
value.
Bycontrast,thecapitalscarcityviewreliesonthedistinctionbetweeninsideandout-
side intermediary capital, imposing a friction on the ability of outside capital to flow in.
To highlight the liquidity view, we abstract entirely from this type of friction, though the
twocaninteractininterestingways.
The role for liquidity in our model originates with households who experience id-
iosyncratic liquidity events (Diamond and Dybvig, 1983): short-lived opportunities to
consume a burst of wealth at high marginal utility, which necessitates a rapid sale of se-
curities. As a result of this urgency, liquidity-event consumption must be financed by
sales of liquid securities, namely those that can be traded quickly and in large quantities
atlowcost.2
We endogenize liquidity based on the notion of low information sensitivity (Gorton
andPennacchi,1990): Asecurityisliquidifitsexpectedpayoffdoesnotdependtoomuch
on private information about the state of the economy. This makes it immune to adverse
selectionandallowsittotradewithoutincurringpriceimpactorothercosts.
Liquidity provision is constrained by the supply of collateral as all promises must
be backed by assets (e.g. Holmström and Tirole, 1998). The efficient use of collateral,
which is especially scarce in crashes, leads to the rise of shadow banking. Whereas an
always-liquid, money-like security requires enough collateral to remain informationally
insensitiveat alltimes, even ina crash,a near-moneysecurity thatis onlyliquid absenta
crashusescollateralmainlywhenitismoreabundant,makingitcheapertoproduce. We
refertothecrash-proofliquidsecurityasmoney(e.g. depositsorTreasury-backedrepos)
and the normal-times liquid security as shadow money (e.g. asset-backed commercial
paper or private-label repos). Shadow banking is the process of issuing shadow money.
It is in this sense that it embodies liquidity transformation; it allows greater liquidity
creationforeachdollarofavailablecollateral.
Thesupplyofcollateralsetstheliquiditypossibilityfrontier,anditsintersectionwith
householddemandpinsdowntheequilibriumliquiditymixandsecurityspreads. House-
holds’ willingness to hold shadow money instead of money falls as the probability of a
crashrisesbecauseshadowmoneybecomesincreasinglylikelytoceasetobeliquidwhen
2Empirical evidence for the importance of liquidity demand is found in Krishnamurthy and Vissing-
Jorgensen(2012a,b), Sunderam(2013), Greenwood, HansonandStein(2014), andNagel(2014). Thesepa-
persshowthatinvestorsacceptlowerreturnsforholdingsecuritieswithmoney-likeliquidity.
2