NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EVIDENCE FOR RELATIONAL CONTRACTS IN SOVEREIGN BANK LENDING
Peter Benczur
Cosmin L. Ilut
Working Paper 20391
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20391
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014
We thank Cristina Arellano, Francesco Bianchi, Craig Burnside, Larry Christiano, Jonathan Eaton,
Refet Gurkaynak, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Gabor Kezdi, Narayana Kocherlakota, Sergio Rebelo, Adam
Szeidl, Balazs Szentes, Mark Wright and participants at the AEA Annual Meeting, ESWC, SED Meeting,
ESSIM, NBER Summer Institute and at seminars at Duke University, National Bank of Hungary (MNB),
Northwestern University, UNC Chapel Hill for helpful comments and suggestions. Part of the work
was done while Ilut was a visiting scholar at and Benczur was affiliated with the National Bank of
Hungary (MNB). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Peter Benczur and Cosmin L. Ilut. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Evidence for Relational Contracts in Sovereign Bank Lending
Peter Benczur and Cosmin L. Ilut
NBER Working Paper No. 20391
August 2014
JEL No. C73,D86,F34,G12,G14,G15
ABSTRACT
This paper presents direct evidence for relational contracts in sovereign bank lending. Unlike the existing
empirical literature, its instrumental variables method allows for distinguishing a direct influence of
past repayment problems on current spreads (a "punishment" effect in prices) from an indirect effect
through higher expected future default probabilities ("loss of reputation"). Such a punishment provides
positive surplus to lenders after a default and decreases the borrower's present discounted value of
the net benefits of future borrowing, which create dynamic incentives. Using data on bank loans to
developing countries between 1973-1981 and constructing continuous variables for credit history,
we find evidence that most of the influence of past repayment problems is through the direct, punishment
channel.
Peter Benczur
European Commission, Joint Research Centre (JRC)
Institute for the Protection and Security
of the Citizen (IPSC)
Financial and Economic Analysis Unit, Ispra
Via Enrico Fermi 2749, 21027 Ispra (VA) Italy
and Central European University
and Institute of Economics, CERS HAS
benczurp@ceu.hu
Cosmin L. Ilut
Department of Economics
Duke University
223 Social Sciences Building
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
cosmin.ilut@duke.edu

1 Introduction
A central issue in limited contract enforceability is that if the identity of a defaulting party
is forgotten, then it can reenter the market with a fresh start. The acts of countries and
major banks, however, are remembered, thus they cannot simply walk away after breaking
their commitments. This implies that one can view sovereign bank lending as a long-term
relationship (a relational contract) between borrowers and lenders. In such contracts, parties
honor their obligations in order to influence the terms of future interactions. This means
that a default or any other form of misbehavior leads to a positive surplus to lenders and a
drop in the present discounted value of the net benefits of future borrowing for the borrower.
Usual punishments are an increase in borrowing costs or a capital market exclusion.
There is indeed evidence that a default leads to an increase in spreads (Ozler (1993),
Eichengreen and Mody (1999), Reinhart et al. (2003), Cruces and Trebesch (2013)). This
literature, however, has been unable to identify the precise mechanism of this effect. In
particular, it cannot tell apart a retaliation argument from a signaling alternative: in the
latter, a default reveals some adverse information about the expectation of the debtor’s
future output (for example, the type of the debtor), which hurts its future outcomes (Eaton
(1996), Sandleris (2008)).
Underpuresignaling,1 countriestrytoavoiddefaultinordernottorevealtheirtype. But
oncethereisanupdateoftheirtype, theygetloansthatare“actuariallyfair”, conditionalon
available publicinformationabout theirfuture nonrepayment. Pastdefaults by thesovereign
should only matter to the extent that they influence investors’ expectations of future default
(and recovery rates). Notice that this mechanism only requires that the country still needs
financial markets after a default, but it does not have to involve a long-run relationship.
Under punishment, extra costs are added to future prices, giving positive surpluses to
lenders even conditional on updated information. This creates dynamic incentives even in
the absence of hidden types. To maintain such surpluses, the existence of repeated borrower-
lender interactions is essential.2 This is what we label as “relational contracts”.
We present empirical evidence that a sovereign default is followed by such positive lender
surpluses. Such evidence has immediate consequences for understanding and modeling
sovereign risk, as it points to the presence of dynamic incentives as a repayment mechanism.3
1Samuelson (2006) labels such a scenario as “reputation”. The sovereign risk literature, on the other
hand, oftenreferstotheretaliatorycontractsasembodyinga“reputationpunishment.”Toavoidconfusion,
we will refer to our two channels as “punishment” and “signaling”.
2This is clear in the case of a simple retaliation mechanism. We argue later that even a default-driven
increase in risk-aversion requires some form of lender-borrower lock-in.
3For example, Alfaro and Kanczuk (2005) find that pure signaling is quantitatively insufficient to make
sovereign debt sustainable. Our mechanism would increase repayment incentives.
1

It is also relevant for the broad context of repeated games, relational contracts and
reputations. In both cases, there is very little direct evidence on dynamic incentives
themselves – the sovereign risk literature, for example, usually calibrates its models to match
various aggregate outcomes, or the timing and frequency of default.
The purpose of our paper is to contribute to the empirical sovereign risk literature in
two major respects. First, and most importantly, our methodology is able to distinguish
betweenanydirecteffectofabadrepaymenthistoryonthespread, andtheindirectonegoing
through increased default probability. Second, we deploy different econometric techniques
and variables in order to control for country fixed effects, an important problem that has
not been thoroughly dealt with in most of the previous research.
ThedataonsovereignbankloanspreadsisfromtheWorldBank’spublication“Borrowing
in International Capital Markets” for the period 1973-1981, on 36 developing countries. This
period was the heyday of syndicated bank lending to sovereigns. While most of the variables
utilized in the paper are those suggested by the literature, we create continuous measures
of past and future default, which are based on arrears data from the World Bank’s Global
Development Finance. These variables are compatible with country fixed effects.
Our estimation strategy is a structural-form asset pricing regression. The starting point
is that the spread is determined by expected default risk and credit history. We also add the
BAA rated US corporate bond spread to capture the risk aversion of lenders. As default risk
is an unobserved variable, we replace the expectation term with its realization and merge the
prediction error into the regression residual. This creates an identification problem, as the
realization is correlated with the prediction error. Assuming that expectations are rational,
we can use any variable (debtor characteristics) available at the time of pricing as a valid
instrument. Identification is thus based on the following intuition: with the exception of
credit history (punishment as a dynamic incentive) and the BAA spread (risk aversion),
all fundamentals affect the spread only through their impact on the probability of default.
Notice that the reduced-form regression of such a framework simply regresses the spread on
various debtor characteristics.
In the reduced-form estimation, we find that recent default history has a significant
positive influence on the spread, but the inclusion of country fixed effects is necessary.
Country effects substantially weaken the effect of distant default history. The conclusion
of our benchmark structural-form specification is that future default risk, an overall risk-
aversion measure (the BAA-rated US corporate bond spread) and recent default history can
robustly and meaningfully describe the spread.
In the structural form, the coefficient estimate for default risk is around 0.41. This
means that if we increase our default risk measure by one standard deviation, the implied
2