NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EMPLOYEE SATISFACTION, LABOR MARKET FLEXIBILITY, AND STOCK
RETURNS AROUND THE WORLD
Alex Edmans
Lucius Li
Chendi Zhang
Working Paper 20300
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20300
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2014
We thank Seong Byun, Paul Edwards, Norbert Häring, Jong Min Oh, Andrew Oswald, Marco Pagano,
Paolo Volpin, and Bin Wang for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Alex Edmans, Lucius Li, and Chendi Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Employee Satisfaction, Labor Market Flexibility, and Stock Returns Around The World
Alex Edmans, Lucius Li, and Chendi Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 20300
July 2014
JEL No. G12,G23,G38,J53,J81,J83,J88,K31
ABSTRACT
We study the relationship between employee satisfaction and abnormal stock returns around the world,
using lists of the “Best Companies to Work For” in 14 countries. We show that employee satisfaction
is associated with positive abnormal returns in countries with high labor market flexibility, such as
the U.S. and U.K., but not in countries with low labor market flexibility, such as Germany. These results
are consistent with high employee satisfaction being a valuable tool for recruitment, retention, and
motivation in flexible labor markets, where firms face fewer constraints on hiring and firing. In contrast,
in regulated labor markets, legislation already provides minimum standards for worker welfare and
so additional expenditure may exhibit diminishing returns. The results have implications for the differential
profitability of socially responsible investing (“SRI”) strategies around the world. In particular, they
emphasize the importance of taking institutional features into account when forming such strategies.
Alex Edmans Chendi Zhang
The Wharton School Warwick Business School
University of Pennsylvania Gibbet Hill Road
2460 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall Coventry CV4 7AL, UK
3620 Locust Walk Chendi.Zhang@wbs.ac.uk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
aedmans@wharton.upenn.edu
Lucius Li
Warwick Business School
Gibbet Hill Road
Coventry CV4 7AL, UK
Lu.Li.10@mail.wbs.ac.uk

This paper studies the relationship between employee satisfaction and stock returns around the
world. Theory provides conflicting predictions as to whether employee satisfaction is beneficial or
harmful to firm value. On the one hand, employee welfare can be a valuable tool for recruitment,
retention, and motivation. For the typical 20th-century firm, the bulk of its value stemmed from its
physical capital. In contrast, most modern firms’ key assets are their workers – not only senior
management, but also rank-and-file employees. For example, in knowledge-based industries such
as software, pharmaceuticals, and financial services, non-managerial employees engage in product
development and innovation, and build relationships with customers and suppliers, and mentor
subordinates. Employee-friendly policies can attract high-quality workers to a firm and ensure that
they remain within the firm, to form a source of sustainable competitive advantage.
Relatedly, employee satisfaction can be a valuable motivational tool. In traditional
manufacturing firms, motivation was simple because workers’ output could be easily measured,
allowing the use of monetary “piece rates” (Taylor (1911)). In the modern firm, workers’ tasks are
increasingly difficult to quantify, such as innovation or building client relationships. The reduced
effectiveness of extrinsic motivators increases the role for intrinsic motivators such as satisfaction.
This role is microfounded in both economics and sociology. The efficiency wage theory of Akerlof
and Yellen (1986) argues that employees view a positive working environment as a “gift” from the
firm and respond with a “gift” of increased effort (Akerlof (1982)). Sociological theories argue that
satisfied employees identify with the firm and internalize its objectives, thus inducing effort
(McGregor (1960)).
On the other hand, employee satisfaction can represent wasteful expenditure by management.
Taylor (1911) argued that workers should be treated like any input – management’s goal is to
extract maximum output from them while minimizing their cost. Under this view, satisfaction is an
indicator that employees are overpaid or underworked, both of which reduce firm value. Indeed,
2

agency problems may lead to managers tolerating insufficient effort and/or excessive pay, at
shareholders’ expense. The manager may enjoy more pleasant relationships with his subordinates
by not holding them down to their reservation utility (Jensen and Meckling (1976)). Alternatively,
high wages may constitute a takeover defense, as modeled by Pagano and Volpin (2005a).
Cronqvist et al. (2009) find that salaries are higher when managers are more entrenched, which
supports the view that high worker pay is inefficient.
The relative importance of the above costs and benefits will depend on the institutional context.
In flexible labor markets, firms face fewer restrictions on the contracts they can offer. When hiring
constraints are weaker, the recruitment benefits of employee satisfaction are stronger. Since one’s
rivals also face few hiring constraints, the retention benefits of employee satisfaction are also more
important. Flexible labor markets also feature fewer firing constraints. Since it is easier for firms to
dismiss underperforming workers and replace them with superior ones, the recruitment benefits of
employee satisfaction are again greater. In addition, the greater risk of firing means that employees
invest in general rather than firm-specific skills, which also increases their ability to be recruited
elsewhere (Hall and Soskice (2001), Thelen (2001)). Separately, the motivational benefits are also
likely higher. Under the efficiency wage theory of Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984), workers exert effort
to avoid being fired from a satisfying job, and thus employee satisfaction has greater motivational
impact when the likelihood of firing is stronger. The motivational effect of employee satisfaction
may be particularly important for rank-and-file employees, who are harder to incentivize with
equity since they individually have a small effect on firm value.
In regulated labor markets, hiring and firing are harder, and thus the recruitment, retention, and
motivational benefits are lower. In addition, expenditure on employee satisfaction is likely to
exhibit diminishing marginal returns. When labor market regulations already ensure a minimum
3