NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO REQUIRED MINIMUM DISTRIBUTIONS MATTER? THE EFFECT OF THE
2009 HOLIDAY ON RETIREMENT PLAN DISTRIBUTIONS
Jeffrey R. Brown
James Poterba
David Richardson
Working Paper 20464
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20464
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014
We are grateful to Ben Sprung-Keyser and especially to Ben Bissette for outstanding assistance
with data analysis, to the TIAA-CREF Institute (Richardson) and the National Science Foundation
(Poterba) for research support, and to William Gentry, Alan Gustman, Brigitte Madrian, Steven
Venti, Mark Warshawsky, Anthony Webb, David Wise, and seminar participants at Brandeis, the
Congressional Budget Office, the 2014 NBER Summer Institute, and the 2014 Trans-Atlantic Public
Economics Symposium for helpful discussions. Brown is a trustee of TIAA, and Poterba is a trustee
of CREF. TIAA-CREF is a provider of investment and retirement income security products. This
paper represents the views of the authors, and it does not necessarily reflect the views of the institutions
with which they are affiliated or of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20464.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Jeffrey R. Brown, James Poterba, and David Richardson. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Required Minimum Distributions Matter? The Effect of the 2009 Holiday On Retirement
Plan Distributions
Jeffrey R. Brown, James Poterba, and David Richardson
NBER Working Paper No. 20464
September 2014
JEL No. H2,J14,J26
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates how the 2009 one-time suspension of the Required Minimum Distribution
(RMD) rules associated with qualified retirement plans affected plan distributions at TIAA-CREF,
a large retirement services provider. Using panel data on retirement plan participants at TIAA-CREF,
we find that roughly one third of those who were affected by minimum distribution rules discontinued
their distributions in 2009. The results also show relatively small differences in the suspension probability
between those who had 2008 distributions equal to the RMD amount, and might be classified as facing
a binding RMD constraint, and those who were taking distributions in excess of the RMD amount
before the distribution holiday. The probability of suspension declines substantially with age and rises
modestly with economic resources. We find that individuals taking monthly distributions are less likely
to suspend distributions than those taking annual distributions, particularly at higher wealth levels.
This pattern is consistent with those who choose monthly distributions being more likely to use their
distributions to finance consumption. We supplement these results based on administrative record
data on retirement plan participants with survey evidence on participant attitudes that affected decisions
about suspending distributions. Our findings provide guidance on the revenue consequences of changing
RMD rules and offer insights about the role of various behavioral considerations, such as inertia, in
modeling distribution behavior.
Jeffrey R. Brown David Richardson
Department of Finance TIAA-CREF Institute
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 8500 Andrew Carnegie Blvd.
515 East Gregory Drive Charlotte, NC 28262
Champaign, IL 61820 dprichardson@tiaa-cref.org
and NBER
brownjr@illinois.edu
James Poterba
Department of Economics, E17-214
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
poterba@nber.org

1
Traditional tax-qualified defined contribution (DC) retirement plans in the United States,
such as Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs) and employer-sponsored 401(k) and 403(b)
plans, were created to provide incentives for individuals to save money during working life in
order to help them achieve a reasonable living standard in retirement. These plans allow workers
to defer taxation of contributions and accruing investment income within the qualified plan
during their working life. Distributions from these plans during retirement are taxed as ordinary
income. Deferring constructive receipt of otherwise taxable income on assets held within
qualified DC plans provides consumption tax treatment to these assets, while operating within an
income tax system.
There is a long regulatory tradition of limiting qualified plan participants' capacity to use
these plans as a means of avoiding taxation on assets that are not needed to support retirement
consumption. The tension between the goals of promoting retirement saving and limiting
revenue costs is evident in the structure of the Required Minimum Distribution (RMD) rules that
apply to tax-qualified plans. The RMD rules require plan participants to withdraw a minimum
percentage of their account balance in each year once they reach a specified age.
Warshawsky (1998) describes the history of regulations on tax-qualified plans that have
effectively required plan assets to be distributed to participants over some period of time after
retirement or the attainment of a particular age. In 1962, Congress established formal
distribution requirements for Keogh plans, tax-qualified plans for self-employed individuals,
requiring plan owners to begin taking distributions by the later of the year in which they retired
or the year in which they reached age 70 ½. Although what led to the choice of age 70 ½ in
1962 is not clear, it remains the key trigger point for current RMD rules despite significant
increases in life expectancy over the intervening half a century.

2
RMD rules now apply to virtually all tax-qualified retirement savings plans, including
401(k) plans, 403(b) plans, IRAs, and numerous other defined contribution plans. These rules
limit the revenue cost of tax deferral and help to focus the tax subsidy for saving on
accumulations for retirement. Soled and Wolk (2000) describe the rules in detail, and also
characterize the various tax-planning approaches that account holders might use to limit the
impact of these rules. Some Roth-style accounts are exempt from the RMD rules. Contributions
to these accounts are made with after-tax rather than pre-tax dollars, and withdrawals are not
taxed. As with other tax-qualified plans, account holders are not taxed on accruing capital
income and therefore receive consumption tax treatment. Because the basis in Roth accounts
was fully taxed when contributed, and withdrawals are not taxed, the timing of withdrawals from
these accounts does not affect income tax revenues in the way that withdrawals from traditional
tax-qualified accounts do. RMD rules apply to Roth 401(k) and 403(b) accounts, but not to Roth
IRAs. For the latter, while there are no required distributions during the lifetime of the account
for the participant who accumulated the account balance, or for the participant's spouse if he or
she inherits the account, RMD rules do apply to inherited Roth IRAs when someone other than a
spouse is the beneficiary.
RMD regulations are one of many requirements that retirement plans must meet in order
be "tax-qualified," i.e., to allow their participants to exclude plan income from their taxable
income. There are also limits on the amount that participants can contribute to these plans each
year, restrictions on how and when funds can be withdrawn without paying penalties, and rules
governing the share of total plan contributions that can go to highly compensated employees.
Each of these and other parameters of the qualified plan system can affect the evolution of
participant contributions and account balances, and therefore federal revenues. The extent to