NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE ROLE OF DYNAMIC RENEGOTIATION AND ASYMMETRIC INFORMATION
IN FINANCIAL CONTRACTING
Michael R. Roberts
Working Paper 20484
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20484
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014
I thank Bill Schwert (editor), two anonymous referees, Franklin Allen, Patrick Bolton, Peter DeMarzo,
Nicolae Garleanu, Todd Gormley, Victoria Ivashina, Mark Leary, Mike Lemmon, Pricila Maziero,
Martin Oehmke, Nick Roussanov, Luke Taylor, Toni Whited, Amir Yaron, Jeffrey Zwiebel for helpful
comments; seminar participants at Columbia University, Michigan State University, New York Federal
Reserve Bank, University of Chicago GSB, University of Pennsylvania; conference participants at
SITE 2011; and, William Mann and Peter Maa for excellent research assistance. Roberts gratefully
acknowledges financial support from the Jacobs Levy Equity Management Center for Quantitative
Financial Research and the Greener Family Research Fellowship. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Michael R. Roberts. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Role of Dynamic Renegotiation and Asymmetric Information in Financial Contracting
Michael R. Roberts
NBER Working Paper No. 20484
September 2014
JEL No. D82,G21,G23,G32,K12
ABSTRACT
Using data from SEC filings, I show that the typical bank loan is renegotiated five times, or every
nine months. The pricing, maturity, amount, and covenants are all significantly modified during each
renegotiation, whose timing is governed by the financial health of the contracting parties and uncertainty
regarding the borrowers' credit quality. The relative importance of these factors depends on the duration
of the lending relationship. I interpret these results in light of financial contracting theories and emphasize
that renegotiation is an important mechanism for dynamically completing contracts and for allocating
control rights ex post.
Michael R. Roberts
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk, #2319
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
mrrobert@wharton.upenn.edu

1. Introduction
Privatelyplaceddebtisbyfarthemostimportantsourceofexternalfinancingforfirmsin
OECDcountries(GortonandWinton,2003). Unsurprisingly,alargeliteraturehasdeveloped
which examines this form of financing and its implications for corporate behavior.1 Despite
this attention, there are few studies examining the renegotiation of privately placed debt
outside of financial distress. This void is troubling because a large number of theoretical
studies show that the possibility of renegotiation can have a significant impact on security
design, incentives, and welfare.2
This paper helps fill that void using a novel, hand-collected dataset of “loan paths” for
a random sample of bank borrowers. A loan path is a sequence of events beginning with
an origination and ending with a terminal event, such as maturity or early termination.
In between these two termini I record any and all renegotiations that occur, as well as
information on the modifications made to the loan. This data enables me to address two
broad questions: What happens in renegotiation? And, when does renegotiation occur? For
both questions, I focus on how the answer varies as a function of the duration of the lending
relationship and the number of renegotiations, or renegotiation round.
My primary findings can be summarized as follow. First, renegotiations are initiated by
borrowers primarily in response to changing conditions, as opposed to lender interventions
due to default. Fewer than 28% of the sample renegotiations are due to a covenant violation
or in anticipation of a covenant violation. Yet, more than 75% of all covenant violations lead
to a renegotiation. Thus, renegotiations caused by contractual breaches occur infrequently,
though when a contractual breach occurs it frequently leads to renegotiation.3
1Empirical studies of privately placed debt have examined: debt maturity (e.g., Scherr and Hulburt,
2001; Ortiz-Molina and Penas, 2004; Berger et al., 2005), pricing (Chava, Livdan and Purnanandam, 2009;
Altman, Gande and Saunders, 2010); and covenants (Bradley and Roberts, 2003; Chava and Roberts, 2008;
Roberts and Sufi, 2009a).
2See Section 3 for a discussion of the relevant theories.
3AnumberofstudiesexaminetheimplicationsofcovenantviolationincludingSmithandWarner(1979),
Beneish and Press (1993, 1995), Chen and Wei (1993), Smith (1993), Sweeny (1994), Chava and Roberts
(2008), Roberts and Sufi (2009a), and Nini, Smith, and Sufi (2009).
1

Second, most loans are renegotiated multiple times over relatively short horizons, with
each renegotiation leading to significant changes to the contract. Ignoring the few short-term
loans that are not renegotiated, the typical loan has a maturity at origination of four and a
half years but is renegotiated almost five times, or every 9 months. This finding is not an
artifact of maturity extensions, which occur in less than 20% of renegotiations and typically
with modifications to other features of the contract.
Specifically, renegotiations produce average increases (decreases) in the pricing, amount,
and maturity of the loan equal to 73 (74) basis points, 103 (100) million dollars, and 23 (12)
months, respectively. Relative to an average interest rate spread of 205 basis points, loan
amount of 200 million dollars, and maturity of 5.5 years, these changes are economically
large. They are also largely independent of the renegotiation round, or the duration of
the contractual relationship. In addition to modifications of the contract terms, I observe
changes to the tranche structure and loan type. Borrowers and lenders frequently repackage
loans into more or fewer tranches during renegotiations, while also changing the nature of
lenders’ commitments from term loans to revolving lines of credit and vice versa.
Third, the plurality of renegotiations (46%) modify only the covenant package. In fact,
covenants are more likely to be modified than other loan term throughout the life of the
loan. These modifications are driven largely by borrowers desires to alter their investment,
operating, or financing policies and, to a lesser extent, by borrowers’ financial distress. In
lightofagrowingnumberofcontingenciestiedtotheinterestrate(performancepricinggrid),
amount (borrowing base), and maturity (evergreen provisions), it may not be surprising that
covenant modifications are responsible for many renegotiations.4 Yet, despite the presence of
these contingencies, the majority (54%) of renegotiations modify the interest rate, amount,
or maturity; and over 35% of renegotiations modify an interest rate spread linked to a pricing
4Some covenants do come with contingencies. For example, maintenance covenant thresholds often vary
overtimeinamannerdeterminedbytheperformanceofthecompany. Forexample,networthcovenantsof-
tenincludebuildupprovisionsthatincreasethethresholdwithafractionofpositivenetincome. Restrictions
on capital expenditures often include carryovers, which define the amount of unused investment capacity in
a given period that may be carried forward into future periods.
2