NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AGGREGATE EXTERNAL FINANCING AND SAVINGS WAVES
Andrea L. Eisfeldt
Tyler Muir
Working Paper 20442
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20442
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014
Previously circulated as "Aggregate Issuance and Savings Waves." We thank seminar participants
and discussants at Kellogg, UCLA, Yale, Columbia, University of Michigan, Stanford, NYU, the
NBER Corporate Finance Meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Financial Frictions in
Macroeconomics Conference, the UBC Winter Finance Conference, the SED Annual Meeting,
the NBER Capital Markets and the Economy Meeting, the LAEF Advances in Macro-Finance
conference, the AEA Annual Meeting, and the WFA Annual Meeting, for helpful comments.
Eisfeldt gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Fink Center for Finance &
Investments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20442.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Andrea L. Eisfeldt and Tyler Muir. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Aggregate External Financing and Savings Waves
Andrea L. Eisfeldt and Tyler Muir
NBER Working Paper No. 20442
September 2014
JEL No. E23,E32,E44,G01,G3,G32
ABSTRACT
US data display aggregate external financing and savings waves. Firms can allocate costly
external finance to productive capital, or to liquid assets with low physical returns. If firms raise
costly external finance and accumulate liquidity, either the cost of external finance is relatively
low, or the total return to liquidity accumulation, including its shadow value as future internal
funds, is particularly high. We formalize this intuition by estimating a dynamic model of firms’
financing and savings decisions, and use our model along with firm level data to construct an
empirical estimate of the average cost of external finance from 1980-2014.
Andrea L. Eisfeldt
UCLA Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza
Suite C4.10
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
andrea.eisfeldt@anderson.ucla.edu
Tyler Muir
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Avenue, Room 4516
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
tyler.muir@yale.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20442

UScorporatesectordatadisplayastrong,positivecorrelationbetweenaggregateexternalfinancing
andsavingsactivity. Asaresult,weobserveaggregateexternalfinancingandsavingswavesinUSdata
1980-2014. Aggregating all but the very largest firms, the correlation between external finance raised
and liquidity accumulated is a statistically significant 0.57. This high correlation is not due to some
firmsraisingexternalfinance,andotherfirmssaving. Conditioningonfirmsthatraiseexternalfinance,
the aggregate correlation increases to 0.80. We also document that the time series of the percentage of
firms raising external finance, and, more importantly, the time series of the cross-sectional correlation
between external finance and savings, are highly correlated with traditional proxies for the cost of
external finance such as the default spread, index of lending standards, and sentiment index.
Motivated by the stylized facts we document, we propose and implement a method for using data
onfirms’sourcesandusesoffundsinthecross-sectioninordertomakeinferencesabouttheaggregate
level of the cost of external finance. The basic intuition is as follows: Firms which raise costly external
finance can invest the issuance proceeds in productive capital assets, or in liquid financial assets with
a low physical rate of return. If firms raise costly external finance and allocate some of the funds to
liquid assets, either the cost of external finance is relatively low at that time, or the total return to
liquidity accumulation, including its shadow value as future internal funds, is particularly high.
To formalize this intuition, we construct and estimate a quantitative, dynamic model economy
consisting of a panel of heterogeneous firms in partial equilibrium. Firms have identical risk-neutral
objective functions, and maximize the present value of their net payouts. They are heterogeneous ex-
post due to variation in their idiosyncratic productivity realizations. Firms choose external finance,
investment, and savings as a function of their size, savings balance, and idiosyncratic productivity
shock, and the aggregate level of productivity and of the cost of external finance. We then use
variation in firms’ investment returns and the economy’s implied cross-sectional moments in order
to quantitatively measure variation in the aggregate cost of external finance. In the model, as in
the data, firms typically finance investment with operating cash flows. However, when the cost of
external finance is low, firms in our model raise external finance, invest some of the proceeds, and save
the remainder in liquid assets. As a result, when the aggregate cost of external finance is low, firms
are more likely to both raise external finance, and to accumulate liquid assets. Consistent with this
idea, we show that in the model and in the data, cross-sectional moments describing the incidence of
firms raising external finance, and importantly, the co-incidence of firms raising external finance and
1

saving the proceeds, are informative about the aggregate level of the cost of external finance. Our
study is aimed at providing an estimate of the aggregate cost of external finance in the US time series
from 1980-2014 based on this intuition. We do so formally using the quantitative implications of our
structurally estimated model.
We estimate the key parameters of our model using Simulated Method of Moments. We show that
in the model, variation in the aggregate average cost of external finance raised can be almost fully
explained by variation in two key moments describing firms’ financing and savings decisions. These
two moments are the fraction of firms raising external finance, and the cross-sectional correlation be-
tween aggregate net external finance raised and liquidity accumulation, which we call “excess external
finance”. Accordingly, we construct a continuous series for this average cost using a regression based
cost-of-external finance index. Specifically, we compute the index weights by running a time series
regression using model data of the cost of external finance at each date on the cross-sectional mo-
ments describing firms’ external financing and savings decisions on that date. We then use the model
implied weights, along with the empirical moments from Compustat data, to construct an estimate of
the empirical cost of external finance in US data. Figure 1 graphs the resulting series, which exhibits
substantial and intuitively appealing variation over our sample. The implied average cost of external
finance is 2.3% per dollar raised, which is close to existing empirical estimates. Moreover, it has an
economically reasonable standard deviation of 1.6% and an autocorrelation of 0.63, which is close to
that of the Baa-Aaa default spread.
We discuss the model’s additional implications and conduct robustness checks. In particular,
we provide a formal statistical test our model featuring aggregate shocks to both productivity and
cost of external finance shocks against a nested alternative model with a constant cost of external
finance. The model with constant costs can be rejected statistically, and also performs poorly on
key empirical moments. In fact, the constant cost model at estimated parameters does not generate
aggregate external financing and savings waves. The key distinction between our model and earlier
business cycle models with costly external finance, such as Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Kiyotaki and
Moore (1997), Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997), and Gomes et al. (2003) is the addition of shocks to the
cost of external finance. These shocks break the otherwise tight relationship between TFP and the
demand for external finance, and thereby allow for aggregate issuance and savings waves as well as a
significantly better overall statistical fit.
2