NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
QUANTIFYING THE SOURCES OF FIRM HETEROGENEITY
Colin Hottman
Stephen J. Redding
David E. Weinstein
Working Paper 20436
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20436
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014
We are grateful to the editor, four referees, Andrew Bernard, Swati Dhingra, Cecilia Fieler, Gene Grossman,
Oleg Itskhoki, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, Bernard Salanié and conference and seminar participants
at Columbia, ERWIT, Dartmouth, Harvard, LSE, NBER-ITI, Philadelphia-Fed, Princeton, UBC, UC
Berkeley, UC Merced, UCLA and UCSD for helpful comments. Thanks to Ildiko Magyari, Scott Marchi
and Dyanne Vaught for providing excellent research assistance. Redding thanks Princeton University
for research support. Weinstein thanks Columbia University and the NSF (Award 1127493) for generous
financial support. We also would like to thank GS1 for providing us with a concordance between the
bar code data and firm identifiers. The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors
and do not represent the views of the Board of Governors, other members of the Federal Reserve System,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All results are calculated based on data from The Nielsen
Company (US), LLC and provided by the Marketing Data Center at The University of Chicago Booth
School of Business.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Colin Hottman, Stephen J. Redding, and David E. Weinstein. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Quantifying the Sources of Firm Heterogeneity
Colin Hottman, Stephen J. Redding, and David E. Weinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 20436
August 2014, Revised November 2015
JEL No. D24,F12,F14
ABSTRACT
We develop and structurally estimate a model of heterogeneous multiproduct firms that can be used to
decompose the firm-size distribution into the contributions of costs, “appeal” (quality or taste), markups,
and product scope. Using Nielsen bar-code data on prices and sales, we find that variation in firm appeal
and product scope explains at least four fifths of the variation in firm sales. We show that the imperfect
substitutability of products within firms, and the fact that larger firms supply more products than smaller
firms, implies that standard productivity measures are highly dependent on implicit demand system
assumptions and probably dramatically understate the relative productivity of the largest firms. Although
most firms are well approximated by the monopolistic competition benchmark of constant markups,
we find that the largest firms that account for most of aggregate sales depart substantially from this
benchmark, and exhibit both variable markups and substantial cannibalization effects.
Colin Hottman David E. Weinstein
Department of Economics Columbia University
Columbia University Department of Economics
420 W. 118th St. MC 3308 420 W. 118th Street
New York, NY 10027 MC 3308
cjh2164@columbia.edu New York, NY 10027
and NBER
Stephen J. Redding dew35@columbia.edu
Department of Economics
and Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
reddings@princeton.edu

I. Introduction
Whyaresomefirmslargerthanothers? Somecompanies,suchastheCocaColaCorporation,generatebillions
ofdollarsofsalesanddominatethemarketsinwhichtheyoperate. Othercompaniesaccountforonlyasmall
fraction of the sales of their larger competitors. What explains these vast differences in firm performance?
Answering this question is important for quantifying equilibrium models of firm heterogeneity developed in
the recent trade and macro literatures and for understanding the relationship between microeconomic firm
performanceandmacroeconomicoutcomes.
Recent research on firm heterogeneity in trade and macroeconomics (e.g., Melitz [2003]; Manova and
Zhang [2012]; Feenstra [2014]) points to four components of firm heterogeneity: marginal cost, “appeal”
(qualityortaste),markupsandproductscope(i.e.,thenumberofproductsproducedbyfirms).1 Wedevelopa
structuralmodelofheterogeneousmultiproductfirmsthatcanbeusedtodecomposethefirm-sizedistribution
intotherelativecontributionsofeachcomponent. Wefirstusethisframeworktostructurallyestimateelastic-
ities of substitution across varieties between and within multiproduct firms. We next implement our model-
based decomposition for the around 20,000 firms that supply goods with bar codes in the Nielsen HomeScan
Database in a typical quarter. This decomposition uses the structure of the model to isolate different margins
inthedatawithoutmakingassumptionsabouthowthosemarginsarerelatedtooneanother(asinthebusiness
cycledecompositionofChari,KehoeandMcGratten2007inthemacroeconomicsliterature). Ourframework
requires only price and expenditure data and hence is widely applicable. We separate out the contributions of
cost and appeal using the exclusion restriction that cost only affects sales through price. In contrast, appeal
affectssalesconditionalonprice.
Our results point to demand differences (which could arise from quality or taste variation) as being the
principal reason why some firms are successful in the marketplace and others are not. Depending on the
specificationconsidered,wefindthat50-70percentofthevarianceinfirmsizecanbeattributedtodifferences
in firm appeal, about 20-25 percent to differences in product scope, and less than 25 percent to cost. When
weturntoexaminetime-seriesevidence,theresultsbecomeevenmorestark. Virtuallyallfirmgrowthcanbe
attributed to firm appeal with most of the remainder due to product scope. These results suggest that most of
what economists call differences in revenue productivity reflects differences in appeal (e.g., quality or taste)
ratherthancost.
Ourframeworkusesanestedconstantelasticityofsubstitution(CES)utilitysystemthatallowstheelasticity
of substitution between varieties within a firm to differ from the elasticity of substitution between varieties
suppliedbydifferentfirms. OurchoiceofthisCESdemandstructureisguidedbyitsprominence,tractability,
andempiricalfeasibility. Acrossinternationaltrade,economicgeography,andmacroeconomics,thereislittle
doubtthatthisframeworkisthepreferredapproachtomodelingproductvariety. Sinceourapproachneststhe
standard CES-monopolistic competition model as a special case, we can compare our results with those that
1Muchoftheexistingempiricalliteraturereferstoanyshifterofdemandconditionalonpriceas“quality,”asinShakedandSutton
(1983);Berry(1994);Khandelwal(2010);BrodaandWeinstein(2010);HallakandSchott(2011);andFeenstraandRomalis(2014).
We use the term “appeal” to avoid taking a stand as to whether the shift in demand arises from vertical quality differentiation or
subjectivedifferencesinconsumertaste.Empirically,wefindthathigherappealproductsareonaveragemorecostlytoproduce,which
isconsistentwithaqualityinterpretation.
2

would be obtained in a standard trade, macro or economic geography model. However, we generalize this
standardmodeltoallowfirmstosupplymultipleproducts(apervasivefeatureofourdata)andtohavemarket
power(sincethelargestfirmsinourdataarefarfrombeingmeasurezero).
Incorporating these features into our structural model yields a number of additional insights. Our model
makesclearaconceptualproblemintheestimationoffirmproductivitythatislikelytobiasexistingestimates.
Mostproductivityestimatesrelyontheconceptofrealoutput,whichiscalculatedbydividingnominaloutput
byapriceindex. However,theformulaforanyeconomicallymotivatedpriceindex,whichisthesameasaunit
expenditurefunction, isdependentonimplicitassumptionsabouthowtheoutputoffirmsentersutility. Thus,
one cannot move from nominal output to real output without imposing assumptions about the structure of the
demandsystem.2 OurresultsshowtheoreticallyandempiricallythattheCESmeasureofamultiproductfirm’s
price is highly sensitive to how differentiated its output is and how many products it supplies. The sensitivity
of the CES price index to demand parameters, such as the elasticity of substitution and whether multiproduct
firms exist, implies that estimates of real output are equally sensitive to these demand parameters. We show
thatifdemandhasanestedCESstructure,conventionalmeasuresofrealoutputwillhaveadownwardbiasthat
riseswithfirmsizewithanelasticityofaroundonethird. Inotherwords,realoutputvariationissubstantially
greaterthannominaloutputvariation. Thisbiasalsoimpliesthattrueproductivitydifferencesaremuchlarger
thanconventionallymeasuredones.
Thebiasisdrivenbytwofeaturesofrealitythataretypicallyignoredinmostanalyses. First,mostanalyses
treatproducersassingle-productfirmssotheycanavoidcomplicationsarisingfromthechallengesofmeasur-
ing the real output of multiproduct firms. However, our results indicate that multiproduct firms are the norm.
For example, we show that 69 percent of firms supply more than one bar code and these firms account for
more than 99 percent of output in their sectors.3 Therefore truly single product firms account for a negligible
shareofsalesinourdata. Second,weshowthatiftheoutputofmultiproductfirmsisdifferentiated,thecom-
monassumptionthattotalfirmoutputissimplythesumoftheoutputofeachgoodunderstatesrealoutputfor
multiproductfirms,andthedegreeofthisdownwardbiasrisesinthenumberofproductssupplied.
Ourframeworkalsoprovidesanewmetricforquantifyingtheextenttowhichafirm’sproductsarediffer-
entiated from those of its rivals. If a firm’s products are perfectly substitutable with each other but not with
thoseofotherfirms,then100percentofanewproduct’ssaleswillcomefromthefirm’sexistingsales,which
implies a cannibalization rate of one. However, if a firm’s market share is negligible (as it is for most firms)
and its products are as differentiated from each other as they are from products supplied by other firms, none
ofanewproduct’ssaleswillcomeattheexpenseofthefirm’sotherproducts,whichimpliesacannibalization
rate of zero. We estimate that the cannibalization rate for the typical firm is about 50 percent, indicating that
although products supplied by the same firm are more substitutable with each other than with those of other
firms,itisnotcorrecttothinkofthemasperfectsubstitutes.
2ThispointwasstressedbyAristotleinhisNicomacheanEthics(BookV,Section5): ”Demandholdsthingstogetherasasingle
unit.... Intruthitisimpossiblethatthingsdifferingsomuchshouldbecomecommensurate,butwithreferencetodemandtheymay
becomeso.”(seehttp://classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/nicomachaen.5.v.html)
3Bycontrast, U.S.CensusofManufacturesdataindicatesthatproducersofmultiplefive-digitStandardIndustrialClassification
(SIC)productsaccountfor37percentoffirmsand87percentofshipments(Bernard, ReddingandSchott[2010]). Thedifference
comesfromdefiningsingleproductfirmsasone-industryfirmsasopposedtoone-bar-codefirms.
3