NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MEASURING THE EFFECT OF THE ZERO LOWER BOUND ON MEDIUM- AND
LONGER-TERM INTEREST RATES
Eric T. Swanson
John C. Williams
Working Paper 20486
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20486
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014
We thank our discussants, James Hamilton, Kei Kawakami, Yvan Lengwiler, Benoit Mojon, John
Taylor, Min Wei, and Jonathan Wright; Refet Gurkaynak, Oscar Jorda, Leo Krippner, David Romer,
and Justin Wolfers; and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, NBER
Monetary Economics Meeting, Federal Reserve Board, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Conference,
Society for Economic Dynamics Meetings, Haas School of Business, Swiss National Bank Conference,
NBER EFG Meeting, UC Irvine, Brown University, Boston University-FRB Boston Conference, Reserve
Bank of Australia Conference, AEA Meetings, Blackrock, the University of Oregon, Stanford University,
and UC Davis, for helpful discussions, comments, and suggestions. We thank Maura Lynch and Kuni
Natsuki for excellent research assistance. The research in this paper was conducted while the authors
where employees of the Federal Reserve System. The opinions expressed in this paper are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the people listed above, the Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, any other individuals
within the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20486.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Eric T. Swanson and John C. Williams. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Measuring the Effect of the Zero Lower Bound on Medium- and Longer-Term Interest Rates
Eric T. Swanson and John C. Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 20486
September 2014
JEL No. E43,E52,E62
ABSTRACT
The federal funds rate has been at the zero lower bound for over four years, since December 2008.
According to standard macroeconomic models, this should have greatly reduced the effectiveness
of monetary policy and increased the efficacy of fiscal policy. However, these models also imply that
asset prices and private-sector decisions depend on the entire path of expected future short-term interest
rates, not just the current level of the overnight rate. Thus, interest rates with a year or more to maturity
are arguably more relevant for asset prices and the economy, and it is unclear to what extent those
yields have been affected by the zero lower bound. In this paper, we measure the effects of the zero
lower bound on interest rates of any maturity by comparing the sensitivity of those interest rates to
macroeconomic news when short-term interest rates were very low to that during normal times. We
find that yields on Treasury securities with a year or more to maturity were surprisingly responsive
to news throughout 2008–10, suggesting that monetary and fiscal policy were likely to have been about
as effective as usual during this period. Only beginning in late 2011 does the sensitivity of these yields
to news fall closer to zero. We offer two explanations for our findings: First, until late 2011, market
participants expected the funds rate to lift off from zero within about four quarters, minimizing the
effects of the zero bound on medium- and longer-term yields. Second, the Fed’s unconventional policy
actions seem to have helped offset the effects of the zero bound on medium- and longer-term rates.
Eric T. Swanson
Department of Economics
University of California at Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
eric.swanson@uci.edu
John C. Williams
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Executive Offices
101 Market St.
San Francisco, CA 94105
john.c.williams@sf.frb.org

1 Introduction
The federal funds rate—the Federal Reserve’s traditional monetary policy instrument—has been
at a lower bound of essentially zero for over four years, since December 2008. According to many
macroeconomic models, the binding constraint of the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates
should have greatly reduced the effectiveness of monetary policy and increased the efficacy of fiscal
1
policy during this period (e.g., Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo, 2011; Woodford, 2011).
However, standard macroeconomic theory, such as Clarida, Gal´ı, and Gertler (1999) and Woodford
(2003), as well as the papers cited above, imply that asset prices and the economy are affected
by the entire path of expected future short-term interest rates, not just the current level of the
overnight federal funds rate. Thus, interest rates with a year or more to maturity are arguably
more relevant for asset prices and the economy, and it is not clear whether the zero bound has
substantially constrained the Fed’s ability to affect these longer-term yields.
Theoretically, if a central bank has the ability to commit to future values of its policy rate, it
can work around the zero bound constraint by promising monetary accommodation in the future
once the zero bound ceases to bind (Reifschneider and Williams, 2000; Eggertsson and Woodford,
2
2003). Empirically, Gu¨rkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005a) show that the Federal Reserve’s
monetary policy announcements affect asset prices primarily through their effects on financial
market expectations of future monetary policy, rather than changes in the current federal funds
rate. Thus, there are both theoretical and empirical reasons to think that monetary policy can
remain effective even when the overnight interest rate is zero. In fact, 1- and 2-year Treasury
yields remained substantially above zero throughout much of 2008–10 (Figure 1), suggesting that
monetary policy still had room to affect the economy despite the constraint on the funds rate. And
indeed, the Federal Reserve generated a drop in medium- and longer-term Treasury yields of as
much as 20 basis points (bp) on several occasions between 2008 and 2012 by managing monetary
3
policy expectations or purchasing assets (Gagnon et al., 2011; Wright, 2012).
1SeealsoEggertsson(2009),ErcegandLind´e(2010),EggertssonandKrugman(2012),andDeLongandSummers
(2012). Intuitively,themacroeconomiceffectsoffiscalpolicyarelargerwhenthezeroboundisbinding,becausethen
interestratesdonotriseinresponsetohigheroutput,soprivateinvestmentandconsumptionarenot“crowdedout”.
2The central bank does not need a perfect commitment technology for this to be true; a partial commitment
technology, as in Schaumburgand Tambalotti (2007), is sufficient.
3Note that, in normal times, it would take a surprise change in the federal funds rate of more than 100 bp to
generate a fall of 20 bp in medium- and longer-term Treasury yields (Gu¨rkaynak et al., 2005).
1

10(cid:882)Year(cid:3)Treasury
5(cid:882)Year(cid:3)Treasury
5 5
2(cid:882)Year(cid:3)Treasury
1(cid:882)Year(cid:3)Treasury
Federal(cid:3)Funds(cid:3)Rate
4 4
3 3
2 2
1 1
0 0
Figure 1. Federal funds rate target and 1-, 2-, 5-, and 10-year zero-coupon Treasury yields
from January 2007 through December 2012. Data are from the Federal Reserve Board and the
Gu¨rkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2007) online dataset.
In this paper, we propose a novel method of measuring the extent to which interest rates
of any maturity—and hence monetary policy, more broadly defined—are constrained by the zero
lower bound. In particular, we estimate the time-varying sensitivity of yields to macroeconomic
announcements using high-frequency data and compare that sensitivity to a benchmark period in
which the zero bound was not a concern (taken to be 1990–2000). In periods when a given yield
is about as sensitive to news as in the benchmark sample, we say that yield is unconstrained. In
periods,ifany, whereayield respondsvery little or notatall to news,wesay thatyield is largely or
completely constrained. Intermediate cases are measured by the degree of the yield’s sensitivity to
newsrelativetothebenchmarksample,andtheseverityandstatistical significanceoftheconstraint
can be assessed using standard econometric techniques.
We emphasize that the level of a yield alone is not a useful measure of whether that yield is
constrained by the zero lower bound, for at least three reasons. First, there is no way to quantify
the severity of the zero bound constraint or its statistical significance using the level of the yield
2