NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ENTRY AND EXIT IN OTC DERIVATIVES MARKETS
Andrew G. Atkeson
Andrea L. Eisfeldt
Pierre-Olivier Weill
Working Paper 20416
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20416
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014
We’d like to thank, for fruitful comments and suggestions, the Co-Editor, three referees, as well as
Gara Afonso, Saki Bigio, Briana Chang, Jean-Edouard Colliard, Darrell Duffie, Ben Lester, Gustavo
Manso, Tyler Muir, Martin Oehmke, Ionid Rosu, Tano Santos, Daniel Sanches, Martin Schneider,
Shouyong Shi, Randy Wright, Pierre Yared, and numerous seminar audiences. Patrick Kiefer, Pierre
Mabille, Omair Syed, Alfredo Reyes, and Semih Uslu provided expert research assistance. We thank
the Bank of France, the Fink Center for Finance and Investments, and the Ziman Center for Real Estate
for financial support. Part of this project was completed when Pierre-Olivier Weill was a visiting Professor
at the Paris School of Economics, whose hospitality is gratefully acknowledged. All errors are ours.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20416.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Andrew G. Atkeson, Andrea L. Eisfeldt, and Pierre-Olivier Weill. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Entry and Exit in OTC Derivatives Markets
Andrew G. Atkeson, Andrea L. Eisfeldt, and Pierre-Olivier Weill
NBER Working Paper No. 20416
August 2014, Revised May 2015
JEL No. G0,G1,G2
ABSTRACT
We develop a parsimonious model to study the equilibrium and socially optimal decisions of banks
to enter, trade in, and possibly exit, an OTC market. Although we endow all banks with the same trading
technology, banks’ optimal entry and trading decisions endogenously lead to a realistic market structure
comprised of dealers and customers with distinct trading patterns. We decompose banks’ entry incentives
into incentives to hedge risk and incentives to make intermediation profits. We show that dealer banks
enter more than is socially optimal. In the face of large negative shocks, they may also exit more than
is socially optimal when markets are not perfectly resilient.
Andrew G. Atkeson Pierre-Olivier Weill
Bunche Hall 9381 Department of Economics
Department of Economics University of California, Los Angeles
UCLA Bunche Hall 8283
Box 951477 Los Angeles, CA 90095
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477 and NBER
and NBER poweill@econ.ucla.edu
andy@atkeson.net
Andrea L. Eisfeldt
UCLA Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza
Suite C4.10
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
andrea.eisfeldt@anderson.ucla.edu
A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20416

1 Introduction
We develop a parsimonious model to study the equilibrium and socially optimal decisions
of banks to enter and trade in an over-the-counter (OTC) market. Banks differ in terms
of their exposure to an aggregate risk factor, their size, and their entry cost, but otherwise
are endowed with the same OTC trading technology. In an entry equilibrium, banks’ opti-
mal participation decisions determine the structure of the OTC market endogenously: the
characteristics of participants, the heterogeneity in their portfolios and trading patterns, the
dispersion in their marginal valuations and transaction prices. We argue that equilibrium
outcomes reproduce stylized facts about the structure of OTC markets. In particular, large-
sized banks endogenously emerge as “dealers” who profit from price dispersion, and in doing
so provide intermediation services to middle-sized “customer” banks. We then formalize
and explicitly characterize banks’ entry incentives, in equilibrium vs. in the corresponding
constrained planning problem. This allows us to address policy questions about market size
and composition. We show that a bank entering the market as a dealer adds social value,
and we formalize the manner in which it mitigates OTC market frictions by facilitating trade
among customer banks with dispersed marginal valuations. However, we also show that, in
an entry equilibrium, the trading profits of the marginal dealer exceed its marginal social
contribution. As a result, dealer banks tend to provide too many intermediation services
relative to the social optimum.
We extend our equilibrium concept to study exit. In an exit equilibrium, banks face
shocks to their cost of ongoing participation in the OTC market, and they make optimal
decisions to stayinortoexit themarket. Crucially, weassume thatthemarket isimperfectly
resilient: a bank who has lost some of its trading counterparties due to exit may or may
not be able to trade with new ones. In this context, we show that dealers are the most
vulnerable to negative shocks: they have the strongest private incentives to exit. However,
we find that, relative to the social optimum, dealers exit too much only if the shock is large
enough and if the market is not perfectly resilient.
Our model is populated by a continuum of financial institutions, called banks, who con-
template entering an OTC market for derivative “swap” contracts. Each bank is a coalition
of many risk-averse agents, called traders. Banks have heterogenous sizes and heterogenous
endowments of a non-tradable risky loan portfolio, creating heterogenous exposures to an
aggregate default risk factor. Since traders in banks are risk averse, they will attempt to
equalize these exposures by trading Credit Default Swaps (CDS) in the OTC market. We
focus on CDS for concreteness, but one could also consider any derivatives contracts for
hedging an aggregate risk such as interest or exchange rate swaps, for example.
2

First, conditional ontheir size andinitial exposuretoaggregatedefault risk, bankschoose
whether to pay a fixed cost in order to enter into the market. The fixed cost payment
represents the acquisition of infrastructure and specialized expertise required to trade in
OTC markets. Second, after entry, all banks are granted access to the same technology to
trade swaps. Their traders are paired uniformly, and each pair negotiates over the terms
of the contract subject to a uniform trade size limit. This limit represents banks’ risk-
management constraints on individual trading desk positions in practice. Third, each bank
consolidates the swaps signed by its traders and all contracts and loans are paid off.
Banks have two distinct privateincentives toenter theOTC market. Thefirst incentive is
to hedge their underlying risk exposure. The second incentive arises because, in equilibrium,
hedging is imperfect. Imperfect hedging creates dispersion in banks’ marginal valuations
and price dispersion. This dispersion gives banks incentives to enter in order to earn trading
profits, and in doing so provide intermediation services. We show that both incentives
are U-shaped functions of a bank’s initial risk exposure: they are larger for banks with
extreme initial risk exposures, either small or large, and smaller for banks with intermediate
exposures. Combined with fixed entry costs, these U-shaped incentives result in entry and
trading patterns which are corroborated by empirical evidence. First, small-sized banks
cannot spread the fixed entry cost over enough traders, and choose not to enter. Second,
medium-sized banks only find it optimal to enter the market if their incentives are large
enough, which occurs if their initial risk exposure is sufficiently small or large. They use
the OTC market to take a large net position, either long or short, and in this sense act as
customers. Third, bankswithintermediateexposureshavethesmallestincentivetoenterand
so they onlypay thefixed cost ifthey arelargeenough. Since they start withanintermediate
exposure, close to the market-wide average, they do not trade to hedge. Instead, they take
many offsetting long and short positions, have large gross exposures, small net exposures,
and enter mostly to make intermediation profits. Hence, these large banks endogenously
emerge as dealers.
Next, westudytheproblemofaplannerwhochooses banks’ entryandtradingpatternsin
theOTCmarket, but isotherwise subject tothesamefrictionsasintheequilibrium. Wefind
that trading patterns are socially optimal conditional on entry, but that entry patterns are
not. We show that dealers are socially useful because they facilitate trade between banks
with dispersed marginal valuations. However, we find that their profits are larger than
their marginal social contribution. Hence, dealers have too great an incentive to enter in
equilibrium. In a parametric example, we show that, starting from the equilibrium, a social
planner finds it optimal to decrease the entry of dealers and increase the entry of customers.
The resulting socially optimal OTC market structure has fewer participants, generates less
3