NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANKS, LIQUIDITY MANAGEMENT AND MONETARY POLICY
Javier Bianchi
Saki Bigio
Working Paper 20490
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20490
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014
We thank the editor and several anonymous referees for helpful comments. We are also grateful
to Cristina Arellano, Andy Atkeson, Harjoat Bhamra, Luigi Bocola, John Cochrane, Dean
Corbae, Itamar Dreschler, Huberto Ennis, Xavier Freixas, Lars Hansen, Todd Keister, Nobu
Kiyotaki, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Ricardo Lagos, Ellen McGrattan, Thomas Philippon, Chris
Phelan, Tomek Piskorski, Erwan Quintin, Ricardo Reis, Chris Sims, Harald Uhlig, Venky
Venkateswaran, Gianluca Violante, Pierre-Olivier Weill, Mike Woodford, Tao Zha, and
participants at various seminars and conferences for many useful comments. Jorge Mondragon
provided excellent research assistance. We are grateful for financial support by the Fondation
Banque de France, and the Smith Richardson Foundation. Bianchi acknowledges the support of
the National Science Foundation under Award 1324395. Bigio thanks the Federal Reserve Bank
of San Francisco for its hospitality. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Javier Bianchi and Saki Bigio. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Banks, Liquidity Management and Monetary Policy
Javier Bianchi and Saki Bigio
NBER Working Paper No. 20490
September 2014, Revised July 2020
JEL No. E0,E4,E51,E52,G01,G1,G11,G18,G20,G21
ABSTRACT
We develop a tractable model of banks' liquidity management and the credit channel of monetary
policy. Banks finance loans by issuing demand deposits. Loans are illiquid, and transfers of
deposits across banks must be settled with reserves in a frictional over the counter market. To
mitigate the risk of large withdrawals of deposits, banks hold a precautionary buffer of reserves
and government bonds. We show how monetary policy affects the banking system by altering the
tradeoff between profiting from lending and incurring greater liquidity risk. We consider two
applications of the theory, one involving the connection between the implementation of monetary
policy and pass-through to loan rates, and another considering a quantitative decomposition
behind the collapse in bank lending during the 2008 financial crisis. Our analysis underscores the
importance of liquidity frictions and the functioning of interbank markets for the conduct of
monetary policy.
Javier Bianchi
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55401
javieribianchi@gmail.com
Saki Bigio
Department of Economics
University of California at Los Angeles
8283 Bunche Hall
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
sbigio@econ.ucla.edu

1 Introduction
The transmission and implementation of monetary policy operates through the banking system.
In practice, central banks set a target for the interbank market rate and implement that target
via open market operations and standing facilities. The ultimate goal is to affect the amount of
credit and thus overall economic activity. It is therefore of paramount importance to understand
how monetary policy affects the interbank market and, in turn, how the interbank market affects
the real economy.
The leading macroeconomic framework usedfor monetarypolicy analysis, theNew Keynesian
model, abstracts from the implementation and transmission of monetary policy through the
interbank market. In the New Monetarist framework, interactions between money and credit
are explicit, but the interbank market and its impact on credit have received little attention.1
Moreover, for the most part, the focus of analysis has been on a sole policy instrument, either
a nominal interest rate or the growth in the monetary base. During the 2008 financial crisis,
and more recently during the Covid-19 crisis, disruptions in interbank markets were met with a
broad set of policy responses designed to inject liquidity into the financial system and mitigate
contractions in credit. These events call for a model that can be used to analyze the effects of
frictions in the interbank market and the transmission of monetary policy through the banking
system.
This paper provides a tractable general equilibrium model with a banking system that ar-
ticulates a notion of the credit channel of monetary policy. At the heart of the theory lies a
liquidity management problem that emerges from frictions in the interbank market. Liquidity
management concerns the trade-off between holding high-yield illiquid loans and holding low-
yield liquid assets. It is by influencing this trade-off that monetary policy affects the supply of
credit and gives rise to a credit channel. In support of this transmission channel, we document
a strong empirical relationship between measures of disturbances in the interbank market and
liquidity premia. We put this framework to work in two quantitative applications that showcase
the importance of examining the transmission of monetary policy through the banking system.
In the theory, banks are competitive. Their portfolio is composed of deposits, loans, gov-
ernment bonds, and reserves. When a bank grants a loan and simultaneously issues deposits,
it gains intermediation profits. However, deposits circulate in an unpredictable way, and thus
banks face deposit withdrawal shocks. When a deposit is transferred out of a bank, another
bank absorbs that liability. As occurs in practice, that transfer is settled with reserves.2 If a
1For a textbook treatment of the NK model, see Woodford (2004) or Gal´ı (2015). New Monetarist models are
surveyed in Williamson and Wright (2010), and Lagos, Rocheteau, and Wright (2017).
2TheFederalReserveWireNetwork(Fedwire)isthereal-timegrosssettlement(RTGS)fundstransfersystem
thatelectronicallysettlesfundsbetweenanyoftheUnitedStatesbanksregisteredintheFederalReserveSystem,
totalling approximately 10,000 banks. The amount of funds transferred daily is approximately USD 3.30 trillion.
1

deposit withdrawal is too large, the bank will end short of reserves. The bank can sell bonds
in exchange for reserves, but this may not be enough. At that point, the bank must incur in
expensive borrowing of reserves, either from the discount window at a penalty rate, or from the
interbank market.The interbank market is over the counter (OTC). The probability of finding a
counterpart in the interbank market depends on the scarcity of reserves: when few banks have
reserve surpluses, the interbank market rate is high—and hence a shortage is expensive. Thus,
the efficiency and tightness of the interbank market affect the degree of liquidity risk. By holding
a large buffer of liquid assets composed of bonds and reserves, a bank reduces its exposure to
liquidity risk, at the expense of intermediation profits. Tilting this trade-off, monetary policy
affects the supply of bank credit by affecting liquidity premia.
From a methodological standpoint, a contribution of the paper is to integrate an OTC inter-
bank market into a dynamic general equilibrium model of the banking system. The interbank
market here is modeled after Afonso and Lagos (2015), who study the Federal funds market in a
repeated OTC setting and deliver predictions for the intraday volume of interbank market loans
and the distribution of interbank rates. That model takes the distribution of reserve balances as
a primitive. Here, the distribution of balances is endogenous, as it results from banks’ optimally
chosen portfolios, which are in turn influenced by monetary policy. We furthermore show how to
encode the effects of the liquidity frictions into a single object: a liquidity yield function. Despite
the non-linear nature of the liquidity yield function, the bank’s problem features aggregation,
and thus the economy features a representative bank. Being analytically tractable, this makes
the analysis transparent and amenable to various applications, both theoretical and quantitative.
The analysis of the transmission of monetary policy through the banking system reveals
severalinsights. Incontrasttomodelsinwhichthedemandforreservesisexogenouslydetermined
by reserve requirements, monetary policy here affects the risk-return trade-off between holding
reserves and loans. The central bank alters this trade-off through open market operations, both
conventional and unconventional, and by setting the rate of interest on reserves and discount
window. Weshowthatalthoughthecompositionbetweenbondsandreservesisindeterminatefor
an individual bank, the composition matters at the macro level. This result has two implications.
First, it implies that the total holdings of liquid assets, and not only the holdings of reserves,
is the correct measure of the precautionary liquidity demand. Second, a policy that swaps
government bonds for reserves has aggregate effects by altering the interbank market tightness
and the liquidity premium. Moreover, by absorbing illiquid assets into the central bank’s balance
sheet, unconventional open market operations have even more potent effects. At the limit, when
the interbank bank market shuts down entirely, only unconventional open market operations
remain effective.
A central insight of the paper is to show how the implementation of monetary policy matters
for macroeconomic outcomes. We first study how the pass-through from the interest on reserves
2