NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INCENTIVE PAY AND BANK RISK-TAKING:
EVIDENCE FROM AUSTRIAN, GERMAN, AND SWISS BANKS
Matthias Efing
Harald Hau
Patrick Kampkötter
Johannes Steinbrecher
Working Paper 20468
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20468
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014
We thank Anil Kashyap and Thorsten Beck for their helpful comments at the NBER 2014 International
Seminar in Macroeconomics in Riga, Latvia. We are also grateful to the participants of the SFI research
day in Gerzensee and in particular to Rüdiger Fahlenbrach, Philipp Krüger, Stevan Ongena, René Stulz,
Alexander Wagner for their helpful feedback. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Matthias Efing, Harald Hau, Patrick Kampkötter, and Johannes Steinbrecher. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Incentive Pay and Bank Risk-Taking: ¸˛Evidence from Austrian, German, and Swiss Banks
Matthias Efing, Harald Hau, Patrick Kampkötter, and Johannes Steinbrecher
NBER Working Paper No. 20468
September 2014
JEL No. D22,G01,G20,G21,G38
ABSTRACT
We use payroll data on 1.2 million bank employee years in the Austrian, German, and Swiss banking
sector to identify incentive pay in the critical banking segments of treasury/capital market management
and investment banking for 66 banks. We document an economically significant correlation of incentive
pay with both the level and volatility of bank trading income–particularly for the pre-crisis period
2003—7 for which incentive pay was strongest. This result is robust if we instrument the bonus share
in the capital markets divisions with the strength of incentive pay in unrelated bank divisions like retail
banking. Moreover, pre-crisis incentive pay appears too strong for an optimal trade-off between trading
income and risk which maximizes the NPV of trading income.
Matthias Efing Patrick Kampkötter
University of Geneva, GFRI University of Cologne
& Swiss Finance Institute Albertus-Magnus-Platz
Bâtiment Pignon 50923 Cologne
40 Bd du Pont d’Arve Germany
1211 Genève 4 patrick.kampkoetter@uni-koeln.de
Switzerland
matthias.efing@unige.ch Johannes Steinbrecher
Ifo Dresden
Harald Hau Einsteinstrasse 3
University of Geneva, GFRI 01069 Dresden
& Swiss Finance Institute Germany
Bâtiment Pignon steinbrecher@ifo.de
40 Bd du Pont d'Arve
1211 Genèva 4
Switzerland
prof@haraldhau.com
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20468

1 Introduction
In2013theEuropeanParliamentproposednewEU-widelegislationonbankbonuses. Likewise,
executive pay was scrutinized in the U.S. in the post-crisis years (e.g. the Say-on-Pay rule
included in the 2010 Dodd-Frank Act). Large bonus payments for employees in the banks’
financial market divisions were allegedly responsible for excessive risk taking. Limits on bonus
payments were justified as a way to curb risk-taking incentives (e.g. Dunning, 2010).
Yet there is only scarce empirical evidence about the nexus between the proportion of per-
formance contingent pay and the amount of risk taking in financial institutions. One obstacle
to such an analysis is the lack of information about the bank’s internal incentive and bonus
systems. Reporting requirements are typically limited only to the CEO and board members
whomayneitherearnthehighestbonusesnormakethemostpertinentriskchoices. Thispaper
exploits a large payroll data set on 12 million bank employee years to extract incentive pay
measures for 66 banks in Austria, Germany, and Switzerland in the period 2004—11. In partic-
ular, we are able to measure performance contingent pay in the most critical bank segments of
Investment Banking and Treasury/Capital Markets at all levels of the bank hierarchy.
Ouranalysispursuesfourobjectives. First, wedocumenttheimportanceofbonuspayments
across bank functions and hierarchies in the Austrian, German, and Swiss banking systems for
the period 2004—11. We show that the Bonus Share defined as the average bonus relative to
the total salary decreased by roughly 20% across bank functions in the crisis period 2008—11
relativetothepre-crisisperiod2004—7. Thedecreaseismuchstrongeratapproximately40%for
the employees in the Investment Banking and Treasury/Capital Market segments, even though
overall trading income did not decrease during the crisis period 2008—11.
Second,wedocumenttherobustcorrelationofpayincentiveswiththebank’stradingincome
andits volatility. Onaverage, tradingincomeinoursampleamountsto 9% of thegrossinterest
income of a bank and shows a systematic correlation with both the equally and hierarchy-
weighted strengths of bonus payments in a bank. This positive correlation is particularly
pronouncedinthepre-crisisperiodandextendstothevolatilityoftradingincome. Byaveraging
our pay incentive measure over a four-year period we attempt to mitigate concerns for reverse
causalitywherebyfavorabletradingprofitrealizationsgeneratehigherpay-outsofperformance-
1

contingent contracts. Nevertheless, averaging the incentive pay by itself is unlikely to solve the
endogeneity problem completely.
A third contribution consists in a causal analysis for which we propose two instruments: If
banks vary exogenously in the degree to which they feature an "incentive culture", we can use
the bonus share in other bank segments, like retail banking or corporate banking, as proxies for
pay incentives in the bank’s capital market segment. To further validate this instrument, we
show that the bonus share in these functionally unrelated bank segments shows no significant
intertemporalcorrelationwithannual tradingincome,whichsuggeststhatbankbonuspoolsare
indeed segment-specific. A second instrument consists in the share of employment outside the
capital market divisions relative to total employment. A bank with a large retail, private, and
corporatebankingsegmentmightmonitoritstraderswithadifferentintensitythanbankswhose
corebusinessisinvestmentbanking. Previousresearchhasfoundweakerbankgovernancetobe
related to higher incentive pay (Fahlenbrach, 2009) and bank risk (Hau and Thum, 2009). Our
two instruments show a strong first stage correlation with the bonus share of a bank’s capital
market employees. The instrumental variable regressions generally produce larger coefficients
for the role of incentive pay than the corresponding OLS regressions–suggesting that high
incentive pay causes both a high level and a high volatility of trading income.
In a fourth step we analyze the trade-off between trading income and its volatility. It
is straightforward to show that, if trading revenue is generated mostly through self-financing
trading strategies without net capital requirements, the net present value (NPV) maximization
of the risk-adjusted cash flow of trading is equivalent to the maximization of its Sharpe ratio.
From the perspective of NPV (or asset value) maximization, the optimal incentive pay for a
bank’s trading operation should maximize the Sharpe ratio of trading income, defined as the
ratio of trading returns and their standard deviation.
Our regression analysis suggests that bonuses paid to traders did not maximize the Sharpe
ratio of trading income in the pre-crisis period. Instead, large bonus payments seem to have
incentivizedrisk-taking that was excessive fromthe perspective of NPVmaximization. Limited
liability of shareholders in combination with high bank leverage can rationalize this finding
whereby incentive pay aligns employee interests with that of shareholders in pursuit of equity
value rather than bank asset value maximization. Yet we cannot exclude that risk-taking
2