NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REALLOCATION IN THE GREAT RECESSION:
CLEANSING OR NOT?
Lucia Foster
Cheryl Grim
John Haltiwanger
Working Paper 20427
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20427
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014
Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent
the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential
information is disclosed. We thank the Kauffman Foundation for financial support and Robert Kulick
for his superb research assistance. We thank David Card, Erik Hurst, Ron Jarmin, Alex Mas, Javier
Miranda, two anonymous referees and participants at the COMP_NET conference in Dublin and the
NBER Conference on Labor Markets in the Aftermath of the Great Recession for their helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Lucia Foster, Cheryl Grim, and John Haltiwanger. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Reallocation in the Great Recession: Cleansing or Not?
Lucia Foster, Cheryl Grim, and John Haltiwanger
NBER Working Paper No. 20427
August 2014
JEL No. E24,E32,J63,O4
ABSTRACT
The high pace of reallocation across producers is pervasive in the U.S. economy. Evidence shows
this high pace of reallocation is closely linked to productivity. While these patterns hold on average,
the extent to which the reallocation dynamics in recessions are “cleansing” is an open question. We
find downturns prior to the Great Recession are periods of accelerated reallocation even more productivity
enhancing than reallocation in normal times. In the Great Recession, we find the intensity of reallocation
fell rather than rose and the reallocation that did occur was less productivity enhancing than in prior
recessions.
Lucia Foster John Haltiwanger
Center for Economic Studies Department of Economics
Census Bureau University of Maryland
Room 2K124 College Park, MD 20742
Washington, DC 20233-6300 and NBER
lucia.s.foster@census.gov haltiwan@econ.umd.edu
Cheryl Grim
US Census Bureau
Center for Economic Studies
4600 Silver Hill Road
Washington, DC 20233
Cheryl.Ann.Grim@census.gov

1. Introduction
The Great Recession is unusually severe and persistent relative to post-WWII recessions;
we explore whether its impact on productivity-enhancing reallocation is also unusual. A
pervasive feature of the U.S. economy is a high pace of output and input reallocation across
producers.1 The annual average job creation rate for the U.S. private sector over the last 30 years
is close to 18 percent while the analogous job destruction rate is 16 percent. Evidence shows this
high pace of reallocation is closely linked to productivity dynamics: resources are shifted away
from low productivity producers towards high productivity producers. An open question is
whether recessions have a “cleansing” impact by accelerating this productivity-enhancing
reallocation. Theory suggests the nature and extent of productivity-enhancing reallocation could
be fundamentally altered by the nature of the downturn. Using micro-level data, we examine how
the pattern of reallocation differs in the Great Recession in terms of both intensity and the extent
to which it was productivity enhancing.
Whether recessions are a period of productive winnowing or counterproductive
destruction has been the subject of a long ongoing debate. Economists trace the genesis of the
debate back to the Schumpeter’s (1939, 1942) discussion of creative destruction. The cleansing
hypothesis is that recessions are times of accelerated productivity-enhancing reallocation because
it is a relatively low cost time for reallocation.2 Alternative hypotheses highlight the potential
distortions to reallocation dynamics in recessions. Such distortions could arise from many
factors. For example, if credit markets are distorted in a recession, reallocation may be driven
more by credit constraints and less by market fundamentals such as productivity, demand and
costs. The close connection between the financial crisis and the Great Recession suggests this
hypothesis might be especially relevant in the recent period.3
Prior research suggests the recession in the early 1980s is consistent with the cleansing
1 We use productivity differences across producers as a placeholder more generally for differences across producers
in terms of technical efficiency, demand and costs. All of these factors contribute to our empirical measure of
establishment-level productivity as we discuss in Section 2.
2 It is important to emphasize that the modern view of the “cleansing” hypothesis does not mean that recessions are
necessarily welfare enhancing. The social planner may prefer to avoid cyclical variation in consumption along with
the loss of activity from unemployment. But, conditional on the cycle occurring, it may be optimal to increase the
pace of productivity-enhancing reallocation given the opportunity cost of time is low.
3 Greenstone and Mas (2012) and Chodorow-Reich (2014) find a relationship between the Great Recession credit
market shock and subsequent employment declines.
1

hypothesis.4 Of particular relevance, Davis and Haltiwanger (1990, 1992, 1999) show job
reallocation activity increased during recessions in the manufacturing sector from the late 1940s
through the 1990s.5 Extending the analysis to the entire private sector, Davis, Faberman and
Haltiwanger (2006, 2012) find these patterns for manufacturing also hold for the entire private
sector for the recessions in the 1990s and 2000s prior to the Great Recession.
The empirical finding that job destruction is more cyclical than job creation is directly
related to the cleansing hypothesis as shown in a series of models developed in the early 1990s.
In these models, the marginal cost of creating jobs is lower in recessions, so while creation falls
in recessions it falls less than the rise in destruction. Possible reasons for this include: the
opportunity cost of time is low in recessions (Davis and Haltiwanger (1990)), the sunk cost of
job creation is increasing in the level of aggregate activity (Caballero and Hammour (1994)), or
the search and matching framework is such that the marginal cost of creating a job is lower in
recessions because it is easier for firms to fill jobs in slack labor markets (Mortensen and
Pissarides (1994)). In all of these models, reallocation is productivity enhancing. These models
provide rationales for why the intensity of reallocation may increase in recessions.
Caballero and Hammour (1996) highlight distortions, such as hold up problems and
bargaining problems, which may impact incentives for job creation and job destruction over the
cycle. In particular, they note if the marginal cost of creating jobs is lower in recessions, then the
social planner would have job destruction rise first followed quickly by an increase in job
creation in recessions. They emphasize that recessions with a rise in job destruction, a decline in
job creation and only a very slow recovery in job creation are a sign of inefficiency.
Beyond the distortions emphasized by Caballero and Hammour (1996), numerous
mechanisms can yield “sullying” or “scarring” effects of recessions. Barlevy (2003) develops a
model building on the credit market imperfections of Bernanke and Gertler (1989). In his model,
recessions are cleansing in the absence of financial constraints, but the cleansing effect can be
4 Foster, Haltiwanger and Krizan (2001) find the 1977-82 and 1982-87 periods were times of especially intense
productivity enhancing reallocation. Davis, Haltiwanger and Schuh (1996) highlight the increased intensity of
reallocation during the 1982-83 recession. Recent research by Collard-Wexler and De Loecker (2013) shows this
type of reallocation was responsible for much of the productivity growth in the U.S. steel industry over the last
several decades.
5 Blanchard and Diamond (1990), Davis and Haltiwanger (1990,1999) and Caballero and Hammour (2005) use
VAR analysis to conduct a more nuanced and sophisticated analysis of the behavior of job reallocation over the
cycle. As they emphasize, exploring the cumulative impulse response functions of job creation, destruction and - in
turn - reallocation in response to an econometric specification that explicitly identifies the aggregate shocks provides
a more comprehensive analysis than simple descriptive statistics of the cyclical patterns of job creation, destruction
and reallocation. Given we do not conduct such analysis here, our characterization of the cyclical dynamics of
creation and destruction here should be viewed as suggestive.
2