NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ASSET MANAGEMENT CONTRACTS AND EQUILIBRIUM PRICES
Andrea M. Buffa
Dimitri Vayanos
Paul Woolley
Working Paper 20480
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20480
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014, Revised October 2019
We thank Ricardo Alonso, Daniel Andrei, Oliver Bought, Jennifer Carpenter, Sergey Chernenko,
Chris Darnell, Peter DeMarzo, Philip Edwards, Ken French, Willie Fuchs, Diego Garcia, Jeremy
Grantham, Zhiguo He, Apoorva Javadekar, Ron Kaniel, Ralph Koijen, Dong Lou, John Moore,
Dmitry Orlov, Marco Pagano, Anna Pavlova, Gabor Pinter, seminar participants at the Bank of
England, Banque de France, Bocconi, Boston University, CEU, Cheung Kong, Dartmouth, Duke,
EIEF, Glasgow, Indiana, Insead, Louvain, LSE, Maryland, Minnesota, MIT, Naples, NY Fed,
SMU, Stanford, Toulouse, UT Austin, Yale, Vienna and conference participants at AEA, ASAP,
BoE Macro-Finance, BIS, CEMFI, CRETE, ESSFM Gerzenzee, FCA, FIRS, FRIC, FTG, Inquire
UK, Jackson Hole, LSE PWC, NBER Asset Pricing, SFS Cavalcade, Utah, and WFA for helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Andrea M. Buffa, Dimitri Vayanos, and Paul Woolley. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Asset Management Contracts and Equilibrium Prices
Andrea M. Buffa, Dimitri Vayanos, and Paul Woolley
NBER Working Paper No. 20480
September 2014, Revised October 2019
JEL No. D86,G12,G14,G18,G23
ABSTRACT
We derive equilibrium asset prices when fund managers deviate from benchmark indices to
exploit noise-trader induced distortions but fund investors constrain these deviations. Because
constraints force managers to buy assets that they underweight when these assets appreciate,
overvalued assets have high volatility, and the risk-return relationship becomes inverted. Noise
traders bias prices upward because constraints make it harder for managers to underweight
overvalued assets, which have high volatility, than to overweight undervalued ones. We
endogenize the constraints based on investors' uncertainty about managers' skill, and show that
asset-pricing implications can be significant even for moderate numbers of unskilled managers.
Andrea M. Buffa Paul Woolley
Department of Finance Financial Markets Group
Boston University London School of Economics
595 Commonwealth Avenue London WC2A 2AE
Boston, MA 02215 UNITED KINGDOM
buffa@bu.edu p.k.woolley@lse.ac.uk
Dimitri Vayanos
Department of Finance, OLD 3.41
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UNITED KINGDOM
and CEPR
and also NBER
d.vayanos@lse.ac.uk

1 Introduction
Financial markets have become highly institutionalized. For example, individual investors were
holding directly 47.9% of U.S. stocks in 1980, but only 21.5% in 2007, with most of the remain-
der held by financial institutions such as mutual funds and pension funds (French (2008)). The
portfolios of these institutions are chosen by professional asset managers.
The institutionalization of financial markets has stimulated research on the performance of
professional managers and their effects on equilibrium asset prices and market efficiency. A vast
literatureexamineswhetheractively-managedfundsoutperformpassively-managedones. Arelated
literature investigates whether the growth of passive funds has made markets less efficient, and
whether efficiency increases in the ratio of active to passive.1
Drawing a sharp distinction between passive funds constrained to hold specific portfolios, and
active funds investing without constraints, is in some ways misleading. This is because much of
active management is done around benchmark portfolios, with managers being constrained in how
muchtheycandeviatefromthem. Theconstraintscanboundamanager’strackingerror(standard
deviation of the difference between the manager’s portfolio’s return and the return of a benchmark
portfolio), or the difference between the weight that the manager allocates to each asset class,
geographical area, or industry sector, and the corresponding benchmark weight.2 Viewing asset
management as a continuum between active and passive, depending on the tightness of managers’
constraints, seems a better description of reality. In this paper we adopt that alternative view and
show that its implications for equilibrium asset prices and market efficiency differ significantly from
the conventional view.
A simple example helps motivate our analysis. Suppose that some asset managers must keep
their portfolio weight in each industry sector within 5% of the sector’s weight in a benchmark
portfolio. Suppose also that a sector that these managers view as overvalued has 10% weight in
the benchmark, while the managers give it 5% weight. If the sector doubles in value, reaching 20%
weight in the benchmark, then its weight in the managers’ portfolio doubles to 10%, but must rise
1See, for example, Elton and Gruber (2013) for a survey of the literature on mutual-fund performance, and
Franzoni,Ben-David,andMoussawi(2017)forasurveyofexchange-tradedfunds(ETFs)andtheireffectsonmarket
performance.
2Foradiscussionoftracking-errorconstraintsandtheirimplicationsforfinancialmarkets,seethe2003reportby
the Committee on the Global Financial System (BIS (2003)). According to that report, bounds on tracking error
are on average 1% for actively-managed bond portfolios and between 2-6% for actively-managed stock portfolios
(p.20). The Norwegian Sovereign Wealth Fund (NBIM), one of the largest institutional investors globally, reports
the following regarding its tracking-error constraint: “The Ministry of Finance has set limits for how much risk
NBIM may take in its active management of the fund. The most important limit is expressed as expected relative
volatility (tracking error) and puts a ceiling on how much the return on the fund may be expected to deviate
from the return on the benchmark portfolio. The expected tracking error limit is 125 basis points, or 1.25%.”
(https://www.nbim.no/en/investments/investment-risk/)
1

furtherto15%sothattheconstraintismet. Buyingpressurebythemanagersamplifiesthesector’s
appreciation, raising its volatility. Overvalued sectors thus have high volatility, in addition to their
low expected return, causing the risk-return relationship to become weak or inverted, consistent
with empirical evidence.3 Amplification does not arise when managers are constrained to hold the
benchmark portfolio, or when they are fully unconstrained. The example implies additionally that
overvaluation is harder to correct than undervaluation. Indeed, managers must stick closer to the
benchmarkinovervaluedsectors: a5%differenceinweightallowslessleewayinrelativetermswhen
the sector’s benchmark weight is large. The links between portfolio constraints of asset managers
and amplification or overvaluation have been recognized by policy-makers.4
In our model’s basic version, described in Section 2, investors can invest in a riskless and a risky
asset over an infinite horizon and continuous time. The riskless rate is constant, and the dividend
flow per share of the risky asset follows a square-root process. Investors maximize a mean-variance
objective over instantaneous changes in wealth. Some investors are unconstrained, while others
face a constraint limiting the volatility or the dollar value of the deviation between their risky-asset
position and a benchmark position. Investors may want to deviate from the benchmark position
to exploit price distortions caused by noise traders.
Section 3 derives the equilibrium price of the risky asset taking the constraint as exogenous
and not distinguishing between investors and the asset managers they employ. Two polar cases
are analyzed first: no constraint, in which case all investors are fully active; and an infinitely tight
constraint, in which case constrained investors must hold the benchmark position and hence are
fully passive. In both cases, we derive a novel closed-form solution for the price and show that it
is affine in the dividend flow. An increase in noise-trader demand raises the price and lowers the
asset’s expected return. It does not affect, however, the asset’s return volatility: the price becomes
more sensitive to the dividend flow, but the effect is proportional to the increase in the price level.
Moving from no constraint (all investors fully active) to an infinitely tight constraint (constrained
investors fully passive) exacerbates the price distortions created by noise traders. This is because
the constraint prevents constrained investors from absorbing noise-trader demand. The constraint
does not affect return volatility, however, because volatility is independent of demand.
Section3nextanalyzesthegeneralcase. Theequilibriuminvolvesaregionwheretheconstraint
3References to the empirical literature are in Section 3.4.
4For example, the BIS (2003) report notes: “Overvalued assets/stocks tend to find their way into major indices,
which are generally capitalization-weighted and therefore will more likely include overvalued securities than under-
valued securities. Asset managers may therefore need to buy these assets even if they regard them as overvalued;
otherwise they risk violating agreed tracking errors.” (p.19). In a similar spirit, a 2015 IMF working paper (Jones
(2015)) notes: “Another source of friction capable of amplifying bubbles stems from the captive buying of securities
in momentum-biased market capitalization-weighted financial benchmarks. Underlying constituents that rise most
in price will see their benchmark weights increase irrespective of fundamentals, inducing additional purchases from
fund managers seeking to minimize benchmark tracking error.”
2