NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE IMPACT OF FAMILY COMPOSITION ON EDUCATIONAL ACHIEVEMENT
Stacey H. Chen
Yen-Chien Chen
Jin-Tan Liu
Working Paper 20443
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20443
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014
The authors thank to the Ministry of Interior Affairs and the Joint Board of the College
Recruitment Commission for providing administrative data. We benefited from feedback from
Josh Angrist, John Ham, Yu-Chin Hsu, Masao Ogaki, Nancy Qian, Tyler VanderWeele, Francis
Vella, anonymous referees, and participants in universities and the 2009 NBER Education and
Children Programs. We acknowledge financial support from the Academia Sinica Career Award
(103-H02), Taiwan’s National Science Council (NSC101-2628-H-001-001-MY3) and National
Health Research Institute. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Stacey H. Chen, Yen-Chien Chen, and Jin-Tan Liu. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Impact of Family Composition on Educational Achievement
Stacey H. Chen, Yen-Chien Chen, and Jin-Tan Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 20443
August 2014, Revised November 2016
JEL No. I20,J13,J16,J24,O10,R20
ABSTRACT
Parents preferring sons tend to go on to have more children until a boy is born, and to concentrate
investment in boys for a given number of children (sibsize). Thus, having a brother may affect
child education in two ways: an indirect effect by keeping sibsize lower and a direct rivalry effect
where sibsize remains constant. We estimate the direct and indirect effects of a next brother on
the first child’s education conditional on potential sibsize. We address endogenous sibsize using
twins. We find new evidence of sibling rivalry and gender bias that cannot be detected by
conventional methods.
Stacey H. Chen Jin-Tan Liu
Academia Sinica Department of Economics
Taipei, Taiwan National Taiwan University
schen@econ.sinica.edu.tw No. 1, Section 4, Roosevelt Road
Taipei (10617), TAIWAN
Yen-Chien Chen and NBER
National Chinan University liujt@ntu.edu.tw
Taiwan
Yenchien@ncnu.edu.tw

The Impact of Family Composition on Educational Achievement∗
Stacey H. Chen, Yen-Chien Chen, and Jin-Tan Liu
October 21, 2016
Abstract
Parents preferring sons tend to go on to have more children until a boy is born, and to concentrate
investment in boys for a given number of children (sibsize). Thus, having a brother may affect child
educationintwoways: anindirecteffectbykeepingsibsizelowerandadirectrivalryeffectwheresibsize
remains constant. We estimate the direct and indirect effects of a next brother on the first child’s
education conditional on potential sibsize. We address endogenous sibsize using twins. We find new
evidenceofsiblingrivalryandgenderbiasthatcannotbedetectedbyconventionalmethods.
1 Introduction
Gender bias in families has been persisting across generations in many regions. Girls in India, for example,
get weaned earlier, receive less childcare and healthcare, and suffer from higher mortality.1 However, some
studies find no evidence that Indian females receive less care than males under normal circumstances (e.g.
Duflo, 2005). Deaton (1997, 2003) suggests that equal parental spending and vaccination were carried out
forbothgendersinthesameregions. UsingdatafromTaiwan—asocietywithalongtraditionofpreferring
sons over daughters2 — we also find surprising evidence of females having the advantage in completing high
∗S.H. Chen (s-chen@grips.ac.jp): Associate Professor of Economics at National Graduate Institute for Policy Studies
(GRIPS). Y.-C. Chen (yenchien@ncnu.edu.tw): Assistant Professor, National Chi-Nan University, Taiwan. J.-T. Liu (li-
ujt@ntu.edu.tw): National Taiwan University and NBER. This is a heavily revised version of Chen, Chen and Liu (2014).
Earlier versions of this paper were circulated under the following titles: “We prefer sons, but does it matter? Evidence from
matched administrative data from Taiwan,” “Estimating the causal effects of sibling gender composition on child mortality
and education using twin gender shocks” and “The impact of family composition on educational achievement.” Thanks to
theMinistryofInteriorAffairsandtheJointBoardoftheCollegeRecruitmentCommissionforprovidingadministrativedata.
We benefited from feedback from Josh Angrist, John Ham, Yu-Chin Hsu, Masao Ogaki, Nancy Qian, Tyler VanderWeele,
FrancisVella,anonymousreferees,andparticipantsinuniversitiesandthe2009NBEREducationandChildrenPrograms. We
acknowledge financial support from the Academia Sinica Career Award (103-H02), Taiwan’s National Science Council (NSC
101-2628-H-001-001-MY3)andNationalHealthResearchInstitute.
1See Chen, Huq and D’Souza (1981), Basu (1989), Sen (1990), Ganatra and Hirve (1994), Borooah (2004), Jayachandran
andKuziemko(2011),Singh(2012),Rosenblum(2013)andBarcellos,CarvalhoandLleras-Muney(2014).
2IllustrationsofTaiwanesepreferenceforsonsincludehigherdeathratesamonggirlsduringthefirsthalfofthe20thcentury
(Barclay,1954)andfeweropportunitiesforyoungwomentoworkorbeeducatedduringthepostwarperiod(Greenhalgh,1985).
Formorerecentevidence,seeParishandWillis(1993)andLin,LiuandQian(2014).

school or attaining university education.3
Oneexplanationforthesemixedresultsisthatfemalesaremoreenduringthanmalesgiventhesamecare
(Waldron, 1983); consequently, gender differences in child outcomes often understate the degree of gender
bias. Alternatively, the endowment deficit of males can be canceled out by comparing the sibling gender
effectonmaleversusfemaleoutcomes,whilekeepingtherealizednumberofsiblings(sibsize)constant. This
strategy has been adopted by the literature on sibling rivalry (or cross-sibling competition).4 However, the
methodofkeepingtherealizedsibsizeconstantdoesnotworkforhouseholdsthatwouldgoontohavemore
children until they get a son — the so-called son-preferring stopping rule of childbearing (Yamaguchi, 1989;
Jensen, 2005; Filmer, Friedman and Schady, 2009). Since households following the son-preferring stopping
rule are excluded from estimation, previously estimated effects of gender composition of siblings might have
understated the degree of gender bias.
Son preference and the son-preferring stopping rule suggest that having a brother may affect the human
capital formation of a boy or a girl in two ways: an indirect effect (IE) by decreasing potential sibsize
and a direct effect (DE) where potential sibsize remains constant. Under son preference, DE captures the
rivalry effect of a son (relative to a daughter) on child outcomes, keeping other things (including potential
sibsize) constant. Under the son-preferring stopping rule, IE captures the gain/penalty from the reduced
sibsize by the presence of a brother, keeping other things (including potential sibling gender) constant. If
child quality is independent of quantity, then IE is zero. However, if child quality decreases with quantity,
then IE is positive. Because DE and IE may go in opposite directions, the overall impact of a brother on
child outcomes can appear to be too small, particularly in countries with strong pro-son bias.5 Therefore,
understanding the relative importance of DE and IE is necessary in detecting gender discrimination.
Giventhatthegendercompositionoftheexistingchildrenaffectsfertilitychoice,theconventionalmeth-
ods of “keeping the realized sibsize constant” creates bad-control problems, which not only understate DE
but also leave IE undefined (because no variation in sibsize is left for defining IE, after the realized sibsize
has been fixed). Since IE has not been formulated in the existing literature on gender bias, the relative
magnitude of IE to DE is still an open question.
Rather than keeping the realized sibsize constant, new methods have been proposed recently to address
the bad-control problem. The most notable work comes from Barcellos, Carvalho and Lleras-Muney (2014),
who shut down the IE channel by restricting their sample to infants under 15 months of age. This strategy
3Rudd(1993)findsnoevidenceofdiscriminationagainstfemalesintheexpendituredataofTaiwanduringtheearly1990s.
4See Parish and Willis (1993), Butcher and Case (1994), Kaestner (1997), Garg and Morduch (1998), Morduch (2000),
Steelman,Powell,WerumandCarter(2002)andLafortuneandLee(2014).
5Vogl (2013) estimates the overall impact of a next sister on older sisters’ marriage and parental co-residence, using data
fromSouthAsiawheretheson-preferringstoppingruleisprevalent. Havinganextsisternotonlyincreasesfamilysizebutalso
increases the firstborn girl’s marriage risk. Both DE and IE of a next sister on firstborn outcomes in this context are likely
negative.
1