NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
APPROPRIABILITY MECHANISMS, INNOVATION AND PRODUCTIVITY:
EVIDENCE FROM THE UK
Bronwyn H. Hall
Vania Sena
Working Paper 20514
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20514
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014
This paper was originally written as one of the reports for the project “The choice between formal
and informal intellectual property,” funded by the UK Intellectual Property Office. We are grateful
to Christian Helmers and the late Mark Rogers for their participation in the project and the data
construction.(cid:3)We have received useful comments from participants in the CDM Workshop, London,
December 2013(cid:3)and various seminars. This work contains statistical data from UK ONS which is
Crown copyright(cid:3)and reproduced with the permission of the controller of HMSO and Queen’s Printer
for Scotland. The(cid:3)use of the ONS statistical data in this work does not imply the endorsement of the
ONS in relation(cid:3)to the interpretation or analysis of the statistical data. This work uses research datasets
which may(cid:3)not exactly reproduce National Statistics aggregates. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors(cid:3)and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Bronwyn H. Hall and Vania Sena. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Appropriability Mechanisms, Innovation and Productivity: Evidence from the UK
Bronwyn H. Hall and Vania Sena
NBER Working Paper No. 20514
September 2014
JEL No. L25,O30,O34
ABSTRACT
We use an extended version of the well-established Crepon, Duguet and Mairesse model (1998) to
model the relationship between appropriability mechanisms, innovation and firm-level productivity.
We enrich this model in several ways. First, we consider different types of innovation spending and
study the differences in estimates when innovation spending (rather than R&D spending) is used to
predict innovation in the CDM model. Second, we assume that a firm simultaneously innovates and
chooses among different appropriability methods (formal or informal) to protect the innovation. Finally,
in the third stage, we estimate the impact of the innovation output conditional on the choice of appropriability
mechanisms on firms’ productivity. We find that firms that innovate and rate formal methods for the
protection of Intellectual Property (IP) highly are more productive than other firms, but that the same
does not hold in the case of informal methods for the protection of a firm’s IP, except possibly for
large firms as opposed to SMEs. We also find that this result is strongest for firms in the services,
trade, and utility sectors, and negative in the manufacturing sector.
Bronwyn H. Hall
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
bhhall@nber.org
Vania Sena
University of Essex
Southend Campus Elmer Approach
Southend-on-Sea SS1 1LW
United Kingdom
vsena@essex.ac.uk

1. INTRODUCTION
Innovation is the engine of long‐run growth. However innovation does not flourish in
isolation but it is the result of the interactions among firms, policy‐makers and the
institutions that shape the environment where firms innovate. Among the institutions
that matter for innovation, the legal system for the protection of the intellectual
property has a prominent role and unsurprisingly, its design has been one of the main
concerns of the innovation and technology policy across the world. A welfare‐enhancing
legal system for the protection of the intellectual property has to balance different
requirements (Nordhaus, 1969). On the one hand, it has to allow inventors to benefit
from their investment by letting them appropriate some of the returns from their
inventions. On the other hand, it has to do so in such a way that the social costs
associated to the creation of a (possibly short‐term) legal monopoly are minimised
while not hindering the diffusion of the newly created knowledge across the economic
system (Levin et al., 1987; Gallini, 2002; Kultti et al., 2006).
Most of the policy and academic debate around the benefits and the social costs
associated to the existence of a legal system for the protection of a firm’s intellectual
property (IP) has revolved around patents (Boldrin and Levine, 2013; Moser, 2013).
This emphasis on patents is mostly due to data availability and economic saliency (given
the economic distortions that the award of a patent generates in the economic system).
In reality, patents are just one of the instruments that the legal system offers to firms to
protect their intellectual property. Mechanisms to appropriate the returns to knowledge
assets are typically classified into formal (patents, trademarks, copyrights, and design
rights) and informal methods (secrecy, lead time, confidentiality agreements, and
complexity).
Survey evidence finds that firms do not consider patents the most effective mechanism
to protect their intellectual property. In two seminal papers in this area, Levin et al.
(1987) and Cohen et al. (2000) find that lead time and secrecy are considered by U.S.
manufacturing firms to be more effective than patents for the protection of their IP. In
addition, Cohen et al. (2000) find that patents are mostly used for strategic reasons.
More recent data sourced from the UK Community Innovation Survey show that the
3

share of firms patenting among those reporting that they have innovated is around 4%
(Hall et al., 2013). Also, Howells et al. (2003) find that formal and informal
appropriability mechanisms are used simultaneously by firms and that the type of
innovation matters for the choice.
The implication is that any analysis on the relationship among appropriability
mechanisms, innovation and firm‐level performance needs to take into account two
main issues: a) formal and informal appropriability mechanisms are not mutually
exclusive and firms can use both at the same time; and b) the choice of the
appropriability mechanisms (be it formal or informal) is correlated with the type and
quality of innovation. Thus understanding how IP protection can foster innovation and
boost firm’s performance needs to control somehow for the type of innovations as well
as their quality where possible.
This paper builds upon the existing literature on the choice of the appropriability
mechanisms and its impact on firm‐level innovation and productivity. At the same time,
it innovates on the existing literature in two ways. First, we explicitly model the choice
that firms make between formal and informal appropriability mechanisms and we test
the extent to which this choice is correlated to the type of innovation. Second, we test
the possibility that the magnitude of the correlation between firms’ performance and
the choice of the appropriability mechanism is conditional on the type of innovation.
Modelling the relationship between firm productivity, innovation and the choice of the
appropriability mechanism presents a set of challenges. First, it is necessary to define
theoretically the channels through which the choice between formal and informal
appropriability mechanisms can affect performance. Our key assumption is that the
association between performance and appropriability mechanisms is conditional on the
type of innovation the IP method is protecting. In other words, firms that are in the
process of developing new products or new processes simultaneously decide whether
to use formal or formal IP methods to protect the intellectual capital attached to the
invention. Once the new products or/and processes are introduced we can observe
changes on firms’ performance that do not stem directly from the choice of a specific
4