NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCING DECISIONS AND PRODUCT INTRODUCTIONS OF PRIVATE AND
PUBLICLY TRADED FIRMS
Gordon Phillips
Giorgo Sertsios
Working Paper 20578
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20578
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014
We thank Nicholas Crain, Erik Gilje, Kathleen Kahle, Chen Lin, Jérôme Taillard, José Tessada, Patricio
Valenzuela and seminar participants at Erasmus University, University of Amsterdam, University
of Arizona, University of Southern California, Universidad Católica, the 2014 CICF conference, the
2014 FMA Asian Conference, the 4th mini-TOI conference and the 2nd Empirical Workshop in Management
Science and Economics for helpful comments. We also thank Juan Cristobal Maass, MD-PhD, for
helping us with medical institutional knowledge. We alone are responsible for any errors and omissions.
Sertsios gratefully acknowledges the financial support of Fondecyt Iniciación (project/folio 11130073).
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Gordon Phillips and Giorgo Sertsios. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Financing Decisions and Product Introductions of Private and Publicly Traded Firms
Gordon Phillips and Giorgo Sertsios
NBER Working Paper No. 20578
October 2014
JEL No. G3,G31,G32,L1,L22,L25,L26
ABSTRACT
We exploit Medicare national coverage reimbursement approvals of medical devices as a quasi-natural
experiment to investigate how private and publicly traded firm financing decisions and product introductions
respond to exogenous changes in investment opportunities. We find that publicly traded companies
increase their external financing, and their subsequent product introductions, by more than private
companies in response to national coverage approvals. The primary source of the increased financing
is through private financing of public firms. We also show that firms that select to go public during
our sample period are ex ante more productive than similar private firms. The results are consistent
with public firms bearing the costs of going public to gain financing advantages that come from being
able to offer securities with better exit liquidity and lower price risk.
Gordon Phillips
Marshall School of Business, Hoffman Hall
University of Southern California
3670 Trousdale Parkway
Bridge Hall 308
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0804
and NBER
Gordon.Phillips@marshall.usc.edu
Giorgo Sertsios
Universidad de los Andes
School of Business and Economics
Las Condes, Santiago, Chile
gsertsios@uandes.cl

I. Introduction
Choosing to be publicly traded has both potential costs and benefits. Costs include increased costs
of disclosure of information, both direct and indirect, as well as potential increased agency
problems arising from the separation of ownership and control. Offsetting these potential costs
are the advantages to founders from obtaining liquidity and diversifying their wealth; and the
ability to purchase other firms using IPO proceeds and liquid public stock. An additional large
potential advantage of public firms is the ability to access additional external funds subsequent to
improvements in investment opportunities. We investigate this potential new financing advantage
of public firms by examining how private and public firms’ financing decisions respond to
exogenous changes in firms’ investment opportunities.
We examine publicly traded and private firms in an ideal environment. We examine public and
private firms’ external financing decisions and product introductions in the medical device
industry before and after Medicare approval of national coverage reimbursement for medical
devices. The advantage of looking pre- and post-Medicare approval in a product category is that
these events represent exogenous changes in the potential for investment and growth for both
public and private firms operating in these product categories.
Our paper is the first to directly look at how publicly traded and privately held firms differ in the
way they raise external financing when facing exogenous changes in their investment
opportunities. In addition, we examine not only whether firms increase their external financing
but also the type of funding — debt and equity — and the source of financing — private versus
public markets. We also examine if there are differences in product introduction rates by public
and private firms subsequent to the Medicare coverage decisions and firms’ financing decisions
Previous papers examining publicly traded and privately held firms have focused on differences
in investment decisions and have come to differing conclusions about whether it is advantageous
for investment decisions for the firm to be publicly traded. Asker, Farre-Mensa and Lundquist
(2013) using a large panel of matched public and private firms and Sheen (2009) in a sample of
firms in the chemical industry find that public firms’ investment decisions are less sensitive than
private firms to investment opportunities. In contrast, Gilje and Taillard (2013) and Maksimovic,
1

Phillips and Yang (2013) conclude that investment and merger decisions by public firms are more
sensitive to changes in investment opportunities when using exogenous shocks to these firms and
controlling for differential firm productivity. Gilje and Taillard (2013), in particular, use a natural
experiment in the natural gas industry and provide evidence that publicly traded firms have higher
investment sensitivity to investment opportunities than private firms. However, the exact source
of differential investment sensitivity is unknown. This motivates our approach of directly
examining public versus private financing decisions, and subsequent product introductions,
following exogenous shocks to their investment opportunities.
There are two potential channels through which publicly traded firms may have an advantage
relative to private firms in raising external financing. First, publicly traded firms have a broader
access to external financing: they can issue seasoned equity and may be able to more easily issue
corporate bonds — in addition to obtaining funds through privately placed equity or bank debt, as
privately held firms. Second, publicly traded firms may have an advantage over privately held
firms even in issuing private security placements to investors. These private security placements
by public firms are called private investment in public equity (PIPEs). Through these securities,
publicly traded firms can offer better exit liquidity and lower price risk to private investors relative
to what investors can obtain by investing in private securities issued by private firms. In particular,
private investors may prefer to invest in publicly traded firms through these private placements as
they can liquidate their positions more easily, as public firms usually register these securities
within one year. Along with this near term registration, private investors can effectively exit their
positions by hedging them, even before the securities are registered: they can short sell the regular
public equity in the public markets after the private security issuance is disclosed through a SEC
filing. This hedging strategy reduces the price risk of holding the private securities.
Despite these potential advantages, it is possible that publicly traded firms may respond less to
better investment opportunities —and thus be unable to capitalize on their potential financing
advantages — due to agency considerations or a short-term focus of managers as has been
postulated by Sheen (2009) and Asker, Farre-Mensa, and Lundquist (2013). Moreover, even if
agency problems or short-term focus of managers were unimportant, it is still possible that publicly
traded firms may not be able to capitalize on having access to public markets, as issuing in the
2