NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A DISTANT MIRROR OF DEBT, DEFAULT, AND RELIEF
Carmen M. Reinhart
Christoph Trebesch
Working Paper 20577
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20577
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014
We would like to thank Michael Bordo, Josefin Meyer, Maurice Obstfeld, Vincent Reinhart, and Ken
Rogoff for helpful comments and suggestions. Maximilian Mandl and Takeshi Tashiro provided excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Carmen M. Reinhart and Christoph Trebesch. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

A Distant Mirror of Debt, Default, and Relief
Carmen M. Reinhart and Christoph Trebesch
NBER Working Paper No. 20577
October 2014
JEL No. E6,F3,H6,N0
ABSTRACT
We take a first pass at quantifying the magnitudes of debt relief achieved through default and restructuring
in two distinct samples: 1979-2010, focusing on credit events in emerging markets, and 1920-1939,
documenting the official debt hangover in advanced economies that was created by World War I and
its aftermath. We examine the economic performance of debtor countries during and after these overhang
episodes, by tracing the evolution of real per capita GDP (levels and growth rates); sovereign credit
ratings; debt servicing burdens relative to GDP, fiscal revenues, and exports; as well as the level of
government debt (external and total). Across 45 crisis episodes for which data is available we find
that debt relief averaged 21 percent of GDP for advanced economies (1932-1939) and 16 percent of
GDP for emerging markets (1979-2010), respectively. The economic landscape after a final debt reduction
is characterized by higher income levels and growth, lower debt servicing burdens and lower government
debt. Also ratings recover markedly, albeit only in the modern period.
Carmen M. Reinhart
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and CEPR
and also NBER
carmen_reinhart@harvard.edu
Christoph Trebesch
Department of Economics
University of Munich and CESifo
Schackstr. 4
80539 Munich
Germany
christoph.trebesch@lmu.de
A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20577

Introduction
“When I was a youngster growing up in South Dakota, we never referred to the national debt, it was
always referred to as the war debt because it stemmed from World War I.”
George McGovern2
Before the subprime financial crisis erupted in the summer of 2007, academic and policy
discussions on the topic of debt relief were almost exclusively directed toward initiatives for the highly
indebted poorest countries (HIPC).3 Advanced economies, apparently, had outgrown volatile business
cycles and financial crises. Sovereign debt crises were a distant memory for them.4 Emerging markets,
having weathered the turbulence of 1994-2003, were also on the mend, helped along by a favorable
external environment of low and stable international interest rates and robust commodity prices. The
debts of the First World War and the controversial defaults by nearly all advanced economies from 1932
to 1934 were an intellectual curiosity with little relevance to current circumstances.
The global financial crisis and its aftermath (which still lingers) abruptly disrupted that tranquility
setting and the accompanying complacency. New restructurings in Greece returned after a hiatus of nearly
80 years (the last Greek default started in 1932 and ended in 1966). The ongoing depression in periphery
Europe has already surpassed the economic collapse of the 1930s by some markers, with unemployment
rates reaching levels not seen since that era. In most advanced economies, record private debt overhangs
are only slowly unwinding, while the steady upward march in public debts continues unabated. The broad
subject of sovereign debt crises and the role of debt write-offs in their resolution is no longer a matter
solely of academic interest.
Research until now has been mostly devoted to documenting the incidence of external and
domestic default, various features of their causes, and the macroeconomic panorama surrounding them.
2 BrainyQuote.com Web site: http://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/g/georgemcgo462619.html
3 See, for example, Chauvin and Kraay (2005) for a skeptical view of the benefits of debt forgiveness for low-
income countries, as well as the welfare analysis by Dias, Richmond and Wright (2013).
4 See Stock and Watson (2002) on the Great Moderation and the reduced volatility of output.
2

This paper provides a first pass at quantifying the magnitudes of debt relief achieved and the subsequent
economic performance of the debtors.
We follow two complementary strands of analysis. One focuses on the highly varied credit events
in the middle-high income emerging markets in the modern era. Recent work by Cruces and Trebesch
(2013, henceforth C&T), which is in line with the approach developed in Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer
(2006), provides a comprehensive quantitative analysis of haircuts on sovereign debt for practically the
universe of emerging market restructuring episodes from 1978 to 2010.5 We look at these haircuts not
from their vantage point of the investor, but from our perspective of debt relief to the borrower.
The second strand extends our earlier work, bringing to the dissection table crises episodes that
are comparatively understudied. Specifically, we turn our attention to the interwar debt hangover of
official (government to government) debt created by World War I and its aftermath.6 We have quantified
and studied the amounts and details of the large network of war-related official debts for 18 advanced
economies. This allows us to estimate the extent of debt relief in this episode for the first time.
The war debt rescheduling and relief has many parallels to the developing country debt crisis and
debt relief initiatives, in particular the Brady deals of the 1990s. Box 1 provides a thumbnail comparison
of three international episodes: the 1920s/1930s, the 1980s/1990s and post-2007. As with bank loans in
the 1970s and 1980s, war debts were the dominant type of indebtedness for many advanced countries in
the 1920s. 7 Just as for many emerging markets in the 1980s, much of the 1920s and 1930s were a “lost
decade (s)” for European countries. Much of the international policy discourse of that time was an
ongoing debate on the need for debt relief. As was the case in the mid-1980s, there were preliminary
rescheduling agreements in the early 1920s, which postponed the repayment of war related debts for more
than 10 years, but without a reduction in the nominal debt burden (Moulton and Pasvolsky 1932). Finally,
5 See also the comprehensive study by Benjamin and Wright (2009).
6 The literature on default is primarily about private creditors and sovereign borrowers; World War I debt and
reparations are about official creditors and sovereign borrowers.
7 Ahamed (2010) often harks back to the war debt overhang theme.
3