NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNDERSTANDING DEFENSIVE EQUITY
Robert Novy-Marx
Working Paper 20591
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20591
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Robert Novy-Marx. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Understanding Defensive Equity
Robert Novy-Marx
NBER Working Paper No. 20591
October 2014
JEL No. G12
ABSTRACT
High volatility and high beta stocks tilt strongly to small, unprofitable, and growth firms. These tilts
explain the poor absolute performance of the most aggressive stocks. In conjunction with the well
documented inability of the Fama and French three-factor model to price small growth stocks, especially
unprofitable small growth stocks, these tilts also drive the abnormal performance of defensive equity
(i.e., low volatility and/or low beta strategies). While defensive strategy performance is explained
by controlling for size, profitability, and relative valuations, the converse is false—the performance
of value and profitability strategies cannot by explained using defensive equity performance.
Robert Novy-Marx
Simon Graduate School of Business
University of Rochester
305 Schlegel Hall
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
Robert.Novy-Marx@Simon.Rochester.edu

1 Introduction
Defensiveequitystrategies haveseenexplosivegrowthoverthelastfiveyears. These strate-
gies overweight “safe” or “defensive” stocks, and under-weight “risky” or “aggressive”
stocks,wherethesearetypicallydefinedbyastock’svolatilityormarketbeta. Theirpopular-
ity has been encouraged by the convergence of two factors: an equity marketthat delivered
twoseverebearmarketsandnegativenominalreturnsoverthefirstdecadeofthetwenty-first
century,andagrowingacademicliteraturedocumentingaweakornegativerelationbetween
equities’risks andreturns.
Low beta strategies were first suggested by Fischer Black (1972), who unsuccessfully
lobbied Wells Fargo to establish a levered low beta fund in the early 1970s. A more recent
surge in academic interest was spurred by Ang et. al.’s (2006)findingof a negative relation
between idiosyncratic volatility and subsequent stock returns, the so-called “idiosyncratic
volatilitypuzzle.” The most influentialof the subsequent workincludes Blitz and Van Vliet
(2007), which considered the performance of portfolios sorted on total volatility; Baker,
Bradley, andWurgler(2011),whichdocuments themodernperformanceof strategies based
on both low volatility and low market beta; and Frazzini and Pedersen (2014), which intro-
duces “betting-against-beta,”a sophisticateddynamicversionofBlack’s beta-arbitrage.
Low volatility and low beta strategies are popular with institutional investors, pension
funds, and insurance companies. Retail defensive equity funds have also seen robust in-
flows,andcompetewith“quality”strategiesandmanagedfuturesasthenewstrategiesmost
favoredbyactivemanagers. Theinterestdefensivestrategieshavereceivedinbothacademia
and on Wall Streethave led some to call forraising them into the canon of the most impor-
tant market anomalies. Frazzini and Pedersen (2014) claim, for example, that the return to
theirbetting-against-betastrategy “rivalsthose of allthe standard asset pricingfactors(e.g.,
value, momentum, and size) in terms of economic magnitude, statistical significance, and
robustness.” Baker, Bradley, and Wurgler (2011) go even further, opining that “among the
many candidates for the greatest anomaly in finance, a particularly compelling one is the
long-termsuccess oflow-volatilityand low-betastock portfolios.”
1

Thispapertakesamoreskepticalview. Whilereaffirmingthepoorabsoluteperformance
of the most aggressive stocks, it nevertheless shows that the performance of defensive eq-
uity strategies is explained by known drivers of cross-sectional variation in returns. This is
somewhat surprising, as previous work, including Blitz and Van Vliet (2007) and Asness,
Frazzini,andPedersen(2014),explicitlyrejectthehypothesisthatdefensivestrategyperfor-
mance isdrivenby size andvalue effects. This earlierworkfailstoaccount forprofitability,
however,whichis an essential ingredientforunderstandingdefensive strategyperformance.
High profitabilityis, next to large market capitalization, the single best predictorof low
volatility. Defensive strategies consequently tilt strongly towards profitability. This also
tends to obscure the true extent to which defensive strategies tilt toward value. Because
profitabilityand value tend to be strongly negatively correlated, the large profitability load-
ings on defensive strategies reduce the defensive strategies’ loadings on value strategies in
tests that fail to control for profitability. Accounting for profitability, and the true extent
to which defensive strategies tilt toward value, are crucial for explaining defensive strategy
performance.
Small growth stocks also play a critical role in defensive equity. Defensive strategies
overweight large value stocks and underweight small growth stocks, which contributes di-
rectlytodefensivestrategyperformance. Smallgrowthadditionallydrivesdefensivestrategy
performance through a second, indirect channel: within style universes, defensive strategy
performanceis stronglyconcentrated in thesmall growthsegment. In fact, defensivestocks
only outperform aggressive stocks in the small growth segment; aggressive stocks actually
significantlyoutperformdefensive stocks inlargevalue.
The success of defensive strategies among small growth firms is consistent with prof-
itabilityand value drivingtheir performance. The small growthsector is also where volatil-
ityis most stronglyassociated withvaluationsand profitability—lowvolatilitystocks inthe
small growth sector have only moderately high valuations and are quite profitable, while
high volatility stocks in this sector on average have both negative book equity and nega-
tive earnings. Because of the large variation in valuations and profitability between high
and low volatility small growth stocks, the performance of defensive strategies constructed
2