NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW DOES GOVERNMENT BORROWING AFFECT CORPORATE FINANCING
AND INVESTMENT?
John Graham
Mark T. Leary
Michael R. Roberts
Working Paper 20581
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20581
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014
This paper previously circulated under the title, “Financial Crowding Out.” We thank Andy Abel,
Ravi Bansal, Effi Benmelech, Joao Gomes, Robin Greenwood, Boyan Jovanovich, Stefan Nagel, Josh
Rauh, Ken Singleton, Jeremy Stein, Amir Sufi, Jules Van Binsbergen, Amir Yaron; seminar participants
at Arizona State University, Duke University, London Business School, London School of Economics,
Miami University, Notre Dame, MIT, Ohio State University, Oklahoma University, Stanford University,
University of British Columbia, University of Chicago, University of Colorado, University of Illinois,
University of Minnesota, University of Pennsylvania, University of Utah, Vanderbilt University, Yale
University; and conference participants at the 2010 SITE and 2014 Safe Assets and the Macroeconomy
Conference for helpful comments on this study and a predecessor paper. Nick della Copa, Ian Appel,
and Jessica Jeffers provided excellent research assistance. Roberts gratefully acknowledges financial
support from the Jacobs Levy Equity Management Center for Quantitative Financial Research. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by John Graham, Mark T. Leary, and Michael R. Roberts. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Does Government Borrowing Affect Corporate Financing and Investment?
John Graham, Mark T. Leary, and Michael R. Roberts
NBER Working Paper No. 20581
October 2014
JEL No. E22,E44,G20,G31,G32
ABSTRACT
Using a novel dataset of accounting and market information that spans most publicly traded nonfinancial
firms over the last century, we show that U.S. federal government debt issuance significantly affects
corporate financial policies and balance sheets through its impact on investors’ portfolio allocations
and the relative pricing of different assets. Government debt is strongly negatively correlated with
corporate debt and investment, but strongly positively correlated with corporate liquidity. These relations
are more pronounced in larger, less risky firms whose debt is a closer substitute for Treasuries. Indeed,
we find a strong negative relation between the BAA-AAA yield spread and government debt, highlighting
the greater sensitivity of more highly rated credit to variation in the supply of Treasuries. The channel
through which this effect operates is investors’ portfolio decisions: domestic intermediaries actively
substitute between lending to the federal government and the nonfinancial corporate sector. The relations
between government debt and corporate policies, as well as the substitution between government and
corporate debt by intermediaries, are stronger after 1970 when foreign demand increased competition
for Treasury securities. In concert, our results suggest that large, financially healthy corporations act
as liquidity providers by supplying relatively safe securities to investors when alternatives are in short
supply, and that this financial strategy influences firms’ capital structures and investment policies.
John Graham Michael R. Roberts
Duke University The Wharton School
Fuqua School of Business University of Pennsylvania
100 Fuqua Drive 3620 Locust Walk, #2319
Durham, NC 27708-0120 Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER and NBER
john.graham@duke.edu mrrobert@wharton.upenn.edu
Mark T. Leary
Olin Business School
Washington University in St. Louis
Campus Box 1133, One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130
and NBER
leary@wustl.edu

How does government borrowing affect the corporate sector? A large literature focuses
on the prediction that an increase in government debt reduces investment by increasing the level
of interest rates.1 However, when wealth effects are present in investors’ portfolio decisions and
asset markets are differentiated beyond money and capital, there are several implications for the
corporate sector that have gone largely unexplored. In particular, fluctuations in the supply of
government debt can alter the relative returns on assets in a manner that depends on the relative
substitutability of different assets in investors’ portfolios (Friedman (1978)). The prices of
securities that are closer substitutes for government debt (e.g., corporate debt) react more
strongly to variation in the supply of government debt than the price of securities that are poorer
substitutes (e.g., corporate equity). This price variation can in turn alter firms’ incentives to
invest in different types of assets and issue different types of securities.
Recent evidence suggests such price effects are present in at least some segments of the
capital markets. Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) find that government borrowing
affects Treasury-corporate yield spreads by altering the premium investors are willing to pay to
hold safe and liquid assets. Baker, Greenwood, and Wurgler (2003) highlight predictability in
corporate bond returns that Greenwood, Hansen, and Stein (2010) attribute to macro liquidity
provision by firms in response to fluctuations in the supply of Treasuries across the yield curve.
These findings complement earlier work by Friedman (1986) predicting that government debt
issuances will increase the cost of corporate debt relative to equity. What is unclear at this point
is whether variation in the supply of government debt, and the attendant price effects, ultimately
impacts corporate policies.
The goal of this study is to shed light on this issue by investigating the relation between
government borrowing and corporate capital structure, liquidity, and investment policies. We do
so using a unique micro dataset containing accounting and market information for U.S.
nonfinancial publicly traded firms over the last century. Our data enable us to exploit both time-
series and cross-sectional variation, the latter of which we show is critical for uncovering and
understanding the link between government debt policy and corporate behavior.
We begin by documenting a significant and robust negative relation between government
debt and corporate debt for nonfinancial firms in what we refer to as the unregulated sector, i.e.,
1 See surveys by Elmendorf and Mankiw (1999) and Hubbard (2011).
1

firms other than railroads, telecommunications, and utilities.2 A one standard deviation increase
in government leverage (the ratio of government debt to total assets of the corporate sector) is
associated with a one third standard deviation decrease in corporate leverage (the ratio of
corporate debt to total assets). We find a similar significant, negative relation between the flow
of government debt and the flow of corporate debt, with the results concentrated in long-term, as
opposed to short-term, debt.
These findings are robust. The relation between corporate and government debt is
economically and statistically significant controlling for firm characteristics and macroeconomic
factors. Further, the relation is present in both levels and first differences, and between
alternative measures of corporate debt (e.g., total debt, debt net of liquid assets) and government
debt (e.g., debt held by the public, gross debt). Subsample analysis reveals that the negative
relation between government and corporate debt policies is present throughout the last 100 years
and is not attributable to the large government deficit of World War II or fiscal policy during
recessions.
We find little evidence that firms substitute to alternative sources of funding, consistent
with a large body of theoretical and empirical evidence highlighting segmented financial markets
and corporate hedging demands.3 We find a statistically insignificant relation between
government debt and corporate equity policies; however, we find a significantly positive and
robust association between government debt and firms’ holdings of cash and other short-term
liquid assets, such as Treasuries. Thus, firms reduce their use of debt and increase their holdings
of liquid assets in response to increases in government borrowing.
These findings are consistent with corporations increasing purchases and reducing sales
of safe and liquid securities – relative to equity – in response to increases in government debt and
the reduction in the price of these securities (Friedman (1986) and Krishnamurthy and Vissing-
Jorgensen (2012)). However, this analysis leaves open the possibility that variation in
2 Our focus on unregulated firms is driven primarily by two considerations. First, the institutional environment and
economic mechanisms responsible for financial and investment policy are fundamentally different across regulated
and unregulated entities – a point emphasized throughout the capital structure literature (e.g., see Frank and Goyal
(2008) for a review). Second, unregulated corporate assets represent the majority of nonfinancial corporate assets
over the last 100 years and over 75% since 1950.
3 See studies by Rubinstein (1973), Auerbach and King (1983), Bolton and Freixas (2000), Baker, Greenwood, and
Wurgler (2003), Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003), Faulkender and Petersen (2005), Leary (2009), and Lemmon and
Roberts (2010) for theoretical and empirical evidence of financial market segmentation. See studies by Acharya,
Almeida, and Campello (2005) and Faulkender and Wang (2006) for evidence of hedging motives and the
distinction between cash and debt.
2