NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES TRANSPARENCY LEAD TO PAY COMPRESSION?
Alexandre Mas
Working Paper 20558
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20558
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014
I am grateful to Will Dobbie, Matthew Gentzkow, Ilyana Kuziemko, Emmanuel Saez, Jesse Shapiro,
and Orie Shelef for helpful comments, as well as seminar participants at University of Chicago, Harvard,
UC Berkeley, NBER, Princeton and Yale. Mingyu Chen, Kevin DeLuca, Kwabena Donkor, Helen
Gao, Disa Hynsjo, Samsun Knight, Rebecca Sachs, Dan Van Deusen, Jessica Wagner, and Yining
Zhu provided excellent research assistance. This project has been approved by Princeton's Institutional
Review Board.The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Alexandre Mas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Does Transparency Lead to Pay Compression?
Alexandre Mas
NBER Working Paper No. 20558
October 2014, Revised February 2016
JEL No. J01,J31,J45,J63
ABSTRACT
This paper asks whether pay disclosure in the public sector changes wage setting at the top of the public
sector distribution. I examine a 2010 California mandate that required municipal salaries to be posted
online. Among top managers, disclosure led to approximately 7 percent average compensation declines,
and a 75 percent increase in their quit rate, relative to managers in cities that had already disclosed
salaries. The wage cuts were largely nominal. Wage cuts were larger in cities with higher initial compensation,
but not in cities where compensation was initially out of line with (measured) fundamentals. The response
is more consistent with public aversion to high compensation than the effects of increased accountability.
Alexandre Mas
Industrial Relations Section
Firestone Library
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
amas@princeton.edu

Pay transparency policies are growing in importance. Recent examples include states and
cities that have increasingly disclosed worker salaries as part of sunshine initiatives, a U.S.
presidential memorandum that recommends requiring federal contractors to submit summary
data on employee compensation by race and sex, and a newly imposed rule that requires publicly
traded companies to compare CEO pay with the pay of the median worker.1 In an extreme
example, Norway publishes all of its residents’ tax returns online (MacDougall 2009).
While the literature has made progress in understanding how preferences about inequality
and redistribution are shaped by available information (e.g. Bartels 2005; Card et al. 2012;
Cruces, Perez-Truglia, and Tetaz 2013; Kuziemko et al. 2013; Karadja, Mollerstrom, and Seim
2014), little is known about whether transparency affects pay. Two reasons why salary
transparency might change the compensation structure in organizations, particularly at the top of
the distribution, are (1) greater accountability and (2) public aversion to salaries perceived as
excessive.
Advocates for transparency polices in the public sector have stressed that increased
disclosure should lead to increased accountability.2 Better information might allow the public to
hold elected officials more accountable for gaps between pay and productivity.3 Increased
accountability could result in lower manager compensation if capture and managerial power are
restrained.4 Consistent with this hypothesis, using survey data from across 175 countries,
1 See https://ballotpedia.org/State_government_salary for states with employee salary databases,
www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/04/08/ presidential-memorandum-advancing-pay-equality-through-
compensation-data for the presidential memorandum, and https://www.sec.gov/news/pressrelease/2015-160.html for
the SEC rule of CEO pay relative to the median worker.
2 See, for example, The Economist, “Sunshine or colonoscopy?” November 19, 2011.
http://www.economist.com/node/21538774
3 Greenstone, Oyer, and Vissing-Jorgenson (2006) find evidence that mandated disclosure requirements in the 1964
Securities Act led managers to focus more on maximizing shareholder value.
4 See Di Tella and Fisman (2004), Diamond (2013) and Brueckner and Neumark (2014) for evidence of rent
extraction in the public sector.
3

Djankov et al. (2010) find that public disclosure of politicians’ income is associated with lower
perceived corruption and better government.
Transparency may also lead to pay compression if there is public sentiment against high
levels of compensation, even if compensation is in line with fundamentals. Such a response
would be consistent with inequality aversion on the part of the public (Fehr and Schmidt 1999).5
There has been speculation in the executive compensation literature that this type of “populist”
response to seemingly high levels of compensation has contributed to lower executive pay in
publicly traded companies where top salaries are disclosed (Jensen and Murphy 1990), though
there is little quantitative evidence of this phenomenon.
Understanding the effects of transparency on wage setting, as well as the underlying
mechanisms, is important for guiding policy. Estimating this effect is challenging, as it requires
finding variation in transparency at an organizational level, as well as data on wages. This paper
seeks to overcome these difficulties by examining how a 2010 California mandate that required
cities to disclose municipal salaries affected the compensation of the Chief Administrative
Officer (“city manager”) position—typically the highest paid city employee. The research design
exploits the fact that prior to the mandate a subset of cities (“previous disclosure” cities) had
already disclosed the salaries of their top managers.6 Using the Internet Wayback Machine and
archives of more than three hundred local newspapers, I identify cities where the salaries of city
managers were already disclosed to the press or on their websites at the time of the mandate.
Prior to the mandate, 63 percent of cities already disclosed the salary of the city manager. I
5 A related mechanism is morale considerations on the part of workers since transparency can lower job satisfaction
(Card et al. 2012) and being paid below expectations can lead to declines in productivity (Greenberg 1990; Krueger
and Mas 2004; Mas 2006; Mas 2008; Cohn et al. 2014). Employers might internalize these fairness concerns when
setting pay (Frank 1984, Akerlof and Yellen 1990, and Bartling and von Siemens 2010). Transparency might also
reduce gender and race wage gaps by making it easier to compare wages of workers in similar jobs; this was, in fact,
the stated motivation behind the 2014 presidential memorandum referenced above.
6 This strategy is similar to the one used by Bo, Slemrod, and Thoresen (2014) who study the effects of disclosure on
tax avoidance in Norway.
4