NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PRODUCT AND LABOR MARKET REGULATIONS, PRODUCTION PRICES, WAGES
AND PRODUCTIVITY
Gilbert Cette
Jimmy Lopez
Jacques Mairesse
Working Paper 20563
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20563
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research or the other institutions the authors belong to.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Gilbert Cette, Jimmy Lopez, and Jacques Mairesse. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Product and Labor Market Regulations, Production Prices, Wages and Productivity
Gilbert Cette, Jimmy Lopez, and Jacques Mairesse
NBER Working Paper No. 20563
October 2014, Revised June 2015
JEL No. C23,L16,L50,O43,O47
ABSTRACT
This study is an attempt to evaluate the effects of product and labour market regulations on industry
productivity through their various impacts on changes in production prices and wages. In a first stage,
the estimation of a regression equation on an industry*country panel, with controls for country*industry
and country*year fixed effects, show that multi-factor productivity is negatively and significantly influenced
by both indicators of industrial prices from same industry and weighted average of industrial prices
from other industries, and by indicators of country wages weighted by industry labour shares for low
and high skilled workers. In a second stage, an economic policy simulation of the implications these
results on the basis of their calibration by the OECD product and labour market anti-competitive regulation
indicators suggests that nearly all countries could expect sizeable gains in multifactor productivity
from deregulation reforms.
Gilbert Cette Jacques Mairesse
Banque de France CREST (ParisTech-ENSAE)
1, rue de la Vrillière 15, Boulevard Gabriel PERI
75001 Paris, France 92245 MALAKOFF CEDEX
and Aix-Marseille School of Economics, FRANCE
CNRS & EHESS and UNU-MERIT (Maastricht University)
gilbert.cette@banque-france.fr and also NBER
mairesse@ensae.fr
Jimmy Lopez
Université de Bourgogne
UFR Economie et Gestion
4, Boulevard Gabriel
21000 Dijon, FRANCE
Jimmy.Lopez@u-bourgogne.fr
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20563

I. Introduction
A large body of literature investigates the productivity impacts of product and labour market
imperfections, and of the anti-competitive regulations establishing and supporting them (see
Aghion and Howitt 2009 for a survey). This paper greatly extends the scope of two previous
studies by the authors (Bourlès et al., 2013, and Cette, Lopez and Mairesse, 2013) that focus
only on the indirect productivity impact of non-manufacturing regulations. By considering the
effects of product and labour market regulations on industry productivity through their
various impacts on production prices and wages, it allows to assess and compare the relative
size of the different channels of direct and indirect impacts of product and labour market
imperfections. The paper relies on country*industry panel that is basically the same as in the
other two previous studies. It also takes advantage of the rich information provided by the
OECD regulation indicators, but it does so only indirectly for economic policy calibration and
simulation purposes.
The originality of our new approach is twofold. First, to our knowledge, it is the first attempt
to assess the consequences on productivity of anti-competitive regulations in product and
labour markets through their impacts on production prices and wages.1 Second, it does so by
considering in conjunction the six channels through which regulations can impact MFP: direct
and indirect influence of product market regulations on rent building in manufacturing and
non-manufacturing industries, and direct influence of labour market regulations on the rent
sharing process between firms on the one hand and skilled and unskilled workers on the other.
Our approach is theoretically grounded in the model developed by Blanchard and Giavazzi
(2003). In their own words, “their model is built on two basic assumptions: monopolistic
competition in the goods market, which determines the size of rents; and bargaining in the
labour market, which determines the distribution of rents between workers and firm.”(pp.
879-880). In other words, firms can take advantage of the market power permitted by product
market anti-competitive regulations to charge higher production prices and generate rents that
they can be kept in the form of increased profits. Workers can also capture in the form of
higher wages a share of these rents, which varies with their bargaining power, itself largely
influenced by labour market regulations. Our empirical framework is an attempt to assess the
productivity impact of regulations as mediated by their effects on the changes on production
1 The study by Askenazy, Cette and Maarek (2013) also rely on similar assumptions.
2

prices and wages. It can be simply explained by the diagram of Figure 1, which we shall now
comment.
INCLUDE FIGURE 1 about HERE
The right side of the diagram outlines the regression equation central to our investigation. It
shows the channels by which the six price and wage indicators, key in the analysis, relate to
Multifactor Productivity (MFP). The left side of the diagram shows the calibration
relationships, which validate our use of six price and wage indicators as proxies of the product
and labour market imperfections impacts, and allow us to perform simulations of the (MFP)
gains resulting from structural reforms of product and labour markets, as gauged by the
OECD indicators for Non-Manufacturing Regulations (NMR), Harmonized tariffs (HT) and
Employment Protection Legislation (EPL).
The regression equation assumes that product market imperfections in an industry generate
higher production prices and rents, which have a “direct” impact on MFP in the same industry
and an “indirect” impact on MFP in other industries. The two price indicators of direct
impacts measure the extent to which what we label “Manufacturing” industries and Non-
Manufacturing” industries are able to charge relatively high prices. They thus benefit from
large rents and have fewer incentives to improve their efficiency and to innovate but also
more financial resources to do so. We can thus expect an impact on MFP which could be
either negative or positive. A negative sign may a priori seem more likely for non-
manufacturing industries generally sheltered from foreign competition and often protected
from national competition by product market regulations. But this may also be true for
manufacturing industries when they are protected from foreign competition by high tariff
barriers. The two price indicators of indirect impacts are similarly indicative of weaker
incentives to improve efficiency and to innovate by “downstream” industries when the rents
they can generate are appropriated by “upstream” industries that have market power and can
charge them relatively high prices for the intermediate inputs they must use. In this case,
however, the expected impact on MFP is unambiguously negative. Again and for the same
reasons this should be more likely when the upstream industries are non-manufacturing
industries than manufacturing industries.
3