NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STRATEGIC TRADING IN INFORMATIONALLY COMPLEX ENVIRONMENTS
Nicolas S. Lambert
Michael Ostrovsky
Mikhail Panov
Working Paper 20516
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20516
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014
We are grateful to the National Science Foundation for financial support (grant CCF-1101209). Ostrovsky
also thanks the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Nicolas S. Lambert, Michael Ostrovsky, and Mikhail Panov. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Strategic Trading in Informationally Complex Environments
Nicolas S. Lambert, Michael Ostrovsky, and Mikhail Panov
NBER Working Paper No. 20516
September 2014
JEL No. D53,D82,D84,G12,G14
ABSTRACT
We study trading behavior and the properties of prices in informationally complex markets. Our model
is based on the single-period version of the linear-normal framework of Kyle (1985). We allow for
essentially arbitrary correlations among the random variables involved in the model: the value of the
traded asset, the signals of strategic traders and competitive market makers, and the demand from liquidity
traders. We show that there always exists a unique linear equilibrium, characterize it analytically, and
illustrate its properties in a series of examples. We then use this characterization to study the informational
efficiency of prices as the number of strategic traders becomes large. If liquidity demand is positively
correlated (or uncorrelated) with the asset value, then prices in large markets aggregate all available
information. If liquidity demand is negatively correlated with the asset value, then prices in large markets
aggregate all information except that contained in liquidity demand.
Nicolas S. Lambert Mikhail Panov
Stanford University Stanford University
Graduate School of Business Graduate School of Business
655 Knight Way 655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305 Stanford, CA 94305
nlambert@stanford.edu mpanov@stanford.edu
Michael Ostrovsky
Stanford University
Graduate School of Business
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
ostrovsky@stanford.edu
An Online Appendix is available at
http://faculty-gsb.stanford.edu/ostrovsky/papers/st%20-%20online%20appendix.pdf

1 Introduction
Whether and how dispersed information enters into market prices is one of the central questions of
information economics. A key obstacle to full information revelation and aggregation in markets is
thestrategicbehaviorofinformedtraders. Atraderwhohasprivateinformationaboutthevalueof
anassethasanincentivetotradeinthedirectionofthatinformation. However, themorehetrades,
the more he reveals his information, and the more he moves the prices closer to the true value of
an asset. Thus, to maximize his profits, an informed trader may stop short of fully revealing his
information, and so the informational efficiency of market prices may fail.
Thus, an important and natural question is when we should expect market prices to in fact
reflect all information available to market participants. One stream of literature considers trading
in dynamic environments, with informed traders having multiple opportunities for trading.1 In
these settings, in each period, traders may have an incentive to withhold some of their information
in order not to eliminate their profits. However, over time, traders will gradually reveal all of their
information, and in many (although not all) cases, by the end of trading, market prices will in fact
aggregate all available information.
One issue with the case of dynamic trading is that while at the end, market prices accurately
reflect all available information, that is generally not the case during most of the time the market
is in operation—and thus much of the trading may happen at prices that are far away from the
ones that would prevail if all private information was publicly available to all market participants.
Therefore, another important stream of research abstracts away from the time dimension and
repeated trading in markets, and considers instead an alternative intuition for when market prices
may accurately reflect information: when the number of informed traders is large, and each one
of them is informationally small. In that case, each of the informed traders has limited impact on
market prices, but their aggregate behavior does in fact reflect the aggregate information available
in the market. As a result, market prices are close to those that would prevail if all private
information were publicly available, and all trades happen at those prices.
Non-strategic explorations of this intuition go back to Hayek (1945), Grossman (1976), and
Radner (1979).2 Subsequently, a line of research (which we discuss in more detail in Section 2) has
consideredstrategicfoundationsforthisintuition, studyingstrategicbehaviorofinformedagentsin
finite markets, and then considering the properties of prices as the number of these agents becomes
large. This stream of work, however, imposes very strict assumptions on how information is dis-
tributedamongtheagents,typicallyassumingthatthesignalsofinformedagentsaresymmetrically
1See, e.g., Hellwig (1982), Kyle (1985), Dubey et al. (1987), Wolinsky (1990), Foster and Viswanathan (1996),
Back et al. (2000), Ostrovsky (2012), and Golosov et al. (2014), among others.
2OtherfoundationalpapersintherichliteratureonRationalExpectationsEquilibriumandrelatednon-strategic
solution concepts include Kreps (1977), Hellwig (1980), Allen (1981), and Anderson and Sonnenschein (1982); for
surveys of the literature, see Jordan and Radner (1982), Allen and Jordan (1998), and Glycopantis and Yannelis
(2005). These papers focus on equilibrium existence and the amount of information aggregated and communicated
by prices in equilibrium, but only consider environments with either an infinite number of infinitesimally small
traders, or with a finite number of traders who essentially ignore the impact they have on market prices and behave
non-strategically.
2

distributed, or satisfy other related restrictions so that in equilibrium, the strategies of all informed
traders are identical (see Section 2). In practice, however, the distribution of information in the
economy can be much more complex. Some agents may be strictly more informed than others.
Groups of agents may have access to different sources of information, so that the correlations of
signalswithinagroupareverydifferentfromcorrelationsacrossgroups(andthesizesofthegroups
may be different, and the correlations of signals between different groups may be different as well).
Some agents may be informed about the fundamental value of the security, while others may be
uninformed about the fundamentals but possess some “technical” information about the market or
other traders. And of course all such possibilities may be present in a market at the same time.
Our paper makes two main contributions.
First, we present an analytically tractable framework that makes it possible to study trading in
such informationally complex environments. Our model is based on the single-period version of the
modelofKyle(1985). Asinthatpaper,animportantassumptionthatmakesourmodelanalytically
tractable is the assumption of joint normality of random variables involved in the setting: the true
value of the traded asset, the signals of strategic traders, the signals of competitive market makers,
and the demand coming from liquidity traders. Beyond that assumption, however, we impose
essentially no restrictions on the joint distribution of these variables, making it possible to model
informationally rich situations such as those described above. In this framework, we show that
there always exists a unique linear equilibrium, which can be computed analytically.
Second, weexploretheinformationalpropertiesofequilibriumpricesasthenumberofinformed
agents becomes large. We assume that there are several types of agents, with each agent of a given
type receiving the same information, and fix the matrix of correlations of signals across the types
(and other random variables in the model). We then allow the numbers of agents of every type to
grow (without restricting the rates of growth in any way; e.g., the number of agents of one type
may grow much faster than the number of agents of another type). We find that the informational
properties of prices in these large markets depend on the informativeness of the demand from
liquidity traders. If the demand from liquidity traders is uncorrelated with the true value of the
asset or is positively correlated with it (conditional on other signals), then prices in large markets
aggregate all available information. If, however, the demand from liquidity traders is negatively
correlated with the true value of the asset, then prices in large markets aggregate all available
information except that contained in liquidity demand.
We also illustrate our model with several applications. One example shows that under fairly
simple (but, crucially, asymmetric) information structures, an informed trader may choose to trade
“against” his information, i.e., sell the asset when his signal implies that the expected value of the
asset is positive, and vice versa. Two examples explore the profitability of “technical” trading,
and show that a trader may be able to make substantial positive expected profit even if he has
no information about the value of the asset, provided there is at least one other (“fundamental”)
trader who does, and provided that the technical trader has information about the demand from
liquidity traders or about the mistakes of the fundamental trader. Our last set of examples shows
3