NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IN PRAISE OF FRANK RAMSEY'S CONTRIBUTION TO THE THEORY OF TAXATION
Joseph E. Stiglitz
Working Paper 20530
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20530
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014
Financial support from INET is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of
the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Joseph E. Stiglitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

In Praise of Frank Ramsey's Contribution to the Theory of Taxation
Joseph E. Stiglitz
NBER Working Paper No. 20530
September 2014
JEL No. E62,H2,H21
ABSTRACT
Frank Ramsey’s classic paper "A contribution to the theory of taxation" gave rise to the modern theory
of optimal taxation. This paper traces the literature that grew out of Ramsey’s 1927 paper and assesses
which of its key insights has proven robust. Though the path breaking work of Peter Diamond and
James Mirrlees showed that Ramsey's results could be generalized in some important ways, other work
showed that the domain of applicability of Ramsey's original insights may be more limited: changes
in assumptions about the set of feasible taxes (not allowing certain taxes, or allowing a progressive
income tax or non-linear commodity taxes), and in particular about the taxation of pure rents, incorporating
more explicitly distributional considerations, and/or recognizing the important ways in which our economy
differs from the competitive model underlying Ramsey’s analysis all change the optimal structure
of commodity taxation in important ways.
Joseph E. Stiglitz
Uris Hall, Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Room 212
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jes322@columbia.edu

In Praise of Frank Ramsey's Contribution to the Theory of Taxation1
Joseph E. Stiglitz2
Frank Ramsey’s brilliant 1927 paper, modestly entitled, "A contribution to the theory of taxation," is a
landmark in the economics of public finance. A third of a century later, through the work of Diamond
and Mirrlees (1971) and Mirrlees (1971), his paper can be thought of as launching the field of optimal
taxation and revolutionizing public finance.3
Ramsey, in his short life, made pathbreaking contributions to two other fields, the theory of optimal
growth (Ramsey, 1928) and the theory of subjective probability (1926)).4 Here, he addresses a
question which he says was posed to him by A. C. Pigou: given that commodity taxes are distortionary,
what is the best way of raising revenues, i.e. what is the set of taxes to raise a given revenue which
maximizes utility. The answer is now commonly referred to as Ramsey taxes. The basic insight was that
taxes should be set so as to reduce the consumption of each good (along its compensated demand
curve) equi-proportionately. He establishes this result in two contexts: (i) if the government needs to
raise only a small amount of tax revenue and (ii) if utility functions are quadratic.
The analysis is beautiful, mathematically sophisticated, making use of all the artillery in the theory of
consumer behavior, including the symmetry of the Slutsky relations. The conclusion overturned
simplistic analyses that somehow continue to prevail in some quarters for decades after Ramsey’s
paper, and in some subfields of economics, continue to this day. Some economists argued against
differential taxation on the grounds that it is best just to have a single tax (typically on wages). A wage
tax introduces a single distortion—between the marginal rate of substitution between labor and
consumption and the marginal rate of transformation. Interest income taxes and commodity taxes
introduce additional distortions. (Interestingly, Ramsey's analysis has, wrongly, continued to be used by
some economists to argue against the taxation of capital5.)
As another example of such simplistic economics, some macro-economists continue to argue that
monetary authorities should only interfere with the market in setting short term interest rates.
1 I owe a great debt to my co-authors with whom I have written in work that may be considered to follow in
Ramsey's footsteps--Rlchard Arnott, Bob Brito, Shahe Emran, John Hamilton, Raaj Sah, Steve Slutsky, and most
especially Tony Atkinson and Partha Dasgupta; and like all those who toil in these fields, I owe a debt to Peter
Diamond and James Mirrlees, who not only shaped the modern theory of optimal taxation but also shaped my
own thinking. I am indebted to Frederic Vermeulen and an anonymous referee for their helpful comments on an
earlier draft and to Sandesh Dhungana and Eamon Kircher-Allen for research and editorial assistance. Financial
support from INET is gratefully acknowledged.
2 University Professor, Columbia University
3 Given the huge number of papers that have been written in this field in the last half century, this paper cannot
even attempt a survey. Rather, focus on the central themes raised by Ramsey in his paper.
4 In addition, he made important contributions to mathematics, logic, and philosophy, before dying at the young
age of 26.
5 See the discussion below and the references cited there.
1

Ramsey showed that efficient taxation required imposing a complete array of taxes—not just a single
tax. A large number of small distortions, carefully constructed, is better than a single large distortion.
And he showed precisely what these market interventions would look like. (He even explains that the
optimal intervention might require subsidies—what he calls bounties—for some commodities. “A tax
on sugar might reduce the consumption of damsons more than in proportion to the reduction in the
total consumption of sugar and so require to be offset by a bounty on damsons.”) Similar reasoning
would suggest that if there are a variety of tools for managing the macro-economy, in general, they
should all be employed.
In the first section of this short celebratory article, I describe briefly Ramsey’s basic insights (section i),
and the early history of the development of the ideas based on Ramsey’s paper (section ii). While
several of these crucial developments showed that Ramsey’s conclusions held under more general
conditions than he had assumed, later analyses showed crucial qualifications, so that the policy
relevance of Ramsey’s analysis may be limited.
1. Major insights
One of the striking aspects of the paper is not only does he provide a general formulation of the set of
optimal taxes, but he translates this into concrete results in the case of linear demand and supply
functions (quadratic utility functions) and shows how the results can be extended to situations when
there are restrictions on the set of feasible taxes. In particular, when there are a set of commodities
with fixed taxes (including commodities that cannot be taxed at all), he shows that there should be an
equi-proportionate reduction in the goods for which taxes can be freely set. In the case of linear and
separable demand and supply curves (quadratic utility functions) and small taxes, he shows that optimal
taxes are inversely related to the elasticity of demand and supply.
(1) t/p = 1/elasticity of demand + 1/elasticity of supply
This implies, of course, raising all the requisite revenue from a good which is either inelastically
demanded or supplied, because such a tax generates no distortions. This in turn has one other
implication: if say labor is supplied inelastically, then optimal taxation requires imposing a tax on labor
alone ; but a proportionate tax on all commodities is equivalent to a tax on labor,. This is hardly a
surprising result—one for which one didn’t need Ramsey’s apparatus (as Ramsey himself recognized):
When there is an inelastic factor, it has long been recognized that there is no distortion associated with
taxing it.6
6 Henry George (1886) focused on the taxation of land as the inelastically supply factor of production. Subsequent
research by Vickrey (1977, 1999) and Arnott and Stiglitz (1978 ) identified conditions under which such a tax would
provide all the revenue that was required for financing public goods (in economies in which there was a local
public good and congestion or other factors leading to decreasing returns to scale led to optimal sized
communities.)
2