NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE GREAT MORTGAGING:
HOUSING FINANCE, CRISES, AND BUSINESS CYCLES
Òscar Jordà
Moritz Schularick
Alan M. Taylor
Working Paper 20501
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20501
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2014
The views expressed herein are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted
as reflecting the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. We are particularly grateful
to a large number of researchers at universities and central banks around the world who helped with
the construction of the historical dataset. Details can be found in the appendix. We wish to thank Philip
Jung, Atif Mian and Gernot Mueller for helpful comments and Katharina Knoll for sharing data on
home ownership rates and housing wealth. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from
the Institute for New Economic Thinking (INET) administered by UC Davis. Schularick received
financial support from the Volkswagen Foundation. This research was undertaken while Schularick
was a Research Fellow of Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research (HKIMR). The generous support
of the HKIMR is gratefully acknowledged. Early Elias and Niklas Flamang provided outstanding research
assistance. All errors are ours.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20501.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Òscar Jordà, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Great Mortgaging: Housing Finance, Crises, and Business Cycles
Òscar Jordà, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 20501
September 2014
JEL No. C14,C38,C52,E32,E37,E44,E51,G01,G21,N10,N20
ABSTRACT
This paper unveils a new resource for macroeconomic research: a long-run dataset covering disaggregated
bank credit for 17 advanced economies since 1870. The new data show that the share of mortgages
on banks’ balance sheets doubled in the course of the 20th century, driven by a sharp rise of mortgage
lending to households. Household debt to asset ratios have risen substantially in many countries. Financial
stability risks have been increasingly linked to real estate lending booms which are typically followed
by deeper recessions and slower recoveries. Housing finance has come to play a central role in the
modern macroeconomy.
Òscar Jordà Alan M. Taylor
Economic Research, MS 1130 Department of Economics and
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Graduate School of Management
101 Market St. University of California
San Francisco, CA 94105 One Shields Ave
and University of California, Davis Davis, CA 95616-8578
oscar.jorda@sf.frb.org and NBER
amtaylor@ucdavis.edu
Moritz Schularick
Department of Economics
University of Bonn
Adenauerallee 24-42
Bonn 53113
Germany
moritz.schularick@uni-bonn.de

1 ntroduction
. I
The past three decades have seen an unprecedented surge in the scale and scope of
financial activities in advanced economies—a process that is sometimes referred to as
financialization. Its effects continue to be contentiously debated.
Financialization shows up in the rising income share of finance (Greenwood and
2013 2013
Scharfstein ; Philippon and Resheff ), the ascent of household debt (Mian and
2014
Sufi ), as well as the growth of the volume of financial claims on the balance sheets
2012
of financial intermediaries (Schularick and Taylor ; Jorda`, Schularick, and Taylor
2013
). The increasing size and leverage of the financial sector has been interpreted as
2013
an indicator of excessive risk taking (Admati and Hellwig ; Aikman, Haldane, and
2014
Nelson ) and has been linked to the increase in income inequality in advanced
2013 2012
economies (Piketty ; Godechot ), as well as to the growing political influence of
2010
the financial industry (Johnson and Kwak ). Clearly, understanding the causes and
consequences of the growth of finance is a first order concern for macroeconomists and
policymakers. Yet surprisingly little is known about the driving forces of these important
new trends in modern financial history.
This paper studies these issues through the lens of long-run macroeconomic history.
Our first contribution is to unveil a new resource for macroeconomic research: a long-run
17 1870
dataset on disaggregated bank credit for advanced economies since . The dataset
is the result of a large-scale investigative process and an extensive standardization effort
to produce consistent time series. In addition to our new credit variables the dataset also
contains a rich set of macroeconomic controls. The new data allow us to delve much
deeper into the driving forces of financialization than has been possible until now.
The database that we provide covers disaggregated bank balance sheet data at annual
1870
frequency for the near universe of industrial countries since . In particular, we study
the development of various subcomponents of loans on banks’ balance sheets—secured
1

and unsecured lending as well as lending to businesses and households—over a span of
140
years. We document the rising share of real estate lending (i.e., bank loans secured
against real estate) in total bank credit and the declining share of unsecured credit to
businesses and households. We also document long-run sectoral trends in lending to
companies and households (albeit for a somewhat shorter time span), which suggest that
the growth of finance has been closely linked to an explosion of mortgage lending to
20
households in the last quarter of the th century. The key facts that the new data allow
us to establish can be summarized as follows.
First, we demonstrate that the sharp increase of credit-to-GDP ratios in advanced
20
economies in the th century has been first and foremost a result of the rapid growth of
1
loans secured on real estate, i.e., mortgage and hypothecary lending. The share of mortgage
loans in banks’ total lending portfolios has roughly doubled over the course of the past
30 1900 60
century—from about % in to about % today. To a large extent the core business
model of banks in advanced economies today resembles that of real estate funds: banks
are borrowing (short) from the public and capital markets to invest (long) into assets
linked to real estate.
Second, looking more deeply at the composition of bank credit, it becomes clear that
the rapid growth of mortgage lending to households has been the driving force behind
this remarkable change in the composition of banks’ balance sheets. The intermediation
of household savings for productive investment in the business sector—the standard
textbook role of the financial sector—constitutes only a minor share of the business of
19
banking today, even though it was a central part of that business in the th and early
20
th centuries. We also find that household mortgage debt has risen faster than asset
values in many countries resulting in record-high leverage ratios that potentially increase
the fragility of household balance sheets and the financial system itself. Complementing
2014
the recent influential work of Mian and Sufi ( ) for the United States, our work takes a
1
Wewillusetheterms“mortgagelending”and“realestatelending”interchangeablyinthispaper.
2