NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE PRICE OF STABILITY:
THE BALANCE SHEET POLICY OF THE BANQUE DE FRANCE AND THE GOLD STANDARD (1880-1914)
Guillaume Bazot
Michael D. Bordo
Eric Monnet
Working Paper 20554
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20554
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014
We are grateful from comments from Vincent Bignon, Rui Esteves, Antoine Parent, Angelo Riva,
Philippe de Rougemont, Pierre Sicsic, Paul Sharp, Stefano Ungaro, François Velde, as well as seminar
participants at the University of South Danemark, Sciences Po Lyon, Federal Reserve of Atlanta and
Banque de France. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the Bank of France, the Eurosystem, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Guillaume Bazot, Michael D. Bordo, and Eric Monnet. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Price of Stability: The balance sheet policy of the Banque de France and the Gold Standard
(1880-1914)
Guillaume Bazot, Michael D. Bordo, and Eric Monnet
NBER Working Paper No. 20554
October 2014
JEL No. E42,E43,E50,E58,N13,N23
ABSTRACT
Under the classical gold standard (1880-1914), the Bank of France maintained a stable discount rate
while the Bank of England changed its rate very frequently. Why did the policies of these central banks,
the two pillars of the gold standard, differ so much? How did the Bank of France manage to keep a
stable rate and continuously violate the “rules of the game”? This paper tackles these questions and
shows that the domestic asset portfolio of the Bank of France played a crucial role in smoothing
international shocks and in maintaining the stability of the discount rate. This policy provides a striking
example of a central bank that uses its balance sheet to block the interest rate channel and protect
the domestic economy from international constraints (Mundell’s trilemma).
Guillaume Bazot Eric Monnet
Université Paris 8 Bank of France
bureau D116 46-1383 DGEI-DCPM-DIACONJ
2 rue de la Liberté 31 rue Croix des Petits Champs
93200 Saint Denis 75049 Paris Cedex 01
France France
gbazot@gmail.com eric.monnet@banque-france.fr
Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu

The Price of Stability.
The balance sheet policy of the Banque de France and the Gold Standard
(1880‐1914)
September 2014
Guillaume Bazot (University Paris 8), Michael D. Bordo (Rutgers University and NBER) and Eric
Monnet (Banque de France)
The textbook account of the classical gold standard emphasizes the crucial role of the “rules of
the game” in international adjustments. In a deficit country, the central bank would use discount-rate
policy and open-market interventions to raise interest rates and tighten credit. In the surplus country, it
would lower the interest rate and expand credit. As a consequence, two components of the “rules of the
game” should be observed in central banks’ practices (Whale 1937, Nurske 1944, Bloomfield 1959):
first, the central bank should raise the discount rate when their gold reserves decrease, and, second,
central banks should not sterilize, that is, expand (or reduce) domestic assets to offset outflows (or
inflows) of gold. The adherence to the rules implies that domestic assets of central banks are positively
correlated with international assets but negatively correlated with the domestic interest rate.
The Banque de France, one of the main pillars of the classical gold standard along with the
Bank of England and the Reichsbank,1 continuously violated the two components of the rules of the
games. First, the official discount rate remained flat. Such a peculiar behavior was the subject of many
discussions by contemporaries in France and other countries alike and it has always been treated as a
curiosity in the subsequent literature on French monetary policy under the gold standard (White 1933,
Whale 1937, Bopp 1952, Nishimura 1995, Gallarotti 1995, Contamin 2003, Rodgers and Payne 2014)2.
It strongly differed from the Banque de France policy under bimetallism – studied in Flandreau (2004)
1 Gallarotti (1995, p.219) claims that the Banque de France was the true hegemon of the gold standard as it served as a
lender of last resort to England in 1890 and 1906-1907.
2 Whale (1973, p.20) argued that “It may be said that the Bank of France was able to avoid varying its discount rates
because the country was only on a limping standard. But this point cannot be substantiated unless it can be shown that the
exchange value of the franc fell below the gold export point for appreciable periods. Other special circumstances might be
adduced in the case of France (e.g. the limited importance of credit money, in later years the size of the metallic reserve).”
Other authors often only refer to the objective of a stable discount rate set by Napoleon when the Banque was created , or
to national preference. Bloomfield (1959, p.24) only suggests that “and several of the banks, especially the Bank of
France, referred to the relative stability and lowness of their discount rates as a measure of their achievements.” See our
discussion on this issue in Section 1.
1

- when the official discount rate changed frequently. In addition – as noted by Bloomfield (1959),
Emanoil (1932) and White (1933) using annual data – the discount portfolio of the Banque de France
varied negatively with gold flows in a systematic way between 1880 and 1913.
This article offers new evidence of these two deviations from the rules of the game and
especially highlights the importance of the Banque de France’s sterilization policy, which is much less
known and documented. More specifically, we show that the Banque de France’s credit to the domestic
economy (discounts and advances) correlates negatively with gold flows because it correlates
positively with the discount rate of the Bank of England. We discuss the conditions that allowed the
Banque de France to run such policies and we explain why and how the objective of a stable discount
rate led the Banque to use its domestic portfolio in order to neutralize the effects of gold inflows and
outflows. We go beyond previous literature that has shown evidence that the rules were violated by
French and other monetary authorities (Bloomfield 1959, Bordo and MacDonald 1997, Morys 2013) as
we provide a complete examination of the mechanisms and adjustments that determined movements in
the balance sheet of the Banque de France and made possible the disconnect between domestic rates
and international rates, without intervention in the exchange market. Following the insights of Jeanne
(1995)’s work on the Bank of England, we use VAR estimations to study the dynamic paths of national
variables in response to international shocks. Our analysis is made possible by newly collected monthly
and quarterly data on the Banque balance sheet and the French business cycle. We are able to estimate
precisely the causes and the effects of central bank interventions, to disentangle domestic aggregate
demand effects from external shocks and to look at differences between short-term adjustments and
long-term relationships. We find that an increase in the English discount rate caused a fall in gold
reserves of the Banque de France but pushed its domestic portfolio up such that gold outflows were
almost completely sterilized. Results show that domestic adjustment to an international shock took
place in a period shorter than a year. Conversely, such an international shock had no significant effect
on the French business cycle (as proxied by imports and railway revenues). We show that the extent of
sterilization of international shocks by the central bank explains these findings.
In a world of integrated financial markets and British leadership, the French money market
interest rate was influenced by foreign, and especially British, rates. A rise in the Bank of England rate
decreased the spread between the French money market rate and the Banque de France official discount
rate. Facing higher demand for credit, the Banque could either increase its discount-rate or, conversely,
increase its discount portfolio to expand domestic credit. The latter brought the spread back to its
2