NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCING CONSTRAINTS, HOME EQUITY
AND SELECTION INTO ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Thais Lærkholm Jensen
Søren Leth-Petersen
Ramana Nanda
Working Paper 20583
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20583
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014, Revised Jun 2021
Previously circulated as “Housing Collateral, Credit Constraints and Entrepreneurship - Evidence
from a Mortgage Reform.” We are extremely grateful to Manuel Adelino, Joan Farre-Mensa,
Kristopher Gerardi, Erik Hurst, Raj Iyer, Bill Kerr, Chris Hansman, Renata Kosova, Francine
Lafontaine, Josh Lerner, Ross Levine, Gustavo Manso, Matt Notowidigdo, Alex Oettl, Tarun
Ramadorai, David Robinson, Matt Rhodes-Kropf, Martin Schmalz, Antoinette Schoar, Elvira
Sojli, David Sraer, Peter Thompson and the seminar participants at the NBER summer institute,
NBER productivity lunch, Imperial College London, ISNIE conference, Georgia Tech, UC
Berkeley, University of Cambridge, University of Copenhagen, University of Southern Denmark,
University of Mannheim, Goethe University, OECD, Paris School of Economics, Tilburg
University and Rotterdam School of Management for helpful comments. The research presented
in this paper is supported by Center for Economic Behavior and Inequality (CEBI), a center of
excellence at the University of Copenhagen financed by grant DNRF134 from the Danish
National Research Foundation, and by funding from the Danish Council for Independent
Research, the Danish Economic Policy Research Network - EPRN, the Kauffman Foundation and
the Division of Research and Faculty Development at the Harvard Business School. Leth-
Petersen is research follow at the Danish Finance Institute.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Thais Lærkholm Jensen, Søren Leth-Petersen, and Ramana Nanda. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Financing Constraints, Home Equity and Selection into Entrepreneurship
Thais Lærkholm Jensen, Søren Leth-Petersen, and Ramana Nanda
NBER Working Paper No. 20583
October 2014, Revised Jun 2021
JEL No. D14,D31,G21,G28,L26
ABSTRACT
We exploit a mortgage reform that differentially unlocked home equity across the Danish
population and study how this impacted selection into entrepreneurship. We find that increased
entry was concentrated among entrepreneurs whose firms were founded in industries where they
had no prior work experience. In addition, we find that marginal entrants benefiting from the
reform had higher pre-entry earnings and that a significant share of entrants started longer-lasting
firms. Our results are most consistent with the view that housing collateral enabled high ability
individuals with less-well-established track records to overcome credit rationing and start new
firms, rather than just leading to `frivolous entry' by those without prior industry experience.
Thais Lærkholm Jensen Ramana Nanda
Department of Economics Harvard Business School
University of Copenhagen Rock Center 317
Oster Farimagsgade 5 Soldiers Field
Building 26 Boston, MA 02163
DK-1353 Copenhagen K and NBER
Denmark rnanda@hbs.edu
tlj@econ.ku.dk
Søren Leth-Petersen
Department of Economics
University of Copenhagen and CEBI
Oster Farimagsgade 5
Building 26
DK-1353 Copenhagen K
Denmark
Soren.Leth-Petersen@econ.ku.dk

1 Introduction
Startups play a disproportionate role in the economy in terms of aggregate job creation
and productivity growth (Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda 2013; Adelino, Ma, and
Robinson 2017), which is why reducing financing frictions for new firms remains a key
policy goal across the world (Bernanke 2010; Mills and McCarthy 2014).
Despitetheimportanceoftheissueandwidespreadpoliciesacrosscountriestopromote
entrepreneurship, little is known about how relaxing financing constraints impacts who
selects into entrepreneurship, both in terms of the characteristics of the entrepreneurs
who enter as well as the performance of the firms they found. An understanding of how
the composition of potential entrepreneurs shifts when constraints are relaxed is also key
to understanding the efficacy of broad-based policies aimed at facilitating entrepreneurial
entry, particularly in light of growing evidence of heterogeneity in the motivations and
nature of constraints facing different potential entrepreneurs (Hamilton 2000; Hurst and
Pugsley 2011; Hvide and Møen 2010; Andersen and Nielsen 2012; Levine and Rubinstein
2017, 2018; Bellon et al. 2020).
The dearth of evidence on this question is driven in large part by the difficulty of
connecting an exogenous change in financing constraints to comprehensive, population-
wide data that can connect individuals and firms in a longitudinal manner. We overcome
these challenges in this paper by combining individual- and firm-level panel data, drawn
from administrative records in Denmark together with a major mortgage reform in 1992
that unexpectedly and differentially unlocked home equity across the population (Leth-
Petersen 2010).
Before the reform, mortgages in Denmark could only be established for buying a
house. As of 1992 this was changed and owners could now take out a mortgage and
use the proceeds for any purpose, including the financing of a business start-up. Since,
at the time, only regular fixed rate mortgage contracts with instalments were available,
1

equity-to-value at the point of the reform was in part determined by the time since
the house was purchased, creating cross-sectional variation in the access to home equity
acrossindividuals. Wedetailbelowhowthereformwasunanticipated, andhowweusethe
resultingexogenousvariationinaccesstohomeequityacrossindividualstostudyselection
into entrepreneurship. A key element of our study is that in addition to measuring the
magnitude of the response to relaxed constraints, we are also able to characterize the
marginal entrants in terms of their ex ante background, as well as ex post survival of the
startups they found.
We first trace the effect of the reform through home-equity based borrowing to an
increase in entrepreneurship. Those benefiting from the reform increased personal debt
by 18% relative to those who did not benefit from unlocked collateral. Differences-in-
differences estimations document that on average, entry into entrepreneurship for the
treated group increased by 14% following the reform. Consistent with prior work docu-
menting the housing collateral channel in enabling entrepreneurship, we find this average
effect was driven by the sub-population of homeowners who had the largest increase in
access to housing collateral.
When looking at the characteristics of entrants and the firms they found, we find two
sets of key results: First, we find that the increase in entrepreneurship among the treated
group was driven almost entirely by individuals without prior experience in the indus-
try that they entered, suggesting that individuals who took advantage of the unlocked
home equity were entrepreneurs with less-well-established track records, who could now
overcome credit rationing by pledging tangible assets themselves. Since entrepreneur ex-
perience and skill is believed to be an important driver of success, the potential lack or
relevant experience for the entrepreneurship we document could be seen as ‘frivolous’ or
driven by those with low human capital (Andersen and Nielsen (2012). Alternatively, it
could reflect credit rationing to entrepreneurs who were harder to screen on observable
dimensions Stiglitz and Weiss (1981), but who were nevertheless building legitimate firms.
2