NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE DIRECT AND INDIRECT EFFECTS OF SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION LENDING ON GROWTH:
EVIDENCE FROM U.S. COUNTY-LEVEL DATA
Andrew T. Young
Matthew J. Higgins
Donald J. Lacombe
Briana Sell
Working Paper 20543
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20543
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014
We thank Jerry Thursby, Bart Hamilton and Daniel Levy for valuable comments and discussions.
We also thank the Small Business Administration for their help in our FOIA request. Higgins acknowledges
funding from the Imlay Professorship. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Andrew T. Young, Matthew J. Higgins, Donald J. Lacombe, and Briana Sell. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Direct and Indirect Effects of Small Business Administration Lending on Growth: Evidence
from U.S. County-Level Data
Andrew T. Young, Matthew J. Higgins, Donald J. Lacombe, and Briana Sell
NBER Working Paper No. 20543
October 2014
JEL No. C31,E65,H25,O47,R11
ABSTRACT
Conventional wisdom suggests that small businesses are innovative engines of Schumpetarian growth.
However, as small businesses, they are likely to face credit rationing in financial markets. If true then
policies that promote lending to small businesses may yield substantial economy-wide returns. We
examine the relationship between Small Business Administration (SBA) lending and local economic
growth using a spatial econometric framework across a sample of 3,035 U.S. counties for the years
1980 to 2009. We find evidence that a county’s SBA lending per capita is associated with direct negative
effects on its income growth. We also find evidence of indirect negative effects on the growth rates
of neighboring counties. Overall, a 10% increase in SBA loans per capita is associated with a cumulative
decrease in income growth rates of about 2%.
Andrew T. Young Donald J. Lacombe
College of Business and Economics Regional Research Institute,
West Virginia University West Virginia University
Morgantown, WV 26505-6025 PO Box 6825
andrew.young@mail.wvu.edu 886 Chestnut Ridge Road
Morgantown, WV 26506-6825
Matthew J. Higgins Donald.Lacombe@mail.wvu.edu
Scheller College of Business
Georgia Institute of Technology Briana Sell
800 West Peachtree Street Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30308 Scheller College of Business
and NBER 800 West Peachtree St. NW
matt.higgins@scheller.gatech.edu Atlanta, GA 30308
Briana.Sell@scheller.gatech.edu

“I said I would cut taxes for small businesses [ - ]the drivers and engines of growth, and we've
cut them 18 times. And I want to continue those tax cuts for middle-class families and for small
businesses.”
Democratic US President Barack Obama
“[C]hampioning small business. Our party has been focused on big business too long. I came
through small business. I understand how hard it is to start a small business. That's why
everything I'll do is designed to help small businesses grow and add jobs. I want to keep their
taxes down on small business. I want regulators to see their job as encouraging small enterprise,
not crushing it.”
Republican US Presidential Nominee Mitt Romney
Second US Presidential Debate, October 16, 2012
1. Introduction
On October 16, 2012, during the second U.S. presidential debate, President Barack Obama and
challenger Mitt Romney together used the phrases “small business” and “small businesses” a
total of 21 times.1 Politicians, policymakers, and pundits regularly extol the virtues of small
businesses as engines of economic growth. This positive view towards small business is reflected
by society more broadly. For example, a 2012 Gallup Poll found that more than 94% of
Americans surveyed reported having a positive image of “small business”.2
David Birch (1979, 1987) did much to popularize the perception that small businesses
account for the bulk of job creation in the U.S. And many researchers – most prominently Zoltan
Acs and David Audretsch along with their coauthors – have argued that small businesses are also
important sources of Schumpetarian (1942) innovation (e.g., Acs and Audretsch, 1993; Acs,
1999; Acs et al., 2009; Audretsch et al., 2006). If this innovation is associated with positive
1 Based on the transcript produced by U.S. National Public Radio (NPR):
http://www.npr.org/2012/10/16/163050988/transcript-obama-romney-2nd-presidential-debate; last accessed March
11, 2014. There were additional references to “small enterprise” and “small employers”.
2 Alternatively, only 75% of Republicans and 44% of Democrats reported having a positive image of “big business”.
“Small business” also garnered more positive reactions than general terms like “free enterprise” and “capitalism”:
http://www.gallup.com/poll/158978/democrats-republicans-diverge-capitalism-federal-gov.aspx; last accessed
March 14, 2014.
2

spillovers but small businesses are financially constrained, then the gains from subsidizing them
may be considerable (Evans and Jovanovic, 1989; Evans and Leighton, 1989).
Consistent with these popular and scholarly perceptions, small businesses in the U.S. are
directly and indirectly subsidized by the federal government in numerous ways. For example
they receive exemptions from regulations (e.g., requirements for advanced notice of layoffs) and
are given preferential tax treatment (e.g, tax credits for the expenses of new retirement plans).
They also receive preferential treatment for government contracts. Additionally, small business
innovative efforts are also subsidized through the Small Business Innovation Research Program
(SBIR) and Small Business Technology Transfer Program (STTR).3 And, of course, the Small
Business Administration (SBA) is a federal government agency whose very mission is to “…aid,
counsel, assist and protect the interests of small business…”.4
The asymmetric information problems that exist between financial intermediaries and
small businesses may be particularly severe. The systematic recording and communication of
information relevant to creditors is subject to economies of scale. As such, small businesses may
be particularly subject to credit rationing (Stiglitz and Weiss, 1981). An important component of
the SBA is its loan programs. To help with these potential information asymmetries, the SBA
facilitates exchange between small businesses and intermediaries, often guaranteeing 75% to
90% of the loan.
Despite popular pro-small business sentiment and scholarly support, not all researchers
are convinced of the benefits of subsidizing small businesses. Hurst and Pugsley (2011) examine
survey responses from a sample of entrepreneurs taken before they started their small businesses.
They find that most of these entrepreneurs are not Schumpetarian innovators – they do not
3 de Rungy (2005) provides a concise overview of these government programs.
4 This is from the SBA mission statement: http://www.sba.gov/about-sba/what_we_do/mission; last accessed March
14, 2014.
3