NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INVESTMENT BANKS AS CORPORATE MONITORS IN THE EARLY 20TH CENTURY
UNITED STATES
Carola Frydman
Eric Hilt
Working Paper 20544
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20544
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014
An earlier version of this paper circulated under the title "Predators or Watchdogs? Bankers on Corporate
Boards in the Age of Finance Capitalism.'' We would like to thank Stanley Engerman, Dan Fetter,
Arvind Krishnamurthy, David Matsa, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Joshua Rauh, and Antoinette Schoar,
along with participants at the NBER Corporate Finance program meetings, the Economic History Association
annual meetings, and various seminars for helpful comments and suggestions. Richard B. Baker, Jack
Chen, Francis Cho, Hannah Galin, Kimberly Le, Angela Lei, Andrew Marok, Ryan Munoz, Shrey
Santosh, Sophie Sun, and Veronica Wilson provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Carola Frydman and Eric Hilt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Investment Banks as Corporate Monitors in the Early 20th Century United States
Carola Frydman and Eric Hilt
NBER Working Paper No. 20544
October 2014
JEL No. N11,N12,N21,N22,N41,N42,N71,N72
ABSTRACT
We use the Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914 to study the effect of bankers on corporate boards in facilitating
access to external finance. In the early twentieth century, securities underwriters commonly held directorships
with American corporations; this was especially true for railroads, which were the largest enterprises
of the era. Section 10 of the Clayton Act prohibited investment bankers from serving on the boards
of railroads for which they underwrote securities. Following the implementation of Section 10 in 1921,
we find that railroads that had maintained strong affiliations with their underwriters saw declines in
their valuations, investment rates and leverage ratios, and increases in their costs of external funds.
We perform falsification tests using data for industrial corporations, which were not subject to the
prohibitions of Section 10, and find no differential effect of relationships with underwriters on these
firms following 1921. Our results are consistent with the predictions of a simple model of underwriters
on corporate boards acting as delegated monitors. Our findings also highlight the potential risks of
unintended consequences from financial regulations.
Carola Frydman
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
cfrydman@bu.edu
Eric Hilt
Wellesley College
Department of Economics
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
ehilt@wellesley.edu

1 Introduction
Understanding the forces that facilitate firms’ access to external finance is central to the analysis
of the economic growth process. In order to mitigate financial frictions arising from asymmetric
information, firms in many countries around the world often form affiliations with financial inter-
mediaries, which enable the intermediary to gain access to information and monitor management.
However, these affiliations may also be costly for firms: theoretical models suggest that interme-
diaries can use their informational monopoly to hold up firms and charge high interest rates or
fees, thereby distorting the firms’ investments (Sharpe, 1990; Rajan, 1992). The extent to which
financial relationships help or hurt firms is therefore an empirical question. Although a substantial
literature has documented correlations between financial relationships and firm value, convincing
evidence is difficult to obtain, because bank-firm relationships are determined endogenously.
The financial history of the United States offers a unique opportunity to estimate the value of
financial relationships. In the early twentieth century, legal protections of investors were weak, and
asymmetries of information between corporate insiders and outsiders were strong. Perhaps as a
result, close affiliations between public companies and the investment banks that underwrote their
securities, which were the firms’ main source of financing, were quite common. Underwriters often
held seats on their clients’ boards, and they used those positions to participate in their clients’
management and governance. The influence of investment banks in corporate governance gave rise
to fears that financiers were abusing their positions to extract rents from their clients. To restrict
their role in the economy, Section 10 of the Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914 prohibited the securities
underwriters of railroads, which were then the largest and most widely held corporations, from
holding board seats with their clients.
We use Section 10 of the Clayton Act to analyze the value of relationship intermediation.
To address the endogeneity of bank-firm relationships, we exploit the preexisting variation in the
strength of railroads’ relationships with underwriters represented on their boards to estimate the
impact of the imposition of Section 10 on firm outcomes. The results indicate that by restricting
the presence of underwriters on their clients’ boards, the regulation limited the bankers’ role as
monitors and undermined the railroads’ ability to finance valuable investment opportunities.
To motivate our empirical analysis we present a simple illustrative model of underwriters as
1

delegated monitors based on Diamond (1984). Firms choose whether to enter into a relationship
with an underwriter, or to utilize an uninformed banker for their underwriting. Relationship
underwriters have a presence on their clients’ boards, which prevents managers from misreporting
the value of their investments. Such monitoring is costly but it reduces inefficient liquidations,
thereby facilitating access to capital and increasing the efficiency of investments. Larger firms, or
firms with more investment opportunities, are more likely to choose an underwriter-monitor since
they benefit more from avoiding liquidation. For firms that would have selected into a relationship
with an underwriter-monitor, the model predicts that the restrictions imposed by Section 10 would
have led to a decline in market values, investment, and borrowing levels, and would have increased
the cost of external finance.
To test these predictions, we construct a new dataset containing financial information for all
railroads whose shares were listed on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) from 1905 to 1929.
Weidentifythepresenceofunderwritersontherailroads’boardsbymatchingthenamesofrailroad
directors to the names of the partners and directors of securities underwriters. We also document
the volume of underwriting done by bankers on railroad boards utilizing newly collected evidence
on the underwriting of corporate bonds over this period. To conduct falsification tests, we also
construct a dataset containing the same information for large NYSE-listed industrial firms.
The ideal experiment to measure the effect of relationship intermediation would assign bank-
firm ties randomly. Although bankers and firms endogenously chose to enter into relationships, the
imposition of Section 10 provides a quasi-experiment based on preexisting variation in the degree
of relationship underwriting across firms. Prior to the enactment of the Clayton Act, the average
railroad in our sample had 41% of its securities underwritten by institutions represented on its
board, and this fraction varied considerably across firms. Yet in the year after Section 10 went
into effect, none of the underwriting among our sample railroads was done by banks represented on
their boards. Railroads that had initially maintained stronger relationships with their underwriters
were therefore more severely affected by the regulatory change.
Quite helpful for our analysis, Section 10 was not implemented in 1914, but was repeatedly
postponed by Congress and only went into effect in 1921 when President Wilson vetoed a further
postponement. Thus, its timing is arguably exogenous to firm outcomes, and our findings are
not confounded by the effects of the other antitrust provisions of the Clayton Act, which were
2