NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INVESTMENT HANGOVER AND THE GREAT RECESSION
Matthew Rognlie
Andrei Shleifer
Alp Simsek
Working Paper 20569
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20569
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014
We thank Giacomo Ponzetto for very helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Matthew Rognlie, Andrei Shleifer, and Alp Simsek. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Investment Hangover and the Great Recession
Matthew Rognlie, Andrei Shleifer, and Alp Simsek
NBER Working Paper No. 20569
October 2014
JEL No. E22,E32,E4
ABSTRACT
We present a model of investment hangover motivated by the Great Recession. In our model, overbuilding
of residential capital requires a reallocation of productive resources to nonresidential sectors, which
is facilitated by a reduction in the real interest rate. If the fall in the interest rate is limited by the zero
lower bound and nominal rigidities, then the economy enters a liquidity trap with limited reallocation
and low output. The drop in output reduces nonresidential investment through a mechanism similar
to the acceleration principle of investment. The burst in nonresidential investment is followed by an
even greater boom due to low interest rates during the liquidity trap. The boom in nonresidential investment
induces a partial and asymmetric recovery in which the residential sector is left behind, consistent
with the broad trends of the Great Recession.
Matthew Rognlie Alp Simsek
Department of Economics Department of Economics, E17-244
Massachusetts Institute of Technology MIT
mrognlie@mit.edu 77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, Ma. 02139
Andrei Shleifer and NBER
Department of Economics asimsek@mit.edu
Harvard University
Littauer Center M-9
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu

1 Introduction
Since 2008, the US economy has been going through the worst macroeconomic slump
since the Great Depression. Real GDP per capita declined from more than $49,000
in 2007 (in 2009 dollars) to less than $47,000 in 2009, and surpassed its pre-recession
level only in 2013. The civilian employment ratio, which stood at about 63% in
January 2008, fell below 58% by January 2010, and remains below 59% in June 2014.
Recent macroeconomic views emphasize the burst of the housing bubble—and its
e¤ects on …nancial institutions, …rms, and households—as the main culprit for these
developments. The collapse of home prices arguably a¤ected the economy through at
least two principal channels. First, it triggered the …nancial crisis, which led …nancial
institutionsthatsu¤eredlossesrelatedtothehousingmarkettocutbacktheirlending
to…rms andhouseholds (Brunnermeier(2008), GertlerandKiyotaki (2010)). Second,
the reduction in home prices also generated a household deleveraging crisis, in which
homeowners that su¤ered leveraged losses from their housing equity cut back their
consumption so as to reduce their outstanding leverage (Guerrieri and Lorenzoni
(2011), Eggertsson and Krugman (2012), Mian and Su…(2014)). Both crises reduced
aggregate demand, plunging the economy into a Keynesian recession. The recession
was exacerbated by the zero lower bound on the nominal interest rate, also known
as the liquidity trap, which restricted the ability of monetary policy to counter these
demand shocks (Hall (2011), Christiano, Eichenbaum, Trabandt (2014)).
A growing body of empirical evidence shows that these views are at least par-
tially correct: the …nancial and the household crises both appear to have played a
part in the Great Recession.1 But these views also face a challenge in explaining the
1Several recent papers, such as Campello, Graham, and Harvey (2010) and Chodorow-Reich
(2014), provide some evidence that …nancial crisis a¤ected …rms’investment before 2010. Mian,
Rao, Su…(2013) and Mian and Su…(2012) provide evidence that household deleveraging reduced
1

nature of the recovery after the Great Recession. As Figure 1 illustrates, the recovery
has been quite asymmetric across components of aggregate private spending. Non-
residential investment and consumption—measured as a fraction of output—reached
or exceeded their pre-recession levels by 2013, while residential investment remained
depressed. One explanation for this pattern is that households are unable to buy
houses due to ongoing deleveraging. But the left panel of Figure 1 casts doubt on
this explanation: sales of durable consumption goods such as cars—which should
also be a¤ected by household deleveraging—rebounded strongly in recent years while
residential investment has lagged behind.
In this paper, we supplement the two accounts of the Great Recession with a third
channel, which we refer to as the investment hangover, which could help explain the
asymmetric recovery. Our key observation is that the housing bubble was an invest-
ment bubble as much as an asset price bubble. Overbuilding during the bubble years
created excess supply of housing capital by 2007, especially certain types of capital
such as owner occupied housing. Between 1996 and 2006, the share of US households
living in their own homes rose from about 65% to about 69%. The homeownership
rate fell back below 65% in 2014, suggesting that the housing capital might have been
in excess for many years after 2007. The excess housing capital lowers residential in-
vestment and slows down economic activity.
OurargumentsofarissimilartotheAustriantheoryofthebusinesscycle,inwhich
recessions are times at which excess capital built during boom years is liquidated
(Hayek (1931)). The Hayekian view, however, faces a challenge in explaining how
low investment in the liquidating sector reduces aggregate output and employment.
As noted by Krugman (1998), the economy has a natural adjustment mechanism
household consumption and employment between 2007 and 2009.
2