NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INVESTMENT UNDER UNCERTAINTY WITH FINANCIAL CONSTRAINTS
Patrick Bolton
Neng Wang
Jinqiang Yang
Working Paper 20610
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20610
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014, Revised July 2019
We are deeply grateful to Pierre-Olivier Weill for his insightful and detailed comments. This
paper was previously circulated under the title “Investment under Uncertainty and the Value of
Real and Financial Flexibility” (2014, NBER wp 20601.) We thank Andrew Abel, Ilona Babenka,
Martin Cherkes, Min Dai, Sudipto Dasgupta, Peter DeMarzo, Janice Eberly, Mark Gertler, Simon
Gilchrist, Steve Grenadier, Lars Peter Hansen, Vicky Henderson, Robert Hodrick, Harrison
Hong, Wei Jiang, Bart Lambrecht, Erica Xuenan Li, Xiaoji Lin, Robert McDonald, Stewart
Myers, Alessandro Pavan (Editor), Robert Pindyck, Tom Sargent, Suresh Sundaresan, Vladimir
Vladimirov, and seminar participants at American Finance Association (AFA) 2014 meetings in
Philadelphia, Boston University, China International Conference in Finance (CICF), Columbia
University, HKUST 2013 Finance Symposium, the Paul Woolley Centre Conference at UTS
Sydney, Rutgers University, University of Cambridge, University of Minnesota Carlson School,
Zhejiang University, and the workshops hosted by the China Young Finance Scholars Society for
helpful comments. Jinqiang Yang acknowledges support from the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (71772112, 71472117, 71573033, 71532009, and 71532012) and Innovative
Research Team of Shanghai University of Finance and Economics (#2016110241) The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Patrick Bolton, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Investment under Uncertainty with Financial Constraints
Patrick Bolton, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 20610
October 2014, Revised July 2019
JEL No. E22,G31,G32
ABSTRACT
We develop an integrated theory of investment, seasoned equity offerings (SEOs), liquidation,
and corporate savings under uncertainty for a financially constrained firm, which features
endogenous growth options, abandonment options, and payout policies. Facing costly external
financing, the firm prefers to fund its investment internally, so that its optimal policies and value
depend on both its earnings fundamentals and liquidity holdings. The firm values not only real
flexibility but also financial flexibility. The interaction of real and financial flexibility generates
novel real options results: (1) Limited financial slack significantly erodes the value of growth &
abandonment options; (2) Firms prefer projects with front-loaded cash-flows; (3) The firm's
incentive to forgo costly external financing and to accumulate internal funds may cause
substantial delay in investment; (4) A financially constrained firm over-invests in early stages of
its life-cycle in an effort to quickly build up its cash-flow generating capacity; (5) SEOs are
driven by both firm survival and growth motives. A firm in the mature phase may find itself in
three mutually exclusive regions: payout, inaction, and liquidation. A firm in its growth phase
may find itself in two additional regions: a region where investment is partly financed with an
SEO and a region where investment is solely financed with internal funds. These regions depend
on both firm savings and earnings fundamentals.
Patrick Bolton Jinqiang Yang
Columbia Business School Shanghai University of Finance
804 Uris Hall and Economics
New York, NY 10027 Guoding Rd. 777
and NBER Shanghai, 200433
pb2208@columbia.edu China
yang.jinqiang@mail.sufe.edu.cn
Neng Wang
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 812
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
nw2128@columbia.edu

1 Introduction
Real-options theory following McDonald and Siegel (1986) and Dixit and Pindyck
(1994) assumes that firms operate in a Modigliani-Miller (MM) environment. This
is for a good reason. The firm’s investment decision can then be formulated as an
American option-exercise and valuation problem that can be solved by using the
classical option pricing tools of Black and Scholes (1973) and Merton (1973).
But, in reality firms operate under imperfect capital markets and face signifi-
cant external financing costs that arise from informational asymmetry, moral hazard,
transaction costs, and other frictions. In order to avoid incurring these costs too fre-
quently firms optimally retain earnings and attempt to mostly internally finance their
investments and cover their operating costs. Indeed, according to Chen, Karabarbou-
nis, and Neiman (2017), “nowadays nearly two-thirds of global investment is funded
by corporate saving.” Also the surveys of chief financial officers (CFOs) by Graham
and Harvey (2001, 2002) have revealed the great importance CFOs attach to main-
taining financial flexibility by holding internal funds.
In practice, the value of real flexibility derived from the optimal timing of real
options is intertwined with the value of financial flexibility derived from the optimal
management of retained earnings and the optimal external financing timing and
issuance decisions. Both the effective discount rate used to determine the value of a
growth opportunity and the cost of investment depend on the firm’s marginal value of
cash, whichvarieswithboththesizeofthefirm’scashholdingsandthefirm’searnings
fundamentals. Thereasonisthatthefirmtakesaccountnotonlyofitscurrentstock of
internal funds but also the information about its future cash flow prospects contained
in persistent earnings shocks. Through the firm’s evolving marginal value of cash, the
real option problem becomes a fundamentally two-dimensional problem, which entails
asignificantgeneralizationoftheclassicalone-dimensionalproblemsofMcDonaldand
Siegel (1986) and Dixit and Pindyck (1994).
Weembarkonsuchageneralizationinthispaperandderivehowoptimalinvestment-
timing and abandonment-timing decisions are made, as well as how assets in place
and growth options are valued, when firms face external financing costs. By intro-
ducing external financing costs, we are, in effect, integrating two strands of literature,
the classical real options literature following McDonald and Siegel (1985, 1986) and
Dixit and Pindyck (1994) with the corporate finance literature following Miller and
2

Orr (1966). Our continuous-time model allows us to not only derive optimal invest-
ment, abandonment, and equity issue size and timing policies but also to carry out a
systematic valuation analysis.
We model the firm’s life-cycle and its evolving collection of assets in place and
growth opportunities in the spirit of Myers (1977). Although we do not explicitly
model adverse selection, one interpretation of costly external financing in our model
is equity dilution cost (due to mis-pricing a la arguments in Myers and Majluf (1984).
In our model, the firm’s investment, financing, payout and abandonment policies
depend on both earnings fundamentals and the firm’s financial slack. Therefore, our
model can explain why following a recession low investment persists even though
earnings fundamentals have recovered. The reason is that following a recession firms
are generally in repair mode, seeking to rebuild their financial slack. Similarly, in our
model firms have a preference for investments with front-loaded earnings. We show
that, as a result, a start-up firm may choose to invest in a project sooner than pre-
dicted by the classical real-option theory in an effort to build future internal funding
capacity. We also show that the firm’s payout policy is fundamentally different de-
pending on whether it is in the growth phase or in the mature phase. In the mature
phase a more profitable firm pays out more, while in the growth phase it pays out
less.
Our model also predicts that the value of growth and abandonment options effec-
tively vanishes for firms with low internal financing ability. Firms with scarce internal
funds are forced into inefficiently liquidating their valuable operating assets. We also
find that the hurdle for investment in the growth phase is a non-monotonic function
of the firm’s internal funds. When the firm’s savings are sufficient to entirely cover
the investment cost, the firm’s investment hurdle decreases with its internal funds.
But when its internal funds cannot entirely cover the cost of investment, the hur-
dle is increasing with the firm’s internal funds. The reason is that when the firm
is approaching the point where it may be able to entirely fund its investment with
retained earnings it has a stronger and stronger incentive to delay investment until it
has sufficient funds to be able to avoid tapping costly external funds. An important
implication of this result is that investment is not necessarily more likely when the
firm has more cash. Investment could well be delayed further, as the firm’s priority
becomes avoiding costly external financing.
We also show that financially constrained firms prefer growth opportunities with
3