NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COMPETING FOR ORDER FLOW IN OTC MARKETS
Benjamin Lester
Guillaume Rocheteau
Pierre-Olivier Weill
Working Paper 20608
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20608
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014
Pierre Mabille and Semih Uslu provided expert research assistance. We’d like to thank the participants
of the JMCB-SNB-Uni Bern 2013 Conference on Financial Frictions and Julien Hugonnier for comments
that greatly improved the paper. The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect those
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Benjamin Lester, Guillaume Rocheteau, and Pierre-Olivier Weill. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Competing for Order Flow in OTC Markets
Benjamin Lester, Guillaume Rocheteau, and Pierre-Olivier Weill
NBER Working Paper No. 20608
October 2014
JEL No. D53,D83,G1,G12
ABSTRACT
We develop a model of a two-sided asset market in which trades are intermediated by dealers and
are bilateral. Dealers compete to attract order flow by posting the terms at which they execute trades—
which can include prices, quantities, and execution speed—and investors direct their orders toward
dealers that offer the most attractive terms. We characterize the equilibrium in a general setting, and
illustrate how the model can account for several important trading patterns in over-the-counter markets
which do not emerge from existing models. We then study two special cases which allow us to highlight
the differences between these existing models, which assume investors engage in random search for
dealers and then use ex post bargaining to determine prices, and our model, which utilizes the concept
of competitive search in which dealers post terms of trade. Finally, we calibrate our model, illustrate
that it generates reasonable quantitative outcomes, and use it to study how trading frictions affect the
per-unit trading costs that investors pay in equilibrium.
Benjamin Lester Pierre-Olivier Weill
Research Department Department of Economics
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia University of California, Los Angeles
10 Independence Mall Bunche Hall 8283
Philadelphia, PA 19106 Los Angeles, CA 90095
Benjamin.Lester@phil.frb.org and NBER
poweill@econ.ucla.edu
Guillaume Rocheteau
Department of Economics
University of California at Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, California 9269
grochete@uci.edu

1 Introduction
Many assets are traded in over-the-counter (OTC) markets, including government, municipal, and
corporate bonds, asset-backed securities, various types of derivatives, and currencies, to name a
few. These markets have not only been growing in size, but also in economic importance: for
example, the market for repurchase agreements has become crucial for the provision of liquidity,
while the markets for credit default swaps and foreign exchange swaps have become essential for
insuring firms and financial intermediaries against various types of shocks. Most often, trade in
thesemarketsisintermediatedbydealerswhomaintainatwo-sidedmarket,simultaneouslybuying
andsellingsecuritiesonbehalfofindividualinvestors.
A recent literature, building off of the framework in Duffie, Gaˆrleanu, and Pedersen (2005,
henceforth DGP), has developed theoretical models that capture important features of intermedi-
ated OTC markets, and has used these models to gain a better understanding of the factors that
determine bid and ask prices, allocations, the speed of trade, and overall trading volume. These
models formalize intermediated OTC markets as highly decentralized trading venues in which in-
vestors contact dealers at a constant (exogenously specified) rate, at which time they are able to
tradeatapricedeterminedbyexpostbargaining.
While this formalization has generated a number of insights, it is at odds with two important
features of real world OTC markets. First, dealers often post and commit to bid and ask prices,
which are readily available to investors.1 Second, these prices appear to play an important role
in determining the speed at which different investors trade. More specifically, empirical evidence
suggests that investors face a clear trade-off between the terms of trade that they are quoted and
the speed at which their trade will be executed: as Boehmer (2005) writes, “high execution costs
are systematically associated with fast execution speed, and low costs are associated with slow
execution speed. This relationship holds both across markets and across order sizes.”2 Hence,
even though empirical evidence suggests that search frictions are an important element of OTC
markets,itremainsachallengetoformalizethesefrictionsinawaythat(i)incorporatestheroleof
1As Duffie (2012, pg. 4) writes, “In some dealer-based OTC markets, especially those with active brokers, a
selection of recently quoted or negotiated prices is revealed to a wide range of market participants. (...) In OTC
marketsforU.S.corporateandmunicipalbonds,regulatorshavemandatedpost-tradepricetransparencythroughthe
publication of an almost complete record of transactions shortly after they occur. (...) In OTC derivatives markets,
such as the market for credit default swaps, clients of dealers can request ‘dealer runs,’ which are essentially lists
of dealers’ prospective bid and offer prices on a menu of potential trades. Dealers risk a loss of reputation if they
frequentlydeclinetheopportunitytotradeneartheseindicativepriceswhencontactedsoonafterprovidingquotesfor
adealerrun.”
2Similarly,Battalio,Hatch,andJennings(2003)findthatordersobtainbettertradepricesontheNYSEbutfaster
executionsatTrimarkSecurities, aNasdaqdealer. Boehmer, Jennings, andLi(2007)establishthatbrokers’routing
decisionstakeintoaccountthedisclosureofqualityexecutionacrosstradingcenters: marketswithlowtradingcosts
andfastfillswereabletoattractmoreorders.
2

pricesindirectingorderflow;and(ii)generatestheobservedrelationshipsbetweenthepricesthat
dealerspost,thetypesofinvestorswhochoosethoseprices,andthespeedatwhichtheseinvestors
trade. Inthispaper,weconstructandanalyzeamodelofOTCmarketstoaccomplishthesegoals.
Our framework adopts many of the basic building blocks from the literature that has evolved
from DGP, and specifically the generalization by Lagos and Rocheteau (2009, henceforth LR):
investors with endogenously determined asset positions periodically receive idiosyncratic shocks
that affect their private valuations, at which time they attempt to re-balance their portfolios by
tradingwithdealersinafrictionalmarket. Themajorpointofdepartureisthewaywemodelthese
frictions: incontrasttotheexistingliterature,weassumethatdealerspostcontractsthatarereadily
observabletoallinvestors,butsearchfrictionsremainbecauseeachdealerislimitedinhiscapacity
toprocessmultipleordersatonce. Thisequilibriumconceptisbasedonthemodelof“competitive
search,” first introduced by Moen (1997) in the context of the labor market, but here generalized
to a two-sided market where dealers have an active role in executing the trades of both buyers and
sellersonafrictionlessinter-dealermarket.
To be more precise, we assume that there is a large mass of competitive dealers posting con-
tractsthatspecifyaquantitythattheywillbuyorsellontheinter-dealermarket,alongwithafeefor
doingso(or,equivalently,abid-askspread). Investors,whoareheterogeneouswithrespecttoboth
their asset positions and their private valuations for the asset, observe these contracts and direct
their order flow to the contract of their choosing. However, dealers are capacity constrained—
they cannot execute orders instantaneously, but rather orders are processed slowly, at a rate that is
decreasingintheratioofordersperdealerforthisparticularcontract.
This formulation of asset market frictions offers several advantages. First, the process of price
formation in the model more closely resembles the protocol in many OTC markets: dealers post
prices,andinvestorssendorderstothesedealerswiththeexpectationthattheirorderswillbefilled
at the posted price. Second, the model is able to account for several empirical findings that do not
emergefromexistingmodels;forexample,investorsfacethetrade-offbetweenthebid-askspread
and execution speed discussed above and, for some specifications, these bid-ask spreads decrease
with the size of the trade, which is consistent with evidence from certain OTC markets. Third,
themodelgeneratesnewnormativeimplicationsaswell;forexample,inasimpleextensionofthe
benchmark model, we show that welfare is unambiguously increasing in the fraction of investors
whocanobservepostedcontractsanddirecttheirsearch,thushighlightingamarginthroughwhich
transparency in financial markets can improve allocations. Finally, the competitive search setting
offers a number of technical advantages, too: it avoids several inefficiencies that arise from the
Nash bargaining protocol, such as the well-known hold-up problem (see, e.g., Hosios (1990)); it
can easily accommodate the introduction of private information (see, e.g., Guerrieri et al. (2010));
3