NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RESERVE REQUIREMENT POLICY OVER THE BUSINESS CYCLE
Pablo Federico
Carlos A. Vegh
Guillermo Vuletin
Working Paper 20612
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20612
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014
The first draft of this paper was written while the authors were visiting the World Bank's Office
of(cid:3)the Chief Economist for Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) and Vegh was also visiting
the(cid:3)Macroeconomics and Growth Division (DEC) at the World Bank, and is part of a project on
macroprudential(cid:3)policy carried out at the Office of the Chief Economist for LAC. The authors are
very grateful for(cid:3)the World Bank's hospitality and stimulating policy and research environment. They
would also like(cid:3)to thank Enrique Alberola, Stijn Claessens, Tito Cordella, Augusto de la Torre, Eva
Gutierrez, Luis(cid:3)Jacome, Alain Ize, Michael Leahy, Samuel Pienknagura, Andy Powell, Alessandro
Rebucci, and seminar(cid:3)participants at the Bank of Japan, Bank of Spain, Brookings Institution, CEMLA,
Central Bank of(cid:3)Bolivia, Central Bank of Uruguay, IDB, IMF, and World Bank for many helpful
comments and discussions.(cid:3) Jorge Puig and Pedro Pablo Matinez provided excellent research assistance.
The views expressed(cid:3)in the paper are the authors' own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Office
of the Chief Economist(cid:3)for LAC, the World Bank, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Pablo Federico, Carlos A. Vegh, and Guillermo Vuletin. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Reserve Requirement Policy over the Business Cycle
Pablo Federico, Carlos A. Vegh, and Guillermo Vuletin
NBER Working Paper No. 20612
October 2014
JEL No. E52,F41
ABSTRACT
Based on a novel quarterly dataset for 52 countries for the period 1970-2011, we analyze the use and
cyclical properties of reserve requirements (RR) as a macroeconomic stabilization tool and whether(cid:3)RR
policy substitutes or complements monetary policy. We find that (i) around two thirds of developing
countries have used RR policy as a macroeconomic stabilization tool compared to just one third of
industrial countries (and no industrial country since 2004); (ii) most developing countries that rely
on RR use them countercyclically; and (iii) in many developing countries, monetary policy is procyclical
and hence RR policy has substituted monetary policy as a countercyclical tool. We interpret the
latter(cid:3)finding as reflecting the need of many emerging markets to raise interest rates in bad times to
defend(cid:3)the currency and not raise or lower the interest rate in good times to prevent further currency
appreciation.(cid:3) Under these circumstances, RR policy provides a second instrument that substitutes
for monetary(cid:3)policy. Evidence from expanded Taylor rules (i.e., Taylor rules that include a nominal
exchange rate(cid:3)target) supports these mechanisms.
Pablo Federico Guillermo Vuletin
BlackRock, Inc. Brookings Institution
pablo.federico@blackrock.com 1775 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
Carlos A. Vegh gvuletin@brookings.edu
School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS)
Johns Hopkins University
1717 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
and NBER
cvegh1@jhu.edu

1 Introduction
The recent global …nancial crisis has triggered an intense debate on the pros and cons of
using macroprudential policy, broadly de…ned as the use of prudential tools, such as reserve
or capital requirements, for macroeconomic stabilization purposes. Although the discussion
is certainly not novel –many emerging countries had resorted to macroprudential policy well
before Lehman Brothers’demise on September 15, 2008 –it took an urgent undertone in light
of the sudden realization of the severe contractionary forces that could be unleashed by the
abrupt unwinding of …nancial imbalances and systemic risk.
Perhaps one of best examples of the renewed debate on macroprudential policy is the
resurgence of the so-called “Tobin tax”–a …nancial tax on short-term capital in‡ows –whose
popularity had arguably reached a low point by the middle 2000’s, after gaining some limited
popularity in previous decades thanks to its use by Chile.1 The mere fact that even the IMF
–presumably a bulwark of macroeconomic orthodoxy –has come out in favor of using Tobin
taxes under some circumstances is a dramatic illustration of the search for new policy tools
in this much-changed post-Lehman world.2
There are, of course, many prudential tools that can be used for macroeconomic stabiliza-
tion purposes, including reserve requirements, capital requirements, caps on the loan-to-value
ratio, credit ceilings, and dynamic provisioning, among many others. Broadly speaking, the
purposeofusingtheseinstrumentsistoreducetheamplitudeofthe…nancialcycleandcontain
potential …nancial vulnerabilities that could be created as a result. Whether many of these
instruments should be used at all and how e¤ective they may be is the subject of an emerging
literature. For example, based on data from an IMF survey, Claessens and Ghosh (2013) look
at seven di¤erent prudential instruments and conclude that debt-to-income caps, limits on
foreign currency lending, and loan-to-value ratios have been relatively e¤ective in reducing
vulnerabilitiesinbankingsystems. Inasimilarvein,Limet al. (2011)presentsomeempirical
1See Edwards, De Gregorio, and Valdes (2000).
2See IMF (2012).
2

evidence to the e¤ect that macroprudential policy may be e¤ective in reducing procyclicality
of …nancial variables and reducing systemic risk.3 By and large, however, the e¤ectiveness of
macroprudential policy is still very much an open question.
This paper contributes to the empirical discussion on macroprudential policy by focusing
on a particular instrument (reserve requirements).4 Due to data limitations, existing studies
on the e¤ectiveness of reserve requirements (see, for instance, Tovar et al. 2012) focus on the
recent past and a small group of countries. There is simple no readily-available, panel data on
reserverequirements. Toremedythissituation,webuildfromscratchanovelquarterlydataset
on legal reserve requirements for 52 countries, 15 industrial and 37 developing, for the period
1970-2011.5 We focus on legal (as opposed to actual) reserve requirements because legal
reserve requirements are a policy instrument whereas actual reserve requirements constitute
an endogenous outcome that will be a¤ected by the amount of deposits (i.e., the state of the
business cycle)6 7 We believe that gathering such large dataset is a fruitful endeavor because
it will allow us to characterize the use of reserve requirements over the business cycle drawing
on a very heterogenous dataset covering up to four decades and very diverse countries and
macroeconomic circumstances.
With this dataset in hand, we ask the following questions: (i) what countries have used
reserve requirements as a macroeconomic stabilization tool? (ii) How does the use of reserve
requirement policy as a macroeconomic stabilization tool compare in emerging and industrial
countries? (iii) In countries that actively use reserve requirements, have they been used
3See also Borio and Shim (2007), Calderon and Serven (2011), Canuto and Ghosh (2013), De la Torre, Ize,
and Schmukler (2012), IMF (2011), Glocker and Towbin (2012), Montoro and Moreno (2011), and Vargas et
al. (2010).
4Wechoosetofocusonreserverequirementsbecause(i)theyarearguablythemostpopularmacroprudential
tool,and(ii)byitsverynature(alonghistoryandavailabletimeseriesfromCentralBanksandotherdomestic
sources), it is feasible to gather a large panel dataset.
5As will become clear from our analysis, the quarterly (as opposed to annual) frequency is critical when it
comes to assessing the cyclical properties of reserve requirements policy.
6Using reserve requirements as a ratio ofdeposits would not solve the problem because changes in deposits
wouldchangesuchane¤ectivereserverequirementratewithoutachangeinpolicy,aswouldvoluntarychanges
in reserves on the part of the banks.
7Hence, in what follows (and unless stated otherwise), the expression “reserve requirements”should be
takentorefertothelegalreserverequirementrateand“reserverequirementpolicy”tochangesinsucharate.
3