NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTRINSIC MOTIVATION IN PUBLIC SERVICE:
THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM STATE SUPREME COURTS
Elliott Ash
W. Bentley MacLeod
Working Paper 20664
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20664
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2014
We thank Yisehak Abraham, Ankeet Ball, Josh Brown, Josh Burton, Matthew Buck, Eammonn Campbell,
Seth Fromer, Gohar Harutyunyan, Archan Hazra, Montague Hung, Dong Hyeun, Mithun Kamath,
James Kim, Michael Kurish, Jennifer Kutsunai, Steven Lau, Sharon Liao, Sarah MacDougall, Justin
McNamee, Sourabh Mishra, Arielle Napoli, Bryn Paslawski, Olga Peshko, Quinton Robbins, Ricardo
Rodriguez, Carol Shou, Alex Swift, Tom Verderame, Sam Waters, Sophie Wilkowske, John Yang,
Geoffrey Zee, and Fred Zhu for their meticulous help in assembling data and other research assistance.
We thank Matthew Freedman, Levon Barseghyan, and Adam Lavecchia for discussant comments
on previous drafts. Columbia University’s Program for Economic Research and the National Science
Foundation Grant SES-1260875 provide financial support for this research. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Elliott Ash and W. Bentley MacLeod. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Intrinsic Motivation in Public Service: Theory and Evidence from State Supreme Courts
Elliott Ash and W. Bentley MacLeod
NBER Working Paper No. 20664
November 2014, Revised June 2015
JEL No. J3,J33,J44,J45
ABSTRACT
This paper provides a theoretical and empirical analysis of the intrinsic preferences of state appellate
court judges. We construct a panel data set using published decisions from state supreme court cases
merged with institutional and biographical information on all (1,636) state supreme court judges for
the 50 states of the United States from 1947 to 1994. We estimate the effects of changes in judge employment
conditions on a number of measures of judicial performance. The results are consistent with the hypothesis
that judges are intrinsically motivated to provide high-quality decisions, and that at the margin they
prefer quality over quantity. When judges face less time pressure, they write more well-researched
opinions that are cited more often by later judges. When judges are up for election then performance
falls, suggesting that election politics take time away from judging work – rather than providing an
incentive for good performance. These effects are strongest when judges have more discretion to select
their case portfolio, consistent with psychological theories that posit a negative effect of contingency
on motivation (e.g. Deci, 1971).
Elliott Ash
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, MC 3308
New York, NY 10027
eta2103@columbia.edu
W. Bentley MacLeod
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, MC 3308
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
bentley.macleod@columbia.edu

1 Introduction
Thispaperprovidesatheoreticalandempiricalstudyoftheintrinsicmotivesofstatesupreme
court judges. We have constructed a panel data set that matches institutional and judge
biographical information with published decisions for all state high courts in the United
States from 1947 until 1994. This data is matched with information on institutional changes
in judicial employment conditions, which either increased or decreased the constraints faced
by judges when doing their work. The within-judge estimates of the behavioral responses
to these changes are consistent with the hypothesis that judges are intrinsically motivated
to choose higher-quality opinions when given more time, and that they intrinsically prefer
quality over quantity at the margin.
Epstein et al. (2013) observe that judges are paid on fixed salaries to reduce pecuniary
motivation that may bias their decision-making. This naturally leads to the question of the
impact that such low-powered incentives have on judicial performance, and the extent to
which judges are motivated to provide high-quality decisions. Second, there is the contro-
versial issue of how judges should be retained and in particular whether they should take
an active part in fund-raising for re-election (see Spottswood, 2007). Using a within-judge
design that measures the dynamic effect of electoral demands, we find that judges reduce
effort in the year they are up for electoral review, suggesting that they are spending time
campaigning rather than judging.
The presence of intrinsic motivation is consistent with White’s (1959) theory of profes-
sionalism. According to White, professionals are individuals who become personally invested
in their skills and are motivated by the challenge of doing a job well. If judges have a pref-
erence for working on influential cases, then constraining their choices can be demotivating
and lead to lower performance. As shown in Section 3, this prediction follows from a sim-
ple model of a utility-maximizing judge who allocates time across cases, outside activities,
and leisure. It is also consistent with work on contingency and motivation developed in
the psychology literature (Deci, 1971), and with recent work in economics on how monetary
incentives can crowd out intrinsic incentives (Frey and Oberholzer-Gee, 1997; Gneezy and
Rustichini, 2000).1
The job of an appellate court judge is to review trial cases and ensure that the law
1Thecareerconcernsliterature (e.g. Dewatripont etal.1999b, Francois2000, andPrendergast2007)has
shown that the conclusions of the simple intrinsic motivation model developed here can also be derived with
standard preferences in a more complex dynamic setting. However, concerns about future promotion have
limitedimportanceinoursetting, wherepromotiontoahighercourt(theU.S.SupremeCourt)isextremely
rare, and almost all judges keep their job until retirement unless they lose election.
2

is properly applied. For empirical purposes this is an attractive setting because the basic
functions of the job have not changed much in the last 200 years. Litigants appeal cases
where they feel there has been an error. The judges choose which cases to hear and then
write decisions regarding the merits of each case. From these written decisions one can build
a number of performance measures, such as the number of decisions written in a year, the
length of a decision, and how often a decision is cited by later judges.2 Section 7 reports
estimates of the effect of changes in employment conditions on these performance measures
using judge fixed effects.
Much of the previous empirical work on appellate judging has focused on federal judges.
In terms of the work requirements, state appellate judging and federal appellate judging are
very similar, the main difference being that state judges mostly interpret state law rather
than federal law. Our results therefore have relatively strong external validity for predicting
the effects of institutional reforms on federal judges. The advantage of studying state judges
consists in the substantial variation across states and over time in the rules for appointing,
compensating, and retaining judges. This allows for a more credible identification of the
effect that employment conditions have on performance than is possible with federal judges.
To organize the data and interpret the results, Section 3 extends the legal-realist model
in Epstein et al. (2013) to allow for intrinsic rewards from high-quality decision-making.3 In
the model, judges prefer working on important cases that can influence the law in the future.
This additional ingredient is sufficient to reproduce Deci’s (1971) result in the judicial setting
– namely, giving a judge more discretion over the cases they hear increases effort in cases
they consider important, while reducing effort in less important cases. Besides providing
micro foundations for how extrinsic incentives might crowd out intrinsic motivation, the
model leads the empirical inquiry toward institutional reforms that give judges more time
to write decisions and more discretion over their work environment.
The first change examined is the introduction of intermediate appellate courts (IAC’s).
This has the effect of reducing the case load of sitting supreme court judges. We measure
the impact of the rule change by comparing the performance of individual judges before
and after the introduction of an IAC. These judges could respond in various ways to the
reduced workload, including working less (choosing more leisure) or working more intensely
on the cases still on the docket. The results show that judges respond to the introduction of
an IAC by focusing on the more interesting cases that are cited more often by later judges.
2See Choi et al. (2008) for a discussion of how to measure judicial performance.
3Recent work by economists in a legal-realist tradition includes Glaeser et al. (2001), Gennaioli and
Shleifer (2007), and Baker and Mezzetti (2012).
3