NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERNATIONAL TRADE, MULTINATIONAL ACTIVITY, AND CORPORATE
FINANCE
C. Fritz Foley
Kalina Manova
Working Paper 20634
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20634
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014
Forthcoming in the Annual Review of Economics 7, doi: 10.1146/annurev-economics-080614-115453.
Foley thanks the Division of Research of the Harvard Business School for financial support. Manova
thanks the Stanford Center for International Development for financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by C. Fritz Foley and Kalina Manova. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

International Trade, Multinational Activity, and Corporate Finance
C. Fritz Foley and Kalina Manova
NBER Working Paper No. 20634
October 2014
JEL No. F10,F20,F23,F36,G3
ABSTRACT
An emerging new literature brings unique ideas from corporate finance to the study of international
trade and investment. Insights about differences in the development of financial institutions across
countries, the role of financial constraints, and the use of internal capital markets are proving central
in understanding international economics. The ability to access financial capital to pay fixed and variable
costs affects choices firms make regarding export entry and operations, and, as a consequence, influence
aggregate trade patterns. Financial frictions and the use of internal capital markets shape decisions
that multinationals make regarding production locations, integration, and corporate governance. This
article surveys this recent research with the goal of highlighting the main themes it explores, the key
results it establishes, and the leading open questions it raises.
C. Fritz Foley
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
ffoley@hbs.edu
Kalina Manova
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
manova@stanford.edu

1 Introduction
Until recently, the international economics literature and the corporate finance literature have evolved
separately. Research on international trade has focused on the role of economies of scale and cross-country
differences in productivity and factor endowments in predicting gains from trade and the pattern of aggregate
trade flows according to comparative advantage. Additional insights have emerged from introducing firm
heterogeneity in trade participation when there are fixed and variable trade costs. Research on the activities
of multinational firms has also emphasized cross-country differences in productivity and factor endowments,
as well as trade costs, market size, and economies of scale as the key drivers of the decision to locate
production abroad. Moral hazard and intangible assets govern when it is advantageous to offshore production
within the boundaries of the firm rather than at arm's length. Much of this work on trade and FDI pays little
attention to corporate finance considerations, and effectively assumes that firms can access the financial
capital necessary to implement their first-best investment choices. This in part reflects the historical
challenges of measuring differences in access to capital across countries and offering motivation for such
differences.
The corporate finance literature, on the other hand, has studied how firms obtain the funding needed
to pursue attractive business opportunities when financial markets are imperfect. Managers are often assumed
to know more about investment alternatives than investors, but to not always act in investors’ interest.
Information asymmetries and moral hazard make it costly for managers to raise capital from outside the firm,
and feature prominently in corporate finance research. This research thus provides frameworks for thinking
about how and why access to capital might vary across heterogeneous firms, as well as across countries with
different institutional environments. Traditionally, however, the finance literature has concentrated on
companies that operate in a single country, and only some strands of this work draw attention to cross-country
differences that affect firm decisions.
This survey article reviews new perspectives on international trade and multinational firms that have
been generated by bringing unique insights from the corporate finance literature to bear. Section 2 describes
work that provided the building blocks for these advances. In the international economics literature, scholars
considered how factor endowments shape trade patterns and firm choices about which activities to conduct
in which locations. The introduction of heterogeneous firms that incur costs to engage in trade or foreign
investment was also important because these costs must be financed. In the corporate finance literature,
analyses that extended the treatment of capital market imperfections to an international setting played a
valuable antecedent role. Studies established the existence of large differences in the availability of capital
across countries, and showed that financial markets are not perfectly integrated across borders. Research on
trade credit, or the financial arrangements between firms in buyer-supplier relationships, facilitated the
understanding of financial contracts that exporters and importers use to meet their working capital
1

requirements. Findings about the allocation of capital within firms proved pivotal to the analysis of
multinational corporations’ financing practices.
Section 3 summarizes the literature that incorporates corporate finance considerations into the study
of international trade. It outlines the mechanisms through which financial frictions may impede trade in
theory, and discusses the empirical evidence of these mechanisms at both the aggregate and firm levels. It
evaluates the impact of financial conditions on international commerce relative to overall production,
considering both normal economic times and crisis episodes. Lastly, the section examines the types of
financial contracts that support international trade.
Section 4 reviews the literature that brings corporate finance considerations into the study of foreign
direct investment. It emphasizes how multinationals may use internal capital markets to pay for fixed costs,
address managerial moral hazard, and exploit differences in access to capital across countries. As a result,
financial frictions shape multinational decisions regarding production location, integration and corporate
governance. This section also addresses how financial factors affect the spillovers that multinational
companies have on local firms.
Finally, Section 5 concludes and highlights policy-relevant open questions that might provide fruitful
avenues for further advances in this research agenda.
2 Antecedents
2.1 International Trade and Investment
Historically, the international trade and investment literature has taken cross-country differences in capital
availability into account, thereby raising the possibility that such differences might affect patterns in trade
and multinational activity. However, this literature often makes specific assumptions of what capital is and
how its accessibility might vary globally that can be enriched by taking a corporate finance perspective.
International economics frameworks that emphasize endowments of input factors often consider the
role of physical capital, as opposed to financial capital. For example, in trade theories that adopt the
Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek notion of comparative advantage, capital endowments are assumed to differ across
countries for exogenous reasons. Capital is typically not internationally mobile, and may or may not move
freely across sectors within an economy. As a consequence, returns to capital can vary across borders. While
analyses in this vein open questions about the potential tradability of physical capital and the role of financial
capital, they do deliver the prediction that capital-abundant countries should export relatively more in
industries intensive in that input factor.
Similarly, in theoretical models of firms’ motives for engaging in foreign investment, capital
availability could play a role, but this possibility has traditionally not been examined in detail or through the
lens of corporate finance. Consider, for example, research that studies how cross-country differences induce
2