NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES UNCERTAINTY ABOUT MANAGEMENT AFFECT FIRMS’ COSTS OF
BORROWING?
Yihui Pan
Tracy Yue Wang
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 20674
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20674
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2014
We would like to thank Shan Ge, Tyler Jensen, Abby Kim, Keeseon Nam, Xi Wu and Julian Zhang
for excellent research assistance. Participants in presentations at Fullerton, Minnesota, Ohio State,
and Utah, as well as Benjamin Bennett, Jeff Coles, Michael Cooper, Isil Erel, Steve Karolyi, Miriam
Schwartz-Ziv, Berk Sensoy, Anil Shivdasani, Léa Stern, Jun Yang and Lu Zhang provided very helpful
suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Yihui Pan, Tracy Yue Wang, and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Uncertainty about Management Affect Firms’ Costs of Borrowing?
Yihui Pan, Tracy Yue Wang, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 20674
November 2014
JEL No. G32,G34,M12,M51
ABSTRACT
Uncertainty about management appears to affect firms’ cost of borrowing and financial policies. In
a sample of S&P 1500 firms between 1987 and 2010, CDS spreads, loan spreads and bond yield spreads
all decline over the first three years of CEO tenure, holding other macroeconomic, firm, and security
level factors constant. This decline occurs regardless of the reason for the prior CEO’s departure. Similar
but smaller declines occur following turnovers of CFOs. The spreads are more sensitive to CEO tenure
when the prior uncertainty about the CEO’s ability is likely to be higher: when he is not an heir apparent,
is an outsider, is younger, and when he does not have a prior relationship with the lender. The spread-
tenure sensitivity is also higher when the firm has a higher default risk and when the debt claim is
riskier. These patterns are consistent with the view that the decline in spreads in a manager’s first three
years of tenure reflects the resolution of uncertainty about management. Firms adjust their propensities
to issue external debt, precautionary cash holding, and reliance on internal funds in response to these
short-term increases in borrowing costs early in their CEOs’ tenure.
Yihui Pan Michael S. Weisbach
Department of Finance Department of Finance
1655 Campus Center Drive Fisher College of Business
University of Utah Ohio State University
Salt Lake City, UT 84112-9303 2100 Neil Ave.
Yihui.Pan@business.utah.edu Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
Tracy Yue Wang weisbach.2@osu.edu
Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
wangx684@umn.edu

1. Introduction
A firm’s default risk reflects not only the likelihood that a firm will have bad luck, but also the risk
that the firm’s managerial decisions will lead the firm to default. Consequently, when evaluating a firm’s
risk, it is important to understand not only the value of the firm’s assets, but also the quality of the firm’s
management. Management risk occurs because the impact of management on firm value is uncertain, and
this uncertainty will affect the market’s perception of a firm’s risk. Practitioners have long understood the
importance of management risk, and regularly state that a firm’s management is an important factor in
evaluating a firm’s risk.1 However, the academic literature has largely ignored the importance of
management in a firm’s risk. In this paper, we empirically assess the extent to which uncertainty about a
firm’s management team affects the market’s expectation of a firm’s default risk.
We identify the effect of management uncertainty on the costs of borrowing using the idea that a
manager’s impact on firm value becomes known more precisely over his tenure. In a sample of S&P 1500
firms between 1987 and 2010, the existence of a new CEO leads to higher spreads on the firm’s CDS, bank
loans and public debt. The CDS spread, a measure of a firm’s expected default risk, is about 35 basis points
(22% relative to the sample mean) higher when a new CEO takes office than three years into his tenure
(after an extensive list of controls). Similarly, our estimates imply that the spread on a new loan is about 20
basis points higher, and the bond yield spread on a new bond issue is about 23 basis points higher, for a
firm led by a new CEO than for the same firm when the CEO is in his third year in office. The estimated
declines in borrowing costs over CEO tenure are not driven by turnovers occurring at times of high
uncertainty about the firm’s fundamentals: the spread difference over CEO tenure following various
subsamples of likely exogenous turnovers is comparable to that in the entire sample of turnovers. These
results suggest that uncertainty about the CEO contributes substantially to a firm’s cost of borrowing during
the early years of a CEO’s tenure.
1 For example, both S&P and Moody’s list “management” as a key factor determining a corporate issuer’s long-term
risk. See, for example, http://www.standardandpoors.com/aboutcreditratings/RatingsManual_PrintGuide.html.
1

The CEO, however, is not the only member of the management team that is relevant for decision-
making in the firm. Chief Financial Officers (CFOs) have a large role in financial decision-making, so
uncertainty about new CFOs could also affect the firm’s default risk and cost of borrowing. Our estimates
indicate that, similar to CEOs, spreads on new debt decline over the first three years of a CFO’s tenure, but
the magnitude of the decline is smaller than that following CEO turnovers, particularly if the CFO turnover
is not accompanied by a CEO turnover. The result suggests that uncertainty about CFOs does affect firms’
costs of borrowing, but not as much as uncertainty about CEOs.
The effect of uncertainty about management quality on the firm’s cost of borrowing around
management turnovers is likely to vary cross-sectionally depending on the characteristics of the new
management and the debt itself. In particular, when the new CEO is not considered an “heir apparent” prior
to getting the position, when he comes from outside of the company, and when the new CEO is younger,
we expect the market to perceive relatively high uncertainty about the CEO’s ability or future actions.
Empirically, we find that the sensitivity of the firms’ spreads to the CEO’s tenure more than doubles in
these circumstances, relative to when the new CEO is an insider, is an heir apparent, or is older. For
example, the CDS spreads decline by 87 basis points in the first three years of tenure for outsider CEOs,
much larger than the 35 basis-point decline in the full sample.
In addition, when the CEO has an existing relationship with a lender before he takes his current job,
the lender is likely to have less uncertainty about the CEO’s ability or choice of actions. Consistent with
this argument, we find that the sensitivity of interest rates to the CEO’s time in office is 39-57% lower for
loans in which the CEO has a prior relationship with the lender relative to those without, even if the CEO is
an outsider and the relationship occurred while the CEO was at his previous firm. Further, any additional
management-induced risk should have a larger impact on the default risk and the pricing of riskier debt
than of safer debt. Consistent with this prediction, we find that the firm’s spreads are more sensitive to
CEO tenure when the firm is more highly levered, for term loans and junior bonds. Overall, all the cross-
2