NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
QUANTIFYING LIQUIDITY AND DEFAULT RISKS OF CORPORATE BONDS
OVER THE BUSINESS CYCLE
Hui Chen
Rui Cui
Zhiguo He
Konstantin Milbradt
Working Paper 20638
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20638
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014
We thank Ron Anderson, Mark Carey, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, Thomas Dangl, Vyacheslav Fos, Joao
Gomes, Lars Hansen, Jingzhi Huang, David Lando, Mads Stenbo Nielsen, Martin Schneider, and seminar
participants at Chicago economic dynamics working group, ECB, Georgia Tech, Kellogg, Maryland,
MIT Sloan, the NBER Summer Institute (Risk of Financial Institution, Capital Markets), Federal Reserve
Board, AFA 2014, the USC Fixed Income Conference, University of Alberta, University of Calgary,
Central European University, Wirtschaftsuniversitaet Wien, WFA, CICF, the Rothschild Caesarea
Conference, and the Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics Workshop for helpful comments.
We acknowledge the financial supported from the Fama-Miller Center at Booth School of Business,
University of Chicago. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Hui Chen, Rui Cui, Zhiguo He, and Konstantin Milbradt. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Quantifying Liquidity and Default Risks of Corporate Bonds over the Business Cycle
Hui Chen, Rui Cui, Zhiguo He, and Konstantin Milbradt
NBER Working Paper No. 20638
October 2014
JEL No. G00,G1,G12,G20
ABSTRACT
We develop a structural credit risk model to examine how the interactions of liquidity and default
risk affect corporate bond pricing. By explicitly modeling debt rollover and by endogenizing the holding
costs via collateralized financing, our model generates rich links between liquidity risk and default
risk. The introduction of macroeconomic risks helps the model capture realistic time variation in default
risk premia and the default-liquidity spiral over the business cycle. Across different credit ratings,
our calibrated model can simultaneously match the average default probabilities, credit spreads, and
bond liquidity measures including Bond-CDS spreads and bid-ask spreads in the data. Through a structural
decomposition, we show that the interactions between liquidity and default risk account for 25(cid:0)40%
of the observed credit spreads and up to 55% of the credit spread changes over the business cycle.
As an application, we use this framework to quantitatively evaluate the effects of liquidity-provision
policies for the corporate bond market.
Hui Chen Zhiguo He
MIT Sloan School of Management University of Chicago
100 Main Street, E62-637 Booth School of Business
Cambridge, MA 02142 5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
and NBER Chicago, IL 60637
huichen@mit.edu and NBER
zhiguo.he@chicagobooth.edu
Rui Cui
University of Chicago Konstantin Milbradt
ruicui1@gmail.com Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Rd #401
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
milbradt@northwestern.edu

1. Introduction
It is well known that a significant part of corporate bond pricing cannot be accounted
for by default risk alone. For example, Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005) estimate that
“non-default components” account for about 50% of the spread between the yields of Aaa/Aa-
rated corporate bonds and Treasuries and about 30% of the spread for Baa-rated bonds.
Furthermore, Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005) find that non-default components of credit
spreads are strongly related to measures of bond liquidity, which is consistent with evidence of
illiquidity in secondary corporate bond markets (e.g., Edwards, Harris, and Piwowar (2007),
Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011)).
Hitherto, the literature on structural credit risk modeling has almost exclusively focused
on the “default component” of credit spreads. The “credit spread puzzle,” as defined by
Huang and Huang (2012), refers to the finding that, after matching the observed default and
recovery rates, traditional structural models produce credit spreads for investment grade
bonds that are significantly lower than those in the data. By introducing macroeconomic
risks into structural credit models, Chen, Collin-Dufresne, and Goldstein (2009), Bhamra,
Kuehn, and Strebulaev (2010) and Chen (2010) are able to explain the default components
of the credit spreads for investment-grade bonds.1 However, these models are silent on the
sources of the non-default component of credit spreads and their potential impact on the
default component of the spreads.
In this paper, we build a tractable structural credit risk model that captures both the
default and non-default components in corporate bond pricing by introducing secondary
market search frictions (a la Duffie, Gˆarleanu, and Pedersen (2005)) into a model with
aggregate macroeconomic fluctuations (e.g., Chen (2010)). Rather than simply piecing
1Chen (2010) relies on estimates of Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005) to obtain the default component of
the credit spread for Baa rated bonds, while Bhamra, Kuehn, and Strebulaev (2010) focus on the difference
between Baa and Aaa rated bonds. The difference of spreads between Baa and Aaa rated bonds presumably
takes out the common liquidity component, which is a widely used practice in the literature. This treatment
relies on the assumption that the liquidity components for bonds of different ratings are the same, which is at
odds with existing literatures on the liquidity of corporate bonds, e.g., Edwards, Harris, and Piwowar (2007),
Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011).
1

together the default and non-default components of credit spreads, our approach of jointly
modeling default and liquidity risk over the business cycle is essential to understanding the
interactions between the two components. Such interactions give rise to endogenous default
as well as endogenous liquidity, which helps explain two general empirical patterns for the
liquidity of corporate bonds: (1) corporate bonds with higher credit ratings tend to be more
liquid; (2) corporate bonds are less liquid during economic downturns, especially for riskier
bonds.2 These interactions can also significantly raise the level of credit spreads and make
them more volatile over the business cycle.
In our model, which builds on He and Milbradt (2014), investors face uninsurable
idiosyncratic liquidity shocks, which drive up their costs for holding corporate bonds. Market
illiquidity arises endogenously because to sell their bonds, investors have to search for dealers
to intermediate transactions with other investors not yet hit by liquidity shocks, and in
the meantime they incur costs for having to hold onto the bonds. The dealers set bid-ask
spreads to capture part of the trading surplus. On the one hand, default risk crucially affects
the trading surplus and thus the liquidity discount of corporate bonds. On the other hand,
heavier liquidity discount makes it more costly for firms to roll over their maturing debt,
hence raising the probability of default. Thus, a default-liquidity spiral arises: when secondary
market liquidity deteriorates, equity holders are more likely to default, which in turn worsens
secondary bond market liquidity even further, and so on so forth.
Our model extends He and Milbradt (2014) in two important aspects. First, instead of
assuming a constant exogenous holding cost due to liquidity shocks as in He and Milbradt
(2014), we model holding costs based on the mechanism of collateralized financing. In this
mechanism, investors hit by liquidity shocks raise cash either via cheaper collateralized financ-
ing (with the bond as collateral, subject to some haircuts) or more expensive uncollateralized
financing. A lower bond market price together with a larger haircut pushes investors toward
more expensive uncollateralized financing, which translates to higher effective holding costs
2See e.g., Edwards, Harris, and Piwowar (2007), Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011), Dick-Nielsen, Feldhu¨tter,
and Lando (2012), and Friewald, Jankowitsch, and Subrahmanyam (2012).
2