NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FEDERAL RESERVE POLICY AND BRETTON WOODS
Michael D. Bordo
Owen F. Humpage
Working Paper 20656
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20656
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2014
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, of the Federal Reserve System, or of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20656.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Michael D. Bordo and Owen F. Humpage. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Federal Reserve Policy and Bretton Woods
Michael D. Bordo and Owen F. Humpage
NBER Working Paper No. 20656
November 2014
JEL No. E5,N1
ABSTRACT
During the Bretton Woods era, balance-of-payments developments, gold losses, and exchange-rate
concerns had little influence on Federal Reserve monetary policy, even after 1958 when such issues
became critical. The Federal Reserve could largely disregard international considerations because
the U.S. Treasury instituted a number of stopgap devices—the gold pool, the general agreement to
borrow, capital restraints, sterilized foreign-exchange operations—to shore up the dollar and Bretton
Woods. These, however, gave Federal Reserve policymakers the latitude to focus on the domestic
objectives and shifted responsibility for international developments to the Treasury. Removing the
pressure of international considerations from Federal Reserve policy decisions made it easier for the
Federal Reserve to pursue the inflationary policies of the late 1960s and 1970s that ultimate destroyed
Bretton Woods. In the end, the Treasury’s stopgap devices, which were intended to support Bretton
Woods, contributed to its demise.
Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu
Owen F. Humpage
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland
P.O. Box 6387
Cleveland, OH 44101-1387
owen.f.humpage@clev.frb.org

In a fundamental sense, a country’s external payments cannot be in
satisfactory equilibrium unless the domestic economy is in reasonable
balance and its basic national and international objectives are being met.
Economic Report of the President 1966, 160
1. Introduction
The Bretton Woods system looked to correct perceived problems of the interwar gold-
exchange standard—competitive devaluation, protectionism, deflation, unemployment—by
establishing institutions that might credibly maintain a set of parity values for national
currencies, while still allowing countries to independently pursue domestic economic objectives
and, if necessary to that end, adjust those parity values. It offered a compromise between those
who wanted greater exchange-rate flexibility and those who wanted a return to the gold standard.
In a world of imperfect wage and price flexibility and incomplete factor mobility, however,
Bretton Woods arguably attempted an improbable task. In such a world, monetary-policy
independence and fixed exchange rates will not always remain compatible, a situation then
requiring the use of significant restraints on capital flows. The latter, however, are disruptive
and wholly incompatible with efficiency in a market economy. Moreover, as applied to parity
values, credible and adjustable are antithetical attributes.
Consequently, the system that emerged—far from its planners’ vision—confronted
persistent problems with macroeconomic adjustment, exchange-rate credibility, and adequate
liquidity. Within that imperfect system, the U.S. dollar quickly became the key international
reserve and vehicle currency, making a credible U.S. commitment to price stability the central
necessary condition for the sustainability of the system.
That commitment, of course, was not fulfilled. Before 1959, when most advanced
currencies were not widely convertible and when trade and financial restraints proliferated,
Bretton Woods and a U.S. monetary policy largely focused on price stability seemed well suited.
Persistent U.S. balance-of-payments deficits supplied the world with the dollar and gold reserves
that countries needed to maintain their parities in a growing economy. Still, the world did not
accept the dollar as gold’s equivalent, and by 1960, just as Bretton Woods was becoming fully
functional, concerns about the dollar’s convertibility raised serious questions about Bretton
Wood’s viability and elicited criticisms of the dollar’s privileged place in that system.
Confidence in Bretton Woods was shaken. The changed environment would henceforth require
U.S. policy makers to weigh external objectives more carefully in formulating U.S.
macroeconomic policies, but with memories of the Great Depression still fresh, no U.S.
administration would sacrifice growth and employment to exchange-rate—or even price—
stability during the late-1960s and 1970s.
This paper investigates how, in this environment, international considerations may have
affected U.S. monetary policy. Between 1960 and 1973, Federal Reserve policy makers often
mentioned balance-of-payments concerns in their deliberations and in their statements of policy
actions. They did sometimes—especially in crisis situations—adjust policy slightly or
temporarily because of international developments. Overall, however, U.S. monetary policy
focused primarily on economic growth at potential and full employment. Federal Reserve policy
makers typically treated balance-of-payments objectives as superfluous to the domestic designs
of monetary policy or simply mentioned and ignored them. This attitude was possible because

2
the Federal Reserve viewed expanding capital constraints, efforts at international cooperation,
and sterilized foreign-exchange operations as relieving monetary policy of responsibility for
international developments and shifting accountability for international events to the U.S.
Treasury. These nonmonetary policies were often successful in the short term. Ironically,
however, by eliminating the balance of payments as a constraint on U.S. monetary policy, they
allowed the Federal Reserve to create the accelerating and entrenched inflation that doomed
Bretton Woods.
2. Fixed Exchange Rates and Full Employment
The designers of the Bretton Woods system envisioned a cooperative international
monetary arrangement that would foster exchange-rate stability, but would still allow countries
to pursue key domestic economic objectives, notably, full employment.1 The agreement
reflected a fundamental lesson from the interwar years: As desirable as fixed exchange rates
might be for promoting international commerce, countries would not long maintain parities at the
expense of full employment, economic growth, or price stability. Domestic economic stability
had now become a prerequisite for international cooperation and exchange-rate fixity (Kenen
2008).
In the United States, this ordering of policy preferences found expression in the
Employment Act of 1946, which required the federal government “to use all practical
means…for the purposes of creating and maintaining…conditions under which there will be
afforded useful employment opportunities…for those able, willing and seeking to work” (Pub. L.
79-304—70th Congress, Ch. 33—2d, S. 380, Sec. 2). This statute referred only obliquely to price
stability (ERP 1966, 176 – 177) and did not mention the balance-of-payments or exchange-rate
objectives. The Employment Act, of course, did not preclude U.S. policy makers from
considering price stability and external economic goals, but it clearly stated U.S. policy
preferences for the Bretton Woods era.
The basic structure of the Bretton Woods system also attempted to remedy potential
conflicts between internal and external equilibrium among its member nations. Under Bretton
Woods, countries established fixed parity values for their currencies. The United States pegged
the dollar to gold and pledged to buy and sell the metal freely at $35 per ounce with foreign
monetary authorities. The other major developed nations pegged their currencies to the dollar,
promising to keep their exchange rates within a 1 percent band around that central rate by
intervening in dollars. When faced with transitory balance-of-payments problems, countries
with insufficient reserves could borrow from the newly created International Monetary Fund
(IMF) and could impose capital restraints instead of quickly instituting deflationary
macroeconomic policies or prematurely altering their par values. If, however, the balance-of-
payments difficulties persisted, countries were to make appropriate adjustments to their monetary
and fiscal policies. If ultimately faced with a “fundamental disequilibrium” in their balance of
payments, countries could adjust their parities. Although the IMF never clearly defined the
concept of fundamental disequilibrium, it seemed to center on an inability to simultaneously
maintain internal and external equilibrium at the existing parity (Kenen 2008, 4). In the limit,
then, the Bretton Woods system allowed nations to solve any fundamental conflict between
internal and external equilibrium in favor of the former.2