NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ADAM SMITH'S "TOLERABLE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE" AND THE WEALTH
OF NATIONS
Douglas A. Irwin
Working Paper 20636
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20636
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014
I thank my colleague Meir Kohn for many helpful discussions, as well as Henry Clark and Dan Klein
for useful comments. All references are to the Glasgow Edition of the Works and Correspondence
of Adam Smith. WN = Wealth of Nations, TMS = Theory of Moral Sentiments, LJ = Lectures on
Jurisprudence, LRBL = Lectures on Rhetoric and Belles Lettres, Corr = Correspondence, followed
by the page number. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Douglas A. Irwin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Adam Smith's "Tolerable Administration of Justice" and the Wealth of Nations
Douglas A. Irwin
NBER Working Paper No. 20636
October 2014
JEL No. B12,B25,B31,K2,O43,P14,P16,P48
ABSTRACT
In the Wealth of Nations, Adam Smith argues that a country's national income depends on its labor
productivity, which in turn hinges on the division of labor. But why are some countries able to take
advantage of the division of labor and become rich, while others fail to do so and remain poor? Smith's
answer, in an important but neglected theme of his work, is the security of property rights that enable
individuals to "secure the fruits of their own labor" and allow the division of labor to occur. Countries
that can establish a "tolerable administration of justice" to secure property rights and allow investment
and exchange to take place will see economic progress take place. Smith's emphasis on a country's
"institutions" in determining its relative income has been supported by recent empirical work on economic
development.
Douglas A. Irwin
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
douglas.irwin@dartmouth.edu

Adam Smith’s “Tolerable Administration of Justice” and the Wealth of Nations
Introduction
Perhaps the most fundamental question in all of economics is explaining why some
countries are rich and others are poor. That was the central question posed by Adam Smith in
the Wealth of Nations, justly regarded as the discipline’s foundational text. Smith’s answer is
found in the first three chapters of Book I: a country’s income depends upon the productivity of
its labor force, which in turn depends on specialization and the division of labor driven by
exchange (trade) and limited by the extent of the market.
But that explanation leads to another question: why are some countries able to take
advantage of the division of labor and others not? Book III, “Of the different Progress of
Opulence in different Nations,” promises an answer, but fails to deliver. By far the shortest of
the five books in Smith’s treatise, Book III examines the symbiotic relationship between town
and country, but does not give a clear answer to the question implicit in its title.
Yet, ultimately, Smith does provide an answer to this second question: the security of
property rights. Without the protection of property, the division of labor will be severely
retarded. Secure property rights provide the necessary incentive to align effort and reward, to
enable people to reap what they sow, and to allow individuals and firms to plan for the future and
invest in economic improvements. The protection of private property makes economic progress
possible and, consequently, in Smith’s view, it is the most important duty of government.
In 1755, more than a decade before the publication of the Wealth of Nations, Smith wrote
a single sentence that encapsulates much of his thinking about economic development: “Little
else is requisite to carry a state to the highest degree of opulence from the lowest barbarism, but
2

peace, easy taxes, and a tolerable administration of justice; all the rest being brought about by the
natural course of things.”2 Smith believed that a “tolerable administration of justice” required
the establishment of a legal system to protect private property from encroachment and enforce
contracts and the repayment of debts. The administration of justice – a term Smith used
frequently – was more than just a means of enabling individuals to “secure the fruits of their own
labor” and provide an incentive for productive effort, it was also a matter of peacefully
adjudicating disputes and ensuring just relations between individuals. And such justice was
absolutely essential for society to subsist at all; without the “administration of justice,” society
itself would disintegrate and dissolve. The administration of justice did not have to be perfect,
just tolerable, and an independent judiciary was critical, in Smith’s view, to ensuring that this
would happen.
Smith provides a compelling explanation as to why secure property is important to a
country’s development and, in turn, why the judicial system is important in ensuring such
security. He also provides several illustrations of the impact of secure versus insecure property
rights on economic development, much in the way that economists working on comparative
economic systems do today. Unfortunately, Smith’s discussion of these issues was scattered
throughout the Wealth of Nations, the Theory of Moral Sentiments, and his Lectures on
Jurisprudence. Perhaps because of this fragmentary treatment, Smith’s emphasis on the link
between the administration of justice and the wealth of nations has never been fully appreciated.3
2 Smith continued: “All governments which thwart this natural course, which force things into another channel, or
which endeavour to arrest the progress of society at a particular point, are unnatural, and to support themselves are
obliged to be oppressive and tyrannical” (EPS IV 25). This is taken from a short paper that Smith wrote to establish
his priority in these ideas. Smith wrote the piece out of fear that his ideas, which were presented in lectures at the
University of Glasgow, might be plagiarized. Dugald Stewart quotes from the manuscript in his memoir of Smith,
but unfortunately the document was later destroyed.
3 Previous studies of Smith’s views on the importance of the legal system (Lieberman 2006) and on the role of
government in economic development (Robertson 1983) touch on these matters, but only tangentially. Billet (1975)
comes closest to making the same point as this paper.
3