NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MORE ON RECENT EVIDENCE ON THE EFFECTS OF MINIMUM WAGES IN
THE UNITED STATES
David Neumark
J.M. Ian Salas
William Wascher
Working Paper 20619
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20619
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014
We are grateful to seminar participants at Aix-Marseille Université, the CUNY Graduate Center, and
Georgia State, and to Marianne Bitler for helpful discussions. The views expressed in this paper do
not necessarily reflect the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by David Neumark, J.M. Ian Salas, and William Wascher. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

More on Recent Evidence on the Effects of Minimum Wages in the United States
David Neumark, J.M. Ian Salas, and William Wascher
NBER Working Paper No. 20619
October 2014
JEL No. J23,J38,J88
ABSTRACT
A central issue in estimating the employment effects of minimum wages is the appropriate comparison
group for states (or other regions) that adopt or increase the minimum wage. In recent research, Dube
et al. (2010) and Allegretto et al. (2011) argue that past U.S. research is flawed because it does not
restrict comparison areas to those that are geographically proximate and fails to control for changes
in low-skill labor markets that are correlated with minimum wage increases. They argue that using
“local controls” establishes that higher minimum wages do not reduce employment of less-skilled
workers. In Neumark et al. (2014), we present evidence that their methods fail to isolate more reliable
identifying information and lead to incorrect conclusions. Moreover, for subsets of treatment groups
where the identifying variation they use is supported by the data, the evidence is consistent with past
findings of disemployment effects. Allegretto et al. (2013) have challenged our conclusions, continuing
the debate regarding some key issues regarding choosing comparison groups for estimating minimum
wage effects. We explain these issues and evaluate the evidence. In general, we find little basis for
their analyses and conclusions, and argue that the best evidence still points to job loss from minimum
wages for very low-skilled workers – in particular, for teens.
David Neumark William Wascher
Department of Economics Federal Reserve Board
University of California at Irvine Stop 66
3151 Social Science Plaza Washington, DC 20551
Irvine, CA 92697 william.l.wascher@frb.gov
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu
J.M. Ian Salas
Harvard Center for Population & Devt. Studies
9 Bow St., Cambridge, MA 02138
salas@hsph.harvard.edu

Introduction
Recent debate on the employment effects of minimum wages has focused on the proper
specification of the control groups for estimating the effects of minimum wages. This is a long-standing
issue that has been confronted in different ways beginning with research in the early part of the last
century (Neumark et al., 2014). In the current incarnation of this debate, Dube et al. (2010, hereafter
DLR) and Allegretto et al. (2011, hereafter ADR) have argued that to obtain valid estimates of minimum
wage effects it is essential to control for “spatial heterogeneity,” using nearby geographic areas as
controls to better account for where and when minimum wages are adopted or increased. Moreover,
based on their specifications of how best to control for this spatial heterogeneity, DLR and ADR have put
forward a severe critique of the findings from much of the existing U.S. evidence on the employment
effects of minimum wages using state-level panel data. They argue that this evidence is biased because of
“a spurious negative relationship between the minimum wage and employment for low wage workers…”
(Dube 2011, p. 763), owing to minimum wages being adopted when there are negative shocks to the
employment of affected workers unrelated to minimum wage effects.
Their evidence in support of this claim comes from implementing two types of what they refer to
as “local controls.” The first is the inclusion in their regression models of jurisdiction-specific linear time
trends. The second is the inclusion of interactions between period dummy variables and dummy variables
for sets of nearby states or neighboring counties, so that minimum wage effects are identified only net of
common changes within these sets. Based on these two approaches, they argue (in DLR, for example)
that there are “no detectable employment losses from the kind of minimum wage increases we have seen
in the United States” (DLR 2010, p. 962).
In Neumark et al. (2014, hereafter NSW), we presented evidence that the methods advocated in
these studies do not isolate more reliable identifying information (i.e., better comparison groups) and thus
are flawed and lead to incorrect conclusions. In one case – the issue of state-specific trends – we
explicitly demonstrate the problem with their methods and show how more appropriate ways of
controlling for unobserved trends that affect teen employment lead to evidence of disemployment effects
1

similar to past studies. In the other case – identifying minimum wage effects from the variation within
Census divisions or, even more narrowly, within contiguous cross-border county pairs – we show that the
exclusion of other regions or counties as potential controls is generally not supported by the data.
Moreover, for regions where restricting the identifying variation in this way is supported by the data, the
evidence is consistent with past findings of disemployment effects. Finally, when we let the data
determine the appropriate control states to use for estimating the effects of state minimum wage increases
in the Current Population Survey (CPS) data, we find evidence of disemployment effects for teens, with
elasticities near −0.15.
Most recently, Allegretto et al. (2013, hereafter ADRZ) have criticized our conclusions, attacking
much of our evidence. In the present paper, we lay out several issues that we see as forming the crux of
this debate about the use of local controls to construct better comparison groups, and provide our own
analysis of these issues. In general, we find little basis for the alternative analyses and conclusions ADRZ
present, and we conclude that the best evidence still points to job loss from minimum wages for low-
skilled workers – in particular for teens.1
In our view, the key issue is whether the identifying assumptions entailed by ADR’s and DLR’s
use of local controls lead to more biased or less biased estimates of the employment effect of minimum
wages. Our previous work concluded that the assumptions implicit in their methods bias the estimated
effect toward zero. The issue was not simply whether the variation left unused by DLR and ADR reduced
the efficiency of their estimates of the employment effects of minimum wages. Labor economists often
use approaches thought to reduce bias at the cost of less precise estimates. In the final section of this
paper we provide a possible explanation for why limiting attention to local controls might produce a bias
towards finding no employment effect, and cite recent evidence from Baskaya and Rubinstein (2012)
1 We focus to some extent on the results for teenagers using the CPS, for three reasons. First, most of the debate in
the literature is about estimated employment effects for low-skilled groups defined by age or other demographic
characteristics, generally using the CPS. Second, for a number of reasons predictions of disemployment effects are
less clear for a single industry – especially the restaurant industry where many workers are tipped. And third, the
differences in the alternative estimates are most evident for the CPS teen results, which is where the disemployment
effects predicted by the neoclassical model are sharpest.
2