NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BENCHMARKS IN SEARCH MARKETS
Darrell Duffie
Piotr Dworczak
Haoxiang Zhu
Working Paper 20620
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20620
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014
We are grateful for useful discussions with and comments from members of the Market
Participants Group on Reference Rate Reform (MPG), as well as Ana Babus, Bruno Biais, David
Bowman, Gregory Connor, Willie Fuchs, Will Gornall, Brett Green, Terry Hendershott, Gustavo
Manso, Jose Moraga-Gonzalez, Konstantin Milbradt, Paul Milgrom, Marzena Rostek, Ali
Shourideh, Andy Skrzypacz, Chester Spatt, Jeremy Stein, Gabor Virag, and Xavier Vives.
Helpful comments were offered by seminar and conference participants at Stanford University,
Princeton University, U.C. Berkeley, Harvard University, MIT, Finance Theory Group, SFS
Cavalcade, European Central Bank, Paul Woolley Centre Annual Conference, Barcelona GSE
Summer Forum, Western Finance Association annual meeting, Bonn Workshop on Information
Aggregation, Society for Economic Dynamics meeting, NBER Summer Institute Asset Pricing
meeting, Econometric Society World Congress, Philadelphia Fed Search and Matching
Conference, the 11th Central Bank Workshop on Microstructure of Financial Markets,
Conference on Monetary Policy Implementation and Transmission in the Post-Crisis Period, and
American Finance Association annual meeting. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20620.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Darrell Duffie, Piotr Dworczak, and Haoxiang Zhu. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Benchmarks in Search Markets
Darrell Duffie, Piotr Dworczak, and Haoxiang Zhu
NBER Working Paper No. 20620
October 2014, Revised September 2016
JEL No. D43,D47,D83,G12,G14,G18,G21,G23
ABSTRACT
We characterize the price-transparency role of benchmarks in over-the-counter markets. A
benchmark can, under conditions, raise social surplus by increasing the volume of beneficial
trade, facilitating more efficient matching between dealers and customers, and reducing search
costs. Although the market transparency promoted by benchmarks reduces dealers' profit
margins, dealers may nonetheless introduce a benchmark to encourage greater market
participation by investors. Low-cost dealers may also introduce a benchmark to increase their
market share relative to high-cost dealers. We construct a revelation mechanism that maximizes
welfare subject to search frictions, and show conditions under which it coincides with announcing
the benchmark.
Darrell Duffie Haoxiang Zhu
Graduate School of Business MIT Sloan School of Management
Stanford University 100 Main Street, E62-623
Stanford, CA 94305-7298 Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER and NBER
duffie@stanford.edu zhuh@mit.edu
Piotr Dworczak
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA, 94305
dworczak@stanford.edu

1 Introduction 1
1 Introduction
An enormous quantity of over-the-counter (OTC) trades are negotiated by counterparties
whorelyontheobservationofbenchmarkprices. Thispaperexplainshowbenchmarksaffect
pricing and trading behavior by reducing market opacity, characterizes the welfare impact of
benchmarks, and shows how the incentives of regulators and dealers to support benchmarks
depend on market structure.
TrillionsofdollarsinloansarenegotiatedataspreadtoLIBORorEURIBOR,benchmark
interbank borrowing rates.1 The WM/Reuters daily fixings are the dominant benchmarks in
theforeignexchangemarket, whichcoversover$5trillionperdayintransactions.2 Thereare
popular benchmarks for a range of commodities including silver, gold, oil, and natural gas,
among others.3 Benchmarks are also used to provide price transparency for manufactured
products such as pharmaceuticals and automobiles.4
Among other roles, benchmarks mitigate search frictions by lowering the informational
asymmetry between dealers and their “buy-side” customers. We consider a market for an
asset in which dealers offer price quotes to customers who are relatively uninformed about
the typical cost to dealers of providing the asset. We provide conditions under which adding
a benchmark to an opaque OTC market can improve efficiency by encouraging entry by
customers, improving matching efficiency, and reducing total searchcosts.
Recent major scandals over the manipulation of benchmarks for interest rates, foreign
currencies, commodities, and other assets have made the robustness of benchmarks a major
concern of international investigators and policymakers. This paper offers a theoretical
foundation for the public-policy support of transparent financial benchmarks. Section 5
discusses the manipulation of benchmarks in more detail.
1LIBOR is the London Interbank Offered Rate. EURIBOR is the Euro Interbank Offered Rate. For
U.S. dollar Libor alone, the Market Participants Group on Reference Rate Reform(2014) (chaired by one of
the authors of this paper) reports that over 3 trillion dollars in syndicated loans and over 1 trillion dollars
in variable-rate bonds are negotiated relative to LIBOR. The MPG report lists many other fixed-income
products that are negotiated at a spread to the “interbank offered rates” known as LIBOR, EURIBOR, and
TIBOR,acrossfivemajorcurrencies. Asoftheendof2013,BankforInternationalSettlements(2014)report
atotalnotionaloutstandingofinterestratederivativesof583trillionU.S.dollars,thevastmajorityofwhich
referenceLIBORorEURIBOR.Theseswapcontractsandmanyotherderivativesreferencebenchmarks,but
are not themselves benchmark products. Other extremely popular benchmarks for overnight interest rates
include SONIA, the Sterling OverNight Index Average, and EONIA, the Euro OverNight Index Average.
2See Foreign Exchange Benchmark Group (2014), which reports that 160 currencies are covered by the
WM/Reuters benchmarks. These benchmarks are fixed at least daily, and by currency pair within the 21
major “trade” currencies.
3The London Bullion Market Association provides benchmarks for gold and silver. Platts provides
benchmarks for oil, refined fuels, and iron ore (IODEX). Another major oil price benchmark is ICE Brent.
ICIS Heren provides a widely used price benchmark for natural gas.
4For a discussion of the Average Wholesale Price (AWP) drug-price benchmarks, see Gencarelli (2005).
The Kelly Blue Book publishes the “Fair Purchase Price” of automobiles, based on the average transaction
price by model and location.

1 Introduction 2
Our model works roughly as follows. In an OTC market with a finite number of dealers
andacontinuumofinvestorsthatwecall“traders,” thecosttoadealerofprovidingtheasset
to a trader is the sum of a dealer-specific (idiosyncratic) component and a component that
is common to all dealers. (In practice the clients of financial intermediaries may be buying
or selling the asset. We take the case in which traders wish to buy. The opposite case is
effectively the same, up to sign changes.) The existence of a benchmark is taken to mean
that the common cost component is publicly announced. Each trader observes, privately,
whether her search cost is high or low. Traders are searching for a good price, and dealers
offer them price quotes that depend endogenously on the presence of a benchmark. Each
dealer posts an offer price, available for execution by any trader, anonymously. Traders,
who have a commonly known value for acquiring the asset, contact the dealers sequentially,
expending a costly search effort, or costly delay, with each successive dealer contacted. At
each point in time the trader, given all of the information available to her at that time
(including past price offers and, if published, the benchmark) decides whether to buy, keep
searching, or exit the market. All market participants maximize their conditional expected
net payoffs, at all times, in a perfect Bayesian equilibrium.
Under natural parameter assumptions, which vary with the specific result, we show that
publishing the benchmark is socially efficient because of the following effects. First, publi-
cation of the benchmark encourages efficient entry by traders, thus increasing the realized
gains from trade. The benchmark improves the information available to traders about the
likely price terms they will face. This assists traders in deciding whether to participate in the
market, based on whether there is a sufficiently large conditional expected gain from trade.
The increased transparency of prices created by the benchmark causes dealers to compete
more aggressively in their quotes. In this sense, publication of the benchmark mitigates the
hold-up problem caused by dealers’ incentives to quote less attractive prices once the search
costs of traders have been sunk.
Second, benchmarkscanimprovematchingefficiency, leadingtoahighermarketsharefor
low-cost dealers. When the benchmark is not observed by traders, high-cost dealers exploit
the ignorance of traders about the cost of providing the asset and may conduct sales despite
the presence of more efficient competitors. The benchmark allows traders to decompose
a price offer into a common-cost component and a dealer-specific component for cost and
profit margin. As a result, if search costs are sufficiently small, customers trade with the
most efficient dealers. Third, benchmarks reduce wasteful search by (i) alerting traders that
gains from trade are too small to justify entry, and (ii) helping traders infer whether they
should stop searching because they have likely encountered a low-cost dealer.
We also characterize cases in which the introduction of a benchmark lowers welfare. This