NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EVOLUTION OF BANK SUPERVISION:
EVIDENCE FROM U.S. STATES
Kris James Mitchener
Matthew Jaremski
Working Paper 20603
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20603
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014
We thank Jessica Hardwick, Lea Halloway, and Amanda Razon for invaluable research assistance
and Mark Carlson, David Wheelock, Charles Calomiris, and Paul Rhode for comments and suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Kris James Mitchener and Matthew Jaremski. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Evolution of Bank Supervision: Evidence from U.S. States
Kris James Mitchener and Matthew Jaremski
NBER Working Paper No. 20603
October 2014
JEL No. E44,G28,N11
ABSTRACT
We use a novel data set spanning 1820-1910 to examine the origins of bank supervision and assess
factors leading to the creation of formal bank supervision across U.S. states. We show that it took
more than a century for the widespread adoption of independent supervisory institutions tasked with
maintaining the safety and soundness of banks. State legislatures initially pursued cheaper regulatory
alternatives, such as double liability laws; however, banking distress at the state level as well as the
structural shift from note-issuing to deposit-taking commercial banks and competition with national
banks propelled policymakers to adopt costly and permanent supervisory institutions.
Kris James Mitchener
Department of Economics
Leavey School of Business
Santa Clara University
Santa Clara, CA 95053
and NBER
kmitchener@scu.edu
Matthew Jaremski
Colgate University
Department of Economics
13 Oak Drive
Hamilton, NY 13346
and NBER
mjaremski@colgate.edu

The Evolution of Bank Supervision: Evidence from U.S. States
It is surprising how little is actually known about when and why formal bank supervisory
institutions came into existence. For example, existing research on their early evolution in the
United States simply summarizes the environment for particular years (e.g., Weldon 1910) or
presents a limited number of case studies (e.g., Gruchy 1937). More recent studies have
examined supervision in later periods (Agarwal et al. 2011; Mitchener 2005, 2007; White 2011),
but they have not attempted to provide a long-term quantitative assessment of the evolution of
bank supervisory institutions.1 We aim to fill this lacuna by analyzing the factors that led to the
creation of formal bank supervisory institutions in the United States at the state level, where such
institutions are defined as government agencies established specifically for the purpose of
supervising banks. We examine their evolution in light of theory as well as modern policy
objectives, such as the reduction of systemic risk and the monitoring of bank balance sheets and
management behavior.
The federalist structure of the United States implies that powers, such as the chartering of
commercial banks, primarily reside with individual states. Supervision of banks chartered by
states naturally followed from this delegation of powers, and meant that bank supervision
initially developed at this jurisdictional level. We thus focus on when and why U.S. states
established banking departments designed to both charter and supervise state financial
institutions. We trace their evolution from the early years of the republic through the beginning
of the twentieth century – a critical period that laid down the foundations of the bank supervisory
system observed today. To do so, we assemble a unique data set spanning 1820-1910 from
archival and census records that provides information on the date of adoption of formal
institutions as well as on state-specific factors influencing that decision. Using these data and
additional information on supervisory characteristics, we also examine whether states made
progressive improvements to the quality of their supervisory institutions. Since implementation
1 Another notable recent contribution is Grossman (2010), which describes the evolution of the banking industry and
discusses the role central banks have played in bank supervision (with extended case studies on Sweden, England,
and the United States). Our analysis is complementary in that it analyzes the evolution of bank supervision prior to
central banking and formally measures its determinants.
2

dates and supervisory characteristics varied considerably across states, we are able to exploit
both the cross-state and time differences to identify factors that drove the adoption of state bank
supervision.
It took more than 100 years to fully develop formal supervisory institutions as well as
what policymakers today would consider as modern supervisory priorities.2 Consistent with
Rajan’s (2009) view that financial regulation has been procyclical, we find that formal
supervisory institutions (i.e., state banking departments) rose from the ashes of banking crises.
Six states created government banking agencies immediately after the Panic of 1837, six states
put them in place after the Baring Crisis of 1890 and Banking Panic of 1893, and 17 made
changes after the Panic of 1907. No other interval had as many new departments established. The
pattern indicates that formal bank supervision was likely a response to bank failures: the high
sunk costs of establishing formal bank supervisory institutions likely delayed states from
preemptively installing them.
The introduction of the National Banking Act and taxes on state bank notes in the 1860s
also appears to have shaped the development of modern supervisory institutions and priorities.
Commercial banks shifted the composition of their liabilities from notes to deposits,
simultaneously drawing more individuals (and potential voters) into the banking sector and
increasing the potential for systemic bank runs.3 The shift also potentially allowed banks to
increase their loan portfolios relative to bond purchases thus more closely tying economic
activity to bank health (Calomiris and Mason, 2008). Our econometric results suggest that state
legislatures refocused their attention on the safety of depositors and installed relatively more
costly state banking departments. As deposit taking grew in importance relative to note issuance,
supervision shifted more purposefully toward maintaining the safety and soundness of banking
systems.
2 Some of the delayed adoption is an artifact of new states that were created late in the period, but there were still
many older states (e.g., Indiana, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, and South Carolina) that did not install formal
supervision until after 1890.
3 While note holders were exposed to bank failure, notes had to be fully backed by collateral and losses were
generally low. Issuance of greenbacks and silver-backed money during the postbellum period also limited the
amount of bank notes that individuals would need to hold in order to carry out transactions.
3