NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OPTION-BASED CREDIT SPREADS
Christopher L. Culp
Yoshio Nozawa
Pietro Veronesi
Working Paper 20776
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20776
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014, Revised September 2017
For their comments, we thank Pierluigi Balduzzi, Jack Bao, Hui Chen, Alexander David, Darrell
Duffie, Peter Feldhütter, Stefano Giglio, Zhiguo He, John Heaton, J.B. Heaton, Steven Heston,
Erica Li, Francis Longstaff, Monika Piazzesi, Juliana Salomao, Steve Schaefer, Yang Song,
Suresh Sundaresan, Andrea Vedolin, and seminar participants at Bocconi University, Stockholm
School of Economics, Bank of Canada, Federal Reserve Board, Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, University of Maryland, University of Chicago Booth School of Business, the Einaudi
Institute for Economics and Finance, AQR, CICF, the 2014 NBER Asset Pricing meeting, the
2015 European Summer Symposium in Financial Markets, the 2016 European Finance
Association, London Business School, Boston College, Oxford University, and Copenhagen
Business School. We thank Bryan Kelly for helping with CME data. The views expressed herein
are the authors’ and do not necessarily reflect those of the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, nor any institutions with which any of the authors are affiliated. A previous
version of this paper was briefly circulated with the title “The Empirical Merton Model.”
Veronesi acknowledges financial support from the Fama-Miller Center for Research in Finance
and by the Center for Research in Security Prices at the University of Chicago Booth School of
Business. The views expressed herein are the authors’ and do not necessarily reflect those of the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Christopher L. Culp, Yoshio Nozawa, and Pietro Veronesi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Option-Based Credit Spreads
Christopher L. Culp, Yoshio Nozawa, and Pietro Veronesi
NBER Working Paper No. 20776
December 2014, Revised September 2017
JEL No. G0,G12,G13,G21,G24,G3
ABSTRACT
We present a novel empirical benchmark for analyzing credit risk using “pseudo firms” that
purchase traded assets financed with equity and zero-coupon bonds. By no-arbitrage, pseudo
bonds are equivalent to Treasuries minus put options on pseudo-firm assets. Empirically, like
corporate spreads, pseudo-bond spreads are large, countercyclical, and predict lower economic
growth. Using this framework, we find that bond market illiquidity, investors’ over-estimation of
default risks, and corporate frictions do not seem to explain excessive observed credit spreads,
but, instead, a risk premium for tail and idiosyncratic asset risks is the primary determinant of
corporate spreads.
Christopher L. Culp Pietro Veronesi
Johns Hopkins Institute University of Chicago
for Applied Economics Booth School of Business
Global Health and Study 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
of Business Enterprise Chicago, IL 60637
3400 North Charles St. and NBER
Baltimore, MD 21218 pietro.veronesi@chicagobooth.edu
cculp@rmcsinc.com
Yoshio Nozawa
Federal Reserve Board
20th and Constitution Avenue NW
Mail Stop 165
Washington D.C. 20551
yoshio.nozawa@frb.gov

1. Introduction
The understanding of credit risk, its time variation, and its relation to the aggregate econ-
omy is critical to policy makers, market participants, and researchers. Yet, questions about
credit risk are hard to answer with purely empirical methods because corporate bonds are
complicated and often illiquid securities, the market values of the assets of firms issuing
bonds are not observable, leverage is endogenous, and the corporate bond market is replete
with market-microstructure idiosyncrasies. Fully empirical methodologies, moreover, do not
easily facilitate analyses of counterfactuals to learn from “what-if” experiments. Instead,
counterfactual experiments generally must be tackled by positing stylized structural models
of default risk, which give rise to other challenges arising from dependencies on highly pa-
rameterizedmodels,modelspecifications(e.g., assumeddistributionsof shocks), and genuine
difficulties in estimation.
In this paper we propose a novel, option-based methodology for analyzing credit risk.
We build fictitious firms, which we call “pseudo firms,” that have simple and empirically
observable balance sheets. Our pseudo firms have assets comprised of real traded securities,
and liabilities comprised of equity and zero-coupon bonds. In the absence of arbitrage, the
market value of a pseudo firm’s zero-coupon bond is equal to the value of a comparable
default-free bond minus the market value of a put option on the traded securities held as
assets by the pseudo firm.1 Using observed prices of traded put options and Treasuries, we
extract the empirical properties of zero-coupon bonds “issued” by pseudo firms, which we
call “pseudo bonds.”
To be concrete, consider a pseudo firm that purchases the S&P500 (SPX) index portfolio
financed by issuing equity and zero-coupon debt with face value K and maturity T.2 The
asset value of this pseudo firm is A = SPX , which is observable. At maturity, the bond
t t
holders of this pseudo firm receivethe minimum between K (no default) or the assets of the
pseudo firm A (default). The payoff to bond holders thus is min(K,A ) = K max(K
T T
− −
A ,0), which is the payoff of the risk-free debt K minus the payoff on a put option on the
T
SPX. The no-arbitrage value of the pseudo bond at t < T is:
B (K,T) = KZ (T) PSPX(K,T), (1)
t t − t
1The basic insight that corpo b rate debt can be b viewed a b s risk-free debt plus a short put option is at-
tributable to Merton (1974). We distinguish between this Merton insight – which requires no assumptions
about the distribution of the values of underlying assets owned by the pseudo firm – and the Merton model
forthevaluationofriskycorporate debt–whichassumes underlyingassetvaluesarelognormallydistributed
and thus uses the Black, Scholes, and Merton formulafor the valuationof corporate debt.
2SPXSM isaservicemarkregisteredbytheChicagoBoardOptionsExchange. Ouruseoftheabbreviation
SPX refers throughout the text to the S&P500 index generally.
1

where Z (T) is the risk-free discount factor at time t corresponding to maturity T, and
t
PSPX(Kb,T) is the value of an SPX put option at t with strike price K and maturity T.
t
Qbuantities denoted with “hats” indicate that their prices are observable from Treasuries and
traded option prices, which comprise the observed values of the liabilitiesof the pseudo firm,
B (K,T). Although the pseudo firm is fictitious, we can nonetheless observe the values of
t
ibts assets and debt from traded securities and thus we have a fully observable balance sheet.3
Toillustrate,PanelAofFigure1plotsthetimeseriesoftwopseudobond pricesB (K ,T)
t i
constructed from equation (1) using Treasuries and two different SPX put optionbs traded
on the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE). Both put options have maturity dates of
T = 12/18/2009, and are distinguished only by their different strike prices, K = 800 and
1
K = 1150. The two strike prices imply two different leverage ratios K /A – i.e., low and
2 i t
high leverage for K = 800 and K = 1150, respectively, where the value of assets A is the
1 2 t
value of the SPX index. The time series of leverage is plotted in Panel B.
Panel A of Figure 1 shows that the low-leverage pseudo bond price steadily increases
over time (like any zero-coupon bond) except during the 2008 crisis, when the price drops
substantially as the SPX (i.e., the asset value of the first pseudo firm) declines by over 50%.
Nevertheless, this pseudo bond recovers in 2009 and eventually pays 100% of principal at
maturity. The pseudo bond issued by the high-leverage pseudo firm, however, displays a
larger price drop during the financial crisis, and the bond never fully recovers. Indeed, the
second pseudo firm eventually defaults, as the the value of the SPX on December 18, 2009
was A = 1102.47 and hence A /K = 95% – i.e. bond holders of the high-leverage pseudo
T T 2
firm would have lost 5% of principal value.
Panel C plots the time series of credit spreads implied by the two pseudo bond prices
B (K ,T) and Treasuries. Their dynamics highlight the variations in credit spreads during
t i
tbhe financial crisis, a topic to which we return later. Indeed, for the first year or so, the two
credit spreads were increasing, albeit by relatively small amounts. September 2008 (when
Lehman failed and AIG was bailed out), however, was a clear turning point when spreads
of both pseudo firms – especially the high-leverage one – skyrocketed. The difference in
reactions of the credit spreads of the two pseudo firms (which are otherwise identical except
for leverage) highlights the increase of a firm’s financial fragility and sensitivity to shocks in
asset value changes resulting from leverage.
Our methodology also allows us to exploit standard econometrictools to computepseudo
bonds’ ex ante default probabilities – i.e., the probabilities p (K) = Pr[A < K ], where
t T t
|F
3For completeness, note that equity holders of the pseudo firm are instead entitled to the residual payoff
max(A K,0) at maturity T and to allcash dividends paid by SPX portfoliountil then.
T
−
2