NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RETAIL FINANCIAL ADVICE:
DOES ONE SIZE FIT ALL?
Stephen Foerster
Juhani T. Linnainmaa
Brian T. Melzer
Alessandro Previtero
Working Paper 20712
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20712
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2014
We thank Shlomo Benartzi, Antonio Bernardo, Chuck Grace, Tal Gross (discussant), Luigi Guiso,
Michael Haliassos (discussant), Markku Kaustia (discussant), Roger Loh (discussant), Jonathan Parker,
Jonathan Reuter (discussant), Antoinette Schoar (discussant), Barry Scholnick, and Dick Thaler for
valuable comments. We are also grateful for feedback given by seminar and conference participants
at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore Management University, National University of
Singapore, University of Windsor, McMaster University, Rice University, Yale University, University
of Washington, SUNY-Buffalo, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, University of Chicago, University
of Alberta, University of Southern California, University of California-San Diego, University of Colorado-Boulder,
American Economic Association 2014 meetings, NBER Behavioral Economics Spring 2014 meetings,
Rothschild Caesarea Center 11th Annual Conference, 2014 Helsinki Finance Summit, 2014 Napa
Conference on Financial Markets Research, Oxford-Harvard-Sloan conference "Household Behavior
in Risky Asset Markets: An International Perspective," and 2014 European Household Finance Conference.
We are especially grateful to Univeris, Fundata, Ipsos-Reid, and four anonymous financial firms for
donating data and giving generously of their time. Zhou Chen and Brian Held provided helpful research
assistance. Stephen Foerster and Alessandro Previtero received financial support from Canadian financial
firms for conducting this research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Stephen Foerster, Juhani T. Linnainmaa, Brian T. Melzer, and Alessandro Previtero. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Retail Financial Advice: Does One Size Fit All?
Stephen Foerster, Juhani T. Linnainmaa, Brian T. Melzer, and Alessandro Previtero
NBER Working Paper No. 20712
November 2014
JEL No. D14,G11,G20
ABSTRACT
Using unique data on Canadian households, we assess the impact of financial advisors on their clients'
portfolios. We find that advisors induce their clients to take more risk, thereby raising expected returns.
On the other hand, we find limited evidence of customization: advisors direct clients into similar portfolios
independent of their clients' risk preferences and stage in the life cycle. An advisor's own portfolio
is a good predictor of the client's portfolio even after controlling for the client's characteristics. This
one-size-fits-all advice does not come cheap. The average client pays more than 2.7% each year in
fees and thus gives up all of the equity premium gained through increased risk-taking.
Stephen Foerster Brian T. Melzer
Ivey Business School Western University Kellogg School of Management
1255 Western Road Northwestern University
London, Ontario, Canada N6G 0N1 2001 Sheridan Road
sfoerster@ivey.ca Evanston, IL 60208
b-melzer@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Juhani T. Linnainmaa
Booth School of Business Alessandro Previtero
University of Chicago Ivey Business School Western University
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue 1255 Western Road
Chicago, IL 60637 London Ontario, Canada N6G 0N1
and NBER aprevitero@ivey.uwo.ca
juhani.linnainmaa@chicagobooth.edu

1 Introduction
The lifecycle asset allocation problem is complex. Choosing how to allocate savings across risky
assets requires, among other things, an understanding of risk preferences, investment horizon, and
the joint dynamics of asset returns and labor income. To help solve this problem, many households
turn to investment advisors. In the United States more than half of households owning mutual
funds made purchases through an investment professional (Investment Company Institute 2013).
Likewise, nearlyhalfofCanadianhouseholdsreportusingfinancialadvisors(TheInvestmentFunds
InstituteofCanada2012), androughly80% ofthe$876billioninretailinvestmentassets inCanada
reside in advisor-directed accounts (Canadian Securities Administrators 2012).
Despite widespread useof financialadvisors, relatively little is known about how advisors shape
their clients’ investment portfolios. Recent studies highlight underperformance and return chasing
by advisor-directed investments and providesuggestive evidence that agency conflicts contribute to
1
underperformance. An opposing view is that financial advisors nevertheless add value by build-
ing portfolios suited to each investor’s unique characteristics, an approach described as “interior
decoration” by Bernstein (1992) and Campbell and Viceira (2002). In this paper, we use unique
data on Canadian households to explore two dimensions through which advisors may add value:
first, by inducingclients to take investment risk and, second, by tailoring investment risk to clients’
particular circumstances as opposed to delivering one-size-fits-all portfolios.
Our analysis begins by using a regulatory shock to the supply of Canadian financial advisors to
measure advisors’ impact on risk-taking. Household survey data show a strong correlation between
portfolio risk and use of an advisor in Canada—advised households allocate more of their portfolio
to risky financial assets. However, these data also indicate substantial sample selection. Clients of
advisors are more educated, wealthier, and earn higher salaries than their unadvised peers. Thus,
the disparity in portfolio risk between advised and unadvised households likely provides a biased
measure of advisors’ impact, one that is confounded by unobserved differences in, for example, risk
tolerance.
1Anumberofstudiesdocumentunderperformanceofadvisor-directedinvestments: brokeredmutualfundsunder-
perform non-brokeredfunds (Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano 2009; Christoffersen, Evans, and Musto 2013) and
investors who pay for advice underperform lifecycle funds (Chalmers and Reuter 2013) and self-managed accounts
(Hackethal, Haliassos, and Jappelli 2012). Brokers are also more likely to sell funds that earn them higher commis-
sions (Christoffersen, Evans, and Musto 2013). Mullainathan, Noeth, and Schoar (2012) find in a field experiment
that advisors encourage theirclients to chase past returns and purchaseactively managed mutual funds.
2

To resolve this selection problem, we study a 2001 regulatory change that imposed licensing,
financial reporting and capital requirements on Canadian financial advisors operating outside of
Quebec. Thischange providesashock to thesupplyoffinancialadvisors thatis plausiblyunrelated
to demand for advice. Using a differences-in-differences model to compare affected households to
those in Quebec, we find that the change reduced households’ likelihood of using an advisor by
roughly 10%. Exploiting this variation within an instrumental variables model, we estimate that
financialadvisorsincreasethemarginalhouseholds’riskyassetshareby30percentagepoints,which
exceeds the estimate from a least squares regression that controls for household characteristics.
This finding suggests that advisors facilitate substantially greater financial market participation
and risk-taking, perhaps by reducing households’ uncertainty about future returns or by relieving
households’ anxiety when taking financial risk (Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny 2014).
Next, we delve deeper into advisors’ impact on risk-taking by examining the portfolios held by
advised households. Using data furnishedby four large Canadian financialinstitutions, we measure
the extent to which advisors tailor their advice. The data include transaction-level records on over
10,000financialadvisorsandtheseadvisors’800,000clients, alongwithdemographicinformationon
bothinvestorsandadvisors. Manyoftheinvestorattributes—suchasrisktolerance,age,investment
horizon, income, occupation, and financial knowledge—ought to be of first-order importance in
determining the appropriate allocation to risky assets.
What determines cross-sectional variation in investors’ exposure to risk? In neoclassical port-
folio theory, differences in risk aversion account entirely for variation in risky shares (see Mossin
(1968), Merton (1969), and Samuelson (1969)). In richer classes of models, many other factors also
shape investors’ optimal risk exposures. For example, according to most models, old investors and
investors facing greater labor income risk should invest less in risky assets (see, for example, Bodie,
Merton, andSamuelson (1992)). Therecommendations implicit inlifecycle fundsalsoembodysuch
advice. These funds allocate nearly the entire portfolio to equities for young investors and then
reduce this exposure as investors near retirement.
We test whether advisors adjust portfolios in response to such factors by studying variation in
the proportion of equities in investors’ portfolios (“risky share”). We find that advisors modify
portfolios based on client characteristics, with a particular emphasis on clients’ risk tolerance and
point in the life cycle. As one would expect, more risk-tolerant clients hold riskier portfolios: the
3