NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TO CUT OR NOT TO CUT? ON THE IMPACT OF CORPORATE TAXES ON EMPLOYMENT
AND INCOME
Alexander Ljungqvist
Michael Smolyansky
Working Paper 20753
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20753
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014, Revised October 2018
We are grateful to Robert Chirinko, Stefano Giglio, Boyan Jovanovic, David Merriman, Holger
Mueller, Thomas Philippon, Steve Sharpe, Robert Shimer, Lisa De Simone (our Tax Symposium
discussant), Gustavo Suarez, David Thesmar, Owen Zidar (our NBER discussant), and seminar
participants at Sveriges Riksbank, the NYU Macro Lunch, the 2014 UNC Tax Symposium, the
2015 National Tax Association meetings, and the 2016 NBER Universities Conference for
helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Alexander Ljungqvist and Michael Smolyansky. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

To Cut or Not to Cut? On the Impact of Corporate Taxes on Employment and Income
Alexander Ljungqvist and Michael Smolyansky
NBER Working Paper No. 20753
December 2014, Revised October 2018
JEL No. E3,E62,H2,H25,H31,H32,H71
ABSTRACT
Do corporate tax increases destroy jobs? And do corporate tax cuts boost employment?
Answering these questions has proved empirically challenging. We propose an identification
strategy that exploits variation in corporate income tax rates across U.S. states. Comparing
contiguous counties straddling state borders over the period 1970 to 2010, we find that increases
in corporate tax rates lead to significant reductions in employment and wage income, while
corporate tax cuts only boost economic activity if implemented during recessions. Our spatial-
discontinuity approach permits a causal interpretation of these findings by both establishing a
plausible counterfactual and overcoming biases resulting from the fact that tax changes are often
prompted by changes in economic conditions.
Alexander Ljungqvist
Stockholm School of Economics
Box 6501
SE-113 83 Stockholm, Sweeden
and NBER
aljungqv@stern.nyu.edu
Michael Smolyansky
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
20th and C Streets NW
Washington, DC 20551
michael.smolyansky@frb.gov

1. Introduction
Despite the recent enactment of a large cut in the federal corporate tax rate,1 the effects that
corporate taxes have on economic activity remains controversial. Academic studies, for example,
have found mixed evidence on how companies respond to changes in corporate tax rates,2 while
opinion among public commentators appears starkly divided. This controversy in large part
stems from the fact that the effects of corporate tax changes are so difficult to measure
empirically.
The challenges are twofold. First, changes in tax policy are unlikely to be random and instead
may themselves be influenced by prevailing economic conditions and other factors. For example,
governments may cut taxes in the hope of stimulating sluggish growth. As a result, observed
correlations between changes in tax policy and ex post economic outcomes will, to some
unknown extent, reflect unobserved or omitted variation in economic conditions. Compounding
this problem is the fact that macroeconomic time-series are relatively short and so typically cover
few policy changes. This means that disentangling the effects of a given tax change from the
confounding effects of other events that coincide with it is difficult. Moreover, tax reform at the
federal level often involves highly complex pieces of legislation affecting numerous aspects of
the tax code, making it nearly impossible to evaluate the effects attributable to a change in the
corporate tax rate, while holding all else equal.
The second empirical challenge is that we do not observe counterfactual outcomes. That is,
even if a tax change was truly random, we do not know how outcomes such as employment and
income would have evolved had the tax change not occurred. The absence of a counterfactual
1 Among its many provisions, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 cut the statutory federal corporate income tax rate
from 35% to 21%.
2 For example, Mertens and Ravn (2013) find that federal corporate tax cuts have significant effects on aggregate
investment, but not on employment, while Hassett and Hubbard (2002) conclude that most studies find limited
effects of federal corporate tax changes on investment. At the state level, Giroud and Rauh (2017) find notable
effects of corporate tax changes on employment. We further review the literature below.
1

means that it is impossible to measure the impact of changes in tax policy without imposing
further assumptions on the behavior of the economic variables of interest.
We propose an empirical strategy designed to address these identification challenges. Our
strategy has two key elements. First, we focus on individual U.S. states rather than the federal
level. In contrast to federal corporate tax rates, which change only rarely,3 changes in state-level
corporate taxes are plentiful: we count 250 changes in state corporate income tax rates from 1970
to 2010.
The second element of our empirical strategy is designed to minimize the effects of
confounding variation in economic conditions as much as possible. To this end, we exploit the
fact that a state’s tax jurisdiction stops at its border. This suggests that when a state undertakes a
corporate tax change, its neighboring states, which arguably share similar economic conditions
but where taxes haven’t changed, might provide a suitable “control group” against which to
measure the effects of the tax change. To get as close to a plausible counterfactual as possible,
however, our tests compare not neighboring states but rather contiguous counties located on
either side of a state border.4 Because of their proximity to each other, these neighboring counties
are likely to be experiencing similar local economic conditions prior to one them being affected
by a tax change – and indeed, our tests validate that this “parallel trends” assumption holds in the
data. Thus, by comparing outcomes in the “treated” county to its neighboring control county on
the other side of the state border, we can effectively remove the biasing influence of otherwise
unobservable variation in local economic conditions. Doing so allows us isolate the effects
specifically attributable to the tax change. Essentially, our strategy is therefore a standard diff-in-
diff approach that exploits a spatial discontinuity in tax policy for identification purposes.
3 Since 1970, there have been only four major changes in the top federal corporate income tax rate: in 1979 (from
48% to 46%), in 1986 (from 46% to 34%), in 1993 (from 34% to 35%), and in 2018 (from 35% to 21%).
4 Several prior studies have implemented the border-county methodology in other contexts, including Holmes
(1998), Huang (2008), Dube, Lester, and Reich (2010), Heider and Ljungqvist (2015), and Hagedorn et al. (2016).
2