NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNPRECEDENTED ACTIONS:
THE FEDERAL RESERVE’S RESPONSE TO THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS
IN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Frederic S. Mishkin
Eugene N. White
Working Paper 20737
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20737
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014
Presented originally at the conference, “The Federal Reserve System’s Role in the Global Economy:
An Historical Perspective” at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, September 18-19, 2014. We particularly
want to thank Michael Bordo and Steven Kamin for their helpful comments. We are also grateful
for suggestions made by participants at the conference, the Columbia University Macroeconomics
workshop and the Banque de France. The views expressed here are our own and are not necessarily
those of Columbia University, Rutgers University, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Disclosure of outside compensated activities for Mishkin can be found at http://www0.gsb.columbia.edu/faculty/fmishkin/
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20737.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Frederic S. Mishkin and Eugene N. White. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Unprecedented Actions: The Federal Reserve’s Response to the Global Financial Crisis in
Historical Perspective
Frederic S. Mishkin and Eugene N. White
NBER Working Paper No. 20737
December 2014
JEL No. E58,G01,N10,N20
ABSTRACT
Interventions by the Federal Reserve during the financial crisis of 2007-2009 were generally viewed
as unprecedented and in violation of the rules—notably Bagehot’s rule—that a central bank should
follow to avoid the time-inconsistency problem and moral hazard. Reviewing the evidence for central
banks’ crisis management in the U.S., the U.K. and France from the late nineteenth century to the
end of the twentieth century, we find that there were precedents for all of the unusual actions taken
by the Fed. When these were successful interventions, they followed contingent and target rules that
permitted pre-emptive actions to forestall worse crises but were combined with measures to mitigate
moral hazard.
Frederic S. Mishkin
Columbia University
Graduate School of Business
Uris Hall 817
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
fsm3@columbia.edu
Eugene N. White
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
and NBER
white@economics.rutgers.edu

In response to the Great Inflation, governments were more willing to cede greater
independence to central banks, giving them better specified mandates; and central banks were
more willing to pledge adherence to rules and transparency; with both, apparently, limiting
discretionary intervention.1 The resulting Great Moderation was thus, in large part, seen as a
triumph of rules over discretion; and a recognition by policy makers of the time consistency
problem. The success of reducing and stabilizing the inflation rate produced a consensus on the
appropriate role and mandate for central banks (Mishkin, 2011). The global financial crisis that
started in August 2007 and the disruptions of the subsequent seven years upset this consensus,
and seemingly novel and unprecedented interventions were employed to address the panic and
then revive markets and economies.
These “unprecedented” interventions included monetary policy easing at a time of robust
growth and rising inflation, bailouts, new lending facilities, nonconventional monetary policy,
such as quantitative easing, and large-scale international swap arrangements. By April 2008,
these developments provoked former Fed Chairman Paul Volcker to comment that the Federal
Reserve had “taken actions that extend to the very edge of its lawful and implied powers,
transcending certain long-embedded central banking principles and practices.”2 Solemn
warnings have been issued about the perils of deviating from the mandates and rules that
emerged out of the Great Moderation. Meltzer (2009) and Taylor (2009), for example, criticized
the Fed for veering away from a clear and simple lender of last resort (LOLR) policy rule, as
prescribed by Bagehot (1873) and other nineteenth century authorities, where it is clearly
announced that financial institutions will not be bailed out. On the other hand, others like
Madigan (2009) have asserted that the Fed’s actions were in line with Bagehot’s prescriptions.
In this paper, we provide a historical framework to evaluate the “unprecedented” actions
of the Fed, comparing its actions to central bank responses to crises in the nineteenth and
twentieth century. This exercise reveals that there is less novelty in the Federal Reserve’s recent
actions and that central banks over the last hundred and fifty years have often not followed the
simple LOLR policy rule. Historical exploration of actual LOLR practices provides a context for
deciding whether the Federal Reserve’s deviation from a Bagehot rule was appropriate.
1 See for example, Bernanke et. al, (1999), Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel, (2002).
2 As quoted in Coy (2008).
2

Our review of leading financial crises in Britain, France and the United States, from the
Overend-Gurney panic of 1866 to the collapse of LTCM in 1998, documents that
“unprecedented” actions by central banks are the norm rather than the exception. The reason for
this observation lies in the necessity of reconciling central banks’ mandates for price stability and
financial stability. Under fixed and flexible exchanges rate regimes, there are important benefits
from a price-stability rule that can be easily monitored so that central banks, and the political
authorities who delegate policy responsibility to them, will be induced to follow credible policies
that avoid time-inconsistency problems. The nature of financial crises, however, is such that
addressing them almost invariably requires a a temporary violation of rules, or the adoption of
more flexible, less easily monitored, rules. Attempts to set a policy rule for financial stability by
following Bagehot’s recommendations accepts that policy will not seek to forestall a crisis but
only respond when a financial crisis has hit, taking remedial action to assist solvent institutions
but allowing the shock from the crisis percolates through the whole economy. However, in most
episodes, central banks have acted pre-emptively to manage failures of large financial
institutions and buffer the economy from the shocks emanating from the crisis. While the
reactive approach risks a recession or a deeper recession, the pre-emptive approach creates
incentives for moral hazard. For the latter approach to be successful, two elements are essential.
First, the conditions when a rule may be temporarily violated must be well-understood so that it
becomes a contingent rule and there will be no market penalty. Alternatively, a more flexible,
less easily monitored, rule must make the central bank sufficiently accountable so that it
constrains discretion and avoids the time-inconsistency problem. Secondly, in order to ensure
that the pre-emptive approach does not set the stage for the next crisis, actions must be taken to
mitigate moral hazard.
Instrument, Contingent and Target Rules for Central Banks
The problem of setting a proper mandate for a central bank dates to their very origin.
Central banks became a common feature of sovereign nations in the nineteenth century, although
there were precursors, notably the Bank of England and the Riksbank. They evolved as
3