NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A TAXONOMY OF ANOMALIES AND THEIR TRADING COSTS
Robert Novy-Marx
Mihail Velikov
Working Paper 20721
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20721
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014
Professor Novy-Marx currently consults with Dimensional Fund Advisors, an investment firm headquartered
in Austin, Texas. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Robert Novy-Marx and Mihail Velikov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

A Taxonomy of Anomalies and their Trading Costs
Robert Novy-Marx and Mihail Velikov
NBER Working Paper No. 20721
December 2014
JEL No. G12,G14
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the performance of a large number of anomalies after accounting for transaction
costs, and the effectiveness of several transaction cost mitigation strategies. It finds that introducing
a buy/hold spread, which allows investors to continue to hold stocks that they would not actively trade
into, is the single most effective simple cost mitigation strategy. Most of the anomalies that we consider
with one-sided monthly turnover lower than 50% continue to generate statistically significant net spreads,
at least when designed to mitigate transaction costs. Few of the strategies with higher turnover do.
In all cases transaction costs reduce the strategies’ profitability and its associated statistical significance,
increasing concerns related to data snooping.
Robert Novy-Marx
Simon Graduate School of Business
University of Rochester
305 Schlegel Hall
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
Robert.Novy-Marx@Simon.Rochester.edu
Mihail Velikov
Simon Graduate School of Business
University of Rochester
305 Schlegel Hall
Rochester, NY 14627
mihail.velikov@simon.rochester.edu

1. Introduction
This paper provides a taxonomy of the most important anomalies, and calculates the
cost of trading each strategy. It also studies several simple transaction cost mitigation
techniques,andshowsthatwhiletransactioncostsdramaticallyreducetheprofitabil-
ity of many anomalies, especially those with high turnover, designing strategies to
minimize transaction costs significantly reduces these costs. It also shows that equal-
weightedportfolioresults,popularintheacademicliteraturebecausetheyfrequently
provide stronger results than value-weighted results, are misleading and should be
viewed skeptically. Because equal-weighted strategies are more expensive to trade,
equal-weightingoftenresultsinadeteriorationofnetperformance.
Over the last 30 years academic researchers have documented hundreds of cross-
sectional “anomalies," a term which has come to mean size, value, momentum, and
any other strategy that generates a significant positive alpha relative to a four-factor
model that accounts for these first three. The incentives to find these strategies are
high both within academia (publications and tenure) and on the street (a marketable
story and a bigger paycheck). This raises significant data snooping concerns. Harvey
etal.(2014)argueoneconometricgroundsthatthreeshouldbethenewtwofort-stats,
and conclude that “most claimed research findings in financial economics are likely
false.” This paper ignores transaction costs, however, meaning that even the spreads
reported in the literature often dramatically overstate the profitability of attempting
totradethesestrategies.
McLean and Pontiff (2014) study the post-publication performance of 82 anoma-
lies and find average post-publication performance decay of 35%. They attribute less
than a third of this decay to statistical bias, and the rest to price pressure by newly
aware investors, arguing that their results are “consistent with costly (limited) arbi-
trage,” because post-publication return declines are more pronounced for strategies
thatdisproportionatelytakepositionsinstocksthatareeasiertotrade.
Limits to arbitrage are important for addressing questions related to market effi-
1

ciency. Market anomalies are often used as potential evidence against efficiency. We
generally believe that markets should be fairly efficient because of the forces of ar-
bitrage, however, and these so called anomalies do not test market efficiency if they
should not attract arbitrage capital because they are not actually profitable to trade.
In this case they may indicate suboptimal behavior on the part of some individual
traders,buttheyarenotsuggestiveofaggregatemispricing.
Several authors have studied the limits trading costs impose when implementing
momentum strategies. Lesmond et al. (2004) argue that while the large gross spreads
observedonmomentumtradescreatean“illusionofprofitopportunitywhen,infact,
noneexists.” KorajczykandSadka(2004)considerthepriceimpactoftradingmomen-
tum,andconcludethatitwouldonlybeprofitabletotradeonaverysmallscale. These
papers do not, however, study momentum strategies designed to minimize transac-
tion costs. More recently Frazzini et al. (2014) have argued that “actual trading costs
are less than a tenth as large as, and therefore the potential scale of these strategies is
morethananorderofmagnitudelargerthan,previousstudiessuggest,"andconclude
that the strategy is “robust [and] implementable,” but their study is conducted using
proprietary data that covers a relatively short time-series, limited to larger stocks. No
studiesprovideacomprehensiveanalysisofthecostoftradingmorethanafewofthe
known anomalies, especially over longer horizons or using the entire cross-section of
stocks.
We consider a large array of well known anomalies, evaluating their after transac-
tioncostperformanceoverlonghorizonsandacrossdifferenttypesofstocks. Inorder
to do this we develop a new performance metric. This measure agrees with common
notions of alpha when trading is frictionless, but provides unambiguous information
about the extent to which an asset improves the investment opportunity set, some-
thing about which the common notion of alpha can be misleading in the presence of
tradingfrictions.
We also evaluate three simple strategies for reducing transaction costs: limiting
2