NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CORPORATE DEBT STRUCTURE AND THE FINANCIAL CRISIS
Fiorella De Fiore
Harald Uhlig
Working Paper 20730
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20730
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014
The views expressed here do not necessarily reflect those of the European Central Bank or the Eurosystem.
We thank Edvardas Moseika and Giovanni Nicolo' for research assistance, Egon Zakrajsek, Ester Faia,
Kevin Sheedy and Paolo Gelain for useful discussions, and participants at the 2013 AEA meetings,
the 2012 SED, SCEF and EEA meetings, the Bank of Canada Workshop on "Real-Financial Linkages",
the CEPR/JMCB conference on "Macroeconomics and Financial Intermediation: Directions since
the Crisis," the 2012 Central Bank Macroeconomic Modeling Workshop, the ECB conference on "Analysing
the role of credit in the macroeconomy," the 11th Macroeconomic Policy Research Workshop, the
2012 Central Bank Macroeconomic Workshop, and the CEPR/LBS workshop on "Developments in
Macroeconomics and Finance," for comments. This research has been supported by the NSF grant
SES-0922550. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Fiorella De Fiore and Harald Uhlig. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Corporate Debt Structure and the Financial Crisis
Fiorella De Fiore and Harald Uhlig
NBER Working Paper No. 20730
December 2014
JEL No. E22,E32,E44,E5
ABSTRACT
We present a DSGE model where firms optimally choose among alternative instruments of external
finance. The model is used to explain the evolving composition of corporate debt during the financial
crisis of 2008-09, namely the observed shift from bank finance to bond finance, at a time when the
cost of market debt rose above the cost of bank loans. We show that the flexibility offered by banks
on the terms of their loans and firm's ability to substitute among alternative instruments of debt finance
are important to shield the economy from adverse real effects of a financial crisis.
Fiorella De Fiore
European Central Bank
Postfach 160319
D-60066 Frankfurt am Main, GERMANY
fiorella.De_fiore@ecb.int
Harald Uhlig
Dept. of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
huhlig@uchicago.edu

1 Introduction
According to the standard narrative, European banks experienced major difficulties to finance
themselves in money markets during the financial crisis of 2008-09. Concerns about their
exposure to the US sub-prime market enhanced the perception of counterparty risk in the
interbank market and triggered a drying-up of liquidity. These difficulties were soon passed
on to Euro area non-financial corporations - traditionally heavily dependent on bank-finance -
through progressively tightening lending standards.
Indeed, non-financial corporations started shifting the composition of their debt from bank
loans towards debt securities early in 2008 (figure 1, panel a). At the same time, the cost of
marketdebtrosetogetherwith(andabove)thecostofbankloans(figure1, panelb), whilethe
default rate of non-financial corporations increased sharply. These events were accompanied
by an aggregate drop in investment and output that was unprecedented since the introduction
of the euro.
In this paper, we propose a model that can account for some of these key facts, incorpo-
rating the narrative above. We use it to evaluate the role played by the debt composition
in determining the response of investment and output to financial shocks. In particular, we
investigate the endogenously evolving debt structure, and the possibilities for companies to
switch between bank financing and bond financing.
We develop and investigate a stochastic dynamic general equilibrium model where lenders
and borrowers face agency costs, and where heterogeneous firms can choose among alternative
instruments of external finance, building on De Fiore and Uhlig (2011, henceforth DFU).
There, we focussed on the steady state analysis, while the emphasis here is on the dynamics
and on the propagation of specific shocks, possibly accounting for the financial crisis.
As in DFU, our model generates an endogenous corporate debt structure. A key feature
is the existence of two types of financial intermediaries, where banks (which intermediate loan
finance)arewillingtospendresourcestoacquireinformationaboutanunobservedproductivity
factor, while "capital market funds" (which intermediate bond finance) are not. Because
information acquisition is costly, bond issuance is a cheaper - although riskier - instrument
of external finance. We view banks as financial intermediaries that build a closer relationship
withentrepreneursthandispersedinvestors. Theyassessandmonitorinformationaboutfirms’
uncertain productive prospects and are ready to adapt the terms of the loans accordingly, in
2

line with the literature stressing the flexibility of bank finance, see Chemmanur and Fulghieri
(1994) and Boot, Greenbaum and Thakor (1993). It is also consistent with the role taken by
banks as originators of asset-backed securities, which requires screening of applicants’ projects.
As in DFU, entrepreneurs (or firms) differ at the beginning of the period regarding their
prediction about final productivity. Based on this information, they choose between bond
finance, bank finance or abstaining from production. The model delivers a endogenous distri-
bution of firms among these three financing choices.When they choose bank finance, a further,
but costly investigation of the proposed production reveals additional information, and pro-
vides the entrepreneur with the option of not proceeding with the loan. In equilibrium, firms
experiencing high risk of default choose to abstain from production and not to raise external
finance, thereby safeguarding their net worth from a potential bankruptcy. Firms with rela-
tively low risk of default choose to issue bonds because this is the cheapest form of external
finance. Firmswithintermediateriskofdefaultapproachbanks,becausetheysufficientlyvalue
the option of abstaining based on further information.
WeextendtheanalysisinDFUbyaddingshocksandexaminingthefulldynamicbehavior.
Inparticular,weinvestigatethedynamicshiftofthefinancingboundariesinresponsetoaggre-
gateshocks, requiringustocalculatethedistributionaldynamics. Wedosoperlog-linearizing,
including the integral equations which aggregate firm-individual choices. We show that our
model requires a combination of three shocks in order to account for the main facts about cor-
porate finance observed during the crisis: an increase in the “iceberg” cost of obtaining bank
financing (or a deterioration in bank efficiency), and two shocks to the uncertainty faced by
firms concerning their own productivity and risk of default. The first uncertainty shock affects
bank-financed firms only and aims at capturing, for instance, the difficulties faced by the U.S.
sub-prime market at the beginning of the crisis. The second shock affects all debt-financed
firms and captures a surge in the overall uncertainty, as reflected by the sharp increase in
stock market volatility observed at the end of 2008 and beginning of 2009 (Bloom (2009) and
Christiano, Motto and Rostagno (2014)).
We obtain two sets of results. First, we show that our model can qualitatively replicate the
observed changes in the composition of corporate debt in response to the first of these three
shocks. This shock induces a fall in the ratio of bank loans to debt securities, as a larger share
of firms with high ex-ante risk of default now finds the cost of external finance too high, and
choosestoabstainfromproduction. Similarly,alargershareoffirmsexperiencingintermediate
3