THE REAL EFFECTS OF CAPITAL CONTROLS:
FIRM-LEVEL EVIDENCE FROM A POLICY EXPERIMENT
Laura Alfaro
Anusha Chari
Fabio Kanczuk
WORKING PAPER 20726

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE REAL EFFECTS OF CAPITAL CONTROLS:
FIRM-LEVEL EVIDENCE FROM A POLICY EXPERIMENT
Laura Alfaro
Anusha Chari
Fabio Kanczuk
Working Paper 20726
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20726
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014, Revised June 2017
Previously circulated as "The Real Effects of Capital Control Taxes: Firm-Level Evidence from a
Policy Experiment." We thank George Alessandria, Alessandra Bonfiglioli, Robin Greenwood,
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan,Nicolas Magud, Elias Papaioannou, James Kalori, Seppo Pynnonen, Adi
Sunderam, participants at the NBER-CBRT pre-conference and conference on Monetary Policy
and Financial Stability, the Barcelona GSE-Summer Forum-International Capital Flows
Conference, the Exchange Rates and External Adjustment Conference in Zurich, LACEA, the
Indian Ministry of Finance’s NIPFP-DEA conference, AEA Meetings-San Francisco and seminar
participants at the IMF, UNC-Chapel Hill, University of Sao Paulo-FEA, Harvard- DRCLAS for
helpful comments and suggestions. We also thank Hayley Pallan, Elizabeth Meyer and Hilary
White for excellent research assistance and HBS for financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Laura Alfaro, Anusha Chari, and Fabio Kanczuk. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Real Effects of Capital Controls: Firm-Level Evidence from a Policy Experiment
Laura Alfaro, Anusha Chari, and Fabio Kanczuk
NBER Working Paper No. 20726
December 2014, Revised June 2017
JEL No. F3,F4,G11,G15,L2
ABSTRACT
This paper evaluates the effects of capital controls on firm-level stock returns and real investment
using data from Brazil. On average, there is a statistically significant drop in cumulative
abnormal returns consistent with an increase in the cost of capital for Brazilian firms following
capital control announcements. Large firms and the largest exporting firms appear less negatively
affected compared to external-finance-dependent firms, and capital controls on equity inflows
have a more negative announcement effect on equity returns than those on debt inflows. Overall,
the findings have implications for macro-finance models that abstract from heterogeneity at the
firm level to examine the optimality of capital control taxation.
Laura Alfaro Fabio Kanczuk
Harvard Business School University of São Paulo
Morgan Hall 263 R.Dr Alberto Cardoso de Melo Neto 110/131A
Soldiers Field Sao Paulo-S.P.-CEP 01455-100
Boston, MA 02163 BRAZIL
and NBER kanczuk@usp.br
lalfaro@hbs.edu
Anusha Chari
301 Gardner Hall
CB#3305, Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
and NBER
achari@unc.edu

1. Introduction
The massive surge of foreign capital to emerging markets in the aftermath of the global
financial crisis of 2008–2009 has led to a renewed debate about the merits of the free flow of
international capital. Given the very low interest rates in developed economies, investors were
attracted to the higher rates in Brazil, Chile, Taiwan, Thailand, South Korea, and many other
emerging markets (Fratzscher 2012). To stem the flow of capital and manage the attendant risks
several emerging markets imposed taxes or controls to curb inflows of foreign capital.1 Further,
in December of 2012, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) released an official statement
endorsing a limited use of capital controls (IMF 2012).
The case for capital controls primarily rests on macro-prudential measures designed to
mitigate systemic risk as well as the volatility of foreign capital inflows. However, controls can
also have an implicitly protectionist or mercantilist motive to maintain persistent currency
undervaluation (Pasricha, 2017; Jeanne, Subrahmanian and Williamson, 2012; Magud, Reinhart,
and Rogoff, 2011; Magud and Reinhart, 2007). Policy makers from emerging Asia and Latin
America expressed concerns that massive foreign capital inflows can lead to an appreciation of
the exchange rate and loss of competitiveness, with potentially lasting effects on the export
sector.
Our paper is the first to provide direct empirical evidence of the costs of controls on
foreign capital inflows using firm-level data from Brazil seen as a poster child for the recent
policy changes. Previous research shows that a variety of barriers can segment international
capital markets (Stulz 2005; Henry 2007). Legal constraints, institutional quality, foreign
ownership restrictions, discriminatory taxes, and transaction costs such as information
asymmetries affect international portfolio choice. The type of international investment barrier we
study in this paper is the effect of discriminatory taxation of foreign investors. The Brazilian
1 According to the governor of Taiwan’s central bank, Perng Fai-Nan “The US printed a lot of money, so there’s a
lot of hot money flowing around. We see hot money in Taiwan and elsewhere in Asia. . . .These short-term capital
flows are disturbing emerging economies.” Similarly, Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Governor Raghuram Rajan
warned of the risk of a global market "crash" should foreign investors start bailing out of their risky asset positions
in emerging markets generated by the loose monetary policies of developed economies.
1