NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE RISE AND FALL OF DEMAND FOR SECURITIZATIONS
Sergey Chernenko
Samuel G. Hanson
Adi Sunderam
Working Paper 20777
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20777
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014
This paper was previously circulated under the title “The Rise and Fall of Securitization.” We are grateful
to Manuel Adelino, Josh Coval, Richard Crump, Mihir Desai, Robin Greenwood, Stefan Lewellen,
David Lucca, Amiyatosh Purnanandam, David Scharfstein, Martin Schmalz, Andrei Shleifer, Erik
Stafford, Jeremy Stein, René Stulz, James Vickery and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, 2014 Fixed Income Conference, Harvard, the LBS Safe Assets and the Macroeconomy,
Michigan Ross, Penn State, Rice, the 2014 NBER Risk of Financial Institutions workshop, and the
SEC/Maryland Conference on the Regulation of Financial Markets for helpful comments. Hanson
and Sunderam gratefully acknowledge funding from the Division of Research at Harvard Business
School. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Sergey Chernenko, Samuel G. Hanson, and Adi Sunderam. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Rise and Fall of Demand for Securitizations
Sergey Chernenko, Samuel G. Hanson, and Adi Sunderam
NBER Working Paper No. 20777
December 2014
JEL No. G01,G12,G22,G23
ABSTRACT
Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) and private-label mortgage-backed securities (MBS) backed
by nonprime loans played a central role in the recent financial crisis. Little is known, however, about
the underlying forces that drove investor demand for these securitizations. Using micro-data on insurers’
and mutual funds’ bond holdings, we find considerable heterogeneity in investor demand for securitizations
in the pre-crisis period. We argue that both investor beliefs and incentives help to explain this variation
in demand. By contrast, our data paints a more uniform picture of investor behavior in the crisis. Consistent
with theories of optimal liquidation, investors largely traded in more liquid securities such as government-guaranteed
MBS to meet their liquidity needs during the crisis.
Sergey Chernenko Adi Sunderam
The Ohio State University Harvard Business School
2100 Neil Avenue Baker Library 359
818 Fisher Hall Soldiers Field
Columbus, OH 43210 Boston, MA 02163
sergey.chernenko@fisher.osu.edu and NBER
asunderam@hbs.edu
Samuel G. Hanson
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 361
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
shanson@hbs.edu

Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) and private-label mortgage-backed securities (MBS)
backed by nonprime loans were at the heart of the recent financial crisis. Issuance of these
securitizations grew exponentially from 2003 to early 2007 before collapsing in mid-2007. Secondary
market prices for these products fell precipitously throughout late 2007 and 2008, generating large
losses for financial intermediaries and helping to trigger a full-blown systemic crisis in late 2008.
Despite general agreement on this broad narrative, there is little consensus about the deeper
forces that drove the rise and subsequent fall in investor demand for CDOs and nonprime MBS.
Broadly speaking, explanations for the pre-crisis run-up in demand point to distortions that affected
either investor beliefs or incentives. Beliefs-based explanations argue that a misunderstanding of the
risks of investing in securitizations helped drive investor demand, while incentives-based
explanations emphasize agency problems between professional investors and their principals.1
Explanations for the collapse in demand during the crisis argue that either fire sales or a
buyers’ strike amplified an initial fundamental shock due to declining home prices. In fire sales-based
explanations, the fundamental shock was amplified by forced sales from investors with high
valuations to others with low valuations, while in buyers’ strike-based explanations, it was amplified
by a refusal to trade due to adverse selection or other frictions.2
While theoretical explanations for the boom and bust abound, empirical work has been
hampered by a lack of data on the investors who bought securitizations.3 In this paper, we use new
micro-data on mutual funds’ and insurance companies’ holdings of fixed-income securities to shed
light on the forces that drove the rise and fall of demand for securitizations. Specifically, we study the
quarterly fixed-income holdings of mutual funds and insurance companies from 2003–2010. These
institutions are two of the largest investors in credit securities, owning close to 30% of all corporate
1 See Coval, Jurek, and Stafford (2009) and Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2012) for beliefs-based explanations. For
incentive-based explanations, see Rajan (2005), Acharya and Richardson (2009), and Merrill, Nadauld, and Strahan (2014).
2 For theoretical models of fire sales, see Shleifer and Vishny (1992, 2011), Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), Lorenzoni
(2008), Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), Geanakopolos (2009), Stein (2012), Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), and
Dávila (2014). See Dang, Gorton, and Holmstrom (2013), Hanson and Sunderam (2013), Milbradt (2012), and Morris and
Shin (2012) for models of buyers’ strikes.
3 For instance, He, Khang, and Krishnamurthy (2010) use Flow of Funds data to assess the balance sheet adjustment of
different financial intermediaries in 2008. However, as the authors note, the Flow of Funds lacks the granularity needed to
track holdings of private securitizations. Similarly, Erel, Nadauld, and Stulz (2013) explore banks’ private securitization
holdings, but cannot explore variation across the type of underlying collateral due to the limits of bank regulatory data.
1

bonds and private securitizations.4 We use this data to pinpoint investor characteristics that were
associated with greater holdings of securitizations and to describe investors’ trading behavior in
securitizations. We then interpret our findings in light of the theoretical literature.
Our analysis focuses on nontraditional securitizations, which consisted of CDOs and MBS
backed by nonprime home mortgages. While traditional securitizations backed by prime residential
mortgages, commercial mortgages, and consumer debt had existed for decades, nontraditional
securitizations were a more recent innovation. And, as Figure 1(a) shows, the rapid growth in
securitization during the 2003–2007 boom was concentrated in nontraditional products.
We begin by showing that during the 2003–2007 boom there was considerable heterogeneity
across investors in their demand for nontraditional securitizations. At a macro level, while both
insurers and mutual funds increased the share of their portfolios allocated to nontraditional
securitizations, these increases did not keep pace with the broader credit market—i.e., as issuance
boomed, insurers and mutual funds became increasingly underweight relative to the market. Within
mutual funds and insurers, a simple variance decomposition of our micro-level holdings data
indicates that most variation in nontraditional securitization holdings was variation across investors
as opposed to common variation over time.
Which investor characteristics were associated with larger holdings of nontraditional
securitizations? We start with mutual funds and estimate cross-sectional regressions relating portfolio
weights in nontraditional securitizations to a variety of fund and manager characteristics. Among
mutual funds with the same objective, fund manager experience stands out relative to other fund
characteristics: experienced managers invested significantly less in nontraditional securitizations than
inexperienced managers.
What explains the relationship between fund manager experience and securitization holdings?
Perhaps inexperienced mutual fund managers faced incentives that were more misaligned with those
of their shareholders than the incentives faced by experienced managers. We find little evidence of
this in our data: inexperienced and experienced managers faced similar performance-flow
relationships, a common proxy for the strength of the risk-taking incentives faced by managers. In
4 According to the Flow of Funds, as of 2007Q2, the total outstanding amount of corporate and foreign bonds, which
include privately-issued securitizations, was $10.88 trillion. Of this, mutual funds (excluding money market mutual
funds) owned $0.84 trillion (7%), and insurers (both life and property and casualty) owned $2.13 trillion (20%).
2