NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE COLLATERAL TRAP
Frédéric Boissay
Russell Cooper
Working Paper 20703
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20703
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2014
We thank seminar participants at CREI, Sciences-Po Paris, Pennsylvania State University, BIS,
CSEF (Capri), and Zurich University for their comments. A special thanks to Elena Carletti, Ed
Green, and Antoine Martin for comments and suggestions. A previous version of this paper
circulated under the title "Inside and Outside Collateral: Implications for Financial Market
Instability".The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect those of the ECB or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Frédéric Boissay and Russell Cooper. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Collateral Trap
Frédéric Boissay and Russell Cooper
NBER Working Paper No. 20703
November 2014, Revised March 2016
JEL No. E44,E51,G21,G23
ABSTRACT
Active wholesale financial markets help reallocate deposits across heterogeneous banks. Because
of incentive problems these flows are constrained and collateral is needed. The composition of
collateral matters. The use of inside assets (loans) creates a “collateral pyramid” in that cash
flows from one loan can be pledged to secure another. Through collateral pyramids the financial
sector creates safe assets, but at the cost of exposing the economy to systemic panics. Outside
collateral (treasuries) serves as foundation of, and stabilises, the pyramid. There is a threshold for
the volume of treasuries, below which investors panic and the pyramid collapses.
Frédéric Boissay
European Central Bank
Kaiserstrasse 29, 60311 Frankfurt am main
Germany
frederic.boissay@ecb.europa.eu
Russell Cooper
Department of Economics
The Pennsylvania State University
611 Kern
State College, PA 16802
and NBER
russellcoop@gmail.com

The Collateral Trap
Fr´ed´eric Boissay∗ and Russell Cooper† ‡
This Version: March 1, 2016
First Version: November 17, 2014
Abstract
Active wholesale financial markets help reallocate deposits across heterogeneous banks.
Because of incentive problems these flows are constrained and collateral is needed. The
composition of collateral matters. The use of inside assets (loans) creates a “collateral
pyramid” in that cash flows from one loan can be pledged to secure another. Through
collateral pyramids the financial sector creates safe assets, but at the cost of exposing the
economy to systemic panics. Outside collateral (treasuries) serves as foundation of, and
stabilises, the pyramid. There is a threshold for the volume of treasuries, below which
investors panic and the pyramid collapses.
1 Introduction
This paper studies the fragility of wholesale financial markets. These markets facilitate the
reallocation of funds within the banking sector: banks with relatively profitable opportunities
borrow from other banks. These exchanges may include various market–financed transfers
of assets between banks and take a variety of forms, including overnight funding markets,
collateralised loan markets, etc. For short, we refer to those markets as “interbank loan”
markets.
Markets secured by inside collateral are less stable. Our analysis highlights the sig-
nificance of collateral for the functioning of the interbank markets. Both the volume, the value,
and the composition of collateral matter. We make a distinction between “outside collateral”,
such as the pledging of treasuries in a repo arrangement, and “inside collateral”, such as the
∗Bank for International Settlements, frederic.boissay@bis.org
†Department of Economics, The Pennsylvania State University; Research Associate, NBER, russell-
coop@gmail.com
‡We thank seminar participants at CREI, Sciences-Po Paris, Pennsylvania State University, BIS, CSEF
(Capri), and Zurich University for their comments. A special thanks to Elena Carletti, Ed Green, and An-
toine Martin for comments and suggestions. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect those of the BIS.
1

pledging of cash flows in the asset backed commercial paper market.1 We argue that markets
are, all else equal, less stable when they are secured by inside collateral than when they are
secured by outside collateral. The use of inside assets creates a type of “collateral pyramid” in
that cash flows from one loan can be pledged to secure another. Through collateral pyramids,
the financial sector is able to create safe assets, but at the cost of exposing the economy to
systemic panics. Indeed, the process of creation of safe assets by banks, which is endogenous,
is subject to strategic complementarities.
Strategic complementarities. Reflecting incentive problems in the interbank market,
a bank’s collateral determines its ability to borrow and thus the extent of the reallocation of
savings from low to high quality banks. In equilibrium, the pledgeability of borrowers’ cash
flows itself depends, through adverse selection, on borrowers’ quality. If lenders believe that
borrowers are high quality, then borrowing constraints are lax, the demand for funding and
the equilibrium interbank rate are high. Only high quality banks, those whose projects have a
positive net present value (NPV), borrow funds. So, borrowers are indeed high quality. Those
complementarities are magnified when transactions are collateralised. Indeed, high quality
loans have high collateral value, which further relaxes borrowing constraints, raises demand,
the equilibrium rate, and borrower quality.
Yet, for the same parameter values there may exist a “collateral trap” in which lenders
are pessimistic about the quality of borrowers. In this equilibrium, borrowing constraints are
tight, borrowers demand little funding, and the equilibrium rate is low. As a consequence, most
projects have positive NPV, even low quality banks borrow, and the sorting of borrowers is less
efficient. Thelackofinformationaboutborrowers’cashflowsunderminestheirpledgeability. In
a collateral trap, pledgeability is low and the volume of safe assets that borrowers can engineer
out of their cash flows, i.e. inside collateral, is scaled down, which contributes to tightening the
borrowing constraint.
The resulting complementarity may generate multiple equilibria including a collateral trap,
characterized by (i) a reduction in the creation of inside collateral by banks, (ii) reduced inter-
bank activity, (iii) resource mis–allocation, (iv) a recession.
Treasuries as foundation of the collateral pyramid. We provide a crisp characteriza-
tionoftheconditionsontheeconomy’sfundamentalsforthistypeofmultiplicity. Weemphasize
the specific role of outside collateral, like treasuries, in avoiding the collateral trap. Treasuries
serve as the foundation of the collateral pyramid. A larger foundation contributes to making
the pyramid immune to beliefs, more stable. There is a threshold for the volume of treasuries
1While the terminology is reminiscent of the distinction between private and public liquidity in Holmstrom
and Tirole (1998), our focus is on different forms of collateral as pledgeable assets rather than liquidity per se.
In our model, as in theirs, a complementarity emerges between inside and outside collateral. Note also that
treasuries may not necessarily be the only type of outside collateral or even may not always be considered as
outsidecollateral,aswouldforexamplebethecasewhenasovereignissuesdebtinordertobailoutitsdomestic
banking sector.
2