NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAPITAL SHARE RISK IN U.S. ASSET PRICING
Martin Lettau
Sydney C. Ludvigson
Sai Ma
Working Paper 20744
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20744
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014, Revised August 2018
Previously circulated as "Capital Share Risk and Shareholder Heterogeneity in U.S. Stock
Pricing" and "Capital Share Risk in U.S. Stock Pricing."
I, Martin Lettau, declare that I received no funds from interested parties and am not an officer or
director of any non-profit or profit-making entity. No other party had the right to review the paper
prior to its circulation.
Sydney Ludvigson received financial support from the C.V. Starr Center for Applied Economics
at NYU. I, Sydney Ludvigson, declare that I received no funds from interested parties and am not
an officer or director of any non-profit or profit-making entity. I am a member of the Economic
Advisory Panel of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, which meets twice per year to discuss
policy areas of interest to the president of the bank. This position is unpaid. No other party had
the right to review the paper prior to its circulation.
I, Sai Ma, state that I have nothing to disclose. No other party had the right to review the paper
prior to its circulation.
We are grateful to Federico Belo, John Y. Campbell, Kent Daniel, Lars Lochstoer, Hanno Lustig,
Stefan Nagel, Dimitris Papanikolaou, and to seminar participants at Duke, USC, the Berkeley-
Stanford joint seminar, the Berkeley Fun Center for Risk Management, Minnesota Macro-Asset
Pricing Conference 2015, the NBER Asset Pricing meeting April 10, 2015, the Minnesota Asset
Pricing Conference May 7-8, 2015, and the 2016 Finance Down Under Conference for helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Martin Lettau, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Sai Ma. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Capital Share Risk in U.S. Asset Pricing
Martin Lettau, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Sai Ma
NBER Working Paper No. 20744
December 2014, Revised August 2018
JEL No. E25,G11,G12
ABSTRACT
A single macroeconomic factor based on growth in the capital share of aggregate income exhibits
significant explanatory power for expected returns across a range of equity characteristic
portfolios and non-equity asset classes, with risk price estimates that are of the same sign and
similar in magnitude. Positive exposure to capital share risk earns a positive risk premium,
commensurate with recent asset pricing models in which redistributive shocks shift the share of
income between the wealthy, who finance consumption primarily out of asset ownership, and
workers, who finance consumption primarily out of wages and salaries.
Martin Lettau Sai Ma
Haas School of Business Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley New York University
545 Student Services Bldg. #1900 19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900 New York, NY 10012
and NBER sai.ma@nyu.edu
lettau@haas.berkeley.edu
Sydney C. Ludvigson
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10002
and NBER
sydney.ludvigson@nyu.edu

Contemporary asset pricing theory remains in search of an empirically relevant stochastic
discountfactor(SDF)linkedtothemarginalutilityofinvestors. Thisstudypresentsevidence
that a single macroeconomic factor based on growth in the capital share of aggregate income
exhibits signi…cant explanatory power for expected returns across a wide range of equity
characteristic portfolio styles and non-equity asset classes, with positive risk price estimates
of similar magnitude. These assets include equity portfolios formed from sorts on size/book-
market, size/investment, size/operating pro…tability, long-run reversal, and non-equity asset
classes such as corporate bonds, sovereign bonds, credit default swaps, and options.
Why should growth in the share of national income accruing to capital (the “capital
share”hereafter) be a source of systematic risk? After all, a mainstay of contemporary asset
pricing theory is that assets are priced as if there were a representative agent, leading to
an SDF based on the marginal rate of substitution over aggregate household consumption.
Under this paradigm, the division between labor and capital of aggregate income is irrel-
evant for the pricing of risky securities, once aggregate consumption risk is accounted for.
The representative agent model is especially convenient from an empirical perspective, since
aggregate household consumption is readily observed in national income data.
But there are reasons to question a model in which average household consumption is the
appropriate source of systematic risk for the pricing of risky …nancial securities. Wealth is
highly concentrated at the top and limited securities market participation remains pervasive.
The majority of households still own no equity but even among those who do, most own
very little. Although just under half of households report owning stocks either directly or
indirectly in 2013, the top 5% of the stock wealth distribution owns 75% of the stock market
value.1 It follows that any reasonably de…ned wealth-weighted stock market participation
rate will be much lower than 50%, as we illustrate below. Moreover, unlike the average
household, the wealthiest U.S. households earn a relatively small fraction of income as labor
compensation, implying that income from the ownership of …rms and …nancial investments,
1Source: 2013 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF).

i.e., capital income, …nances much more of their consumption.2 Consistent with this, we …nd
that the capital share is strongly positively related to the income shares of those in the top
5-10% of the stock market wealth distribution, but negatively related to the income shares
of those in the bottom 90%.
These observations suggest a di¤erent approach to explaining return premia on risky
assets. Recent inequality-based asset pricing models imply that the capital share should
be a priced risk factor whenever risk-sharing is imperfect and wealth is concentrated in the
handsofafewinvestors, or“shareholders,”whilemosthouseholdsare“workers”who…nance
consumption primarily out of wages and salaries (e.g., Greenwald, Lettau, and Ludvigson
(2014), GLL). In these models, redistributive shocks that shift the share of income between
labor and capital are a source of systematic risk for asset owners. In the extreme case
where workers own no risky asset shares and there is no risk-sharing between workers and
shareholders, a representative shareholder who owns the entire corporate sector will have
consumptioninequilibriumequaltoC KS , whereC isaggregate(shareholderplusworker)
t t t
(cid:1)
consumption and KS is the capital share of aggregate income.3 The capital share is then a
t
source of priced risk.
With this theoretical motivation as backdrop, this paper explores whether growth in the
capitalshareisapricedriskfactorforexplainingcross-sectionsofexpectedassetreturns. We
…nd that an asset’s exposure to short-to-medium frequency (i.e., 4-8 quarter) ‡uctuations in
capital share growth has strong explanatory power for the cross-section of expected returns
on a range of equity characteristics portfolios as well as other asset classes. For the equity
portfolios and asset classes mentioned above, we …nd that positive exposure to capital share
risk earns a positive risk premium, with risk prices of similar magnitude across portfolio
2In the 2013 SCF, the top 5% of the net worth distribution had a median wage-to-capital income ratio
of 18%, where capital income is de…ned as the sum of income from dividends, capital gains, pensions, net
rents, trusts, royalties, and/or sole proprietorship or farm.
3This reasoning goes through as an approximation even if workers own a small fraction of the corporate
sector and even if there is some risk-sharing in the form of risk-free borrowing and lending between workers
and shareholders, as long as any risk-sharing across these groups is imperfect.
2