NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RESERVATION PRICES:
AN ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF CIGARETTE PURCHASES ON INDIAN RESERVATIONS
Philip DeCicca
Donald S. Kenkel
Feng Liu
Working Paper 20778
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20778
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Philip DeCicca, Donald S. Kenkel, and Feng Liu. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Reservation Prices: An Economic Analysis of Cigarette Purchases on Indian Reservations
Philip DeCicca, Donald S. Kenkel, and Feng Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 20778
December 2014
JEL No. H26,I18
ABSTRACT
The special legal status of Indian tribes in the U.S. means that state excise taxes are not necessarily
collected on cigarette purchases on Indian reservations. We focus on two under-studied but basic empirical
economic questions this raises. Using novel data from New York surveys that asked directly about
cigarette prices and purchases from reservations, we first ask: What is the economic incidence of the
tax break? In data from New York over a period when the state did not attempt to collect taxes on
reservation purchases, our estimates suggest that the tax break is usually fully shifted to the consumer.
The notable exception is on one reservation where a tribal monopoly captures almost half of the tax
break. Second, we ask: Has the tax break increased consumer demand for low-quality cigarettes relative
to high-quality cigarettes? New York's cigarette tax is a fixed amount per pack, providing an opportunity
to test the Alchian and Allen substitution theorem. We find some support for the prediction that the
tax break increases consumer demand for lower-quality cigarettes.
Philip DeCicca Feng Liu
Department of Economics School of Economics
422 Kenneth Taylor Hall Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
McMaster University Shanghai 200433, China
Hamilton, ON L8S 4M4 fliu22@gmail.com
CANADA
and NBER
decicca@mcmaster.ca
Donald S. Kenkel
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
College of Human Ecology
Cornell University
Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853-4401
and NBER
dsk10@cornell.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
As >domestic dependent nations,= federally recognized Indian tribes in the U.S. have
limited sovereignty over their members and territory. Supreme Court decisions have established
that while the individual states do not have the authority to collect taxes on cigarettes sold to tribal
members on Indian reservations, they can collect state cigarette taxes on reservation sales to
non-members.2 Over the years, in many states cigarette sales on Indian reservations have been
substantial. In its 1994 decision upholding New York=s taxation scheme, the Supreme Court cited
evidence that Athe volume of tax exempt cigarettes sold on New York reservations in 1987 - 1988
would, if consumed exclusively by tax immune Indians, correspond to a consumption rate 20 times
higher than that of the average New York resident...@ (Department of Taxation and Finance of New
York v. Milhelm Attea & Bros, Inc. 1994). Until a few years ago, reservation cigarette sales
continued to flourish in New York. A report for the New York State Department of Health
estimates that reservation sales resulted in between $254 million and $329 million of lost tax
revenues in 2004 (Davis et al. 2006). This corresponds to reservation sales of between 169 million
and 219 million packs, which is around one-quarter to one-third as large as the tax-paid sales of
648 million packs that year (Orzechowski and Walker 2008).
Collecting cigarette taxes on reservation sales has repeatedly been advocated as a way to
address New York=s and other states= budget problems, but it has often been strongly opposed by
2Fredericks (1989), Folster (1998) and EchoHawk (2003 - 2004) provide detailed
discussion of the legal status of Indian tribes and States= taxation authority. We follow the court
cases and the federal government and use the term AIndian@ to refer to descendants of the
indigenous peoples of the Americas. Another term in common usage is ANative American.@ Most
style guides describe the terms as inter-changeable. In data from a 1995 supplement to the Current
Population Survey, 50 percent of members of this ethnic/racial group prefer the term Indian, and
37 percent prefer the term Native American (Tucker, Kojetin, and Harrison, 1995).
2

the affected Indian tribes. The most dramatic opposition took place in 1997 in response to New
York Governor Pataki=s attempt to enforce the tax collection scheme ruled constitutional in the
1994 Supreme Court=s Milhelm Attea & Bros decision. On April 20, 1997 a protest against
cigarette tax collection shut down highways near reservations, resulted in 11 arrests and 12
damaged police cars, and sent a dozen New York State Troopers to the hospital (Folster 1998, pp.
707-708). A month later, Governor Pataki announced that the state would abandon efforts to
collect cigarette taxes on reservations. Literally a generation after Governor Mario Cuomo
proposed in 1988 to collect taxes on reservation sales, in June 2011 Governor Andrew Cuomo=s
administration began enforcing tax collection on New York Indian reservations (Associated Press
2011).
State taxation of cigarette sales on Indian reservations raises interesting legal questions and
has implications for state revenues and public health. In this paper we focus on two under-studied
but basic empirical economic questions raised by the unusual tax situation.
First, we ask: What is the economic incidence of the tax break given to cigarette purchases
on Indian reservations? We do not know of any previous studies of the incidence of this tax break,
and the degree of tax shifting is difficult to predict a priori. On the one hand, the strong opposition
from the Indian tribes suggests that part of the tax break might be shifted back to them as
monopoly profits. On the other hand, most previous empirical studies suggest that cigarette excise
taxes are fully shifted or even over-shifted to consumer prices. At least part of the tax break must
be shifted to lower consumer prices, to induce non-residents to travel to the reservations. To
estimate the incidence of the tax break we analyze data from the New York State Adult Tobacco
Survey (NYS-ATS) from 2003 – 2009. The NYS-ATS asked smokers directly about cigarette
prices and their purchases from Indian reservations. Section II provides more background on
3