NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECT OF REGULATORY HARMONIZATION ON CROSS-BORDER LABOR MIGRATION:
EVIDENCE FROM THE ACCOUNTING PROFESSION
Matthew J. Bloomfield
Ulf Brüggemann
Hans B. Christensen
Christian Leuz
Working Paper 20888
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20888
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2015
We appreciate the helpful comments of Mary Barth, Jannis Bischof, Matthias Breuer, Willem
Buijink, Richard, Crowley, Scott Emett, Joachim Gassen, Chris Hansen, Alan Jagolinzer, Morris
Kleiner, Michael Welker, Steve Zeff as well as workshop participants at Bristol University,
University of Chicago, Colorado Summer Accounting Research Conference, Cornell University,
EAA Annual Congress 2015, University of Exeter, Frankfurt School of Finance and
Management, Global Issues in Accounting Conference 2014, IHW Halle, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Lancaster University, London Business School, University of Manchester,
University of Paderborn, Queen’s University, Rice University, Erasmus University Rotterdam,
Vienna University of Economics and Business, WHU, XI Workshop on Empirical Research in
Financial Accounting and University of Zurich. This study is based on data from Eurostat,
Labour Force Survey, 2002-2010. The responsibility for all conclusions drawn from the data lies
entirely with the authors. We thank Marie Johann (DAAD) for kindly providing data on the
Erasmus program. Christian Leuz gratefully acknowledges research funding provided by the
Initiative on Global Markets (IGM) at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Matthew J. Bloomfield, Ulf Brüggemann, Hans B. Christensen, and Christian Leuz.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Regulatory Harmonization on Cross-border Labor Migration: Evidence from
the Accounting Profession
Matthew J. Bloomfield, Ulf Brüggemann, Hans B. Christensen, and Christian Leuz
NBER Working Paper No. 20888
January 2015, Revised September 2016
JEL No. D10,E24,F22,F55,F66,J44,J61,J62,K22,L84,M41,M42
ABSTRACT
The paper examines whether international regulatory harmonization increases cross-border labor
migration. To study this question, we analyze European Union (EU) initiatives that harmonized
accounting and auditing standards. Regulatory harmonization should reduce economic mobility
barriers, essentially making it easier for accounting professionals to move across countries. Our
research design compares the cross-border migration of accounting professionals relative to
tightly-matched other professionals before and after regulatory harmonization. We find that
international labor migration in the accounting profession increases significantly relative to other
professions. We provide evidence that this effect is due to harmonization, rather than increases in
the demand for accounting services during the implementation of the rule changes. The findings
illustrate that diversity in rules constitutes an economic barrier to cross-border labor mobility and,
more specifically, that accounting harmonization can have a meaningful effect on cross-border
migration.
Matthew J. Bloomfield Hans B. Christensen
University of Chicago University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave Booth School of Business
Chicago, IL 60637 5807 S. Woodlawn Ave
mbloomfi@chicagobooth.edu Chicago, IL 60637
hans.christensen@chicagobooth.edu
Ulf Brüggemann
Wirtschaftswissenschaftliche Fakultät Christian Leuz
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin Booth School of Business
Unter den Linden 6, 10099 Berlin, Germany University of Chicago
u.bruggemann@hu-berlin.de 5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637-1610
and NBER
cleuz@chicagobooth.edu

1. Introduction
In recent years, we have witnessed a strong push towards global convergence of rules in
many areas of regulation. These initiatives are often intended to ease cross-border investments
and to improve the allocation of capital (e.g., FSAP, 1999). Research in accounting and finance
has analyzed whether regulatory harmonization indeed increases cross-border capital flows and
has associated benefits such as increased liquidity and lower cost of capital (see Leuz and
Wysocki, 2016, for an overview). Capital, however, is not the only factor of production for
which diversity in rules could create economic barriers to mobility. Regulatory harmonization
should also make it easier for professionals to seek employment outside of their home country,
which in turn should improve the efficiency of labor markets. Indeed, labor mobility could be an
important adjustment mechanism through which regions adjust to asymmetric economic shocks,
especially in a currency union such as the Eurozone (Mundell, 1961; Farhi and Werning, 2014).
However, there is no evidence on the role and potential benefits of regulatory harmonization for
cross-border labor mobility.
In this paper, we analyze the effects of regulatory harmonization affecting the accounting
profession in the European Union (EU) on cross-border labor migration. This setting has several
desirable features from a research-design perspective. First, the accounting profession generally
has a higher level of standardization than comparable occupations (Madsen, 2011), and
regulatory harmonization has typically taken the form of adopting identical rules (or standards).
Both factors should make it easier to detect an effect of regulatory harmonization on labor
migration in the accounting profession, if there is one. Second, there is free movement of labor in
the EU. Free movement of labor ensures that we can focus on regulatory harmonization and
economic barriers, rather than immigration policies and other explicit restrictions. Third, there
has been a relatively sharp increase in regulatory harmonization for the accounting profession in
1

the EU in recent years. In particular, two EU initiatives have substantially harmonized the rules
relevant to those working in the accounting profession: (1) after mandatory reporting under IFRS
publicly traded firms use identical accounting standards; (2) Directive 2006/43/EC harmonized
statutory audits of companies’ annual accounts and consolidated financial statements. We
analyze changes in cross-border labor mobility around these regulatory changes. Henceforth, we
refer to these changes also as “the treatment”.
Our data are based on the EU’s annual Labour Force Survey (LFS). The LFS is meant to
generate a representative sample for each country using a standardized methodology, which
substantially improves the comparability of mobility statistics across countries. In addition, the
LFS data are collected at the individual level, giving us a rich set of demographics to control for
other factors that affect migration. Following the literature, our main analysis is based on
changes in a stock measure of migrants, i.e., the number of individuals that have a foreign
nationality and were born abroad (Martí and Ródenas 2007; Bonin et al., 2008). To get closer to
migration flows around regulatory changes, we also present analyses using a novel quasi-flow
measure that starts from the stock measure but counts only foreigners that recently changed jobs,
who are more likely to have moved in response to accounting and auditing harmonization.
Our identification strategy exploits that the regulatory changes primarily affect the
accounting profession. Thus, we perform a difference-in-differences estimation comparing
changes in cross-border mobility of accounting professionals with changes in mobility of other
professions around regulatory harmonization. We estimate the effects relative to three separate
control groups: legal professionals, all other professionals, and a combination of business people.
We control for demographic characteristics known to determine migration (i.e., gender, marital
status, age, education level, and the presence of children), including all possible interactions of
these characteristics in order to account for non-linearities in these categorical demographics. In
2