NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAPITAL CONTROLS OR MACROPRUDENTIAL REGULATION?
Anton Korinek
Damiano Sandri
Working Paper 20805
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20805
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and should not be attributed to the IMF, its Executive
Board, its management, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank Larry Ball, Suman
Basu, Marcos Chamon, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan,
Luc Laeven, Albert Martin, and Joseph Stiglitz as well as participants at the CBRT-NBER-pre-conference
and at a seminar at the IMF for helpful comments and suggestions and Olivier Blanchard, Rex Ghosh
and Jonathan Ostry for detailed discussions on the topic. Korinek acknowledges financial support
from the IMF Research Fellowship and from CIGI/INET.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Anton Korinek and Damiano Sandri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Capital Controls or Macroprudential Regulation?
Anton Korinek and Damiano Sandri
NBER Working Paper No. 20805
December 2014
JEL No. E44,F34,F41
ABSTRACT
We examine the effectiveness of capital controls versus macroprudential regulation in reducing financial
fragility in a small open economy model in which there is excessive borrowing because of externalities
associated with financial crises and contractionary exchange rate depreciations. We find that both
types of instruments play distinct roles: macroprudential regulation reduces the indebtedness of leveraged
borrowers whereas capital controls induce more precautionary behavior for the economy as a whole,
including for savers. This reduces crisis risk by shoring up aggregate net worth and mitigating the
transfer problem that occurs during crises. In advanced countries where the risk of large contractionary
depreciations is more limited, the role for capital controls subsides. However, macroprudential regulation
remains essential in our model to mitigate booms and busts in asset prices.
Anton Korinek
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
440 Mergenthaler Hall
3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
akorinek@jhu.edu
Damiano Sandri
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street N.W.
Washington D.C. 20431
dsandri@imf.org

1 Introduction
IntheaftermathoftheGreatFinancialCrisisof2008/09manyemergingeconomieshaveex-
periencedlargecapitalin‡owsandhavestruggledtode…neanoptimalpolicyresponse. Pol-
icymakers have resorted to capital controls and macroprudential regulation to lean against
the risks created by capital in‡ows. Both types of …nancial market interventions place
restrictions on …nancial ‡ows between creditors and debtors, typically with the goal of
enhancing macroeconomic stability.1
The de…ning feature of capital controls is that they apply exclusively to …nancial trans-
actions between residents and non-residents, i.e. they discriminate based on the residency
of the parties involved in a …nancial transaction.2 For example, controls on capital in‡ows
applytotransactionsbetweenforeigncreditorsanddomesticdebtors. Similarly, controlson
capital out‡ows apply to transactions between domestic savers and international borrowers.
Capital controls segment domestic and international …nancial markets, as illustrated in the
left panel of Figure 1. As a result of this segmentation, international lenders and domestic
agents face di¤erent e¤ective interest rates.
Macroprudential policies, by contrast, restrict borrowing by domestic agents indepen-
dently of whether credit is provided by domestic or foreign creditors. They impose a seg-
mentation between borrowers and all types of lenders, as illustrated in the right panel of 1.
As a result, borrowers and lenders in the economy face di¤erent e¤ective interest rates.3
domestic domestic
borrowers borrowers
borrowers
lenders
international domestic international domestic
agents savers agents savers
Capital Controls Macroprudential Regulation
Figure 1: Capital Controls Versus Macroprudential Regulation
1See e.g. Ostry et al. (2011) for capital controls and Galati and Moessner (2013) for macroprudential
regulation. SeealsoOstryetal.(2014)foradetailedanalysisofthepolicyconsiderationsinvolvedinchoosing
between capital controls and macroprudential regulation.
2More recently, the IMF (2012) has adopted the term capital ‡ow management measures (CFMs) for
capital controls, since the latter term has traditionally had a negative connotation. In this paper, we use
the term capital controls in accordance with the tradition in the academic literature.
3In some instances, it is di¢ cult to distinguish between capital controls and macroprudential regulation
becauseregulatorswanttorestrictborrowingingeneral(i.e. frombothforeignersanddomesticagents),but
the only instrument that they have to restrict the borrowing from foreigners is a restriction on the capital
account. Such a measure just places foreign and domestic creditors on equal footing and therefore does not
represent a capital control as we de…ned it in the preceding paragraph, although others may de…ne it as a
capital control. We assume away targeting problems in the current paper and assume that regulators have
both an e¤ective macroprudential instrument and an e¤ective capital controls at their disposal. For a more
detailed analysis of targeting problems see e.g. Ostry et al. (2014).
2

Should countries use capital controls or macroprudential regulation when they experi-
ence large credit growth? Some have argued that capital controls should only be used as a
measure of last resort (see e.g. IMF, 2012). Others, by contrast, have argued that capital
controls are the more natural instrument when credit growth is mainly driven by capital
‡ows from abroad (see e.g. Ostry et al., 2011). Should the two policy instruments be
thought of as equivalent? Or alternatively, does each of the two have its own comparative
advantage depending on speci…c circumstances?
Weanalyzetheseissuesinamodelofasmallopeneconomywithpecuniaryexternalities
arising from collateral constraints. The key departure from the existing literature is that
we explicitly account for the presence of both domestic and foreign creditors in order to
distinguish between capital controls and macroprudential measures. As can be easily seen
in Figure 1, capital controls and macroprudential regulations are equivalent in models that
feature only either domestic or foreign lenders. In our framework, the main di¤erence
between domestic and foreign lenders is that the latter do not consume domestic non-
traded goods; therefore a transfer of resources between domestic and foreign agents a¤ects
spending on domestic goods and the real exchange rate, giving rise to a transfer problem.4
Tointroduce…nancialfragilityandcrisesinourmodel, weassumeacollateralconstraint
thatlimitstheborrowingcapacityofdomesticborrowers. Critically,thisconstraintdepends
on the level of the exchange rate, re‡ecting that part of the collateral of domestic borrowers
is consists of non-tradable goods. As a result, the borrowing capacity of the economy is
lowest when domestic borrowers are poorest and would most like to borrow.
Weequateequilibriawithbinding…nancialconstraintsonborrowerswith…nancialcrises.
When …nancial constraints bind, the economy experiences the classic dynamics of sudden
stops and …nancial ampli…cation (see e.g. Korinek and Mendoza, 2014). Domestic demand
by constrained agents declines, leading to capital out‡ows and the depreciation of the ex-
change rate that further tightens borrowing constraints. This triggers the feedback loop
illustrated in Figure 2 which leads to a sharp reduction in domestic aggregate demand, a
large exchange rate depreciation, and a reversal in the current account.
Exchange Rate
Depreciations
Tightening
Constraints
Capital
Outflows
Figure 2: Feedback loop of …nancial crises with exchange rate depreciations
The East Asian crisis in 1997 provides a clear example of the extreme dynamics of a
4Thetransferproblem associatedwithlargeinternationalcapital‡owswas…rstidenti…edinadebateby
Keynes(1929)andOhlin(1929)ontheeconomice¤ectsofGermanWorldWarIreparationsonthecountry’s
exchange rate and ability to pay.
3