NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
NEGLECTED RISKS:
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF FINANCIAL CRISES
Nicola Gennaioli
Andrei Shleifer
Robert Vishny
Working Paper 20875
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20875
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2015
Gennaioli thanks the European Research Council (Starting Grant #241114) for financial support. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Nicola Gennaioli, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Neglected Risks: The Psychology of Financial Crises
Nicola Gennaioli, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny
NBER Working Paper No. 20875
January 2015
JEL No. G01,G02
ABSTRACT
We model a financial market in which investor beliefs are shaped by representativeness. Investors
overreact to a series of good news, because such a series is representative of a good state. A few bad
news do not change investor minds because the good state is still representative, but enough bad news
leads to a radical change in beliefs and a financial crisis. The model generates debt over-issuance,
“this time is different” beliefs, neglect of tail risks, under- and over-reaction to information, boom-
bust cycles, and excess volatility of prices in a unified psychological model of expectations.
Nicola Gennaioli Robert Vishny
Department of Finance Booth School of Business
Università Bocconi The University of Chicago
Via Roentgen 1 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
20136 Milan, Italy Chicago, IL 60637
nicola.gennaioli@unibocconi.it and NBER
Rvishny@gmail.com
Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M-9
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu

Neglected Risks: The Psychology of Financial Crises

Nicola Gennaioli, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny
December 2014
Financial crises are supposed to be rare events, yet they occur quite often. According to
Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), investors suffer from “this time is different” syndrome, failing to
see crises coming because they do not recognize similarities among the different pre-crisis
bubbles. As a result, each crisis surprises investors.
Economists typically model financial crises as responses to shocks to which investors
attach a low probability ex ante, but which nonetheless materialize. Such shocks (sometimes
referred to as “MIT shocks”; e.g., Caballero and Simsek 2013) are consistent with rational
expectations in that investors recognize that there is a small chance that the shock might occur,
but they are harder to reconcile with the Reinhart Rogoff observation that crises are not that
unusual.
The 2008 financial crisis in the US has deepened the challenge, by bringing up direct
evidence that investors underestimated the risk of a crisis. Coval, Jurek, and Stafford (2009)
show that investors underestimated the probability of mortgage defaults in pricing mortgage
backed securities. Foote, Gerardi, and Willen (2012) find that investors did not even contemplate
the magnitude of home price declines that actually materialized. Rather than being considered
unlikely, the risks appear to have been entirely neglected. We need a theory of beliefs consistent
with sharp underestimates of the odds of a crisis.
 Gennaioli: Universita Bocconi, Department of Finance, Via Roentgen 1, Milan, Italy (e-mail:
nicola.gennaioli@unibocconi.it); Shleifer: Harvard University, Economics Department, Littauer Center, 1805
Cambridge Street, Cambridge, MA 02138 USA (e-mail: shleifer@fas.harvard.edu); Vishny: ChicagoBooth, University
of Chicago, 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637 (e-mail: Robert.vishny@chicagobooth.edu).
Gennaioli thanks the European Research Council (Starting Grant #241114) for financial support.
1

In this paper, we present a psychological theory of the neglect of risk and financial crises.
The theory seeks to explain precisely why the probability estimates of a crisis in a boom are too
low, offering a foundation of “unanticipated” shocks, and of zero probabilities attached to some
states of the world by investors (Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny 2012). Our theory yields boom-
bust financial crises based entirely on beliefs; we do not incorporate into the model any
economic mechanisms that amplify the shocks, such as fire sales or imperfect capital markets.
Our theory is based on Kahneman and Tversky’s (1972) idea of representativeness,
previously modeled by Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998), Gennaioli and Shleifer (2010), and
Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2014). In our model, representativeness induces people to
over-estimate the probability of outcomes that are relatively more likely in light of recently
observed data. Representativeness is intimately related to the idea of similarity: after seeing
some data, people concentrate their forecasts on outcomes similar to the data observed,
neglecting alternative future paths.
This principle has far-reaching implications for finance. An investor observing a string of
good news (internet stocks, housing prices) views them as being generated by a favorable
economic scenario. A series of good news is similar to a continuing boom. The investor then
puts too much probability weight on that scenario and neglects the risk of bad outcomes. If
investor expectations are elicited at this point, they look extrapolative.
Observing some bad news intermixed with good news does not change the investor’s
mind. He views the few bad news as an aberration and under-reacts. Only after a string of
unfavorable news the bad outcome becomes sufficiently more likely that the representative
scenario changes from boom to bust. A pattern of sufficiently dramatic or continuing bad news
is similar to the low payoff state, leading to a change in the underlying beliefs. Previously
2