NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PROPERTY RIGHTS, REGULATORY CAPTURE, AND EXPLOITATION OF NATURAL
RESOURCES
Christopher Costello
Corbett Grainger
Working Paper 20859
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20859
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2015
We are deeply grateful for helpful comments from Wolfram Schlenker, Jennifer Alix-Garcia, Gary
Libecap, Robert Deacon, Scott Taylor, Larry Karp, Ray Hilborn, Mike Melnychuk, Steven Gaines,
Bruno Nkuiya, John Lynham, Jeffrey Traczynski, and seminar participants at various institutions,
including the NBER, University of Hawaii, University of Calgary, the World Congress of Environmental
and Resource Economists, the Heartland Workshop at UIUC, and Institute Henri Poincare (Paris).
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Christopher Costello and Corbett Grainger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Property Rights, Regulatory Capture, and Exploitation of Natural Resources
Christopher Costello and Corbett Grainger
NBER Working Paper No. 20859
January 2015
JEL No. H23,H41,L2,Q2,Q22
ABSTRACT
We study how the strength of property rights to individual extractive firms affects a regulator’s choice
over exploitation rates for a natural resource. The regulator is modeled as an intermediary between
current and future resource harvesters, rather than between producers and consumers, as in the traditional
regulatory capture paradigm. When incumbent resource users have weak property rights, they have
an incentive to pressure the regulator to allow resource extraction at an inefficiently rapid rate. In contrast,
when property rights are strong, this incentive is minimized or eliminated. We build a theoretical model
in which different property right institutions can be compared for their incentives to exert influence
on the regulator. The main theoretical prediction - that stronger individual property rights will lead
the regulator to choose more economically efficient extraction paths - is tested empirically with a novel
panel data set from global fisheries. Exploiting the variation in timing of catch share implementation
in our panel data, we find that regulators are significantly more conservative in managing resources
for which strong individual property rights have been assigned to firms; this is especially pronounced
for resources that have been overexploited historically.
Christopher Costello
Bren School of Environmental
Science & Management
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
costello@bren.ucsb.edu
Corbett Grainger
Department of Agricultural and Applied Economics
University of Wisconsin, Madison
Madison, WI 53706
http://www.aae.wisc.edu/cagrainger
cagrainger@wisc.edu

Property rights, regulatory capture, and exploitation of
natural resources∗
Christopher Costello† and Corbett Grainger‡
January 9, 2015
Abstract
We study how the strength of property rights to individual extractive firms affects a
regulator’s choice over exploitation rates for a natural resource. The regulator is mod-
eled as an intermediary between current and future resource harvesters, rather than
between producers and consumers, as in the traditional regulatory capture paradigm.
When incumbent resource users have weak property rights, they have an incentive to
pressuretheregulatortoallowresourceextractionataninefficientlyrapidrate. Incon-
trast, when property rights are strong, this incentive is minimized or eliminated. We
buildatheoreticalmodelinwhichdifferentpropertyrightinstitutionscanbecompared
for their incentives to exert influence on the regulator. The main theoretical prediction
- that stronger individual property rights will lead the regulator to choose more eco-
nomically efficient extraction paths - is tested empirically with a novel panel data set
from global fisheries. Exploiting the variation in timing of catch share implementation
in our panel data, we find that regulators are significantly more conservative in manag-
ing resources for which strong individual property rights have been assigned to firms;
this is especially pronounced for resources that have been overexploited historically.
1 Introduction
Many natural resources are governed not by the well-studied extremes of open access or sole
ownership, but instead by an intermediate case in which a regulator sets extraction caps
and a limited number of firms are granted the rights to extract. We focus on two features
of these systems: First, because the regulator herself sets the extraction rate, she may be
∗We are deeply grateful for helpful comments from Wolfram Schlenker, Jennifer Alix-Garcia, Gary
Libecap, Robert Deacon, Scott Taylor, Larry Karp, Ray Hilborn, Mike Melnychuk, Steven Gaines, Bruno
Nkuiya, John Lynham, Jeffrey Traczynski, and seminar participants at various institutions, including the
NBER, University of Hawaii, University of Calgary, the World Congress of Environmental and Resource
Economists, the Heartland Workshop at UIUC, and Institute Henri Poincare (Paris).
†Bren School, University of California Santa Barbara; National Bureau of Economic Research. Email:
costello@bren.ucsb.edu
‡Department of Ag. & Applied Economics, University of Wisconsin - Madison. Email: ca-
grainger@wisc.edu
1

susceptible to the influence of the extraction sector, i.e. to regulatory capture. Second, the
strength of property rights allocated to extractive firms may affect their preferred rates of
extraction. We derive the equilibrium behavior of the regulator in this setting, and we show
how extraction paths will depend on the strength of property rights granted to the harvest
sector. We test our theoretical predictions with a novel data set of global fisheries, roughly
half of which have implemented policies granting stronger individual property rights over the
past several decades. Consistent with our theory, we find that stronger individual property
rights lead the regulator to reduce aggregate rates of extraction. The resulting differences in
extraction rates have both economic and ecological consequences.
Property right institutions play a central role in shaping incentives and determining eco-
nomic outcomes including investment, resource use and growth (e.g. Acemoglu and Johnson
(2005), Grainger and Costello (2014), and North et al. (2009)). It is well-established that
individual owners’ behaviors depend on the security of the underlying property rights. Weak
property rights can lead to incentives for individual over-exploitation in fisheries (Costello
andKaffine2008)andforests(Deacon1995; Deacon1999),12 andlandtenurehasbeenshown
to affect land use decisions in several settings (Besley 1995; Alston et al. 2000). Despite
this evidence, it may be impossible or undesirable to grant sole-ownership over an entire
resource stock to a single firm. Large aquifers, highly migratory fish stocks, rights to water
in rivers or streams, and atmospheric pollution are just a few examples of resources that are
often managed by a regulator who sets an extraction cap affecting a limited set of firms with
access rights. Despite the ubiquity of this arrangement, the literature on property rights and
natural resources has focused on individual incentives and has largely ignored the role of the
regulator in setting the overall extraction rules.3
We address two fundamental questions about the effects of property rights institutions on
a common pool resource: First, in a theoretical sense, under what conditions does the prop-
erty right strength to individual firms alter incentives for the regulator setting the extraction
policy? And second, is there empirical evidence that property right strength affects the ag-
gregate exploitation chosen by the regulator? Recent work on the effects of rights based
management on fishery outcomes (Costello et al. 2008; Grafton et al. 2000; Grainger and
Costello 2014; Newell et al. 2005) has been criticized because for most natural resources, it is
the regulator, not the individual firms, that determines exploitation rates. This critique calls
into question the economist’s intuition about the role of property rights in efficient resource
use. To our knowledge we are the first to examine the impact of individual property rights
on the regulator’s choice of resource exploitation rates. We develop a general framework to
determine how individual property rights affect the regulator’s extraction policy, and when
that extraction policy coincides with the social optimum.
FollowingKarpoff(1987)andothers, wetakeasgiventhattheextractiveindustrywillat-
tempttoinfluencetheregulatorydecisionsintheirfavor. Mostoftheliteratureonregulatory
capture focuses on natural monopolies or industries in which rights are well-defined and per-
1See Liscow (2013) for a recent counterexample regarding the impact on deforestation.
2A noteworthy nuance is introduced by Bohn and Deacon (2000), who delineate conditions under which
extraction may be increased or decreased as a result of ownership risk.
3While they do not model the influence of industry on a regulator’s chosen extraction rate, Homans
and Wilen (1997) do examine a setting in which a regulator must respond to entry by firms, typically by
shortening the allowable fishing season.
2