NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SPARE TIRE? STOCK MARKETS, BANKING CRISES, AND ECONOMIC RECOVERIES
Ross Levine
Chen Lin
Wensi Xie
Working Paper 20863
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20863
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2015
We thank Franklin Allen, Thorsten Beck, Daniel Berkowitz, Craig Doidge, Erik Gilje, Itay Goldstein,
Todd Gormley, Gary Gorton, Jun-Koo Kang, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Michelle Lowry, Yona
Rubinstein, Luke Taylor, Sheridan Titman, and Luigi Zingales for helpful comments and discussions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Wensi Xie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Spare Tire? Stock Markets, Banking Crises, and Economic Recoveries
Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Wensi Xie
NBER Working Paper No. 20863
January 2015
JEL No. D22,E02,G21,G3,G38,K22
ABSTRACT
Do stock markets act as a “spare tire” during banking crises, providing an alternative corporate financing
channel and mitigating the economic severity of banking crises? Using firm-level data in 36 countries
from 1990 through 2011, we find that the adverse consequences of banking crises on firm profitability,
employment, equity issuances, and investment efficiency are smaller in countries with stronger shareholder
protection laws. These findings are not explained by the development of stock markets or financial
institutions prior to the crises, the severity of the crisis, or overall economic, legal, and institutional
development. The evidence is consistent with the view that stronger shareholder protection laws provide
the legal infrastructure for stock markets to act as alternative sources of finance when banking systems
go flat, easing the impact of the crisis on the economy.
Ross Levine Wensi Xie
Haas School of Business Faculty of Business and Economics
University of California at Berkeley The University of Hong Kong
545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685) wencyxie@hku.hk
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu
Chen Lin
Faculty of Business and Economics
The University of Hong Kong
chenlin1@hku.hk

1
1. Introduction
Researchers show that shareholder protection laws shape the functioning of stock markets
and the efficiency of corporate investments. By reducing the ability of corporate insiders to
expropriate resources from minority shareholders, stronger shareholder protection laws boost
stock market development (La Porta et al., 1997, 1998), the dispersion of ownership (La Porta et
al., 1999), market valuations (La Porta et al., 2002), stock market liquidity (Beck et al., 2003;
Brockman and Chung, 2003), the information content of stock prices (Morck et al., 2000), and
the efficiency of corporate investments (Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic, 1998; McLean et al.,
2012), with potentially large ramifications on economic growth (Levine and Zervos, 1998).
Researchers have not, however, assessed whether shareholder protection laws influence
how firms respond to banking crises. When banking systems fail, this disrupts the flow of bank
credit to firms with harmful effects on investment, employment, and economic growth (e.g.,
Kroszner et al., 2007, and Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009). In 1999, Alan Greenspan, then Chairman
of the Federal Reserve System, argued that stock markets could mitigate these negative effects.
Using the analogy of a “spare tire,” he conjectured that banking crises in Japan and East Asia
would have been less severe if those countries had built the necessary legal infrastructure, so that
their stock markets could have provided financing to corporations when their banking systems
could not. If firms can substitute equity issuances for bank loans during banking crises, then
banking crises will have less harmful effects on firms and the economy. Although official
entities and others discuss the spare tire argument (e.g., U.S. Financial Crisis Inquiry
Commission, 2011; Wessel, 2009), we are unaware of systematic assessments of this view.
In this paper, we evaluate several interrelated implications of the spare tire view. First the
spare tire view stresses that if firms can issue equity at low cost when banking crises limit the
flow of bank loans to firms, this will ameliorate the impact of the banking crisis on firm
performance. Put differently, if a banking crisis shuts off bank lending and firms do not have an
alternative source of financing, firms will suffer more than they would in the presence of a stock
market that provides an alternative source of external finance. Second, the benefits of stock

2
markets when banks reduce lending accrue primarily to firms that depend heavily on external
finance. For those firms that do not rely on external finance, there are likely to be fewer benefits
from having substitute forms of external finance. Third, the spare tire view stresses the ability of
the stock market to provide financing during a banking crisis, not the size and liquidity of the
market before the crisis. Although bank loans might be the preferred source of external financing
during normal time, the spare tire view holds that when this preferred source goes “flat,” equity
issuances can, at least partially, substitute for bank loans. Critically, for the stock market to play
this role, the legal infrastructure must be in place before the banking crisis, so that the market can
respond when the banking system falters. It is the pre-crisis legal infrastructure—not necessarily
the pre-crisis size of the stock market—that allows the market to act as a spare tire in times of
crisis.
We assess these predictions by combining several datasets and employing a difference-
in-differences methodology. The dependent variable is a measure of firm profitability,
employment, or equity issuances. We obtain these, and other, firm-level data from the
Worldscope database. The key explanatory variable is the interaction term of (1) a measure of
the strength of shareholder protection laws and (2) a systemic banking crisis dummy variable that
equals one in the year of the onset of the crisis and remains one for the next three years. To
measure the strength of shareholder protection laws, we use the Djankov et al. (2008) “Anti-self-
dealing” index, which gauges the degree to which the law protects minority shareholders from
being expropriated by managers or controlling shareholders using self-dealing transactions.
Based on an extensive body of research, we interpret greater values of the Anti-self-dealing
index as indicating that outside investors will feel more confident about buying shares in
companies and this will improve the firms’ accessibility to equity market financing. To date
systemic banking crisis, we use Laeven and Valencia (2012). If the key interaction term enters
positively in the performance, employment, and equity issuance regressions, then this would
suggest that firm performance and employment deteriorate less following a systemic crisis when
the country has stronger shareholder protection laws, and that such comparatively strong firm