NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FIGHTING THE LAST WAR:
ECONOMISTS ON THE LENDER OF LAST RESORT
Richard S. Grossman
Hugh Rockoff
Working Paper 20832
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20832
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2015
This paper was prepared for the Norges Bank conference, “Of the Uses of Central Banks: Lessons
from History,” Oslo, June 5-6, 2014. Michael Bordo, Øyvind Eitrheim, an anonymous referee, and
our discussant Charles Goodhart made many helpful suggestions. Jessica Scheld provided able research
assistance. We are responsible for the remaining errors. Grossman acknowledges financial support
from the John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation. The authors received an honorarium from
Norges Bank for writing this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Richard S. Grossman and Hugh Rockoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Fighting the Last War: Economists on the Lender of Last Resort
Richard S. Grossman and Hugh Rockoff
NBER Working Paper No. 20832
January 2015
JEL No. B0,N2
ABSTRACT
In this paper we trace the evolution of the lender of last resort doctrine—and its implementation—from
the nineteenth century through the panic of 2008. We find that typically the most influential economists
“fight the last war”: formulating policy guidelines that would have dealt effectively with the last crisis
or in some cases the last two or three. This applies even to the still supreme voice among lender-of-last-resort
theorists, Walter Bagehot, who wrestled with the how to deal with the financial crises that hit Britain
between the end of the Napoleonic Wars and the panic of 1866. Fighting the last war may leave economists
unprepared for meeting effectively the challenge of the next war.
Richard S. Grossman
Department of Economics
Wesleyan University
Middletown, CT 06459
and Institute of Quantitative Social Science, Harvard University
rgrossman@wesleyan.edu
Hugh Rockoff
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
and NBER
rockoff@econ.rutgers.edu

1. Introduction
In this paper we trace the evolution of lender of last resort (LOLR) doctrine—and its
implementation—from the nineteenth century through the panic of 2008. There are, of
course, many excellent histories of the LOLR, for example, Bordo (1990), Humphrey
(1989, 1992), Goodhart (1999), Capie and Wood (2006), Kindleberger and Aliber
(2011), and Bignon, Flandreau, and Ugolini (2012). Inevitably, we will cover many of the
same experiences and ideas as these authors, but we hope to draw attention to some
patterns in the way ideas about the LOLR have emerged from historical experience that
have not received as much attention as we believe they should.
In the next section we define a LOLR and identify some of the important
controversies. In section 3 we recount the evolution of the Bank of England as LOLR
and in section 4 that evolution in other countries. Section 5 then discusses ideas of the
LOLR focusing especially on Bagehot’s Lombard Street. Section 6 discusses the Great
Depression and section 7 the contributions of R.G. Hawtrey, Milton Friedman and Anna
J. Schwartz, and Ben Bernanke to the theory of the LOLR. In sections 3-7, our focus is
on the provision of money to calm a financial panic that is already underway. In section
8 we address “rescue operations”: bailouts of individual firms with the idea of preventing
a financial panic from starting. Section 9 discusses the subprime crisis and section 10
concludes.
3

2. The Lender of Last Resort: Definitions and Controversies
What is a lender of last resort? Economists have offered many definitions.
Thomas Humphrey (1992, 571) put it this way: “The term ‘lender of last resort’ refers to
the central bank’s responsibility to accommodate demands for high-powered money in
times of crisis, thus preventing panic induced contractions of the money stock.” In
Manias, Panics, and Crashes Charles P. Kindleberger (1978, 261) tells us, however,
that “[t]he lender of last resort stands ready to halt a run out of real and illiquid financial
assets into money by making more money available.”
At the heart of both definitions is the notion of a “run” or “panic” and the damage
it can do. The classic banking panic was characterized by a sudden widespread fear
that “hard cash” (i.e., specie when there was a metallic monetary standard, fiat currency
when there was not) would not be available when needed, leading holders of bank
notes or deposits to try to withdraw their funds as quickly as possible. The potential for a
damaging run is inherent in fractional reserve banking: since banks only hold cash
accounting for a portion of deposits, if all depositors demand their cash at once only a
fraction can be paid. Diamond and Dybvig (1983) was the first of a long line of papers
analyzing the inherent instability of the banking system within a formal model.
The two definitions of the LOLR differ, however, in terms of the range of events
that would warrant intervention. Humphrey, evidently, would limit the LOLR’s actions to
a relatively narrow swath of the financial sector, perhaps to just the banking sector, and
would focus on the goal of maintaining the stock of money. Kindleberger’s definition
goes beyond the familiar case of commercial bank depositors attempting to convert
deposits into cash. His “Real and illiquid financial assets” would include real estate,
4