NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM
Alejandro Justiniano
Giorgio E. Primiceri
Andrea Tambalotti
Working Paper 20874
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20874
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2015
We thank Tobias Adrian, Larry Christiano, Simon Gilchrist, Cosmin Ilut, Igor Livshits, Ander Perez,
Monika Piazzesi, Vincenzo Quadrini, Giacomo Rondina, Martin Schneider, Amir Sufi as well as seminar
and conference participants for comments and suggestions. Giorgio Primiceri thanks Bocconi University
and EIEF for their hospitality while conducting part of this research. The views expressed in this paper
are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago,
New York or the Federal Reserve System. Giorgio Primiceri is a consultant for the Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago and a research visitor at the European Central Bank. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Alejandro Justiniano, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Credit Supply and the Housing Boom
Alejandro Justiniano, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti
NBER Working Paper No. 20874
January 2015
JEL No. E32,E44
ABSTRACT
The housing boom that preceded the Great Recession was due to an increase in credit supply driven
by looser lending constraints in the mortgage market. This view on the fundamental drivers of the
boom is consistent with four empirical observations: the unprecedented rise in home prices and household
debt, the stability of debt relative to house values, and the fall in mortgage rates. These facts are difficult
to reconcile with the popular view that attributes the housing boom to looser borrowing constraints
associated with lower collateral requirements. In fact, a slackening of collateral constraints at the peak
of the lending cycle triggers a fall in home prices in our framework, providing a novel perspective
on the possible origins of the bust.
Alejandro Justiniano Andrea Tambalotti
Economic Research Department Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Research and Statistics Group
230 S. LaSalle Street 33 Liberty Street, 3rd Floor
Chicago, IL 60604 New York, NY 10045
ajustiniano@frbchi.org a.tambalotti@gmail.com
Giorgio E. Primiceri
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
318 Andersen Hall
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER
g-primiceri@northwestern.edu

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM
ALEJANDRO JUSTINIANO, GIORGIO E. PRIMICERI, AND ANDREA TAMBALOTTI
Abstract. ThehousingboomthatprecededtheGreatRecessionwasduetoanincrease
in credit supply driven by looser lending constraints in the mortgage market. This view
on the fundamental drivers of the boom is consistent with four empirical observations:
theunprecedentedriseinhomepricesandhouseholddebt,thestabilityofdebtrelativeto
housevalues,andthefallinmortgagerates. Thesefactsaredifficulttoreconcilewiththe
popularviewthatattributesthehousingboomtolooserborrowing constraints associated
with lower collateral requirements. In fact, a slackening of collateral constraints at the
peak of the lending cycle triggers a fall in home prices in our framework, providing a
novel perspective on the possible origins of the bust.
1. introduction
The U.S. economy recently experienced a severe financial crisis that precipitated the
worst recession since the Great Depression. Housing and mortgage markets were at the
center of these events. Four facts characterize the behavior of these markets in the period
leading up to the collapse in house prices and the ensuing financial turmoil.
Fact 1: House prices rose dramatically. Between 2000 and 2006 real home prices in-
creasedroughlybetween40and70percent, dependingonmeasurement, asshowninFigure
1.1. This unprecedented boom was followed by an equally spectacular bust after 2006.
Fact 2: Households’ mortgage debt surged. This is illustrated in figure 1 for both
the aggregate household sector and for financially constrained households in the Survey of
Consumer Finances (SCF)—the group that is most informative for the parametrization of
our model. Both measures of indebtedness were stable in the 1990s, but increased by about
Date: First version: March 2014. This version: January 2015.
We thank Tobias Adrian, Larry Christiano, Simon Gilchrist, Cosmin Ilut, Igor Livshits, Ander Perez,
Monika Piazzesi, Vincenzo Quadrini, Giacomo Rondina, Martin Schneider, Amir Sufi as well as seminar
and conference participants for comments and suggestions. Giorgio Primiceri thanks Bocconi University
and EIEF for their hospitality while conducting part of this research. The views expressed in this paper
are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago,
New York or the Federal Reserve System.
1

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM 2
180#
FHFA# CoreLogic#
170#
160#
150#
140#
130#
120#
110#
100#
90#
80#
1985# 1990# 1995# 2000# 2005# 2010#
Figure 1.1. Realhouseprices. FHFA(formerlyOFHEO)all-transactionshouse
price index for the United States and CoreLogic Home Price Index (HPI). Both
indexesaredeflatedbytheconsumerpriceindex,andnormalizedto100in2000:Q1.
30 and 60 percentage points between 2000 and 2007, before falling during the financial
crisis.
Fact 3: Mortgage debt and house prices increased in parallel. As a result, the ratio
of home mortgages to the value of residential real estate remained roughly unchanged into
2006. This often under-appreciated fact is documented in figure 1.3, which also shows that
this aggregate measure of household leverage spiked when home values collapsed before the
recession.
Fact 4: Real mortgage rates declined. Figure 1.4 plots the 30-year conventional mort-
gage rate minus various measures of inflation expectations from the Survey of Professional
Forecasters. It shows that real mortgage rates fluctuated around 5% during the 1990s, but
fell by 2 to 3 percentage points as the housing boom unfolded.
We argue that the key factor behind these four phenomena was a progressive relaxation
of lending constraints starting in the late 1990s, which led to a significant expansion in
the supply of mortgage credit. This account of the facts is in contrast with the more
conventional view that attributes the boom to looser borrowing limits.
Tohighlightthiscontrast, wedevelopasimplegeneralequilibriumframeworkthatdraws
a particularly stark distinction between the supply and demand for credit. On the demand