NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PEER-TO-PEER CROWDFUNDING:
INFORMATION AND THE POTENTIAL FOR DISRUPTION IN CONSUMER LENDING
Adair Morse
Working Paper 20899
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20899
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2015
I thank David Scharfstein and Francesco D’Acunto for very helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Adair Morse. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Peer-to-Peer Crowdfunding: Information and the Potential for Disruption in Consumer Lending
Adair Morse
NBER Working Paper No. 20899
January 2015
JEL No. G24
ABSTRACT
Can peer-to-peer lending (P2P) crowdfunding disintermediate and mitigate information frictions in
lending such that choices and outcomes for at least some borrowers and investors are improved? I
offer a framing of issues and survey the nascent literature on P2P. On the investor side, P2P disintermediates
an asset class of consumer loans, and investors seem to capture some rents associated with the removal
of the cost of that financial intermediation. Risk and portfolio choice questions linger prior to any inference.
On the borrower side, evidence suggests that proximate knowledge (direct or inferred) unearths soft
information, and by implication, P2P should be able to offer pricing and/or access benefits to potential
borrowers. However, social connections require costly certification (skin in the game) to inform credit
risk. Early research suggests an ever-increasing scope for use of Big Data and incentivized re-intermediation
of underwriting. I ask many more questions than current research can answer, hoping to motivate future
research.
Adair Morse
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Bldg, #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
morse@haas.berkeley.edu

a. Introduction
Peer-to-peer lending (P2P) is the household credit implementation of crowdfunding. In
P2P, individuals post their borrowing needs and personal profiles on a P2P platform such as
Lending Club or Prosper. Individual and institutional investors then can view and fund consumer
loans through the platform. In 2013, the top five P2P platforms in the United States originated
$3.5 billion in loans, up from $1.2 billion in 2012.2 According to a Fitch report, P2P is expected
to grow to $114 billion in lending, conservatively, in the medium term (Fitch Ratings (2014);
Wall Street Journal, August 14, 2014). As a comparison, households in the United States have
$880 billion in credit card debt outstanding as of July 2014, reflecting net new borrowing of
$28.5 billion over the prior twelve months.3 Taking the $28.5 billion figure as a rough estimate
of the growth in securitized consumer lending, the Fitch’s number suggests that a relevant share
of consumer lending net growth could be captured by crowd lending.
P2P crowdfunding has a host of other names, including social finance, marketplace
finance, and disintermediated finance. None of these terms is alone a prime facie description of
peer-to-peer lending; P2P is indeed a disintermediation of consumer finance using a social
marketplace. The disintermediation facet is that investors wanting diversified exposure to a fixed
income asset class of consumer loans need not go through asset-backed security (ABS) markets,
removing layers of intermediation and opening the asset class to smaller investors. The
marketplace term reflects investor-lenders and borrowers meeting on one direct market. A push-
back on this rather appealing term is that, as we will see, the amount of additional intermediation
which might be optimal in underwriting P2P is now a first-order question. Finally, the social
finance term reflects the idea that soft information via networks can inform underwriting, thereby
improving screening or that relationships may improve repayment behavior. Questions arising
out of the social network aspect of crowdfunding are the center of the nascent literature. As we
will see, the extent to the benefits to proximate knowledge and relationships facilitated by a P2P
platform matters greatly for how P2P positions itself in completing consumer finance markets.
Even if it is difficult to pin down the correct characterization of P2P, it is straightforward
to claim that the market of disintermediated lending facilitated by technology and by the role of
2 https://www.fitchratings.com/gws/en/fitchwire/fitchwirearticle/P2P-Lending's-Success?pr_id=851174
3 Federal government data aggregated by www.nerdwallet.com.
2

potentially improved screening has witnessed impressive growth. This growth of P2P lending
may partially reflect the popularity of the idea of finding alternatives to traditional financial
institutions in the wake of the Great Recession. However, I explore the argument that P2P carries
the real possibility for disruption that improves choices and outcomes for at least some borrowers
and investors.4 Thus, my agenda is to explore the economics of the possibilities for disruption in
P2P. A starting point is the work of Agrawal, Catalini, and Goldfarb (2013), who offer a
discussion of economics of equity (entrepreneurial startups) crowdfunding. However, the role of
technology and screening is quite different in P2P markets, as is the investor base. That being
said, this work provides an insightful discussion for thinking about information in the crowd of
investors.
This article frames the possibilities for economic disruption with a two-step agenda. I
begin in Section (b) with a quick overview of the mechanics of P2P and then delve into the
potential for disintermediation to create rents accruing to investors. Little research has yet delved
in the topic of portfolio choice and investor benefits arising from P2P; thus, I offer a framing of
the discourse.5 My take away is:
i. At least some cost savings of disintermediation seem to accrue to investors, but
characterizing risk and portfolio selection are first order research needs to understand to what
extent the crowd captures rents from disintermediation.
Section (c), the core of this review, surveys the role of proximity in the crowd model.
Although the literature is very much in a formative stage, I draw three more take-aways.
ii. The crowd of investors has valuable proximate knowledge when proximate implies real-
world connections and when the investors certify the information with skin in the game.
iii. Disclosure of personal narratives has the potential to increase proximate knowledge, but also
the potential to bias decisions. Algorithmic extraction of signals seems possible
iv. Social circles and local economic indicators can inform credit risk. Big data presumably can
play more of a role in credit profiling, which could mean anti-competitive effects for
borrowers if personal information monopolies inform credit risk.
4 Throughout most of the paper, I do not speak to financial intermediary welfare implications or to competition
among intermediaries because no research yet delves into these important topics. Thus, I am implicitly assuming
that borrowers will gain from markets with more information based on the traditional literature, although this is not
obvious if the P2P platform market does not maintain sufficient competition (Besanko and Thakor, 1987).
5 Agrawal, Catalini, and Goldfarb (2011) provide evidence profiling investors in equity-based crowdfunding.
3