NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BUSINESS STRATEGY AND THE MANAGEMENT OF FIRMS
Mu-Jeung Yang
Lorenz Kueng
Bryan Hong
Working Paper 20846
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20846
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2015
Funding for this study was generously provided by Ivey Business School, Kellogg School of Management,
University of Washington-Seattle, and Industry Canada. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Mu-Jeung Yang, Lorenz Kueng, and Bryan Hong. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Business Strategy and the Management of Firms
Mu-Jeung Yang, Lorenz Kueng, and Bryan Hong
NBER Working Paper No. 20846
January 2015
JEL No. D22,D23,D24,D92,M21
ABSTRACT
Business strategy can be defined as a firm's plan to generate economic profits based on lower cost,
better quality, or new products. The analysis of business strategy is thus at the intersection of market
competition and a firm's efforts to secure persistently superior performance via investments in better
management and organization. We empirically analyze the interaction of firms' business strategies
and their managerial practices using a unique, detailed dataset on business strategy, internal firm organization,
performance and innovation, which is representative of the entire Canadian economy. Our empirical
results show that measures of business strategy are strongly correlated with firm performance, both
in the cross-section and over time, and even after controlling for unobserved profit shocks exploiting
intermediates utilization. Results are particularly striking for innovation, as firms with some priority
in business strategies are significantly more likely to innovate than firms without any strategic priority.
Furthermore, our analysis highlights that the relationship between strategy and management is driven
by two key organizational trade-offs: employee initiative vs. coordination as well as exploration of
novel business opportunities vs. exploitation of existing profit sources.
Mu-Jeung Yang Bryan Hong
Department of Economics Ivey Business School
University of Washington Western University
Savery Hall, 327 1255 Western Road
Seattle, WA 98195-3330 London, ON N6G 0N1
mjyang@uw.edu Canada
bhong@ivey.ca
Lorenz Kueng
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
l-kueng@kellogg.northwestern.edu

BUSINESS STRATEGY 1
1 Introduction
What drives different types of persistent comparative advantages across firms? Recent
applied models in a variety of fields such as industrial organization, macroeconomics, or
international trade describe the equilibrium implications of different types of comparative
advantages between businesses. For example, static trade models are often based on cost
or quality differences across firms, while comparative advantages in endogenous growth
models are often based on new products or drastically better quality. However, even
conditionalonaparticularcomparativeadvantage,theretypicallyexistalternativemodels
with different implications for equilibrium outcomes. A case in point are models of cost
competition, which can exhibit either constant markups, as in Melitz (2003), or markups
which are declining in marginal costs, as in Bernard, Eaton, Jensen and Kortum (2003) or
MelitzandOttaviano(2008). Differencesinfirms’behaviorimplydifferencesintheimpact
of policy affecting competition and trade. Despite this theoretical ambiguity, empirical
evidence on how firms act when they pursue different types of performance advantages
remains rare.
At the same time, a parallel empirical literature argues that a large part of persistent
firm performance differences can be explained by differences in management practices; see
e.g., Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) and Bloom, Eifert, McKenzie, Mahajan and Roberts
(2013a). This literature mostly focuses on management practices that every optimizing
firmshouldadopt, asarguedbyBloom, SadunandVanReenen(2013c). Yet, theadoption
of some management practices might be a function of the type of comparative advantage
pursued by the firm. For example, a firm pursuing high-quality might adopt management
practices such as training programs for high-skilled workers, while a low-cost producer
might not. Using the concept of business strategy, we join these two questions and link
the structure of management practices to the types of comparative advantage pursued.
Business strategy can be defined as a firm’s plan to generate economic profits through
higher value creation due to lower cost, better quality, or newer products compared to
competitors.
Toourknowledge, thisisthefirstempiricalpapertoanalyzetheinteractionofbusiness
strategies, the management of firms, and firm performance in a representative sample of
businesses. To this end, we exploit unique detailed data on business strategies, internal
organization, and firm performance which is representative of all Canadian business firms.
We build on recent advances in models of firm heterogeneity, in which superior value
creation is based on cost advantages, higher quality, or newer products, to guide our
empirical analysis. We therefore measure business strategy as a firm’s top priority to
compete in a product market via lower costs, better quality, or newer products. This
leads us to categorize firms into four types: (i) novelty firms have the development of new
products or services as top strategic priority; (ii) high-quality firms pursue higher-quality
products or services; (iii) low-cost firms have low-cost as their top strategic priority; and
we use (iv) firms for which business strategy is not important as the main comparison
group.

2 YANG, KUENG AND HONG
Four sets of results stand out. First, business strategy priorities are systematically
correlated with firm performance, and these correlations are robust in a number of ways.
They hold for performance data that is entirely based on auxiliary tax information which
has been gathered independently of the survey data we utilize. They hold in the cross-
section and also after including firm fixed effects and controlling for unobserved profit
shocks exploiting intermediates usage. These systematic correlations reassure us about
the validity of our measures of business strategy.
Second, we provide stylized facts that are of importance for different static models of
firm heterogeneity with high-quality or low-cost as the source of performance differences.
For instance, models such as Melitz (2003) predict that markups should be unrelated
to cost differences across firms, while models such as Bernard et al. (2003) or Foster,
Haltiwanger and Syverson (2008) predict that firms with lower marginal costs exhibit
highermarkups. Weshowthatfirmswithlow-coststrategiesexhibithighermarketshares,
but also lower markups. Similarly, high-quality firms in models such as Johnson (2012)
and Kuglerand Verhoogen(2012) do not have higher markups than lower-quality firms, in
contrast to models such as Sutton (2012), where higher quality implies higher markups.
We find that high-quality firms exhibit systematically higher markups, higher market
shares, and higher profitability compared to firms with other strategic priorities.
Third, we document correlations between innovation and business strategy that are
potentially interesting for further theory development of endogenous growth models. For
example, in models such as Klette and Kortum (2004) and Acemoglu, Akcigit and Ce-
lik (2014), exogenous differences in the ability to innovate drive performance differences
across firms. Our evidence suggests that differences in the likelihood to innovate are
systematically related to business strategy. Firms with some strategic priority are signif-
icantly more likely to innovate than firms without any strategic priority. Furthermore,
firms with novelty as their top strategic priority are more likely than firms with high-
quality or low-cost as their top strategic priority to generate new products or processes
instead of just improving upon existing ones. These patterns suggest that modeling the
choice of business strategy is a promising way forward to endogenize firms’ comparative
advantage to innovate.
Fourth, we document systematic correlations between firms’ business strategies and a
broad range of management practices, such as the distribution of real authority within
the firm, the implementation of performance pay, the demand for skilled employees, the
use of job-training programs, and operational practices like coordination along the value
chain and re-engineering. Together with our empirical results on business strategy and
firm performance, our analysis suggests that the joint choice of strategy and management
is driven by two key organizational trade-offs, summarized in table 1 and similar to those
discussed by Roberts and Saloner (2013). First, organizations need to trade off employee
initiative vs. employee coordination, as many management practices that encourage em-
ployeeinitiative—suchasthedecentralizationofdecision-making—candirectlyreducethe
extentof employee coordination. Thesecond trade-off isbetween theexploration offuture
business opportunities and the exploitation of current profit sources, since incentives tied