NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAPITAL FLOW MANAGEMENT MEASURES:
WHAT ARE THEY GOOD FOR?
Kristin Forbes
Marcel Fratzscher
Roland Straub
Working Paper 20860
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20860
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2015
Thanks to Anusha Chari, Kathryn Dominguez, Jeffrey Frankel, Marcio Garcia, Rex Ghosh, Graciela
Kaminsky, Michael Klein, Maurice Obstfeld, Jonathan Ostry, Vincent Reinhart, Hélène Rey, Andy
Rose, Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel, Silvia Sgheri, and James Yetman for extremely helpful suggestions
and conversations. Further thanks for comments from other participants in conferences and seminars
hosted by the Bank of Canada, Bank of Korea, Bank of Latvia, Banco de Mexico, Central Bank of
Turkey, European Central Bank, International Monetary Fund, NBER, and New Zealand Central Bank
and Treasury. Thanks to Bogdan Bogdanovic and Daniel Happ for excellent research assistance. The
views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the ECB,
the Eurosystem, any institutions with which the authors are affiliated, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Kristin Forbes, Marcel Fratzscher, and Roland Straub. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Capital Flow Management Measures: What Are They Good For?
Kristin Forbes, Marcel Fratzscher, and Roland Straub
NBER Working Paper No. 20860
January 2015
JEL No. F3,F4,F5,G0,G1
ABSTRACT
Are capital controls and macroprudential measures related to international exposures successful in
achieving their objectives? Assessing their effectiveness is complicated by selection bias; countries
which change their capital-flow management measures (CFMs) often share specific characteristics
and are responding to changes in variables that the CFMs are intended to influence. This paper addresses
these challenges by using a propensity-score matching methodology. We also create a new database
with detailed information on weekly changes in controls on capital inflows, capital outflows, and macroprudential
measures related to international transactions from 2009 to 2011 for 60 countries. Results show that
these macroprudential measures can significantly reduce some measures of financial fragility. Most
CFMs do not significantly affect other key targets, however, such as exchange rates, capital flows,
interest-rate differentials, inflation, equity indices, and different volatilities. One exception is that removing
controls on capital outflows may reduce real exchange rate appreciation. Therefore, certain CFMs
can be effective in accomplishing specific goals—but most popular measures are not “good for” accomplishing
their stated aims
Kristin Forbes Roland Straub
MIT Sloan School of Management European Central Bank
100 Main Street, E62-416 Roland.Straub@ecb.int
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
kjforbes@mit.edu
Marcel Fratzscher
DIW Berlin
GERMANY
mfratzscher@diw.de

1. Introduction
Over the last few years, economists and policymakers have become more supportive of “capital-flow
management” measures (CFMs) to address the negative effects of large and volatile capital flows. This
support has been bolstered by a series of IMF papers developing scenarios in which different CFMs
should be “part of a policy toolkit”, as well as a series of theoretical papers modeling how CFMs can
increase social welfare.1 A number of countries have followed these recommendations and over 40
countries have adjusted their CFMs at least once from just 2009 through 2011. The stated purpose of
these recent changes in CFMs includes: limiting exchange rate appreciation, reducing portfolio inflows,
providing greater monetary policy independence, reducing inflation, reducing volatility, and/or reducing
specific measures of financial fragility (such as bank leverage, credit growth, asset bubbles, foreign-
currency exposure, or short-term liabilities). But can CFMs accomplish any of these goals? If the answer
is affirmative, CFMs could help stabilize economies experiencing substantial capital flow volatility driven
by external factors (see Bluedorn et al., 2013).
CFMs refer to two types of measures: (1) capital controls or any types of restrictions on cross-border
financial activity that discriminate based on residency; and (2) macroprudential measures which do not
discriminate based on residency, but relate to cross-border or foreign-currency exposure and lending. This
definition does not include prudential regulations targeting individual institutions or macroprudential
regulations unrelated to cross-border exposure.2 Most papers have found little or mixed evidence that
capital controls affect exchange rates, the volume of capital flows, monetary policy independence, and
other macroeconomic variables, but stronger evidence that they can significantly affect the composition of
capital flows and specific measures of financial vulnerability.3 The IMF writes that: “Because capital
controls have been used many times in the past, evidence on their effects is more abundant but still
surprisingly inconclusive.” (Blanchard et al., 2013, pg. 20) Empirical evidence on the effectiveness of
macroprudential measures is even more limited, partially due to their infrequent use before 2009. The
IMF admits that: “Empirical evidence on the effectiveness of these measures is scant….” (Blanchard et
al., 2013, pg. 17)
1 Key IMF papers are: IMF (2011a, 2011b, 2012) and Ostry et al. (2010, 2011). Key theoretical papers are: Korinek
(2010, 2011), Jeanne and Korinek (2010), Costinot, Lorenzoni, and Werning (2011), and Jeanne (2012, 2013).
2 See IMF (2012, page 40) for the “institutional” definition of CFMs. For example, this measure includes restrictions
on exposure to mortgage debt denominated in foreign currency but does not include restrictions on exposure to
mortgage debt based on loan-to-value or debt-to-income ratios.
3 For recent surveys of this literature that show limited effects of capital controls, see Forbes (2007a), Cline (2010),
Magud, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2011), Klein (2012), and IMF (2013). For more recent evidence that controls and
macroprudential measures may improve a country’s liability structure and increase its resilience to crises, see Ostry
et al. (2012), Ostry et al. (2010), and IMF (2013). For mixed evidence from just Brazil’s recent use of capital
controls, see Forbes et al. (2012), Chamon and Garcia (2013), and Jinjarak et al. (2013).
1

This inconclusive series of results is not surprising given major challenges in assessing the impact of
capital controls and macroprudential measures: data limitations and selection bias (related to both time-
invariant country characteristics as well as time-varying values of outcome variables and other policy
choices). Selection bias can occur because countries which adjust their CFMs tend to have different
characteristics than other countries. For example, estimates in this paper show that countries with stronger
institutions are significantly more likely to remove controls on capital outflows and increase
macroprudential measures. A time-varying form of this bias can also occur because governments tend to
adjust their CFMs in response to changes in key variables which the CFMs are intended to influence. For
example, estimates in this paper show that countries are more likely to increase controls on capital
inflows and reduce controls on outflows after a currency appreciation. This paper addresses these
econometric challenges by using a propensity-score matching methodology. This methodology is fairly
new to the macro and international economics literatures, but has been used for years in medical and labor
economics.4 This methodology has a number of advantages over standard estimation techniques for the
analysis in this paper, including its ability to avoid strong assumptions about functional form while
addressing non-random sample selection by putting more weight on similar countries.
In order to analyze the impact of capital controls and macroprudential measures using propensity-score
matching, it is necessary to construct a new database with information on CFMs at a higher frequency and
for a larger sample of countries than previously existed. More detailed information is needed for this
methodology in order to construct accurate control groups, as well as to capture all changes in capital
controls and macroprudential measures. (In contrast, most other datasets only capture initial changes in
CFMs, but not subsequent adjustments of similar measures.) Therefore, we compile detailed information
on increases and decreases in controls on capital inflows, controls on capital outflows, and
macroprudential measures at a weekly frequency for 60 countries from 2009 through 2011. We also
divide our database into: measures aimed at stemming capital inflows/appreciation/credit growth or
outflows/depreciation/credit contractions; capital controls affecting equities, bonds, or FDI;
macroprudential measures targeting banks or foreign exchange; and CFMs that were “major” in the sense
they received substantial attention by investors.
4 See Rosenbaum and Rubin (1985) for background on this methodology and Angrist and Pischke (2008) for an
excellent discussion and examples from the labor literature. Persson (2001) is the earliest application of this
approach to macroeconomic, time series data. Differences between propensity-score matching and more traditional
regression analysis, as well as recent examples in which propensity-score matching is starting to be used to address a
international and macroeconomic topics, are discussed in Section 3.1 and Appendix C.
2