NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOMESTIC AND MULTILATERAL EFFECTS OF CAPITAL CONTROLS IN EMERGING
MARKETS
Gurnain Pasricha
Matteo Falagiarda
Martin Bijsterbosch
Joshua Aizenman
Working Paper 20822
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20822
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2015, Revised August 2018
We would like to thank Thomas Dallaire, Gagandeep Pabla, Bryce Shelton and Derrick Shroeter
for excellent research assistance. We would also like to thank two anonymous referees, Damien
Cubizol, Rose Cunningham, Michael Ehrmann, Andrea Fracasso, Serdar Kabaca, Rahul
Mukherjee, Robert McCauley, seminar participants at Bank of Canada, Bank for International
Settlements, International Monetary Fund, Inter-American Development Bank, the Central Bank
of Republic of Turkey and Bank of England joint G20 workshop on “International Monetary and
Financial System: short-term challenges, long-term solutions”, the 13th Research Meeting of
NIPFP-DEA Research Program at Neemrana, India, the 13th INFINITI conference on
International Finance, the 2016 Annual Conference of the Royal Economic Society and the
EMG-ECB Workshop on Global Liquidity and its International Implications held in April 2016,
for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors.
No responsibility for them should be attributed to the Bank of Canada, the European Central
Bank or the NBER. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the
public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Gurnain Pasricha, Matteo Falagiarda, Martin Bijsterbosch, and Joshua Aizenman. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Domestic and Multilateral Effects of Capital Controls in Emerging Markets
Gurnain Pasricha, Matteo Falagiarda, Martin Bijsterbosch, and Joshua Aizenman
NBER Working Paper No. 20822
January 2015, Revised August 2018
JEL No. F32,F41,F42
ABSTRACT
Using a novel, high frequency dataset on capital control actions in 16 emerging market
economies (EMEs) from 2001 to 2012, we provide new insights into the domestic and
multilateral effects of capital controls. Increases in capital account openness reduce monetary
policy autonomy and increase exchange rate stability, confirming the constraints of the monetary
policy trilemma. Both gross in- and outflows rise, while the effect on net capital flows is
ambiguous. Tighter capital inflow restrictions generated significant spillovers, especially in the
post-2008 environment of abundant global liquidity. We also find evidence of a domestic policy
response to foreign capital control changes in countries that are affected by these spillovers.
Gurnain Pasricha Martin Bijsterbosch
Bank of Canada Frankfurt
234 Wellington Street, Europe
Ottawa, ON K1A 0G9 martin.bijsterbosch@ecb.europa.eu
Canada
gpasricha@bankofcanada.ca Joshua Aizenman
Economics and SIR
Matteo Falagiarda USC
Frankfurt University Park
Europe Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043
matteo.falagiarda@ecb.europa.eu and NBER
aizenman@usc.edu
A Data appendices is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20822

1. Introduction
As the size and volatility of international capital flows have increased over the past
decade, the policy debate about how to manage these flows has intensified. A key question being
debated is whether capital controls are useful as tools to manage capital inflow surges.
Proponents argue that capital controls are effective in stemming large and volatile inflows in
recipient countries and can therefore be valid tools of macroeconomic and macro-prudential
management (IMF, 2011a). However, the empirical evidence of effectiveness of capital controls
in meeting domestic policy objectives is mixed.3
While the evidence on the domestic effects of capital controls may be limited, what
makes capital controls an issue of heated international debate is the concern that these controls
may have multilateral, i.e. spillover effects. They may distort the global allocation of resources
by diverting flows to other economies and can be used as tools in a currency war to gain an
unfair competitive advantage. Just as concerns have been raised about spillovers of non-
conventional monetary policies in advanced economies on emerging market economies (EMEs),
so have policy-makers in the latter countries raised concerns about the use of capital controls in
other EMEs.
We provide new evidence on both aspects of this debate: First, we investigate whether
capital controls are effective in influencing gross flows using a model specification based on the
monetary policy trilemma. Second, we examine whether capital control actions have spillover
effects and whether these have become more important in the post-global financial crisis
environment of abundant global liquidity. In order to address these questions, we use a novel
dataset of 782 policy changes or capital control actions (CCAs) in 16 EMEs over the period 1
January 2001-31 December 2012, along with information about their precise implementation
dates.
We contribute to the literature in three ways. First, we use a new, high frequency dataset
on capital control actions, which allows us to more precisely capture the policy whose
effectiveness is being assessed. This adds to the literature as most existing cross-country studies
on the effectiveness of capital controls tend to use less precise (and annual) measures of
3 Recent literature overviews suggest that capital flow measures have little effect on overall capital flows, although they may have an impact on
the composition of flows (Magud et al., 2011). Effects of capital flow measures may vary markedly across the types of capital controls, with
those on debt and equity flows being more effective in influencing capital flows than others (Binici et al., 2010). There is also evidence that
controls may increase the maturity of inflows (De Gregorio et al., 2000).

3
existence of capital controls across countries, which do not capture how policy is actually used
for counter-cyclical macroeconomic management. Using data on policy actions also allows us to
conduct the analysis using quarterly data, thus focusing on a horizon that is more relevant for
policy-makers.
Second, we investigate the effectiveness of changes in capital controls in a model based
on the monetary policy trilemma.4 The literature has identified several potential macroeconomic
targets of using capital controls policy: the level or composition of capital flows, the level or
volatility of exchange rate, and the level of monetary policy autonomy. These variables are
related via the monetary policy trilemma. This trilemma, or the impossible trinity, states that it is
impossible to simultaneously have a fixed exchange rate, an independent monetary policy and an
open capital account. The trilemma assumes that a change in de-jure openness leads to an
equivalent change in de-facto openness, and equates the two. This is where the scope for testing
capital control effectiveness through the lens of the trilemma arises. In a panel VAR framework,
we ask whether de-jure changes in a country’s openness lead to changes in de-facto openness
and therefore in the level of monetary policy autonomy and the volatility of the exchange rate.
This approach also takes into account the endogeneity of capital controls, highlighted by the
recent literature.5 Aizenman and Pasricha (2013), for example, find that countries actively
modify capital controls to manage pressure of inflows, and Pasricha (2017) that capital controls
policy systematically responds to both mercantilist and macroprudential concerns. While VARs
have been commonly used in country-specific studies examining the impact of capital controls,
we are among the first to use structural VARs in a panel setting, and, to our knowledge, the first
to do this for spillover effects of capital controls.6
Third, we provide a comprehensive assessment of cross-country spillover effects of
capital controls for both the pre- and the post-global financial crisis period, a topic on which
there is currently little empirical evidence. The available evidence either pertains to post-crisis
4 The empirical evidence on the effects of capital controls on the variables of the monetary policy trilemma is mixed. For instance, Klein and
Shambaugh (2015) find that with pegged exchange rates, capital controls provide greater monetary autonomy only when they are long standing
and extensive. Miniane and Rogers (2007) show that countries with more stringent capital controls were not more insulated from foreign
monetary policy shocks. Hutchison, Pasricha and Singh (2013) find that even in a country with extensive capital controls, these controls were
able to sustain a covered interest rate differential between onshore and offshore markets only in periods in which these controls were actively
tightened. Further capital controls do not seem to have a clear effect on currency appreciation in most cases (Pandey et al., 2015; Jinjarak et al.,
2013), with the exception of Chile in the 1990s (Edwards and Rigobon, 2009).
5 Existing tests of the trilemma are based on testing whether the indices of (levels) of capital controls, monetary policy autonomy and exchange
rate stability add to a constant (Aizenman, Chinn and Ito, 2010) or whether nominal interest rates in a country respond more to foreign interest
rates in countries with more open capital accounts and less flexible exchange rates (Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor, 2005) or testing co-
movements of asset prices with the global financial cycle (Rey, 2015).
6 Saborowski et al. (2014) use panel VARs to assess the effectiveness of capital outflow restrictions in EMEs. Studies using country-specific
VARs include Cardoso and Goldfajn (1998), De Gregorio et al. (2000) and Baba and Kokenyne (2011).
3