NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LOAN ORIGINATIONS AND DEFAULTS IN THE MORTGAGE CRISIS:
THE ROLE OF THE MIDDLE CLASS
Manuel Adelino
Antoinette Schoar
Felipe Severino
Working Paper 20848
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20848
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2015
We thank Nittai Bergman, Markus Brunnermeier, Ing-Haw Cheng, Matthieu Gomez, Raj Iyer, Amir
Kermani, Andrew Lo, Sendhil Mullainathan, Debarshi Nanda, Jonathan Parker, Adriano Rampini,
David Robinson, Steve Ross, Amit Seru, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, Jialan Wang and seminar
participants at Berkeley, Cass, Brandeis, CFPB Research Forum, Dartmouth, Duke, Harvard Business
School, Maryland, McGill, MIT, NBER Corporate Finance, Princeton, UNC and Imperial College
London for thoughtful comments. This paper was previously circulated under the title “Changes in
Buyer Composition and the Expansion of Credit during the Boom.” The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Manuel Adelino, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Loan Originations and Defaults in the Mortgage Crisis: The Role of the Middle Class
Manuel Adelino, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino
NBER Working Paper No. 20848
January 2015, Revised June 2015
JEL No. G0,G01,G2,R2
ABSTRACT
We provide new facts on the debt dynamics leading up to the financial crisis of 2007. Earlier research
suggests that distortions in the supply of mortgage credit, evidenced by a decoupling of credit flow
from income growth, may have caused the rise in house prices and the subsequent housing market
collapse. This paper shows that the increase in mortgage originations was shared across the whole
distribution of borrowers, and that middle- and high-income borrowers made up the majority of originations
even at the peak of the boom. Compared to prior years, middle- and high-income borrowers (not the
poor), as well as those with medium and high credit scores, made up a much larger share of delinquencies
in the crisis relative to earlier years. We show that the relation between individual mortgage size and
income growth during the housing boom was always strongly positive, also in line with previous periods
(and independent of how income is measured). These results are most consistent with an expectations
based view of the financial crisis in which both homebuyers and lenders were buying into increasing
housing values and defaulted once prices dropped.
Manuel Adelino Felipe Severino
Duke University Tuck School of Business
Fuqua School of Business Dartmouth College
100 Fuqua Drive 100 Tuck Hall
Durham, NC 27708-0120 Hanover, NH 03755
manuel.adelino@gmail.com felipe.severino@tuck.dartmouth.edu
Antoinette Schoar
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-638
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
aschoar@mit.edu

1. Introduction
Understanding the origins of the housing crisis of 2007/08 has been an enduring challenge for
financial economists and policy makers alike. One of the predominant narratives that has emerged is
that fundamental changes in the origination technology and incentives of the financial sector
significantly contributed to unsustainable levels of lending and borrowing. The central assertion is
that unprecedented lending to low-income and poor credit quality borrowers caused the acceleration
of house prices and the subsequent crash in the housing market. This interpretation builds on a key
finding by Mian and Sufi (2009) that growth in mortgage credit for home purchase at the zip code
level became negatively correlated with per capita income growth in the run-up to the financial
crisis, suggesting that lending became decoupled from income, especially in areas with strong house
price growth. As a result, there has been a significant emphasis on understanding the role of the
financial industry in providing credit to low-income borrowers in particular.1
We provide new analysis on the debt dynamics leading up to the financial crisis, which runs counter
to the previous interpretation that large distortions in the supply of credit to low-income borrowers
set off a housing bubble and was primarily responsible for the crash. We show that between 2002
and 2006 mortgage origination increased proportionally across the whole income distribution, not
just for low-income borrowers. While mortgage credit origination to all income groups expanded
significantly between 2002 and 2006, the majority of purchase mortgages by value were originated
for middle class and high-income segments of the population even at the peak of the boom, in line
with prior years. Similarly, we show that the share of originations to low- versus high-credit-score
borrowers remained largely stable across the pre-crisis period. While the pace of origination rose in
low-income zip codes, this increase translates into small changes in the overall distribution of credit,
given that it starts from a low base (as borrowers in these zip codes obtain fewer and significantly
smaller mortgages on average).2 These results are inconsistent with the hypothesis that large
distortions in the supply of credit to poor or marginal borrowers drove the house price increases and
the subsequent crash in the mortgage market.
Delinquency patterns also shed doubt on the interpretation that credit to low-income borrowers
caused the crisis. Using delinquency information from Lender Processing Service (LPS), we show
that the share of mortgage dollars in delinquency stemming from the lowest income groups actually
decreased during the financial crisis. In contrast, middle- and high-income borrowers constituted a
much larger share of mortgage dollars in delinquency than in any prior years. The magnitudes are
large: If we look at purchase mortgages originated in 2003 to borrowers in zip codes in the top
quintile of the income distribution, we find that they make up only 13% of mortgage dollars in
delinquency three years later, even though they represent 33% of the mortgage dollars that were
originated in that year. This is what one would expect: borrowers in high-income zip codes usually
have better credit and receive larger mortgages than lower-income groups. In 2006, however, this
picture is reversed: mortgages originated to borrowers in zip codes in the top income quintile make
up 23% of the delinquencies three years out. This is almost a doubling of their share of defaults. In
contrast, over the same time period, the contribution of delinquencies from the zip codes in the
lowest 20% of the income distribution fell from 22% to only 11%.3
1 “The expansion of mortgage credit to marginal borrowers kicked off an explosion in household debt in the U.S. between
2000 and 2007.” (Mian and Sufi, 2009, emphasis in original text).
2 The average purchase mortgage for the borrowers in the lowest income quartile of zip codes is about $97K as of 2002,
and approximately 2 mortgages are originated per 100 residents per year. Borrowers in the top quartile of zip codes
obtain average mortgages of over $246K, and about 3 mortgages per 100 residents.
3 In this article we look at where leverage and mortgage default occurred, but we are not making welfare statements.
While lower income borrowers did not contribute to delinquency at a higher volume than other income groups, it is
likely that lower income households (and zip codes) suffered more from defaults than higher income ones. This might
be driven by more limited non-housing wealth, worse income shocks, or lack of other funding possibilities.

We find a similar pattern when we look at credit scores: borrowers with high credit scores increased
their share of defaults on purchase mortgages significantly during the crisis. The fraction of
mortgage dollars in delinquency from high-credit-score borrowers (those with a FICO score above
720) that took a loan for home purchase in 2003 was very low (9%), even though these borrowers
account for 55% of the credit being originated. However, high-credit-score borrowers made up 23%
of delinquencies in the 2006 cohort of purchase loans. The inverse pattern emerges for borrowers
below a credit score of 660 (a common cutoff for subprime borrowers, see, e.g., Mian and Sufi
2009), where the share of delinquencies goes from 71% in the 2003 mortgage cohort to 39% for the
2006 cohort. In other words, what is different about the crisis is not that defaults became
particularly concentrated in low-income or low-credit-score borrowers but rather that they became
less so, as middle- and high-income households (and middle- and high-credit-score borrowers)
significantly increased their share in the total mortgages in default.
Earlier research proposes that a decoupling between mortgage growth and income growth
constitutes evidence in favor of supply-side distortions, which in turn caused the house price run-up
(Mian and Sufi 2009). This evidence relies on a regression of the growth in total dollar value of
originations by zip code on the growth in average household income from the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS). The growth in zip-code-level originations, however, combines increases at the
intensive margin (changes in average mortgage size) with the extensive margin (growth in the
number of mortgages originated in a zip code). Given that households take on mortgages, not zip
codes, it is only the relation between individual mortgage size and income that is informative about
potential supply-side distortions.
We show that the negative correlation of income and purchase mortgage credit is driven entirely by
a change in the velocity of mortgage origination (the number of mortgages), not a decoupling of the
growth in average mortgage size from income growth. In fact, growth in individual mortgage size is
strongly positively related to the growth in IRS household income throughout the pre-crisis period.
The apparent decoupling of zip-code-level credit growth and per capita income growth is due solely
to the negative relation between the number of new originations and per capita income growth.4 That
means that the pace of mortgage origination increased inversely with per capita income growth, but
at stable leverage of the average household. This negative correlation is concentrated in high-income
zip codes that saw fast per capita income growth and moderate growth in the number of mortgages
during this time period. For the bottom 75% of zip codes, the relation between growth in dollar
volume of originations and per capita income growth is always positive.
An additional conceptual problem arises when using zip code level aggregates as in Mian and Sufi
(2009), since growth in zip code income (in this case household income data from the IRS)
confounds the income of new homebuyers with the stock of the average income of the existing
residents in an area. Buyers, in fact, have very different income levels from the average household in
a zip code—approximately double that of the average resident in an area—over this period and
historically. We find that total mortgage credit and average mortgage size track growth in buyer
income. In addition, when we look at a longer period, between 1996 and 2007, we confirm that
there was neither a reversal of the sign nor a change in the slope between credit flows and income
growth using individual borrower income.
4 Our tests also show that the coefficient of aggregate mortgage growth on zip code household income is negative only if
we include county fixed effects (as proposed in Mian and Sufi 2009). Without the county fixed effects, the coefficient on
average household income is positive even for the regressions using total mortgage credit. If the aim is to test whether
credit is increasingly allocated to zip codes with slower income growth, county fixed effects should not be included. The
analysis with county fixed effects only tests whether, within a given county, zip codes that are growing more quickly than
the county average are disproportionately receiving more credit. However, differences in growth rates in both credit and
income between counties are also large (as shown in the summary statistics in Mian and Sufi, 2009), which is lost by the
within-county analysis. We show results with and without fixed effects throughout the paper.