NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EVOLUTION OF THE FINANCIAL STABILITY MANDATE:
FROM ITS ORIGINS TO THE PRESENT DAY
Gianni Toniolo
Eugene N. White
Working Paper 20844
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20844
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2015
Presented originally at the Norges Bank Conference: Of the Use of Central Banks: Lessons from History,
June 5-6, 2014. We particularly want to thank Michael Bordo, Øyvind Eitreim, Rui Pedro Esteves,
Stefan Gerlach, Eric Monnet and the conference participants for their helpful comments. We are
also grateful for suggestions made by participants at the Financial Stability Conference held at the
European Banking Center at Tilburg University. The views expressed here are our own and are not
necessarily those of LUISS (Roma), Duke University, the Center for Economic Policy Research, Rutgers
University, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Support from the Norges Bank for this
project is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Gianni Toniolo and Eugene N. White. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Evolution of the Financial Stability Mandate: From Its Origins to the Present Day
Gianni Toniolo and Eugene N. White
NBER Working Paper No. 20844
January 2015
JEL No. E58,G21,N1,N2
ABSTRACT
We investigate the origins and growth of the Financial Stability Mandate (FSM) to examine why bank
supervisors, inside and outside of central banks succeeded or failed to meet their FSM. Three issues
inform this study: (1) what drives changes in the FSM, (2) whether supervision should be conducted
within the central bank or in independent agencies and (3) whether supervision should be rules- or
discretion/principles-based. As histories of bank supervision are few, we focus on the history of six
countries where there is sufficient information, three in Europe (England, France, and Italy) and three
in the New World (U.S., Canada, and Colombia) to highlight the essential developments in the FSM.
While there was a common evolutionary path, the development of FSM in each individual country
was determined by how quickly each adapted to changes in the technology of the means of payment
and their political economy, including their disposition towards competitive markets and openness
to the world economy.
Gianni Toniolo
LUISS School of
European Political Economy
Via di Villa Emiliani 14
00197 Roma Italy
toniolo@economia.uniroma2.it
Eugene N. White
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
and NBER
white@economics.rutgers.edu

1. Introduction
“Financial stability remained a goal, of course.”
-----Ben Bernanke (2013)
In his somewhat wistful discussion of the Great Moderation of 1984-2007 for the
centennial of the Federal Reserve, Ben Bernanke (2013) conceded that “financial stability did not
figure prominently in monetary policy discussions during these years” as many economists and
central bankers had concluded that “the details of the structure of the financial system could be
largely ignored when analyzing the behavior of the broader economy.” The Federal Reserve's
and most other central banks' financial stability mandate was often a secondary consideration for
much of this period when control of inflation was of foremost importance. Since the Crisis of
2008, central banks have been given broad, new or renewed, mandates to guarantee financial
stability. The objective behind these mandates is to prevent another financial meltdown, but
there is little agreement about how to select and implement the appropriate policy instruments.
While there is a vast historical literature on the issue of price stability that has informed the
development of policies to carry out the price stability mandate, there are large gaps in our
knowledge of financial stability policies in the past. In this paper, we provide a historical
overview of the evolution of the “financial stability mandate” or FSM. Surveying its
development from the emergence of modern central banks through the Great Moderation, we
offer some general lessons.
As the behavior of policy makers during the Great Moderation demonstrated, price
stability and financial stability are often treated as separable in “ordinary times,” with regulation
and supervision of financial institutions and markets frequently conducted outside of central
banks. A commonly shared view, similar to that prevailing a century earlier, was that the best
guarantee of financial stability that a central bank could provide was long-term price stability
(Bordo and Schwartz, 1995; Bordo and Wheelock, 1998). If a financial crisis—an
“extraordinary” event---erupted, the central bank should step in, as Bagehot (1873)
recommended and act as a lender-of-last-resort (LOLR), providing liquidity to the market.
Central bank responses to the 1987 stock market and the dot.com crashes are near textbook
examples of this approach, with its emphasis on containment though liquidity provision that
enables solvent firms to withstand a panic and preserves the payments and settlement systems
(Mishkin and White, 2014). What is missing from this approach and what the Crisis of 2008
highlighted, is that regulation and supervision create financial systems that may moderate or
amplify panic-inducing shocks. For the most part, we will leave questions of LOLR, which
treats financial stability in “extraordinary” times to others in this conference volume and focus
on financial stability policies---regulation and supervision---deployed during “ordinary” times
with the aim of reducing the frequency and magnitude of crises.
In this paper, we investigate the origins and growth of the FSM with an eye to improving
policy makers’ understanding of why central banks and policy regimes in the past succeeded or
failed to meet their FSM. Two issues inform this chapter (1) whether supervision should be
conducted within the central bank or in independent agencies and (2) whether supervision should
be rules- or discretion/principles-based? We focus on the history of six countries, three in Europe
(England, France, and Italy) and three in the New World (U.S., Canada, and Colombia) to
highlight the essential developments in the FSM. While there was a common evolutionary path,
the development of FSM in each individual country was determined by how quickly each
3

adapted to changes in the technology of the means of payment and their political economy,
including their disposition towards competitive markets and openness to the world economy
Our historical approach permits us to provide an important perspective on the newly
relevant FSM. Mandates for price stability and full employment have been broad, perhaps even
vague, leaving central banks considerable discretion to define precise measures of their
performance. The same is certainly true for the FSM.1 For financial stability to be a separate
goal from price stability and full employment, Ricardo Reis (2013) points out that there must be
a measurable definition of financial stability and the trade-offs with these other goals must be
recognized so that a policy action may be contemplated when prices are stable and the economy
has met its growth objective but financial instability is a threat.2
In the next part, Section 2, we provide a definition of the FSM and the issues that arise
from this definition. Our survey begins in Section 3 with the nineteenth century when FSM
concerned itself with the convertibility of banknotes into coin. The challenge of deposit banking
to the FSM is examined in Section 4. Section 5 covers the transitional years from World War I
to the Great Depression when the problem of disentangling the payments mechanism from large
systematically important banks---SIFIs---to use an anachronistic term led some countries to
rescue insolvent institutions. Section 6 examines financial repression from the 1930s to the
1970s, when the shock the depression and the echoes of World War I induced countries to
provide an explicit or implicit guarantee to all banks while they imposed heavy regulation either
to fund wars or channel resources to favored industries. In Section 7, we cover the era of
globalization and deregulation beginning in the 1970s through the 1990s, when driven by
international capital flows and growing crises, financial repression collapsed. Although much of
the regulatory structure of the previous period was abandoned, the explicit and implicit
guarantees remained in place, leaving us with today’s unresolved dilemma. We end our survey
in Section 7 by examining the issues surrounding the internationalization of bank supervision.
We touch briefly on the renewal of the FSM after the 2008 crisis.
Although the term FSM is of recent coinage, its purpose has remained basically the same
over time: a protection of the payments and settlements system. Problems arise when attempts
are made to use the supervisory regime for other purposes—serving macroeconomic policy or
special interests. Several basic findings emerge from our selective historical survey: (1)
Supervision can only be as effective as the regulatory structure it is mandated to enforce. It is
necessary to support regulation but it has only limited scope in substituting for a flawed structure
that requires reform to keep pace with financial innovation of the payments and settlement
system (2) Given that financial innovation moves ahead of regulatory updating, it is challenging
1
The Swiss National Bank ‘s (2014) task is to “contribute to the stability of the financial system,” where “a stable
financial system can be defined as a system whose individual components---financial intermediaries and the
financial market infrastructure—fulfil their respective functions and prove resistant to potential shocks.” The
European Central Bank (2014) seeks financial stability, defined as: “a condition in which the financial system
comprising of [sic] financial intermediaries, markets and market infrastructures—is capable of withstanding shocks,
thereby reducing the likelihood of disruptions in the financial intermediation process which are severe enough to
significantly impair the allocation of savings to profitable investment opportunities.” The Norges Bank (2014) is
charged to promote “financial stability and contribute to robust and efficient financial infrastructures and payment
systems. The Financial Services Act of 2012 gave the Bank of England a statutory objective of protecting and
enhancing the stability of the financial system of the United Kingdom. Under the Bank’s “Core Purposes,” the bank
is committed to sustain financial stability whose purpose is to maintain three vital functions of the financial system
(1) the payments mechanism (2) financial intermediation (3) insuring against and dispersing risk.”
2
Borio (2011 ) argues that it may not be possible to attain all of these objectives simultaneously, presenting the
central bank with a dilemma.
4