NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERNATIONAL COORDINATION OF CENTRAL BANK POLICY
Charles Engel
Working Paper 20952
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20952
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2015
These remarks were prepared for the joint European Central Bank – International Monetary Fund conference
on “International Dimensions of Conventional and Unconventional Monetary Policy,” held at the European
Central Bank, April 28-29, 2014. I thank Jeffrey Frankel for helpful discussions, and Livio Stracca
for many useful comments on an earlier draft of this paper. The views expressed herein are those of
the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Charles Engel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

International Coordination of Central Bank Policy
Charles Engel
NBER Working Paper No. 20952
February 2015
JEL No. F41,F42
ABSTRACT
This paper surveys the current state of the literature on international monetary policy coordination.
It relates recent policy discussions to the lessons from the literature. It proposes several avenues for
future research.
Charles Engel
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
and NBER
cengel@ssc.wisc.edu

In recent years, there has been increasing interest in international monetary policy
cooperation, and, in general, coordination of central bank policies. In September 2010, Guido
Mantega, the Brazilian finance minister, commented that “we are in the middleof a currency
war”1, referring to the depreciation of the major currencies against those of Brazil and other
emerging markets. As Figure 1 shows, the trade-weighted dollar depreciated more than 15%
from early 2009 until September 2010. Subsequently, the dollar began to appreciate, which
brought further protests from policymakers in emerging markets. In April 2014, Raghuram
Rajan, the governor of the Reserve Bank of India, complained about the “initiation of
unconventional policy as well as an exit whose pace is driven solely by conditions in the source
country,”specifically aiming his remarks at monetary policy in the U.S. and other industrial
countries that “hold interest rates near zero for long, as well as balance sheet policies such as
quantitative easing or exchange intervention, that involve altering central bank balance sheets in
order to affect certain market prices.”2 Olivier Blanchard, Jonathan Ostry and Atish Ghosh of the
International Monetary Fund comment “if large players in the global economyare responsible
for significant adverse spillovers across a swath of smaller countries, this needs to be
acknowledged as well, and feasible remedies considered.”3
Even with this increasing concern about the spillovers from monetary policy, little new
research has emerged on this topic. This essay’s primary goal is to provide suggestions for
directions for future research on this important topic. A secondary goal is to point out the
disconnect between the recent policy discussion and what the existing academic literature tells
us.
Clearly much of the recent concern about the need for monetary policy coordination
stems from the recent behavior of the dollar. Figure 1 plots the dollar exchange rate relative to
the euro and a trade-weighted basket. Much of the initial concern about the external effects of
U.S. monetary policy stem from the large depreciation of the dollar index from early 2009 until
late 2010. Much of the commentary has attributed this depreciation to the aggressively
expansionary policy of the Federal Reserve.
However, it is informative to consider this depreciation in light of the dollarfluctuations
before and during the global financial crisis. The depreciation of the dollar in 2009-2010 in effect
1See Financial Times, 2010.
2See Rajan, 2014.
3Blanchard, Ostry and Ghosh, 2013.
1

exactly reversed the dollar appreciation that began in August 2008. By September 2010, the
effective dollar exchange rate was at approximately the same point as in August 2008. On the
other hand, the 2009-2010 dollar depreciation mirrors the sustained dollar depreciation from late
2005 to early2008. The relevant question is whether the fluctuations of the dollar can be laid
entirely at the doorstep of monetary policy in 2005-2008 and 2009-2010, or whether other forces
were at work.
The dollar/euro exchange rate has not followed exactly the pattern of the dollar index.
Like the dollar index, there was a depreciation of the dollar relative to the euro from 2005-2008,
an appreciation during the height of the global financial crisis, and then a subsequent
depreciation. However, the depreciation of the dollar relative to the euro came to a halt in late
2009, and the dollar appreciated from 2009 until the end of 2010, before beginning to depreciate
again. The subsequent dollar appreciation beginning in 2011 is usually attributed to the European
debt crisis.
While monetary policy in the U.S. clearly has a very important role in driving the
exchange rate (and euro area monetarypolicy is an important determinant of the dollar/euro rate
as well), there are circumstances that drive monetary policy. The 2005-2008 and 2009-2010
periods are often described as times when investors “search for yield” drove them to move their
capital overseas, much of it to emerging markets, in order to generate a higher return. The period
of dollar appreciation during the global financial crisis as well as during the European debt crisis
is often called a flight to safety, where the dollar is considered a “safe haven.”
What does it mean for the dollar to be a safe haven, and why does this lead to a dollar
appreciation? It is not plausiblethat the phrase refers to a case in which U.S. real assets –
equities, property, etc. – are perceived to be less volatile than similar foreign assets. Most likely
such a change in risk would lead to an increase in the value of those assets, but not necessarily an
increase in the value of the dollar. That is, the price of U.S. stocks would rise, but that would not
require a dollar appreciation – their price would rise in dollar terms if there is aflight to safety by
both U.S. and foreign investors. There is no reason for the dollar to appreciate unless the U.S.
stocks provide more of a safe haven to foreign investors than to U.S. investors. If the exchange
rate stays constant, the increase in the price is the same for U.S. investors that value returns in
dollars and foreign investors that value return in foreign currency.
2