NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
‘TO HAVE AND HAVE NOT’:
ARE RICH LITIGIOUS PLAINTIFFS FAVORED IN COURT?
B. Zorina Khan
Working Paper 20945
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20945
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2015
I received valuable comments from Stanley Engerman, Catherine Fisk, William Gallagher, Henry
Gemery, Naomi Lamoreaux, Craig McEwen, Alan S. Taylor, Christopher Tomlins, and participants
in seminars at Bowdoin College, the National Bureau of Economic Research, American Society for
Legal History, and the Economic History Association. Employees at the Maine Archives were very
helpful. I am grateful to Bowdoin College for offering research support for the project, and to Ginny
Hopcroft, Carr Ross and Guy Saldanha for their assistance. Liability for errors is limited to the author.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by B. Zorina Khan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

‘To Have and Have Not’: Are Rich Litigious Plaintiffs Favored in Court?
B. Zorina Khan
NBER Working Paper No. 20945
February 2015
JEL No. K10,K41,N11,O43
ABSTRACT
A long-standing debate centers on the role of the “Haves” and the “Have Nots” in litigation. It is often
suggested that wealthier plaintiffs are more likely to be repeat players, who tend to prevail in disputes
before the courts. Do wealthy repeat players indeed capture courts and succeed in shaping legal rules
regardless of the intent of policy makers? This paper employs a unique historical data set that allows
a direct test of these hypotheses, including information on the wealth of participants in civil district
courts, their occupations, and the total number of lawsuits filed by each litigant over a long period.
The results show that repeat players indeed tended to be wealthier, in occupations that likely benefited
from creating a reputation for uncooperative litigation strategies. However, outcomes in court were
independent of wealth, and related more to the type of case. Far from being under the sway of the
“Haves,” early courts functioned as an effective enforcement mechanism for extensive markets in
debt, that likely promoted economic growth during this period.
B. Zorina Khan
9700 College Station
Bowdoin College
Brunswick, ME 04011
and NBER
bkhan@bowdoin.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
“Do not rich men oppress you, and draw you before the judgment seats?”
-- Epistle of St. James, 2:6
Legal institutions are a primary source of socioeconomic capital, and have the potential to enable
market interactions and economic growth if they are objective, predictable and unbiased. At the
most general level, this project responds to Douglass C. North’s call for more research on the
economics of institutions comprising “the rules of the game of a society or, more formally, the
humanly-devised constraints that structure human interaction.”1 Similarly, Stanley Engerman and
Kenneth Sokoloff point out that, although it is widely acknowledged that institutions are a key factor
in explaining divergent economic growth paths, there is less understanding about the way in which
institutions are formed, how they evolve, and why some persist despite their inefficiency.2
Our understanding of the evolution of institutions has been enriched by a large stock of
historical-legal research on courts and cases. Law and society scholars have been somewhat divided,
however, on the relationship between courts, markets and society. Some have proposed that a
“moral economy” existed at least until the end of the eighteenth century, and that courts were based
on community norms which were hostile to rational economic transactions; whereas others point to a
pervasive commercial market orientation that existed from the earliest years of settlement, and to
court dockets that primarily functioned as an enforcement mechanism for deep and extensive debt
markets that spanned many states.3 Another way in which legal institutions can depart from their
1 Douglass C. North, p. 3, Institutions, institutional change and economic performance. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ.
Press.
2 Stanley Engerman and Kenneth Sokoloff, “Institutional and Non-Institutional Explanations of Economic Differences,”
NBER WP 9989, 2003; “Colonialism, Inequality and Long-Run Paths of Development,” WP 11057, 2005; and “Factor
Endowments, Inequality, and Paths of Development among New World Economies,” Economia, vol. 3 (1) 2002.
3 See, among others, Bruce H. Mann, Neighbors and Strangers: Law and Community in Early Connecticut (Chapel Hill,
NC, 1987), 9-10. David Thomas Konig, Law and Society in Puritan Massachusetts: Essex County, 1629-1692 (Chapel
Hill, North Carolina, 1979); William E. Nelson, Disputes and Conflict Resolution in Plymouth County, Massachusetts,
3

role as the facilitator of market enterprise is through corruption or biases in favour of special
interests. Recent research highlights the strong negative impact of “the grabbing hand” for
economic progress, whereby talented individuals funnel resources and abilities to wealth-
redistribution, rather than wealth-creation, a problem that is especially prevalent in developing
countries where ancillary institutions are less able to substitute for captured legal processes.4
Marc Galanter, in what has been called “the most visible, widely cited, and influential article
ever published in the law and society field,” promoted the thesis that the “Haves” tend to prevail in
litigation.5 The Haves comprise repeat players in court who acquire both economic and political
advantages that allow them to defeat their opponents (“the Have Nots”) and to attain their private
long-run objectives, potentially at the cost of social welfare. Such repeat players have access to
extensive specialized resources, accumulate knowledge about what works best, and are able to
benefit from economies of scale and low start up costs. They can also count on privileges beyond
the legal system that enhance their standing in court, such as long-term relationships and influential
social networks. The judiciary itself might be captured and act to further the interests of the Haves,
despite countervailing pressure from those who represent the relatively disadvantaged petitioners.
More generally, the Haves can influence the rules of the game or the path of institutional change,
regardless of the initial intent of policymakers. A corollary of this perspective is that the focus of
1725-1825 (Chapel Hill, North Carolina, 1981). Bruce Mann’s study of early Connecticut, pointed to a
professionalization of the legal system that framed conflicts in a more predictable and uniform fashion than prior
resolutions based on community norms. Mann also found that courts soon became the fora for settling commercial
disputes rather than personal grievances, and argued that more impersonal capital markets had developed in rural
Connecticut by the 1750s. However, in Republic of Debtors: Bankruptcy in the Age of American Independence,
(Harvard University Press, 2002, pp. 2-3) he claimed the existence of a “moral economy of debt” that waned over the
course of the 18th century but still “established the idea against which debtors and creditors measured themselves and
each other and to which they gave legal expression…. Within that framework inability to pay was a moral failure, not a
business risk.”
4 A. Shleifer, R. Vishny, and K. Murphy, "Why is rent-seeking so costly to growth?" American Economic Review
83.2:409-414 (1993).
5
Grossman, Kritzer and Macaulay (p. 803), referring to Galanter, Marc (1974) “Why the ‘Haves’ Come Out Ahead:
Speculations on the Limits of Legal Change,” 9 Law and Society Rev. 95-160 .
4