NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE DYNAMICS OF FINANCIALLY CONSTRAINED ARBITRAGE
Denis Gromb
Dimitri Vayanos
Working Paper 20968
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20968
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2015
We thank Philippe Bacchetta, Bruno Biais, Patrick Bolton, Darrell Duffie, Vito Gala, Jennifer Huang,
Henri Pages, Anna Pavlova, Matti Suominen, as well as seminar participants in Amsterdam, Bergen,
Bordeaux, the Bank of Italy, la Banque de France, BI Oslo, Bocconi University, Boston University,
CEMFI Madrid, Columbia, Copenhagen, Dartmouth College, Duke, Durham University, ESC Paris,
ESC Toulouse, the HEC-INSEAD-PSE workshop, HEC Lausanne, Helsinki, the ICSTE-Nova seminar
in Lisbon, INSEAD, Imperial College, Institut Henri Poincare, LSE, McGill, MIT, Naples, NYU,
Paris School of Economics, University of Piraeus, Porto, Queen's University, Stanford, Toulouse,
Universite Paris Dauphine, Science Po - Paris, the joint THEMA-ESSEC seminar, Vienna and Wharton
for comments. Financial support from the Paul Woolley Centre at the LSE, and a grant from the Fondation
Banque de France, are gratefully acknowledged. All errors are ours. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Denis Gromb and Dimitri Vayanos. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Dynamics of Financially Constrained Arbitrage
Denis Gromb and Dimitri Vayanos
NBER Working Paper No. 20968
February 2015
JEL No. D52,D53,G01,G11,G12,G14,G23
ABSTRACT
We develop a model of financially constrained arbitrage, and use it to study the dynamics of arbitrage
capital, liquidity, and asset prices. Arbitrageurs exploit price discrepancies between assets traded in
segmented markets, and in doing so provide liquidity to investors. A collateral constraint limits their
positions as a function of capital. We show that the dynamics of arbitrage activity are self-correcting:
following a shock that depletes arbitrage capital, profitability increases, and this allows capital to be
gradually replenished. Spreads increase more and recover faster for more volatile trades, although
arbitrageurs cut their positions in these trades the least. When arbitrage capital is more mobile across
markets, liquidity in each market generally becomes less volatile, but the reverse may hold for aggregate
liquidity because of mobility-induced contagion.
Denis Gromb
INSEAD
Boulevard de Constance
77305 Fontanebleau
France
denis.gromb@insead.edu
Dimitri Vayanos
Department of Finance, OLD 3.41
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UNITED KINGDOM
and CEPR
and also NBER
d.vayanos@lse.ac.uk

1 Introduction
The assumption of frictionless arbitrage is central to finance theory and all of its practical applica-
tions. Itishardtoreconcile, however, withthelargebodyofevidenceonasset-market“anomalies,”
especiallythoseconcerningthepricediscrepanciesbetweenassetswithalmostidenticalpayoffs. One
approach to address the anomalies has been to abandon the assumption of frictionless arbitrage
and study the constraints faced by real-world arbitrageurs, e.g., hedge funds or trading desks in
investment banks. Arbitrageurs often have limited external capital, and there is growing evidence
that this constrains their activity and ultimately affects market liquidity and asset prices. These
effects arise both during crises and more tranquil times, and in a variety of markets ranging from
individual stocks all the way to currencies.1
In this paper we develop a model of financially constrained arbitrage, and use it to study
the dynamics of arbitrage capital, liquidity, and asset prices. These dynamics involve a two-way
feedback. On one hand, arbitrageurs’ capital affects their investment capacity and hence asset
prices. On the other hand, because arbitrageurs trade in asset markets, asset prices determine
their trading profits and losses, which in turn drive the evolution of arbitrage capital.
We show that the dynamics of arbitrage activity are self-correcting. For example, following a
shock that depletes arbitrage capital, arbitrage activity becomes more profitable, and this allows
capital to be replenished and converge back towards its steady-state, pre-shock value. We also
determine how the self-correcting pattern manifests itself in the cross-section of arbitrage trades.
More volatile trades with higher margin requirements experience a larger increase in their spreads
(i.e., price discrepancies relative to frictionless arbitrage) in response to the shock, and a faster
recovery. Yet, arbitrageurs cut their positions in these trades the least. Trades with longer time to
convergence also experience a larger increase in their spreads in response to the shock.
We finally use our model to examine how the degree of mobility of arbitrage capital affects
market stability. When capital is more mobile across markets, the liquidity that arbitrageurs
provide to investors in each market generally responds less to shocks. At the same time, mobility
generates contagion, as arbitrageurs cut their positions across multiple markets in response to a
shock in one market. Because of contagion, the aggregate liquidity, averaged across markets, may
respond more to shocks when arbitrage capital is more mobile.
1For example, Comerton-Forde, Hendershott, Jones, Moulton, and Seasholes (2010) find that bid-ask spreads
quotedbyspecialists intheNewYorkStockExchangewidenwhenspecialists experiencelosses. Hameed,Kang,and
Viswanathan(2010)andNagel(2012)showthatthereturnstoaliquidity-providingstrategythatexploitsshort-term
reversals are higher following drops in the stock market or increases in volatility, times during which specialists are
more likely to be constrained. Coval and Stafford (2007) show that stocks sold by distressed mutual funds, which
experienceextremeoutflows,performabnormallywellaftertheoutflowsoccur. JylhaandSuominen(2011)findthat
outflowsfromhedgefundsthatperformthecarrytradepredictpoorperformanceofthattrade,withlowinterest-rate
currencies appreciating and high-interest rate ones depreciating.
1

The specifics of our model are as follows. We assume a discrete-time, infinite-horizon economy,
with a riskless asset and a number of “arbitrage opportunities” consisting of pairs of risky assets
with identical payoffs. Each risky asset is traded in a segmented market by investors who can
trade only that asset and the riskless asset. Investors receive endowment shocks that affect their
valuation for the risky asset in their market. Because of these shocks, the prices of the two assets in
a pair can differ. The assumption that the two assets in each pair have identical payoffs is meant to
capture situations where assets have closely related payoffs but can trade at significantly different
prices. Market segmentation could arise because of informational asymmetries or regulation.2
An additional set of agents, arbitrageurs, seek to exploit the price discrepancies between the
assets in each pair. In doing so, they intermediate trade across investors and provide liquidity to
them. Arbitrageurs are “special” in that they can trade across segmented markets and thus have
better opportunities than other investors. We term theprice discrepancies that they seek to exploit
“arbitrage spreads” and use them as an inverse measure of liquidity: arbitrageurs provide perfect
liquidity if spreads are zero.
Arbitrageurs are constrained in their access to external capital. We derive their financial con-
straint following the logic of market segmentation and assuming that they can walk away from
their liabilities unless these are backed by collateral. Consider an arbitrageur wishing to buy an
asset and short the other asset in its pair. The arbitrageur could borrow the cash required to buy
the asset, but the loan must be backed by collateral. Posting the asset as collateral would leave
the lender exposed to a decline in its value. The arbitrageur could post as additional collateral the
short position in the other asset, which offsets declines in the value of the long position. Market
segmentation, however, prevents investors other than arbitrageurs from dealing in multiple risky
assets. Hence, the additional collateral must come from the arbitrageur’s holdings of the riskless
asset. We assume that collateral must be sufficient to fully protect the lender against default. The
collateral requirement limits the positions that arbitrageurs can establish as a function of their
capital. Note that positions in assets with more volatile payoffs require more collateral so that
lenders are protected against larger fluctuations in asset value.
In the Appendix we derive the arbitrageurs’ financial constraint as an optimal contracting
arrangement. We consider the full set of collateralized contracts that can be traded between
arbitrageurs andinvestors in each segmented market. We showthat whenasset payoff distributions
from one period to the next are binomial, contracts traded in collateral equilibrium (Geanakoplos
2Examples of assets with closely related payoffs that can trade at significantly different prices include “Siamese-
twin” stocks, which are claims to identical dividend streams but trade in different countries (e.g., Rosenthal and
Young(1990) andDaboraandFroot(1999)),“on-the-run”and“off-the-run”bonds,whichhavesimilarcouponrates
and times to maturity but were issued at different times (e.g., Amihud and Mendelson (1991), Warga (1992) and
Krishnamurthy (2002)), bonds and credit-default swaps, the two legs of covered interest arbitrage strategies in the
currencymarket,etc. InthecaseofSiamese-twinstocks,forexample,theinvestorsinourmodelcouldbeinterpreted
as domestic-equity mutual funds,which havea regulatory mandateto invest only in domestic stocks.
2