NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXCHANGE RATE EXPOSURE AND RISK MANAGEMENT:
THE CASE OF JAPANESE EXPORTING FIRMS
Takatoshi Ito
Satoshi Koibuchi
Kiyotaka Sato
Junko Shimizu
Working Paper 21040
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21040
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2015
The authors would also appreciate the financial support of the JSPS (Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science) Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research; Ito for (A) -25245044; Koibuchi for Young Scientists
(B) No. 23730307Sato for (A) No. 24243041 and (B) No. 24330101, and Shimizu for (C) No. 24530362.
This survey is supported by the Research Institute of Economy, Trade and Industry (RIETI) and the
Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI). We wish to thank all respondents of firms and
RIETI staff for their kind help and cooperation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Takatoshi Ito, Satoshi Koibuchi, Kiyotaka Sato, and Junko Shimizu. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Exchange Rate Exposure and Risk Management: The case of Japanese Exporting Firms
Takatoshi Ito, Satoshi Koibuchi, Kiyotaka Sato, and Junko Shimizu
NBER Working Paper No. 21040
March 2015
JEL No. F31,G15,G32
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the relationship between the Japanese firms’ exposure to the exchange rate
risk and risk management, such as choice of invoicing currency, and financial and operational hedge.
The firm’s exposure to the exchange rate risk is estimated by co-movements of the stock prices and
exchange rates, following Dominguez (1998) and others. Data on risk management measures—financial
and operational hedging, the choice of invoice currency and the price revision strategy (pass-through)—were
collected from a questionnaire survey covering all Tokyo Stock Exchange listed firms in 2009. Results
show the followings: First, firms with greater dependency on sales in foreign markets have greater
foreign exchange exposure. Second, the higher the US dollar invoicing share, the greater is the foreign
exchange exposure. But, risk is reduced by both financial and operational hedging. Third, yen invoicing
reduces foreign exchange exposure. These findings indicate that Japanese firms use the combination
of risk management tools to mitigate the degree of the exchange rate risk.
Takatoshi Ito Kiyotaka Sato
Columbia University Yokohama National University
School of International and Public Affairs Department of Economics,
International Affairs Building 79-3 Tokiwadai, Hodogaya-ku
Room 927, (MC 3333) Yokohama, 240-8501, Kanagawa
420 West 118th Street Japan
New York, NY 10027 sato@ynu.ac.jp
and NBER
ti2164@columbia.edu Junko Shimizu
Gakushuin University
Satoshi Koibuchi Faculty of Economics
Chuo University 1-5-1 Mejiro, Toshima-ku
Faculty of Commerce Tokyo, 171-8588, Japan
742-1 Higashi Nakano Junko.Shimizu@gakushuin.ac.jp
Hachioji, Tokyo, 192-0393 Japan
koibuchi@tamacc.chuo-u.ac.jp

1. Introduction
A period of strong yen squeeze profits of Japanese exporters either by lower sales with
higher prices, in case that yen appreciation is passed through to the retail prices in the
destination market, or by a decline in the profit margin, in case that it is not passed through, in
the destination market. Between 2008 and 2012, the yen appreciated vis-à-vis the US dollar by
more than 30 percent. Since the yen was floated in 1973, Japanese firms have continuously
concerned and struggled with the yen appreciation, and this time was no exception.
Various ways to manage foreign exchange risk have been developed by the Japanese
exporters over the time. Even though some production bases have been moved abroad,
significant production capacity remains in Japan. Those productions in Japan are still exposed to
the exchange rate risk—a long-term yen appreciation trend and short-term volatility.
Japanese firms usually use both financial and operational hedges to manage their currency
exposure. Financial hedges are conducted mainly with the use of currency derivatives, while
operational hedges are devised in the firm's international transactions between the head office
and foreign subsidiaries. With the development of financial hedge techniques, such as forward
transactions, currency swaps, and currency options, firms can hedge their currency exposure
against foreign exchange risks. However, these transactions, which determines the yen receipt
with certainty if fully hedged, can be used only for the horizon of several months, and with
some costs. Financial hedge cannot be effective in the long-run. In response to the
unprecedented level of strong yen in the mid-1990s, Japanese exporting firms have accelerated
moving and expanding production bases overseas. The firms have also increased the proportion
of imported components from overseas and taken other counter measures to mitigate the
damage from the stronger yen.
It is well-known that Japan is an outlier in the pattern of invoicing currencies. According to
"stylized facts" of the choice of invoice currency, which were developed in the 1970s following
the seminal work of Grassman (1973), trades between two economically advanced countries
tend to be invoiced in the exporter's currency, and trade between economically advanced and
developing countries is generally invoiced in the advanced country’s currency. However,
Japan’s currency invoicing pattern differs from these stylized facts1. According to the Ministry
of Finance data, Japanese exporters have a strong tendency to choose the importer’s currency
for their exports to advanced countries such as the US and EU. For exports to Asia, the US
dollar, which is the currency of the third country, is commonly used. This is one of the reasons
why currency risk management is a serious problem among the Japanese firms. If their exports
1 Ito et al. (2010, 2012) investigate this puzzle by conducting and analyzing a series of interviews of
representative exporters.
2

were invoiced in the yen, their business performance would not have been affected as much as it
has actually been during the strong yen periods. Besides invoicing, firms can change export
prices, even if the invoicing currency is in the yen in the medium-term (in the next export
contract period). How often the firms adjust the export prices in response to the exchange rate
(i.e., pass-through), is a variable that the firms choose to decide. If firms are so competitive that
they can raise their product prices to offset losses from yen appreciation, then the exchange rate
fluctuations would not cause any severe impact on their profit performance. Accordingly, the
medium-term effectiveness of exchange risk management depends on the choice of invoicing
currency and the degree of pass-through, both of which depends on competitiveness of products.
Then, how can the effectiveness of Japanese firms' exchange rate risk management be
measured? One possible way is to measure each firm's exchange rate exposure, and to
investigate the relationship between the exchange rate exposure and the exchange rate risk
management. We follow previous studies (such as Dominguez (1998) and Doukas (2003)) that
have derived exchange rate exposure by estimating the sensitivity of firms’ cash flows to the
fluctuations in the exchange rate. The value of a firm is the present value of its future cash flow
stream and the current exchange rate variation will affect the cash flows in the future. To date,
many empirical studies have used stock returns as a proxy for the firm value, and have obtained
exchange rate exposure from a regression of stock returns on an exchange rate change.
Although the issue of how to measure firms’ exposure to the exchange rate fluctuations has been
investigated by many researchers in the field of corporate finance, few existing studies have
specifically undertaken the firm level analysis of the exchange rate exposure and exchange rate
risk management including the choice of invoice currency and pass-through policy.
In order to obtain information on how export firms are coping with the exchange rate
fluctuation, an ad hoc questionnaire survey was designed and conducted with the cooperation of
the Research Institute of Economy, Trade, and Industry (RIETI). Questionnaires were sent in
September 2009 to 920 Japanese manufacturing firms. They were selected among those listed
on the Tokyo Stock Exchange with a criterion that they reported foreign sales in the
consolidated financial statements in fiscal year 2008 and 2009. Our sample firms are those that
responded to the RIETI Survey 2009. The number of our samples is 227, spreading across 15
industries: Food, Textile, Chemicals, Medicinal Chemicals, Coal and Oil Products, Rubber
Products, Glass and Stone Products, Iron and Steel, Non-Metal Products, Metal Products,
General Machinery, Electrical Machinery, Transport Equipment, Precision Instruments and
Other products. The response rate was 25% (=227/920). The questionnaire survey (hereafter,
the 2009 RIETI survey) provided us with new information on Japanese firm's use of financial
and operational hedging, price revision in response to the exchange rate changes, and choice of
invoicing currency. The survey results are aggregated by industry and by the firm size, using
3