NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SHORT-TERM, LONG-TERM, AND CONTINUING CONTRACTS
Maija Halonen-Akatwijuka
Oliver Hart
Working Paper 21005
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21005
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2015
We would like to thank Oren Bar-Gill, Lucian Bebchuk, Kirill Borusyak, Donald Franklin, Louis Kaplow,
Jeffrey Picel, Robert Scott, Kathryn Spier, Paul Tucker, Massimiliano Vatiero, and Luigi Zingales
for helpful discussions. We have also benefitted from the responses of audiences at the 2014 FOM
meetings at the University of Southern California, at the University of Lausanne, and at Harvard Law
School. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the U.S. National Science Foundation through
the National Bureau of Economic Research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Maija Halonen-Akatwijuka and Oliver Hart. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Short-term, Long-term, and Continuing Contracts
Maija Halonen-Akatwijuka and Oliver Hart
NBER Working Paper No. 21005
March 2015
JEL No. D23,D86,K12
ABSTRACT
Parties often regulate their relationships through “continuing” contracts that are neither long-term
nor short-term but usually roll over. We study the trade-off between long-term, short-term, and continuing
contracts in a two period model where gains from trade exist in the first period, and may or may not
exist in the second period. A long-term contract that mandates trade in both periods is disadvantageous
since renegotiation is required if there are no gains from trade in the second period. A short-term contract
is disadvantageous since a new contract must be negotiated if gains from trade exist in the second
period. A continuing contract can be better. In a continuing contract there is no obligation to trade
in the second period but if there are gains from trade the parties will bargain “in good faith” using
the first period contract as a reference point. This can reduce the cost of negotiating the next contract.
Continuing contracts are not a panacea, however, since good faith bargaining may preclude the use
of outside options in the bargaining process and as a result parties will sometimes fail to trade when
this is efficient.
Maija Halonen-Akatwijuka
Department of Economics
School of Economics, Finance and Management
University of Bristol
12 Priory Road
Bristol BS8 1TN
United Kingdom
Maija.Halonen@bristol.ac.uk
Oliver Hart
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 220
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ohart@harvard.edu

1. Introduction
A large literature in economics and law has studied why parties write long-term contracts. A leading
explanation is that such contracts are useful to support specific investments, and there is much
empirical support for this1. In a way it has been more challenging for economists to explain why parties
write short-term contracts, that is, contracts that are shorter than the likely term of their relationship.
The conventional answer is that it is costly for the parties to anticipate the contingencies that will arise
during the latter part of their relationship and to write down unambiguously how to deal with them.
However, as Maskin and Tirole (1999) have shown, if parties are fully rational, ingenious mechanisms
can be used to get the parties to reveal information as their relationship progresses, and to incorporate
this information into an enforceable contract. If there is even a reasonable chance that the parties’
relationship will endure it is hard to see why, under classical assumptions, such mechanisms would not
be used. Thus the question remains: why do parties write short-term contracts?
The purpose of this paper is to investigate this question and in doing so also to study another question
that as far as we know has received little attention from economists or lawyers. Why do parties often
regulate their relationships through contracts that are neither explicitly long-term nor short-term, but
rather are of indefinite duration in the sense that most of the time they roll over? Leading examples are
rental contracts where the lease is typically renewed; month to month rental contracts with no lease;
employment contracts where each party can (under some conditions) terminate the relationship, but
where they usually do not – most of the time business continues “as usual”. We call such contracts
“continuing”, although other terms are surely possible2.
Before proceeding we should make it clear that we do not view continuing contracts as necessarily
legally enforceable. A tenant is typically not obliged to renew the lease or even to attempt to do so, and
the landlord may have no such requirement either. Similarly, in many employment contracts, a worker
can quit or a firm can fire the worker. Also, in a continuing relationship, the existence of a prior contract
may put no legal constraints on how the parties negotiate the next contract3. In this paper we will be
interested less in what is legally required than in how people actually behave. We will focus on the idea
that the parties are likely to apply notions of fairness, fair dealing and good faith when they renegotiate
continuing contracts even if they are not legally required to do so. Moreover, the prior contract is likely
to be a very important reference point for determining whether a renegotiation is seen as fair4. For
1 See Williamson (1975) and Klein et al. (1978). For empirical evidence, see Goldberg and Erickson (1987), Joskow
(1987), Crocker and Masten (1988), Pirrong (1993), Brickley et al. (2006), and Bandiera (2007).
2 We do not describe them as “indefinite-term contracts” since lawyers already use the term indefinite to describe
preliminary agreements that may not be enforceable. See Bebchuk and Ben-Shahar (2001) and Schwartz and Scott
(2007) for an analysis of such agreements.
3 But in some cases the parties may have an obligation to bargain in good faith. See Schwartz and Scott (2007).
4 Kahneman et al. (1986), a paper to which we return below, provides considerable support for the idea that past
transactions serve as a reference point for future ones. See also Okun (1981). Rotemberg (2011) analyzes the
optimal pricing policy for a firm that faces consumers who can be antagonized by prices that are higher than usual.
Bar-Gill and Ben-Shahar (2003) argue that fairness is an important consideration when contracts are renegotiated
and that previously agreed-upon terms will influence what is regarded as fair.
2

example, consider a new rent or wage. Whether this is regarded as reasonable or not will be judged in
light of the initial rent or wage: attention will be focused on the change. Of course, other factors can be
important, such as market conditions, but the prior terms that the parties agreed to will have particular
salience5. We will be interested in analyzing the consequences of this for the choice of an optimal
contract. We will argue that using the prior contract as a reference point can have costs as well as
benefits. On the one hand it can mean that there is less to argue about if not much has changed in the
relationship. On the other hand, it may make it more difficult to take certain kinds of outside options
into account, which may cause inefficiency.
We will consider a situation where parties have a choice between a long-term, a short-term, and a
continuing contract. A short-term contract is one where the parties agree in advance that they will not
be bound by considerations of fairness or good faith if they negotiate a future contract. A continuing
contract is one where the parties agree that they will be bound by such considerations6. Of course, in
practice the choice may not be as clear-cut as this. For example, one of the authors of this paper has
rented a vacation house for many years in a row. The relationship as it has developed is best thought of
as continuing even though no language was ever used to that effect. This is a situation where a short-
term contract was probably feasible only if one or both parties had no intention of renewing.
Nonetheless it is useful to consider the choice of all three contracts—long-term, short-term, continuing -
-since economists have traditionally focused on long-term and short-term contracts. We will return to
this issue of feasibility in the conclusions7.
To analyze continuing contracts, we apply the contracts as reference points approach developed in Hart
and Moore (2008). According to this approach one role of a contract is to get parties “on the same
page”, so as to avoid future misunderstanding. Misunderstanding leads to aggrievement and shading (in
the form of departures from consummate performance), and consequent deadweight losses. Hart and
Moore (2008) show that, under these conditions, Maskin-Tirole-type mechanisms lose their force and
5 Some support for the idea that prior transactions serve as a reference point can also be found in the law. The
Uniform Commercial Code, Article 2-305, deals with the case where parties have signed a contract but left the
price open. Subsection 2, dealing with the case where the price is to be fixed by one party, includes the
qualification that the price must be fixed in good faith. The commentary goes on to argue that ‘ in the normal case
a “posted price” or a future seller’s or buyer’s “given price,” “price in effect,” “market price,” or the like satisfies
the good faith requirement.’ (Italics added.) See Uniform Commercial Code 50 2014-2015.
6 Parties do sometimes include language in contracts about future negotiation. For example, Goldberg and Erickson
(1987, footnote 29) describe a contract that was for three successive three-year terms. The contract stated that
the parties could not terminate solely because the price was unsatisfactory without first engaging in good faith
negotiation on the price.
7 It is worth noting that Kahneman et al. (1986) find that past transactions do not form a reference point if the
previous transaction was explicitly temporary, supporting the distinction we make between short-term and
continuing contracts. Also Bewley (1999) finds that while wages in the primary sector (long-term employment) are
downward rigid, wages in the secondary sector (short-term positions) are flexible downward, again supporting our
distinction between short-term and continuing contracts.
3