NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REGIONAL REDISTRIBUTION THROUGH THE U.S. MORTGAGE MARKET
Erik Hurst
Benjamin J. Keys
Amit Seru
Joseph S. Vavra
Working Paper 21007
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21007
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2015
We thank Sumit Agarwal, Heitor Almeida, Tom Davidoff, John Driscoll, Matthew Kahn, Arvind
Krishnamurthy, John Leahy, Tomasz Piskorski, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Monika Piazzesi, David
Scharfstein, Johannes Stroebel, Adi Sunderam, Francesco Trebbi, and seminar participants at
Berkeley Haas, Ennaudi Institute, Federal Reserve Board, HEC, Indian School of Business,
Kellogg, MIT, National University of Singapore, NBER Monetary Economics Program Meeting,
Ohio State, NBER Summer Institute, Chicago Fed, Rutgers, Stanford, Toronto, UBC, UCLA,
University of Chicago Booth, University of Chicago Harris, University of Illinois, University of
Michigan, Wharton, the FRIC 2014 conference on financial frictions, and the NBER conference
on Financing Housing Capital for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Erik Hurst, Benjamin J. Keys, Amit Seru, and Joseph S. Vavra. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Regional Redistribution Through the U.S. Mortgage Market
Erik Hurst, Benjamin J. Keys, Amit Seru, and Joseph S. Vavra
NBER Working Paper No. 21007
March 2015, Revised March 2016
JEL No. E02,G21,G28
ABSTRACT
Regional shocks are an important feature of the U.S. economy. Households' ability to self-insure
against these shocks depends on how they affect local interest rates. In the United States, most
borrowing occurs through the mortgage market and is influenced by the presence of government-
sponsored enterprises (GSEs). We establish that despite large regional variation in predictable
default risk, GSE mortgage rates for otherwise identical loans do not vary spatially. In contrast,
the private market does set interest rates that vary with local risk. We use a spatial model of
collateralized borrowing to show that the national interest rate policy substantially affects welfare
by redistributing resources across regions.
Erik Hurst Amit Seru
Booth School of Business Booth School of Business
University of Chicago University of Chicago
Harper Center 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637 Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER and NBER
erik.hurst@chicagobooth.edu amit.seru@chicagobooth.edu
Benjamin J. Keys Joseph S. Vavra
The Harris School Booth School of Business
University of Chicago University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Suite 161 Chicago, IL 60637
Chicago, IL 60637 and NBER
benkeys@uchicago.edu joseph.vavra@chicagobooth.edu

I Introduction
The Great Recession has led to wide disparities in economic activity across regions within the United States. The
extent to which households can borrow to self-insure against these regional shocks depends crucially on the interest
rate and how it varies with regional economic conditions. Theoretical models typically assume that regions within
a monetary union share a common risk-adjusted interest rate.1 Yet, there are no papers — of which we are aware
— testing whether risk-adjusted interest rates are equated across regions within a monetary union like the United
States.
In this paper, we use data on mortgage loans, which represent the bulk of household borrowing, to document
two new facts. First, risk-adjusted rates are not equalized across locations within the U.S. monetary union: despite
large regional variation in ex-ante predictable default risk, there is no regional variation in mortgage contract rates
for loans securitized by government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs). Since GSEs securitize most of the loans in the
U.S. mortgage market, this constant contract rate in the face of variation in predictable default risk implies that
the majority of borrowers face risk-adjusted rates which do vary with their locations. Second, this lack of risk-based
pricing does not occur because this risk cannot be observed ex ante: we show that otherwise similar non-GSE loans
that are securitized in the private market increase (decrease) mortgage rates when ex-ante local default risk rises
(falls).
If mortgage rates do not respond to local economic shocks that increase ex-ante default risk, then individuals in
thoseregionsfacelowerborrowingcoststhantheyotherwisewouldifdefaultriskwaspricedintointerestrates. This
reduction in borrowing costs may in turn offset some of the negative local economic shock that increased default
risk in the first place. Conversely, individuals in regions with low default risk will face higher borrowing costs than
if this low default risk was priced into interest rates. Thus, the constant interest rate “policy” followed by the
GSEs results in state-contingent regional transfers. While the first half of our paper concentrates on documenting
the constant interest rate policy, the second half of the paper quantifies the size and welfare consequences of these
implicit transfers.
Our paper unfolds in three parts. We begin by using detailed loan-level data securitized by the GSEs to show
that local characteristics systematically predict future local loan default even after controlling for other observable
borrower and loan characteristics. For example, there is medium-run persistence in local default probabilities:
conditional on borrower and loan characteristics, regions that experienced higher default rates yesterday are more
likely to experience higher default rates tomorrow. These findings hold throughout the entire 2000s and are not
limited to the period surrounding the 2008 recession. Despite this finding, we further document that interest rates
on loans securitized by the GSEs do not vary at all with this predictable default risk. These patterns hold across
different time periods and are robust to many different specifications to predict local mortgage default rates. The
1Thetheoreticalliteraturethatassumesaconstantrisk-adjusted(orrisk-free)interestrateacrossregionsisextensive. Recentpapers
makingthisassumptioninthemacroeconomics,monetaryunion,andpublicfinanceliteraturesinclude: LustigandVanNieuwerburgh
(2005),FahriandWerning(2014),NakamuraandSteinsson(2014),Yagan(2014),Zidar(2015),andBerajaetal. (2015).
1

results are striking. Even though the GSEs charge different interest rates to borrowers who take on greater leverage
(i.e.,havehigherloan-to-valueratios)orwhoarelesscreditworthy(i.e.,havelowerFICOscores),theydonotcharge
higher rates to borrowers in regions with declining economic conditions even though they are much more likely to
eventually default. Additionally, we show that local mortgage rates for loans securitized by the GSEs do not vary
with other dimensions that could also induce local adjustment for risk, such as local mortgage recourse laws, local
bankruptcy laws, or local lender concentration.
In the second part of the paper, we then provide an assessment of the extent to which GSE interest rates should
varyspatially, giventhelargespatialvariationindefaultrisk. Todothis, weexploitloan-leveldatacontainingloans
securitizedbyprivateagencies. Tofacilitatecomparisons,wefocusonasetofloansthatwerefertoas“primejumbo”
loans. TheGSEsareonlyallowedtosecuritizeloanssmallerthansomethresholdsize,knownastheconformingloan
limit. Our prime jumbo loans are larger than those made by the GSEs but comparable on many other dimensions
(in particular, FICO score and LTV ratio). Unlike the interest rate on GSE loans, we document that the interest
rate on prime jumbo loans rises dramatically with ex-ante local predicted default risk. Thus, although there is no
regional risk-based pricing in the government-backed GSE market, the private market does set interest rates based
in part on regional risk factors. This result shows that local risk factors are ex-ante observable by lenders.
Employing a variety of techniques, including a regression discontinuity approach around the conforming limit
threshold, we construct counterfactual estimates of the extent to which GSE mortgage rates should have varied
across regions within the United States. In particular, we construct these estimates during both the early 2000s
and during the Great Recession, assuming that the GSEs priced local risk similarly to the private market. These
results are robust to controlling for many potential confounding factors, including the possibility that prepayment
propensities or points and fees vary spatially. We also document that loan amounts for GSE and prime jumbo
borrowers do not respond differentially to ex-ante predictable default. This suggests that, relative to the private
market, the GSE market does not compensate for the lack of spatial variation in mortgage rates by reducing the
amount of credit extended.
We explore a number of explanations for why the relationship between mortgage rates and predictable default
differs in the GSE and private markets. We conclude that political pressure is the most reasonable explanation for
thepatternsweobserve. TheGSEsfaceagreatdealofpoliticalscrutiny: weprovideevidenceshowingthatmultiple
timesduringthepastdecadetheGSEstriedtoimplementspace-basedpoliciesbutthattheseeffortswereabandoned
afterbacklashfromCongress,realtors,andcommunitygroupsthatobjectedtoGSEsusingdifferentstandardsacross
regions.2
Thefactthatrisk-adjustedmortgageratesarenotequalizedacrossregionsimpliesthatresourcesareredistributed
across regions through the mortgage market. In the final part of the paper, we quantify the economic impact of the
2ThislackoflocalvariationinpricingrulesappearsinmanypricingdecisionsfortheU.S.government. Forexample,theU.S.Postal
Service charges the same flat rate for all first-class mail regardless of the distance traveled. Finkelstein and Poterba (2013) also find
that political economy considerations can explain why U.K. insurance providers price nationally despite the presence of local drivers of
mortalityrisk.
2