NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FIRM LEVERAGE AND UNEMPLOYMENT DURING THE GREAT RECESSION
Xavier Giroud
Holger M. Mueller
Working Paper 21076
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21076
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2015
We thank Nick Bloom, Itamar Drechsler, Andrea Eisfeldt, Mark Gertler, Ed Glaeser, Bob Hall, Theresa
Kuchler, Atif Mian, Jordan Nickerson, Stijn van Nieuwerburgh, Jonathan Parker, Thomas Philippon,
Paul Romer, Alexi Savov, David Scharfstein, Phillip Schnabl, Antoinette Schoar, Andrei Shleifer,
Rui Silva, Johannes Stroebel, Amir Sufi, and seminar participants at MIT, NYU, Stanford, UBC, ITAM
Finance Conference 2015, LBS Summer Finance Symposium 2015, and NBER CF Spring Meeting
2015 for helpful comments. We are grateful to Manuel Adelino and Albert Saiz for providing us with
data. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential
information is disclosed. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Xavier Giroud and Holger M. Mueller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Firm Leverage and Unemployment during the Great Recession
Xavier Giroud and Holger M. Mueller
NBER Working Paper No. 21076
April 2015, Revised July 2015
JEL No. E24,E32,R3
ABSTRACT
We argue that firms’ balance sheets were instrumental in the propagation of shocks during the Great
Recession. Using establishment-level data, we show that firms that tightened their debt capacity in
the run-up to the Great Recession (“highleverage firms”) exhibit a significantly larger decline in employment
in response to household demand shocks than firms that freed up debt capacity (“low-leverage firms”).
In fact, all of the job losses associated with falling house prices during the Great Recession are concentrated
among establishments of high-leverage firms. At the county level, we show that counties with a larger
fraction of establishments belonging to high-leverage firms exhibit a significantly larger decline in
employment in response to household demand shocks. Thus, firms’ balance sheets also matter for
aggregate employment.
Xavier Giroud
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-639
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
xgiroud@mit.edu
Holger M. Mueller
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street
Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
hmueller@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
Prominent research argues that (non-financial) firms’ balance sheets play an important
role in the propagation of business cycle shocks (Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Bernanke,
Gertler, and Gilchrist (1996, 1999), Sharpe (1994), Kiyotaki and Moore (1997)). And
yet, in the most recent Great Recession, the focus has been almost entirely on either
households’ balance sheets or those of financial intermediaries.1 A look at Figure 1 may
help understand why. While household leverage rose significantly in the years preceding
the Great Recession–and that of investment banks, already at high levels, rose even
further–the leverage of (non-financial) firms remained essentially flat.
This paper argues that firms’ balance sheets were instrumental in the propagation of
shocks during the Great Recession. To be clear, we do not mean to argue that household
balance sheets or those of financial intermediaries are unimportant. On the contrary, our
results are consistent with the view that falling house prices lead to a drop in consumer
demand by households (Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013)), with important consequences for
employment (Mian and Sufi (2014)). But households do not lay off workers. Firms do.
Thus, the extent to which demand shocks by households translate into employment losses
depends on how firms respond to these shocks. To explore this issue, we construct a
unique data set that combines employment and wage data at the establishment level from
the U.S. Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) with balance sheet and
income statement data at the firm level from Compustat and house price data at the ZIP
code and county level from Zillow.
According to the firm balance sheet channel, firms’ responses to household demand
shocks depend on the strength of their balance sheets. To this end, we note that the
seemingly flat line in Figure 1 masks an important fact: there is substantial variation
1For work emphasizing the role of household balance sheets during the Great Recession, see, e.g.,
Mian and Sufi (2011, 2014), Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013), Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2011), Hall (2011),
Midrigan and Philippon (2011), and Eggertson and Krugman (2012). For work emphasizing the role
of financial intermediary balance sheets, and “lender health” more generally, see, e.g., Chodorow-Reich
(2014), Gertler and Kyotaki (2011), He and Krishnamurthy (2013), Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014),
and Moreira and Savov (2014). A notable exception is Gilchrist et al. (2014), who document that firms
with weak balance sheets increase prices during the Great Recession, which might help explain why the
U.S. economy experienced only a mild disinflation during that period.
2

in leverage changes in the years prior to the Great Recession. Indeed, while the median
change in firm leverage (debt over assets) between 2002 and 2006 is virtually zero, the
average change in the above-median group is 0.179, and that in the below-median group
is -0.265. Thus, some firms come into the Great Recession having just tightened their
debt capacity, while others come into the Great Recession having just freed up debt
capacity. With a slight abuse of terminology, we call these firms “high-leverage” firms
and “low-leverage” firms, respectively.
Our results strongly support the firm balance sheet channel: establishments of high-
leverage firms exhibit a significantly larger decline in employment between 2007 and 2009
in response to household demand shocks than establishments of low-leverage firms. In
fact, all of the job losses associated with falling house prices are concentrated among
establishments of high-leverage firms.2 By contrast, there is no significant association
between changes in house prices and changes in employment during the Great Recession
among establishments of low-leverage firms. These results are based on more than a
quarter million observations and thus precisely estimated.
The granularity of our data allows us to include a wide array of fixed effects. Most of
our analysis is cross-sectional–we examine the relation between changes in house prices
and changes in employment during the Great Recession. Our tightest specification in-
cludes both firm and ZIP code industry fixed effects. Thus, accounting for the possi-
×
bility that high- and low-leverage firms may experience differential job losses for reasons
unrelated to changes in house prices, we compare establishments in the same ZIP code
and industry–e.g., a local Macy’s versus Nordstrom department store, a local Safeway
versus Kroger supermarket, or a local Target versus Kmart discount retailer–where some
establishments belong to high-leverage firms and others belong to low-leverage firms. We
alsoestimateapanel regressionwithestablishment, firm year, andZIPcode industry
× ×
year fixed effects. The results are the same.
×
2Based on evidence in Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013) and Mian and Sufi (2014)–as well as evidence in
Section 3.5–we use the terms “falling house prices” and “household demand shocks” interchangeably.
Importantly, these household demand shocks are orthogonal to whether firms tightened or freed up debt
capacity in the run-up to the Great Recession. As Panel (A) of Table 1 shows, establishments of low-
and high-leveragefirms experiencethe same drop in houseprices between 2006 and 2009and arelocated
in areas with the same housing supply elasticity.
3