NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TAX-EFFICIENT ASSET MANAGEMENT:
EVIDENCE FROM EQUITY MUTUAL FUNDS
Clemens Sialm
Hanjiang Zhang
Working Paper 21060
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21060
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2015
We thank Dan Bergstresser, Jonathan Cohn, Joel Dickson, Steve Dimmock, Rich Evans, Will Gerken,
Greg Kadlec, Inmoo Lee, Marlena Lee, Jim Poterba, John Shoven, Laura Starks, Sheridan Titman,
Scott Weisbenner, and participants at the 2015 American Finance Association Meetings in Boston,
Stanford University, and the University of Texas at Austin for helpful comments. Clemens Sialm thanks
the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research for financial support during his Sabbatical leave.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21060.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Clemens Sialm and Hanjiang Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Tax-Efficient Asset Management: Evidence from Equity Mutual Funds
Clemens Sialm and Hanjiang Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 21060
April 2015
JEL No. G11,G18,G23,G28,H2,H22,H24
ABSTRACT
Investment taxes have a substantial impact on the performance of taxable mutual fund investors. Mutual
funds can reduce the tax burdens of their shareholders by avoiding securities that are heavily taxed
and by avoiding realizing capital gains that trigger higher tax burdens to the funds’ investors. Such
tax avoidance strategies constrain the investment opportunities of the mutual funds and might reduce
their before-tax performance. Our paper empirically investigates the costs and benefits of tax-efficient
asset management based on U.S. equity mutual funds. We find that mutual funds that follow tax-efficient
asset management strategies generate superior after-tax returns. Surprisingly, more tax-efficient mutual
funds do not underperform other funds before taxes, indicating that the constraints imposed by tax-efficient
asset management do not have significant performance consequences.
Clemens Sialm
University of Texas at Austin
McCombs School of Business
2110 Speedway; B6600
Austin, TX 78712-1276
and NBER
clemens.sialm@mccombs.utexas.edu
Hanjiang Zhang
Division of Banking and Finance
Nanyang Business School
Nanyang Technological University
Nanyang Avenue, Singapore, 639798
Zhanghj@ntu.edu.sg

1 Introduction
Investment taxes have a substantial impact on the long-term performance of taxable mutual
fund investors. U.S. mutual funds are required to distribute their dividend income and their
realized capital gains to their shareholders at an annual frequency. Taxable mutual fund
investors need to pay taxes on these mutual fund distributions even if they do not liquidate
their mutual fund positions and continue to hold the funds for the long-term. Mutual funds
can reduce the tax burdens of their shareholders by avoiding securities that are heavily taxed
and by avoiding realizing capital gains that trigger higher tax burdens to the funds’ investors.
Such tax avoidance strategies, however, constrain the investment choices of the mutual funds
and might reduce their before-tax performance. Our paper empirically investigates the costs
and benefits of tax-efficient asset management based on U.S. equity mutual funds.
The U.S. taxes different income sources to mutual fund investors at different rates. Short-
term capital gains distributions, generated by the liquidation of fund positions held for less
than one year, are typically taxed at substantially higher rates than long-term capital gains
distributions. On the other hand, unrealized capital gains remain untaxed until the securities
are liquidated or can completely be avoided due to the “step-up of the cost basis at death”
if the investment passes through an estate. In addition, stocks with high dividend yields also
face relatively high tax burdens, especially prior to the 2003 tax reforms, when dividends were
taxed at substantially higher rates than long-term capital gains.
Mutual funds can reduce the tax burdens of their investors by avoiding stocks with high
dividend yields, by avoiding the realization of capital gains, and by accelerating the realiza-
tion of capital losses, as discussed by Bergstresser and Poterba (2002). However, it is not
clear whether tax-efficient asset management substantially reduces before-tax performance.
Tax avoidance strategies might be costly because they constrain funds’ investment strategies
and thereby reduce these funds’ before-tax performance. On the other hand, tax-efficient
1

asset management strategies might not only reduce the tax burdens of investors, they might
generate lower trading costs or superior investment performance before taxes. For example,
tax-efficient investment strategies exhibit relatively low turnovers generating lower trading
costs. In addition, liquidating stock positions with embedded capital losses and holding on to
positions with capital gains can generate superior before-tax returns due to the momentum
effect of Jegadeesh and Titman (1993). Overall, on an after-tax basis, it is not clear whether
tax efficiency leads to better or worse performance either. Our paper aims to investigate the
implications of tax-efficient asset management on subsequent fund performance both before-
and after adjusting for taxes.
To empirically address the costs and benefits of tax-efficient asset management, we use
data on a comprehensive sample of U.S. equity mutual funds between 1990 and 2012. We find
that taxes have a significant impact on the performance of taxable fund investors. On average,
taxable fund shareholders are estimated to pay investment taxes amounting to 1.12% of their
investment value per year. This average tax burden is similar in size to fund expenses, which
have recently received substantial attention (French(2008)). Furthermore, thevariationin the
tax burden differs substantially across funds. Large cross-sectional differences in tax burdens
canhave substantial impact oninvestment performance. Forexample, a $10,000investment in
1990 in the most tax-efficient decile of domestic equity mutual funds would have accumulated
to $48,818 in 2012 after taking into account taxes on dividend and capital gains distributions.
On the other hand, an equal investment in the least tax-efficient decile of domestic equity
funds would have accumulated to only $37,850 after taxes.
We find that the tax burden is persistent over time and can be predicted by the investment
styles of the mutual fund, by the flows of fund investors, and by the capital gains overhang.
Taxburdensonmutualfundstendtobehigherforfundsthatfocusonsmall-capitalizationand
value portfolios, as these investment styles trigger relatively high capital gains distributions.
2