NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PREVENTIVES VERSUS TREATMENTS
Michael Kremer
Christopher Snyder
Working Paper 21012
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21012
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2015
Previous versions of this paper were circulated as “Why Is There No AIDS Vaccine” among other
titles. The authors are grateful to Marcella Alsan, Emmanuelle Auriol, Chris Avery, David Blanchflower,
Bryan Boulier, Ryan Bubb, Jim Dana, Esther Duflo, Glenn Ellison, Amy Finkelstein, Jerry Green,
Jon Hamilton, Jason Hartline, Corinne Langinier, Scott Lee, David Malueg, David McAdams, Sendhil
Mullainathan, Scott Pauls, Robert Porter, Michael Schwarz, Andrew Segal, Lars Stole, GlenWeyl,
Heidi Williams, Hongkai Zhang, Jon Zinman, and seminar participants at the American Enterprise
Institute, Cornell, Dartmouth, Fordham, Harvard, Indiana, MIT, Northeastern, Northwestern, NYU,
Princeton, RAND, Stanford, UCLA, University of Pennsylvania, University of Rochester, University
of Toronto, the IAEN Symposium on the Economics of AIDS/HIV in Developing Countries (Barcelona),
the IDEI Conference on Markets for Pharmaceuticals and the Health of Developing Nations, the International
Industrial Organization Conference (Boston), the NBER Summer Institutes on Health and Aging and
on Innovation and the Global Economy, and the Southern Economic Association Conference (Charleston)
for helpful comments; and to Lindsey Beckett, Ruben Enikolopov, Cacey Tang, Suzanne Wang, and
Dan Wood for excellent research assistance. We are grateful for the medical expertise of Scott Lee,
who directed the effort to code risk heterogeneity for diseases in our sample. We are especially indebted
to the editors and referees for extensive suggestions which substantially improved the paper. Snyder
gratefully acknowledges funding for research assistants provided by the Dartmouth College Presidential
Scholars Program. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Michael Kremer and Christopher Snyder. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Preventives Versus Treatments
Michael Kremer and Christopher Snyder
NBER Working Paper No. 21012
March 2015
JEL No. D42,I18,L11,O31
ABSTRACT
Preventives are sold ex ante, before disease status is realized, while treatments are sold ex post. Even
if the mean of the ex ante distribution of consumer values is the same as that ex post, the shape of
the distributions may differ, generating a difference between the surplus each product can extract.
If, for example, consumers differ only in ex ante disease risk, then a monopolist would have more
difficulty extracting surplus with a preventive than with a treatment because treatment consumers,
having contracted the disease, no longer differ in disease risk. We show that the ratio of preventive
to treatment producer surplus can be arbitrarily small, in particular when the distribution of consumer
values has a Zipf shape and the disease is rare. The firm's bias toward treatments can be reversed, for
example, if the source of private information is disease severity learned ex post. The difference between
the producer surplus earned from the products can result in distorted R&D incentives; the deadweight
loss from this distortion can be as large as the entire producer-surplus difference. Calibrations for HIV
and heart attacks based on risk factors in the U.S. population suggest that the distribution of disease risk
is sufficiently Zipf-similar to generate substantial differences between producer surplus from preventives
and treatments. Empirically, we find that proxies for the Zipf-similarity of the disease-risk distribution
are associated a significantly lower likelihood of vaccine development but not drug development.
Michael Kremer
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center M20
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mkremer@fas.harvard.edu
Christopher Snyder
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
301 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
chris.snyder@dartmouth.edu

1. Introduction
Many industry observers and public health advocates believe that disease preventives are inherently less
lucrative than treatments (see, e.g., Rosenberg 1999). Thomas (2002) and others have argued that private
incentives for research and development (R&D) on preventives fall far short of social needs particularly
in the case of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Consistent with this view, the manufacturer did not
secure the approval of Truvada as an HIV preventive until eight years after its initial approval as an HIV
treatment, and the revenue generated by its use as a treatment continues to dwarf that from its use as a
preventive. Commentators have argued that weak preventive incentives call for government involvement,
and indeed governments have undertaken special programs to support preventive R&D for HIV and other
diseases, programs including the International AIDS Vaccine Initiative (IAVI), the U.S. Advisory Council
onImmunizationPolicy(ACIP),andthePneumococcusAdvanceMarketCommitment.
ThedelayinthedevelopmentofanyparticularproductsuchasTruvadacouldbeascribedtoavarietyof
forces. The analysis in this paper will shed light on one determinant of the gap between private and social
R&Dincentives. Wearguethatdifferencesinthedistributionofconsumervaluesatthetimepreventivesand
treatmentsaresoldcanaffectthemanufacturer’sabilitytoextractsurpluswiththeproducts. Thedifference
inproducersurpluscandriveawedgebetweenprivateandsocialincentivestoinvestinthetwoproducts.
To see the logic, consider an examplein which a monopoly pharmaceutical manufacturer sells directly
to rational, risk-neutral, completely patient consumers. The firm can develop a preventive or a treatment,
each of which has its own associated R&D cost. To make the example as simple as possible, assume both
the preventive and treatment have no production costs, are perfectively effective, costless to manufacture,
and have no side effects. Suppose the harm to a consumer from contracting the disease is $100. Assume
thatthefirmknowsthedistributionofdiseaseriskinthepopulationbutnotanindividual’srisk(oratleast
cannotpricediscriminatebasedonthisrisk).
Suppose first there is no heterogeneity in disease risk in the population. In particular, assume there are
100 consumers who have a 19% chance of contracting the disease. The firm would earn $1,900 from a
preventivebysellingittoall100consumersatapriceequaltotheirexpectedharmof$19. Thefirmwould
earn$1,900inexpectationfromatreatmentbysellingittothe19consumersexpectedtocontractthedisease
atapriceequaltoavoidedharmof$100. Theproducersurplusisthesamefromeitherproduct,sothefirm
developswhichever has lower R&D costs. Since the firm captures all of the social surplus created by each
product,itwouldchoosetodevelopthesameproductasasocialplanner.
Nowincorporateconsumerheterogeneitybyassumingthattheyhavetwotypes: 90havea10%disease
risk and 10 have a 100% risk. As before, 19 consumers are expected to contract the disease, so the firm
continuestoearn$1,900inexpectationfromatreatment. Howeverthefirmnowearnslessfromapreventive.
It can either sell only to high-risk consumers at $100 or to all consumers at $10. Either way, producer
surplus from a preventive falls to $1,000, biasing the firm away from developing a preventive toward a
treatment. The bias can result in substantial distortions. To see how large, suppose R&D costs are slightly
less than $1,900 for a treatment and slightly more than $1,000 for a preventive. Then the firm develops
1

a treatment while a social planner would prefer a preventive because it also eliminates the entire $1,900
diseaseburdenwhilesavingnearly$900onR&D.ThisextraR&Dspendingonthetreatmentrepresentsthe
potential deadweight loss from a biased product choice. An even starker illustration of this large potential
deadweightlossisprovidedinanexampleinwhichnoproductisdeveloped. Takethepreviousexamplebut
nowsupposeR&Dcostsareslightlymorethan$1,900foratreatment. Thennoproductisdevelopedeven
though, as before, the social gain from developing a preventive exceeds the social cost by nearly $900, so
againsocietyexperiencesanearly$900deadweightloss.
When will this bias arise? What characteristics of the disease-risk distribution leads to large biases?
Howlargecanthebiaspossiblybe? Toaddressthesequestions,weconstructabenchmarkmodelinwhicha
monopolistsellsaperfectlysafeandeffectiveproduct,whichiscostlesstoproduce,directlytorisk-neutral
consumers. We show that producer surplus from a treatment will always be strictly higher than from a
preventiveaslongasthereisanyheterogeneityamongconsumerswithpositivediseaserisk. Thenumerical
exampleillustratesthefeaturesofariskdistributioncontributingtoalargebiasagainstpreventives: although
the high consumer type values the preventive ten times more than the low, it only makes up a tenth of
the population, so that the preventive monopolist earns the same (low) producer surplus whichever type it
targets. Distributions with the property that higher values have proportionately fewer types with at least
that value are called Zipf distributions. We derive the “worst case” distribution, minimizing the ratio of
producersurplusfromapreventivetothatfromatreatmentholdingconstantdiseaseprevalence,showingit
is a particular type of Zipf distribution, which we call a symmetrically truncated Zipf (abbreviated STRZ,
read “stars”) distribution. The STRZ distribution leads to a simple demand curve, one that is globally
unit elastic over all prices between its truncated endpoints, generating constant producer surplus for all
these prices. Indeed, constant producer surplus across prices is a necessary condition for producer-surplus
minimization: if one price were more lucrative than others, there would be scope for reducing producer
surplus by converting some of the mass from the marginal type into disease risk at other points in the
distribution,thusholdingmeandiseaseriskconstant.
We provide a formula that can be used to decompose the ratio of preventive to treatment producer
surplus into just two factors: an index of similarity to the STRZ distribution and disease prevalence. For
extremely rare and Zipf-similar disease distributions, the ratio of preventive to treatment producer surplus
can approach zero. This limiting result can be illustrated by extending the previous numerical example by
includingadditionalconsumertypes: 900with1%diseaserisk, 9,000with0.1%risk, etc. Eachadditional
typeadds$900totheproducersurplusfromatreatmentbutnothingtotheproducersurplusfromapreventive
because, by construction, the firm continues to earn $1,000 whichever types it targets with the preventive
price. If enough types are added, the producer-surplus ratio can thus be driven arbitrarily close to zero.
If disease prevalence is bounded away from zero, the producer-surplus ratio is bounded away from zero
accordingtoaformulawederive.
Much of the analysis uses a simple model of direct-to-consumer sales, which serves as a benchmark
againstwhichotherinstitutionscanbecomparedandpolicyresponsesevaluated. Inextensionsweexplore
2