NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IS NO NEWS (PERCEIVED AS) BAD NEWS? AN EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION
OF INFORMATION DISCLOSURE
Ginger Zhe Jin
Michael Luca
Daniel Martin
Working Paper 21099
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21099
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2015, Revised May 2018
Patrick Rooney provided excellent research assistance. All errors are ours. Part of the revision
was carried out while Jin took leave at the Federal Trade Commission. The views expressed are
those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the U.S. Federal Trade
Commission, any individual Commissioner, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Ginger Zhe Jin, Michael Luca, and Daniel Martin. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Is No News (Perceived as) Bad News? An Experimental Investigation of Information Disclosure
Ginger Zhe Jin, Michael Luca, and Daniel Martin
NBER Working Paper No. 21099
April 2015, Revised May 2018
JEL No. C9,D8,K2,L51
ABSTRACT
This paper uses laboratory experiments to directly test a central prediction of disclosure theory:
that strategic forces can lead those who possess private information to voluntarily provide it. In a
simple two-person disclosure game, we find that senders disclose favorable information, but
withhold less favorable information. The degree to which senders withhold information is
strongly related to their stated beliefs about receiver actions, and their stated beliefs are accurate
on average. Receiver actions are also strongly related to their stated beliefs, but receiver actions
and beliefs suggest they are insufficiently skeptical about non-disclosed information in the
absence of repeated feedback.
Ginger Zhe Jin Daniel Martin
University of Maryland Northwestern University
Department of Economics Kellogg School of Management
3115F Tydings Hall 2211 Campus Drive
College Park, MD 20742-7211 Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER daniel@martinonline.org
jin@econ.umd.edu
Michael Luca
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field Road
Boston, MA 02163
mluca@hbs.edu

1 Introduction
From the number of calories in a croissant to the fuel efficiency of a car,
businesses routinely have private information about the quality of their products that
potential customers would like to know. Businesses then face a decision – should they
reveal or withhold this information?
A central result in information economics is that market forces can lead firms to
voluntarily and completely disclose such information, as long as the information is
verifiable and the costs of disclosure are small (Viscusi 1978, Grossman and Hart 1980,
Grossman 1981, Milgrom 1981). The mechanism behind this result is simple: consumers
will treat all non-disclosing companies the same, so the best businesses among those that
do not disclose have an incentive to separate themselves through disclosure. Applied
iteratively, this logic produces unraveling in the quality of non-reporting firms, so that in
equilibrium consumers correctly infer the very worst from non-disclosure. In other
words, no news is bad news.
The policy relevance of the unraveling result is clear. Information can be
important for markets to function properly, and this result suggests that voluntary
disclosure could solve asymmetric information problems across a variety of domains.
Moreover, this result points to policies that should increase the extent of disclosure. For
example, some cities send hygiene scorecards that restaurants can voluntarily post on
their doors, which is an attempt to make disclosure both low cost and verifiable.
Yet, the unraveling logic rests on strong assumptions around the ability
of consumers to make inferences about a business’s decision to withhold information. In
practice, voluntary disclosure is far from complete (Mathios 2000, Luca and Smith 2015,
Bederson et al 2018). Many restaurants did not post their hygiene grades unless required
to; many universities only publicized rankings in which they did well; and many grocery
store food items did not include nutritional information until it was mandated. However,
because multiple factors can lead to failures of voluntary disclosure, it is difficult to
cleanly test the unraveling prediction and the role of consumer inferences about non-
disclosure.
The goal of our paper is to investigate the unraveling predictions using lab
experiments that are complex enough to capture the main strategic tensions of the theory
2

yet simple enough for subjects to easily understand these tensions. In our experiments,
there are two players: an information sender (e.g., the firm) and an information receiver
(e.g., the consumer). The sender receives private information that perfectly identifies the
true state (e.g., the firm’s true quality level). The sender then makes a single decision:
whether or not to disclose this information to the receiver. As a result, the sender cannot
misrepresent the state.1 In many markets, such as those with truth-in-advertising laws,
firms choose whether or not to reveal information, but can only disclose verifiable
information. By prohibiting dishonest reporting, we mirror this feature, and also
reproduce the assumptions underlying the unraveling prediction.
After the sender decides whether or not to disclose her private information, the
receiver must guess the state. If the sender has revealed the state (a whole number
between 1 and 5), the receiver knows it with certainty. Otherwise, the receiver must infer
the true state based on the sender’s decision to withhold information and on the
distribution from which states are drawn, which is common knowledge. Reflecting many
market transactions, the sender and receiver do not have aligned interests. The sender
earns more when the receiver guesses that the state is higher, and the receiver earns more
when their guess is closer to the true state.
With these payoffs, the logic of unraveling leads to a unique sequential
equilibrium: senders should always reveal their information (unless the state takes the
lowest possible value, in which case they are indifferent between revealing and not), and
receivers should correctly guess that the state takes the lowest possible value when
senders do not reveal their information.
Consistent with the theoretical predictions, we find high overall rates of disclosure
– and almost full disclosure at the highest states. However, in contrast with the full
unraveling prediction, some senders do not disclose intermediate states. Importantly, and
for the first time in the literature, we elicit sender beliefs about receivers and find
evidence that this unpredicted non-disclosure is driven by the belief that not disclosing
intermediate states is optimal given receiver actions. Moreover, we find that sender
beliefs are correct on average, which means that the unpredicted non-disclosure we
1 This is in contrast with existing experiments on strategic information transmission where senders can
engage in “cheap talk” (Cai and Wang 2006, Wang, Spezio, and Camerer 2011).
3