NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LOST IN THE CLOUDS:
THE IMPACT OF CHANGING PROPERTY RIGHTS ON INVESTMENT IN CLOUD COMPUTING VENTURES
Josh Lerner
Greg Rafert
Working Paper 21140
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21140
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2015
Funding for this research was provided by the Computers and Communication Industry Association,
whose members can be found here, http://www.ccianet.org/index.asp?bid=11, Harvard Business School’s
Division of Research, and the Toulouse Network on Information Technology. We thank a number
of venture capital investors, seminar audiences at the National Bureau of Economic Research, the
Toulouse Network, and numerous universities, and Mark Lemley, Matt Marx, Rob Merges, Michael
Meurer, and Scott Stern, for helpful comments. All errors and omissions are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21140.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Josh Lerner and Greg Rafert. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Lost in the Clouds: The Impact of Changing Property Rights on Investment in Cloud Computing
Ventures
Josh Lerner and Greg Rafert
NBER Working Paper No. 21140
May 2015
JEL No. G24,O34
ABSTRACT
Our analysis seeks to understand the impact of changing allocations of property rights on investment
in new firms. We focus on the Cartoon Network, et al. v. Cablevision decision in the U.S., which narrowed
the protection enjoyed by content creators (e.g., movie studios) and gave greater rights to downstream
technology firms, as well as decisions in France and Germany that took an opposite view. Our findings
regarding relative venture capital investment in the U.S. and Europe, across Europe, and between the
various judicial circuits of the U.S. suggest that decisions around the allocation of property rights can
have economically and statistically significant impacts on investment in innovative enterprises.
Josh Lerner
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 214
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jlerner@hbs.edu
Greg Rafert
Analysis Group
1010 El Camino Real, Suite 310
Menlo Park, CA 94025
grafert@analysisgroup.com

1. Introduction
The ways in which the strength and allocation of property rights can affect investment
decisions have been an enduring topic of interest (e.g., La Porta et al. [2000], Acemoglu [2003]).
The consequences of property rights are particularly critical when evaluating intellectual
property policies. An extensive theoretical literature suggests that shifts in the design of such
property right schemes—in particular, the relative protection offered to initial innovators and
those who do follow-on work—can have dramatic impacts on the rate and direction of
technological progress. For instance, if all the rewards go to the initial innovators, other firms are
unlikely to be able to access resources for follow-on innovations (e.g., Gilbert and Shapiro
[1990]; Scotchmer [2004]; Hopenhayn, et al. [2006]; and, Boldrin and Levine [2008]).
The empirical literature on the impact of changes in the nature of property rights on the
ability to finance innovation, however, remains inconclusive (see, for instance, Sakakibara and
Branstetter [2001]; Branstetter, et al. [2006]; and, Lerner [2009]). Many of the difficulties stem
from the difficulties of identifying appropriate “natural experiments.” Legislation altering
intellectual property rights is often undertaken in conjunction with other policy reforms or in
response to shifting economic circumstances. Moreover, empirical studies to date have largely
focused on the patent regime: given the long lag times between discoveries and commercial
application in many technical fields, identifying what effects may exist empirically can be
especially challenging.
The shorter time lags between the production and dissemination of creative activities and
software suggest that examining the impacts of copyright law may be more promising. From a
more practical perspective, the consequences of shifting copyright protection remains intensely
1

partisan, given the intensity of real world controversies about the Digital Millennium Copyright
Act and the proposed Stop Online Piracy Act.
This paper examines the effect of major but largely unanticipated changes in the allocation
of copyright protection on venture capital (VC) investment in cloud computing companies. In
particular, it examines the impact of the Second Circuit Court of Appeals’ decision The Cartoon
Network, et al. v. Cablevision, which was widely perceived as enhancing the property rights of
cloud computing companies relative to the content owners such as major movie studios and
publishers, a claim backed by an event study of cloud-computing firms. Meanwhile, decisions in
French and German courts took substantially narrower views of these firms’ property rights.
We focus on the impact of these decisions on VC investment because venture activity is
well documented, and has been shown to have a positive impact on growth and innovation. Thus,
while VC represents only a fraction of total investment in this industry, it is a natural setting for
understanding the impact of policy shifts.
To understand the impact of copyright protection changes on the willingness of venture
capitalists to invest in cloud computing, we employ a difference-in-difference approach,
hypothesizing that policy shifts affect investments in different geographies, sectors, and years in
varying ways. Such analyses have been widely employed in the economics literature to examine
the consequences of policy shifts.
To quantify the impact of copyright protection changes, we first analyze the effects on VC
investment in cloud computing firms of the Cablevision decision in the U.S., which narrowed the
protection enjoyed by content creators (e.g., movie studios) and gave greater rights to
downstream technology firms using this content. We anticipate that the decision eased investors’
fears about litigation entangling innovative cloud computing firms, resulting in greater
2