NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HIGH-FREQUENCY, ALGORITHMIC SPILLOVERS BETWEEN NASDAQ AND
FOREX
Takatoshi Ito
Masahiro Yamada
Working Paper 21122
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21122
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2015
Ito acknowledges financial support Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research A-25245044. We thank Frank
Hatheway (Nasdaq OMX) for providing Nasdaq OMX data. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Takatoshi Ito and Masahiro Yamada. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

High-frequency, Algorithmic Spillovers Between NASDAQ and Forex
Takatoshi Ito and Masahiro Yamada
NBER Working Paper No. 21122
April 2015
JEL No. F31,G12,G14,G15,G23
ABSTRACT
We empirically examine the order flows spillovers between Nasdaq and the Forex markets in 2008
and 2009. With emphasis on a role of high-frequency traders (HFTs) who aggregate information between
the two markets as well as within each market, our results show that HFTs in Nasdaq trade intensively
on the market-wide information more rapidly than other market participants, and that their order flows
contain more information about the Forex rates than those of the Forex themselves. As a result, order
flows by HFTs in Nasdaq significantly lead those in the Forex activities. Reflecting each market's
exposures to the common shocks during the Global Financial crisis, these spillovers vary over time,
and HFTs have increased their influences. These empirical results are consistent with theoretical predictions
of the rational expectations model of multi-asset trading.
Takatoshi Ito
Columbia University
School of International and Public Affairs
International Affairs Building
Room 927, (MC 3333)
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
ti2164@columbia.edu
Masahiro Yamada
Hitotsubashi University
2-1 Naka
Kunitachi, Tokyo, 186-8601
Japan
m.yamada@r.hit-u.ac.jp

1 Introduction
Recently, behavior of high-frequency traders (HFTs) becomes a focus of intensive exami-
nation among practitioners, regulators, as well as academics. Although there is a growing
literature of HFTs in individual assets, their spillovers across different markets have not been
investigated in the literature. In this study, using a dataset that identifies transactions by
HFTs in Nasdaq OMX, we explore the spillovers between Nasdaq stock market and Foreign
exchange (Forex) markets. We find that HFTs trade on the common information more ag-
gressively and rapidly than non-HFTs and their order flows contain more information about
the Forex rates than those of the Forex themselves.
Stock prices and Forex rates are correlated. Figure 1 plots three Forex rates (EUR/JPY,
EUR/USD, USD/JPY), Nasdaq index, and the volume share of Nasdaq HFTs from January
2008 to August 2009. The plots shows that the correlation between Forex rates and the
stock index are time-varying. After September 2008, the correlation seems increased as the
volume share of HFTs rose. Then, what is the role of HFT in the determination of the
correlation between stocks and Forex? Recent studies on HFTs show that HFTs trade in the
same direction of permanent price changes and contribute to the price discovery as a market
maker (Hirschey (2013); Menkveld (2013); Hendershott (2011); Carrion (2013); Brogaard,
Hendershott and Riordan (2012)), but they do not investigate the spillovers of HFTs to
other markets or the source of better price discovery by HFTs.
We aim to answer HFT’s role in influencing cross-market correlation. To do so, we
combineNasdaqOMXhigh-frequencytraderdatasetandEBSForexdataset. Nasdaqdataset
identifies transactions by HFTs, allowing an analysis on HFTs as a group. By using the
dataset, we compare market-wide order flows in Nasdaq and Forex activities. A standard
vector auto-regression (VAR) is used to investigate the lead-lag, cross-price impacts, and the
information share of order flows among order flows in the Forex, Nasdaq HFT, non-HFT,
and the Forex returns.
Since we can interpret these empirical results in many ways, a theoretical framework
1

which provides a consistent explanation of the results is presented. In the Kodres and
Pritsker (2002) framework, where traders can trade multiple-assets in a one-shot game, since
uninformed traders make signal extraction from prices, noise trading in one market can
influence the other markets. We numerically examine the estimated cross-price impacts and
price correlations and judge whether the model can replicate empirical results.
Our main empirical findings are as follows. First, we find strong evidence that HFT
order flows are very influential to the Forex market. In particular, an empirical results show
that order flows by Nasdaq HFTs proceed to the Forex activities but those by non-HFT
do not have such property. Forex returns and order flows lag to HFT’s order flows by 500
milliseconds. However, this lead-lag can occur due to not only some economic reasons but
also mechanical reasons such as a difference of trading architectures. Theoretical analysis
suggests that a response in a market to noise tradings in other markets can be different
depending on the price informativeness in each market. This asymmetry can be interpreted
as a short-run lead-lag relationship. To examine the informativeness, we estimate following
Hasbrouck(1991), eachorderflow’scontributiontothepermanentchangesofForexrates. As
a result, we find that the contribution by Nasdaq HFT order flows dominate the contribution
from non-HFT order flows and Forex order flows. This result means that the HFT order
flows contain more market-wide information that affects both stocks and Forex rates.
Second, we find that HFTs and non-HFTs differs in the weight and reaction speed for
market-wide information. HFT order flows in individual stocks are more correlated with
market-wide order flows than non-HFT order flows.1 Since idiosyncratic order flows in in-
dividual stocks do not affect the Forex market at all, influences to Forex by Nasdaq traders
can be different between HFTs and non-HFTs. In addition, the spillovers from the Forex
are different between HFTs and non-HFTs. After the changes in Forex return, HFTs order
more aggressively than non-HFTs for less than around two seconds. After that, orders from
non-HFTs become larger than those from HFTs.
1Brogaard, Hendershott and Riordan (2012) also report this property.
2