NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION:
A MODERN PRIMER
Alex Edmans
Xavier Gabaix
Working Paper 21131
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21131
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2015
We thank Steven Durlauf (the editor), two anonymous referees, Taylor Begley, David Dicks, Steve
Kaplan, Robert Miller, Yuliy Sannikov, Fenghua Song, Luke Taylor, David Yermack, and especially
Pierre Chaigneau for helpful comments, and Deepal Basak, Olivia Domba, and Jan Starmans for valuable
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Alex Edmans and Xavier Gabaix. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Executive Compensation: A Modern Primer
Alex Edmans and Xavier Gabaix
NBER Working Paper No. 21131
April 2015
JEL No. D86,G34
ABSTRACT
This article studies traditional and modern theories of executive compensation, bringing them together
under a unifying framework. We analyze assignment models of the level of pay, and static and dynamic
moral hazard models of incentives, and compare their predictions to empirical findings. We make
two broad points. First, traditional optimal contracting theories find it difficult to explain the data,
suggesting that compensation results from "rent extraction" by CEOs. In contrast, more modern theories
that arguably better capture the CEO setting do deliver predictions consistent with observed practices,
suggesting that these practices need not be inefficient. Second, seemingly innocuous features of the
modeling setup, often made for tractability or convenience, can lead to significant differences in the
model's implications and conclusions on the efficiency of observed practices. We close by highlighting
apparent inefficiencies in executive compensation and additional directions for future research.
Alex Edmans
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2460 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
aedmans@wharton.upenn.edu
Xavier Gabaix
New York University
Finance Department
Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street, 9th floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
xgabaix@stern.nyu.edu

1. Introduction
There is considerable debate onexecutive compensationinboththepublic arenaandacademia.
This debate spans several important topics in economics, such as contract theory, corporate
…nance, corporate governance, labor economics, and income inequality. One side is the “rent
extraction”view, whichclaimsthatcurrentcompensationpracticessharplycontrastthepredic-
tions of traditional optimal contracting models (e.g. Holmstrom (1979)). Thus, contracts are
not chosen by boards to maximize shareholder value, but instead by the executives themselves
to maximize their own rents. This perspective, espoused most prominently by Bebchuk and
Fried(2004), has beentakenveryseriouslybybothscholars andpolicymakers, andledtomajor
regulatory changes. In the U.S., the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) mandated
increased disclosure of compensation in 2006, and say-on-pay legislation was passed as part of
Dodd-Frank in 2007. In 2013, the European Union capped bankers’bonuses at the level of
their salary, or twice their salary if shareholders agree. In the same year, the SEC passed a
rule requiring …rms to disclose the ratio of Chief Executive O¢ cer (“CEO”) pay to median
employee pay, and Switzerland held an ultimately unsuccessful referendum to limit CEO pay
to twelve times the pay of the lowest worker.
The “optimal contracting”view reaches a di¤erent conclusion. While it acknowledges stan-
dard agency models are inconsistent with practice, it argues that such models do not capture
the speci…cs of the CEO setting, since they were created as frameworks for the principal-agent
problem in general. For example, CEOs have a very large e¤ect on …rm value compared to
rank-and-…le employees. Thus, in a competitive labor market, it may be optimal to pay high
wages to attract talented CEOs, and implement high e¤ort from them even though doing so
requires paying a premium.1 Newer optimal contracting models aim to capture the speci…cs
of the CEO employment relationship, and do indeed generate predictions consistent with the
data. Under this perspective, regulation will do more harm than good.
This article critically assesses the rent extraction vs. optimal contracting debate, by ana-
lyzing newer models of executive compensation and evaluating the extent to which they can
explain observed practices. In particular, while recent theories have used di¤erent frameworks
and focused on di¤erent dimensions of the contracting problem, we present a tractable unifying
modeltobringtogethertheconclusionsofthislargeliterature, startingwithclassictheoriesand
then moving to modern ones. In Section 2 we begin by analyzing the determinants of the level
of pay, starting with neoclassical production models of the …rm and then moving to modern
assignment models. These assignment models yields empirical predictions for how CEO pay
varies cross-sectionally between …rms of di¤erent sizes, and over time as the size of the average
…rm in the economy changes.
Having determined the level of pay, we then move to incentives. In Section 3 we consider a
1AsimplemodelcanjustifyhighCEOpaysimplybyassumingahighlevelforthereservationutility,which
is an exogenous parameter. Modern assignment models endogenize the reservation utility.
2

static moral hazard model where the CEO takes an action that improves expected …rm value,
starting in Section 3.1 with the risk-neutral case and moving to risk aversion in Section 3.2.
While this setting appears quite standard, we will show that seemingly innocuous features of
the modeling setup, often made for convenience or tractability (e.g. the choice between additive
ormultiplicative utilityandproductionfunctions, andbinary orcontinuous actions) canleadto
signi…cant di¤erences in the model’s implications –and thus conclusions as to whether observed
practices are consistent with theory. We also discuss various frameworks that researchers can
use to yield tractable solutions to the contracting problem, and the appropriate empirical
measure of incentives. Section 3.3 embeds the moral hazard model into a market equilibrium
to generate additional empirical implications, and Section 3.4 discusses the evidence. Section
3.5 considers the case of multiple signals. In contrast to the Holmstrom (1979) informativeness
principle, CEO pay in reality depends on industry shocks outside his control, which Bebchuk
and Fried (2004) argue is strong evidence that contracting is suboptimal. We show that the
theory does not unambiguously predict that industry shocks should be …ltered out due to other
considerations in a CEO setting that are absent from Holmstrom (1979). Section 3.6 allows
the CEO to a¤ect the volatility as well as mean of …rm value, by choosing the …rm’s risk.
It discusses how options can encourage “good”risk-taking, and debt-based compensation can
deter “bad”risk-shifting if the …rm is levered.
Section 4 moves to a multi-period model. A dynamic setting poses several challenges absent
from a single-period model: contracts that are initially optimal may lose their incentive e¤ect
over time, the CEO can take myopic actions that boost short-term returns at the expense
of long-run value, and he may undo the contract by private saving. In addition to these
complications, a dynamic setting provides the principal with additional opportunities: she can
provide incentives through the threat of termination, and base the CEO’s pay on returns in
previous as well as current periods.
Each section will compare the empirical predictions of the theories with the evidence.
Broadly speaking, we will argue that many, but not all, features of observed contracts that
are frequently criticized are actually consistent with e¢ ciency. However, empirical correlations
cannot be interpreted as de…nitive proof of the optimal contracting view, given the di¢ culties
in identifying causality. Section 5 highlights apparent ine¢ ciencies in executive compensation,
as well as open questions for future research. Section 6 concludes.
This article aims to di¤er from existing surveys of executive compensation. Core, Guay, and
Larcker (2003), Jensen and Murphy (2004) and Frydman and Jenter (2010) focus largely on the
empirical evidence. Murphy (2013) provides a historical perspective and discusses the role of
institutional constraints. Edmans and Gabaix (2009) focus exclusively on recent theories and
use verbal descriptions rather than a formal model. Our main contribution is to study both
traditional and modern contracting theories, with a particular attention to the role of modeling
choices, andcombinetheir…ndingsintoasingleunifyingframework. Aswithanysurvey, weare
forced to draw boundaries and thus the analysis of asymmetric information focuses on moral
3