NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
VOLUNTARY ASSOCIATIONS, CORPORATE RIGHTS, AND THE STATE:
LEGAL CONSTRAINTS ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF AMERICAN CIVIL SOCIETY, 1750-1900
Ruth H. Bloch
Naomi R. Lamoreaux
Working Paper 21153
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21153
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2015
We would especially like to thank John Wallis, Jonathan Levy, Sally Clarke, Johann Neem, and
Jonathan Sassi, who wrote comments on an earlier draft of this paper, and Guillaume Frencia,
Brittany Adams, and Ben Nelson, who assisted us with research. In addition, we benefited from
valuable feedback from the anonymous referees for the University of Chicago Press and from the
participants at preparatory conferences sponsored by NBER and the Yale Program in Economic
History in 2012, 2013, and 2014. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Ruth H. Bloch and Naomi R. Lamoreaux. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Voluntary Associations, Corporate Rights, and the State: Legal Constraints on the Development
of American Civil Society, 1750-1900
Ruth H. Bloch and Naomi R. Lamoreaux
NBER Working Paper No. 21153
May 2015, Revised October 2016
JEL No. N11
ABSTRACT
The freedom of citizens to form voluntary associations has long been viewed as an essential
ingredient of modern civil society. Our chapter revises the standard Tocquevillian account of
associational freedom in the early United States by accentuating the role of state courts and
legislatures in the creation and regulation of nineteenth-century American nonprofit corporations.
Corporate status gave associations valuable rights that went beyond the basic right of individuals
to associate. Government officials selectively used their power to grant and enforce corporate
charters to reward politically favored groups while denying equivalent rights to groups they
viewed as politically or socially disruptive.
Ruth H. Bloch
2150 Broadway, Apt. 9-D
New York, NY 10023-8259
bloch@history.ucla.edu
Naomi R. Lamoreaux
Department of Economics
Yale University
27 Hillhouse Ave., Rm. 39
Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520-8269
and NBER
naomi.lamoreaux@yale.edu

1
New Jersey farmer George Hutchins catalyzed a major legal dispute in the late 1880s by
bequeathing part of his modest estate to support the propagation of political radicalism.
Hutchins’s will set up a trust fund dedicated to the free distribution of the writings of Henry
George, the popular critic of private property and leader of New York’s United Labor Party,
naming George and his “heirs, executors and administrators” as the trustees managing the fund.1
Legally, this bequest fell into the realm of charitable trust law, a contested branch of (originally
British) equity law that allowed testators to give property to groups without corporate charters as
long as courts deemed their purposes to be sufficiently “charitable.”2 At the urging of Hutchins’s
widow and son, the will’s executor asked the state’s Chancery Court to invalidate the bequest.
Since the American Revolution, state courts and statutes had overturned dozens of similar wills
leaving legacies to unincorporated associations.3 The outcome of this case proved no different.
New Jersey’s Chancery Court rejected Hutchins’ bequests on what were in effect political
grounds.
The legal question at the heart of the case, according to Vice Chancellor John Taylor
Bird, was “What is a charity?”4 Reviewing the precedents, Bird conceded that some types of
voluntary associations, such as evangelical missionary societies, were routinely regarded as
1 Hutchins’ Ex’r v. George (NJ 1888) 44 N.J. Eq. 124, quote at 125.
2 In England, charitable trust law had since the sixteenth century allowed specific kinds of unincorporated groups to
receive legacies. In the wake of the American Revolution several states, most notably Virginia, passed statutes
rejecting British practice, though most other states (including New Jersey) did not. The courts’ willingness to
enforce charitable trusts varied widely from state to state until the U.S. Supreme Court, in the 1844 case Vidal v.
Girard's Executors 43 U.S. 127 (also known as the Girard’s Will Case) reversed a contrary decision of 1819 by
recognizing charitable trusts as an embedded feature of American common law. Soon almost all American states
either tacitly or actively came to accept that unincorporated groups pursuing religious, educational, or
conventionally charitable purposes could receive bequeathed property. Useful surveys of this history include Gareth
Jones, History of the Law of Charity, 1532-1827 (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1960) and Howard
S. Miller, The Legal Foundations of American Philanthropy, 1776-1844 (Madison, Wisc.: State Historical Society
of Wisconsin, 1961).
3For the key cases, see Miller, Legal Foundations, pp. 21-50. Well into the twentieth century, appellate decisions
about the disposition of charitable trusts for political causes continued to vary according to judges’ assessments of
the threats posed by the recipient groups. See Note, “Charitable Trusts for Political Purposes,” Virginia Law Review,
37 (1951), esp. pp. 988-94.
4 Hutchins’ Ex’r v. George, quote at 126.

2
charitable even though they aimed to destroy “existing laws, customs, institutions, and
religions.”5 He also acknowledged two recent path-breaking decisions by the Massachusetts and
Pennsylvania supreme courts that defined charity widely enough to encompass bequests for the
dissemination of abolitionist and atheist ideas (albeit only on the condition that the trustees
accept their primary goal to be education and not opposition to the law or Christianity).6 In
Bird’s view, however, the purposes of the book fund were more fundamentally subversive.
George’s vilification of private landholding posed too great a threat to the law for the trust to
stand. “Whatever might be the rights of the individual author in the discussion of such questions
in the abstract, it certainly would not become the court to aid in the distribution of literature
which denounces as robbery--as a crime--an immense proportion of the judicial determinations
of the higher courts. This would not be legally charitable.”7
George successfully appealed to New Jersey’s high court the following year, but the
damage was done. Reversing the Chancery Court’s verdict, Chief Justice Mercer Beazley ruled
the key issue was not George’s radicalism but Hutchins’s intentions. The will itself, which
benignly described George’s works as “spreading the light” of “liberty and justice in these
United States of America,” disclosed no inclination to violate the law. Rather the book fund,
Beazley concluded, was best understood as akin to a library and, therefore, stood squarely within
the “charitable” domain of education.8 Nonetheless, George’s hard-won victory brought little
satisfaction to him and his followers. According to a biography written later by his son, legal fees
devoured a sizeable portion of the bequest, and the public fallout from the case damaged
5 Hutchins’ v. George, quote at 137.
6 Jackson v. Phillips, 96 Mass. 539 (1867); Manners v. Philadelphia Library Company 93 Pa. 165 (1880).
7 Hutchins’ v. George, quote at 139.
8 George v. Braddock, 45 N.J. Eq. 757 (1889).