NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES EXPOSURE TO ECONOMICS BRING NEW MAJORS TO THE FIELD? EVIDENCE
FROM A NATURAL EXPERIMENT.
Hans Fricke
Jeffrey Grogger
Andreas Steinmayr
Working Paper 21130
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21130
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2015
Andreas Steinmayr received funding from the Swiss National Science Foundation for this project through
grant P2SGP1_155412. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Hans Fricke, Jeffrey Grogger, and Andreas Steinmayr. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Exposure to Economics Bring New Majors to the Field? Evidence from a natural Experiment.
Hans Fricke, Jeffrey Grogger, and Andreas Steinmayr
NBER Working Paper No. 21130
April 2015
JEL No. A20,I20,I23
ABSTRACT
This study investigates how being exposed to a field of study influences students’ major choices. We
exploit a natural experiment at a Swiss university where all first-year students face largely the same
curriculum before they choose a major. An important component of the first-year curriculum that
varies between students involves a multi-term research paper in business, economics, or law. Due
to oversubscription of business, the university assigns the field of the paper in a standardized way
that is unrelated to student characteristics. We find that being assigned to write in economics raises
the probability of majoring in economics by 2.7 percentage points, which amounts to 18 percent of
the share of students who major in economics.
Hans Fricke Andreas Steinmayr
Swiss Institute for Empirical Economic Research Harris School of Public Policy
University of St. Gallen University of Chicago
Varnbuelstrasse 14 1155 E. 60th Street
9000 St. Gallen Chicago, IL 60637
Switzerland asteinmayr@uchicago.edu
hans.fricke@unisg.ch
Jeffrey Grogger
Irving B. Harris Professor of Urban Policy
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL~ 60637
and NBER
jgrogger@uchicago.edu

1 Introduction
A student’s choice of college major has a large impact on her post-graduation labor market
outcomes.1 Indeed, wage differences between some majors are as big as the wage gap between
college and high school graduates (Altonji, Blom, and Meghir 2012). Besides economic
considerations, recent studies suggest that students choose their field of study according to their
tastes and abilities.2 These individual characteristics determine how much students enjoy their
coursework and how much time and effort they invest towards their degree.
When students start college, they have imperfect knowledge about their tastes and abilities. They
are then exposed to different fields of study through their coursework, which potentially helps
them learn about their preferences and capabilities. In fact, one justification for late specialization
is a better student-major match quality (Malamud 2010; Malamud 2011).
Yet we know little about how exposure to different fields affects a student’s major decision. A
principal reason is that students self-select into courses, that is, students choose courses in fields
they think will interest them. As a result, using course selection to estimate the effect of exposure
on major choice could overstate the importance of exposure.
This study analyzes how quasi-random exposure to academic fields affects major choice.
Specifically, we study the impact of exposure to economics and law for students who are
interested in business. To do so we exploit a natural experiment at a Swiss university.
The University of St. Gallen offers studies in the fields of Business, Economics, Law, Law and
Economics, and International Affairs. Coursework for first-year students is almost identical
irrespective of the student’s intended major. However, in addition to coursework, the first-year
curriculum involves a substantial first-year paper. Each student must write a paper in one of the
three core fields: business, economics, or law. Students may state their preferences over fields, but
because business is oversubscribed, students do not necessarily receive their preferred choice. To
1 See Arcidiacono (2004); Grogger and Eide (1995); Hamermesh and Donald (2008); Hastings, Neilson, and
Zimmerman (2013); James et al. (1989); and Kirkebøen, Leuven, and Mogstad (2014).
2 Literature outside economics focuses on the role of aptitudes (i.e., major specific skills and abilities), tastes, and
preferences (e.g. Malgwi, Howe, and Burnaby 2005). More recently, also the economics literature has started devoting
more attention to these dimensions of the major decision. See Altonji (1993); Arcidiacono, Hotz, and Kang (2012);
Montmarquette, Cannings, and Mahseredjian (2002); Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2014); Zafar (2011); and Zafar
(2013).
1

deal with the oversubscription problem, the university assigns the field of the first-year paper in a
standardized way that is unrelated to student characteristics. This allows us to identify the effect of
exposure to economics and law on subsequent major choice and on other student outcomes.
Among students whose preferred field is business, we find that being assigned to write a paper in
economics increases the probability of majoring in economics by 2.7 percentage points. This is
equal to 17.6 percent of the share of students who major in economics. Being assigned to write a
law paper increases the probability of studying law by 1.6 percentage points. Furthermore, we find
that being assigned to economics positively influences grades in introductory economic courses.
Exposure to economics affects male students’ major choices, whereas exposure to law affects
female students’ choices. Exposure to the field apparently does not help explain why relatively few
women major in economics.
In a broader sense, our study relates to the policy discussions about major choices. For instance, a
policy objective in the United States is to guide students towards STEM majors.3 Stinebrickner and
Stinebrickner (2014) argue that greater exposure, by means of additional science courses, might
lead to more science graduates. Our results suggest that such a policy might be worth exploring.
A few recent studies suggest that students’ major choices are affected by coursework. Joensen and
Nielsen (2015) provide evidence that high school math in combination with chemistry increases
women’s participation in health sciences and technical sciences. Zafar (2011) and Stinebrickner
and Stinebrickner (2014) find that learning has not only a major-specific component but also a
general component: by learning about their abilities or interests with respect to their pursued
major, students also receive information about non-pursued majors. However, in these two studies
students decide on their coursework, which in turn determines the fields about which students
receive new information. That is, exposure to fields might be partly driven by unobserved tastes
directly related to major choice. Wiswall and Zafar (2015) show that such tastes play an important
role in students’ major choices. An important advantage of our approach is that the institutional
setting at the University of St. Gallen allows us to study exogenous exposure that is unrelated to
students’ characteristics.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces the institutional setting at
the University of St. Gallen and the assignment mechanism. Section 3 describes the administrative
3 For an overview of the discussion see Bettinger (2010).
2