NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK SOVEREIGN BOND HOLDINGS, SOVEREIGN SHOCK SPILLOVERS,
AND MORAL HAZARD DURING THE EUROPEAN CRISIS
Andrea Beltratti
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 21150
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21150
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2015
We are grateful to Brian Baugh and Andrei Gonçalves for scientific assistance. We thank seminar
participants at the European Central Bank and at the University of Lugano, Carlo Favero, Nicola Gennaioli,
and Luigi Guiso for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21150.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Andrea Beltratti and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Bank sovereign bond holdings, sovereign shock spillovers, and moral hazard during the European
crisis
Andrea Beltratti and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 21150
May 2015
JEL No. F34,G12,G15,G21,H63
ABSTRACT
From 2010 to 2012, the relation between bank stock returns from European Union (EU) countries
and the returns on sovereign CDS of peripheral (GIIPS) countries is negative. We use days with tail
sovereign CDS returns of peripheral countries to identify the effects of shocks to the cost of borrowing
of these countries on EU banks from other countries. A CDS tail return affects banks with greater
exposure to the country experiencing that return more, but it has an impact on banks regardless of
exposure. Shocks to peripheral countries that are more pervasive impact the returns of banks from
countries that experience no shock more than shocks to small individual peripheral countries. In general,
the impact of tail returns is asymmetric in that banks suffer less from adverse shocks to peripheral
countries than they gain from favourable shocks to such countries.
Andrea Beltratti
Department of Finance
Bocconi University
Via Roentgen 1
20100 Milan
Italy
and FEEM
andrea.beltratti@intesasanpaolo.com
René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu

Throughout the acute phase of the European sovereign crisis, policymakers were very much concerned that
shocks to the cost of borrowing of peripheral countries (the GIIPS countries, namely Greece, Ireland, Italy,
Portugal, and Spain) could endanger other countries and the financial system of the European Union (EU) as
a whole. There was little doubt for policymakers that, as put by Vitor Constâncio, the vice-president of the
ECB at the time, “contagion phenomena play a crucial role in exacerbating the sovereign debt problems in
the euro areas.” He went on to say that “Several of the ECB’s interventions have been motivated by the need
to address contagion”.1 Shocks to the cost of borrowing of the peripheral countries could affect the cost of
borrowing of healthier countries directly, but they could also affect countries and the financial system
through their impact on banks. A key potential transmission channel of the crisis through banks was the fact
that banks in healthy countries held bonds from peripheral countries. In this paper, we provide new evidence
on the transmission of shocks to the cost of borrowing of peripheral countries to banks in other EC countries
using data on bank exposures to peripheral countries.
Much attention has been paid to the complicated relation between sovereign risk and European banks
(e.g., Acharya, Drechsler, and Schnabl (2014)). On the one hand, adverse developments concerning the cost
of debt of sovereigns affect banks directly, partly because they hold sovereign debt, partly because of the
sovereign debt credit rating ceiling, and partly because they rely on sovereigns for support. In addition, a
worsening of the creditworthiness of a sovereign has indirect adverse effects on banks as it leads to a
deterioration in economic activity and an increase in the cost of funds. At the same time, however, a
worsening of the creditworthiness of banks in a country also has an adverse impact on the creditworthiness
of the country. This impact arises because of the expectation that the country’s government will have to
rescue banks. Ireland provides perhaps the most striking example of this dialectic as a highly-rated sovereign
saw its creditworthiness decline sharply as it bailed out banks. The fact that a weakening of banks can have
an adverse impact on the creditworthiness of a country complicates any analysis of transmission of the crisis
as this relation makes it harder to assess whether shocks to creditworthiness of countries cause a weakening
of banks or the other way around.
To identify the impact of shocks to the cost of borrowing of sovereigns (sovereign shocks) on banks, we
use an event study approach. With this approach, we look at the impact on banks of large sovereign shocks
1 “Contagion and the European debt crisis,” keynote lecture at the Bocconi University/Intesa Sanpaolo conference on
“Bank Competitiveness in the Post-crisis World,” Milan, October 2011.
1

measured as events where the credit default swap (CDS) return for one or multiple peripheral sovereigns is at
the tail of the distribution of the CDS returns of the respective sovereign or sovereigns. As is conventional,
we measure returns on CDS by the return to the protection buyer, so that a positive return corresponds to a
worsening of the credit in that it becomes more expensive to insure against the credit. In the absence of
frictions, a positive return on a CDS corresponds to a drop in the value of the bonds issued by the referenced
name. We identify large sovereign shocks as one-day CDS returns that are more than two standard deviations
away from the mean in absolute value. Such tail peripheral CDS returns cannot be attributed to news about
banks from other (peripheral or non-peripheral) countries and hence make it possible to evaluate the impact
of sovereign shocks on these banks.
Transmission of sovereign shocks to banks in other countries than those suffering from the sovereign
shock could take place through two distinct channels. First, a sovereign shock could affect banks adversely
because such a shock makes the financial system more vulnerable and could affect the economy of the
bank’s country through the weakening of the financial system or through a decrease in the demand for the
country’s products from the country affected by the sovereign shock. Hence, with this transmission channel,
a bank would be affected even if it is not directly exposed to the country that experiences a sovereign shock.
We call this channel the systemic risk channel. Second, a sovereign shock could affect a foreign bank
because it is exposed to the country that suffers the shock. We call this channel the exposure channel. A bank
could be exposed to a foreign country for a variety of reasons. For instance, it could have operations in that
country. However, much attention has been paid to the exposure of banks through sovereign bond holdings.
One potential factor affecting these exposures is that holding sovereign bonds from peripheral countries
enabled banks to hold bonds with high yields without having to use regulatory capital as the risk weights of
these bonds were zero (Acharya and Steffen (2012), Korte and Steffen (2014)). A bank that holds sovereign
bonds from the country suffering the shock would experience a loss as the value of the bonds drop. In this
paper, we investigate these two transmission channels.
To obtain data on bank exposures, we use the data from the stress tests that were required of EU banks
starting in 2010. These stress tests provide data on large EU banks’ exposure to the sovereign debt of
European countries for five separate dates during our sample period from April 2010 to November 2012.
Stress test banks had a strong home bias in their holdings of European sovereign debt. However, these banks
2