NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BORROWING FROM THE FUTURE:
401(K) PLAN LOANS AND LOAN DEFAULTS
Timothy (Jun) Lu
Olivia S. Mitchell
Stephen P. Utkus
Jean A. Young
Working Paper 21102
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21102
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2015
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21102.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Timothy (Jun) Lu, Olivia S. Mitchell, Stephen P. Utkus, and Jean A. Young. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Borrowing from the Future: 401(k) Plan Loans and Loan Defaults
Timothy (Jun) Lu, Olivia S. Mitchell, Stephen P. Utkus, and Jean A. Young
NBER Working Paper No. 21102
April 2015
JEL No. D04,D14,H24,J26
ABSTRACT
Tax-qualified retirement plans seek to promote saving for retirement, yet most employers permit pre-
retirement access by letting 401(k) participants borrow plan assets. This paper examines who borrows
and why, and who defaults on their loans. Our administrative dataset tracks several hundred plans
over 5 years, showing that 20% borrow at any given time, and almost 40% do at some point over five
years. Employer policies influence borrowing behavior, in that workers are more likely to borrow
and borrow more in aggregate, when a plan permits multiple loans. We estimate loan default “leakage”
at $6 billion annually, more than prior studies.
Timothy (Jun) Lu Stephen P. Utkus
Peking University Vanguard Center for Retirement Research
HSBC Business School 100 Vanguard Boulevard, M38
Room 725 Malvern, PA 19355
University Town, Nanshan District steve_utkus@vanguard.com
Shenzhen 518055 P.R. China
junlu@phbs.pku.edu.cn Jean A. Young
Vanguard
Olivia S. Mitchell 100 Vanguard Boulevard
University of Pennsylvania Malvern, PA 19355
Wharton School Jean_young@vanguard.com
3620 Locust Walk, St 3000 SH-DH
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu

2
Borrowing from the Future:
401(k) Plan Loans and Loan Defaults
I. INTRODUCTION
Defined contribution (DC) retirement plans in the U.S. generally are accorded
tax-deferred status as a means to encourage saving for old age,1 yet most plans also include
liquidity features giving workers pre-retirement access to their money.2 The tax code typically
discourages such pre-retirement access by imposing a tax liability and an additional 10 percent
penalty tax on amounts withdrawn early. Nevertheless, estimates of aggregate premature
withdrawals (so-called account “leakage”) from all tax-deferred accounts, including both 401(k)s
and IRAs, amount to 30-45 percent of annual total contributions (depending on the economic
environment; Argento, Bryant, and Sabelhaus, 2015). Such sizeable outflows relative to inflows
raise the important question of how these liquidity features may influence future retirement
security.
A few recent papers (Li and Smith, 2010; Beshears et al., 2012) have examined the
demographic and financial aspects of 401(k) borrowers, but no previous study has explored how
employer loan policy affects participant behavior and consequent default outcomes. This is
notwithstanding the fact that most DC participants in the U.S. have the option of borrowing from
their retirement accounts.3 Accordingly, here we address several questions regarding borrowing
from retirement accounts. First, we ask whether and how participants’ borrowing patterns
1 Here we use the terms “DC plan,” “401(k) plan,” “retirement plan,” and “pension plan” interchangeably. More
than 88 million private sector workers are covered by DC retirement plans holding more than $3.8 trillion in assets
(U.S. Department of Labor, 2013).
2 Pre-retirement liquidity mechanisms include hardship withdrawals (the worker can access his own contributions
under limited conditions); certain types of non-hardship withdrawals (e.g. the withdrawal of employer profit-sharing
contributions); and full access to savings on termination of employment with the current employer. Hardship and
non-hardship withdrawals and loans are at the prerogative of the plan sponsor; they are generally subject to income
tax and a 10 percent penalty tax though there are exemptions to the penalty.
3 In total, around 90 percent of plan participants had access to plan loans, and one-fifth of active workers had
outstanding loans (in 2011; Vanderhei et al., 2012).

3
respond to different loan policies. Second, we investigate who defaults on plan loans, and how
this pattern is related to employer loan policy. And finally, we offer our thoughts on the
implications for retirement security of allowing 401(k) loans.
Drawing on a rich administrative dataset of 401(k) plans containing information on plan
borrowing and loan defaults, we demonstrate that retirement account loans are quite common,
with 20 percent of DC participants having an outstanding loan at any point in time, and nearly 40
percent borrowing over a five-year period. Prior research has suggested that the availability of
plan loans encourages higher retirement plan contributions by making tax-deferred retirement
accounts more liquid (Mitchell, Utkus, and Yang, 2007). Yet by law, participants must repay
their 401(k) loans on a set schedule, usually through payroll deduction, and we estimate that
fully 90 percent of loans are repaid in a timely way. Yet one in 10 loans is not repaid – failure to
repay typically occurs when the worker leaves his current employer – and such loan “defaults”
represent a permanent reduction or “leakage” from retirement savings.4 We also show that
employer loan policy has a sizeable effect on 401(k) borrowing. When a plan sponsor permits
multiple rather than only one loan, each individual loan tends to be smaller; this is consistent
with workers taking a buffer-stock approach, retaining the option to borrow more in case of
future consumption shocks (Carroll, 1992).5 At the same time, the probability of plan borrowing
nearly doubles, and the aggregate amount borrowed rises by 16 percent, suggesting that
employees perceive that easier loans are actually an encouragement to borrow (i.e., an
“endorsement effect”). It is possible that firm loan policy might reflect endogenous differences in
credit demand across groups of workers, so we undertake several tests to rule out such
4 Inasmuch as 401(k) loans are a way people access their own saving, there is no technical “default” as with a
conventional loan from a bank or other intermediary.
5 As Carroll (1992:62) stated: “consumers hold assets mainly so that they can shield their consumption against
unpredictable fluctuations in income.”