NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
POLITICAL BONDS:
POLITICAL HAZARDS AND THE CHOICE OF MUNICIPAL FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
Abhay Aneja
Marian Moszoro
Pablo T. Spiller
Working Paper 21188
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21188
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2015
Data from Bloomberg Financial is gratefully acknowledged. We are grateful to Fernando Ferreira
and Joseph Gyorko for sharing their municipal election data and Mosche Barache for his assistance
needed to link the bond and election data. We are also thankful to Kenneth Ayotte, Richard Boylan,
David Schleicher, and Eric Singer for extensive and helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Abhay Aneja, Marian Moszoro, and Pablo T. Spiller. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Political Bonds: Political Hazards and the Choice of Municipal Financial Instruments
Abhay Aneja, Marian Moszoro, and Pablo T. Spiller
NBER Working Paper No. 21188
May 2015
JEL No. D23,D73,D78,H57,K23
ABSTRACT
We study the link between the choice of rule-based public contracts and political hazards using the
municipal bond market. While general obligation bonds are serviced from all municipal revenue streams
and offer elected officials financial flexibility, revenue bonds limit the discretion that political agents
have in repaying debt as well as the use of revenues from the projects financed by the debt. We predict
that public officials choose revenue bonds when elections are very contested to signal trustworthiness
and transparency in contracting to the voter. We test this hypothesis on municipal finance data that
includes 6,500 bond issuances nationwide as well as election data on over 400 cities over 20 years.
We provide evidence that in politically contested cities, mayors are more likely to issue revenue bonds.
The correlation is economically significant: a close victory margin of winning candidates and more
partisan swings increases the probability of debt being issued as a revenue bond by 3–15% and the
probability of issuing bonds through competitive bids by 7%. We test a few additional hypotheses
that strengthen the argument that the choice of revenue bonds is a political risk adaptation of public
agents so as to signal commitment and lower the likelihood of successful political challenges of misuse
of funds.
Abhay Aneja Pablo T. Spiller
University of California, Berkeley University of California, Berkeley
Walter A. Haas School of Business Walter A. Haas School of Business
2200 Piedmont Avenue Faculty Bldg. 593
Berkeley, CA 94720 Berkeley, CA 94720
abhay_aneja@haas.berkeley.edu and NBER
spiller@haas.berkeley.edu
Marian Moszoro
University of California, Berkeley
Institute for Business Innovation
Walter A. Haas School of Business
Faculty Bldg. F402
Berkeley, CA 94720
mmoszoro@berkeley.edu

1 Introduction
Municipal bonds are commonly issued by cities and states to raise money for public projects.
These securities comprise a substantial fraction of the overall American securities market.
The municipal bond market accounted for $3.7 trillion in 2014, roughly 10% of the American
public debt.
The are two main types of securities in this market: general obligation (G.O.) bonds
and revenue bonds. In this paper, we analyze municipal bonds as a type of long-term public
(debt) contract entered into by an elected official. These two types of bonds have different
characteristics. The proceeds of G.O. bonds are used at the discretion of the elected official
and the bonds are backed by all forms of city finances, including general tax revenues, and
offer politicians flexibility in spending. In contrast, revenue bond proceeds are earmarked
for specific purposes and are backed by the revenues related to the investment project they
finance. A combined treatment of municipal finance and political governance is herein pro-
posed. AnalogouslytoWilliamson(1988), where“debtgovernanceworksmainlyoutofrules,
while equity governance allows much greater discretion,” we argue that revenue bonds are
more rule-based than G.O. bonds. Accordingly, we consider a G.O. bond to be a flexible,
incomplete-type contract and a revenue bond as a specific-type contract. Moreover, by se-
lecting revenue bond financing the politician can self-restrict the scope of her discretion to
insulate from charges of improper use of public monies.
We use the municipal bond market to explore the determinants of public contracts.
A significant body of previous work on private and public contracting focuses on concerns
related to efficiency (such as the choice of auctions versus negotiations to sell contracts).
Another prominent strand of literature related to government contracts centers on how con-
tractual discretion relates to the accountability of public officials (elected and appointed)
with contracting power.
Research suggests that financial needs and risk allocation are the main factors influenc-
ing thechoice of municipal bond type (Kidwelland Koc1982; Ingram, Brooks, and Copeland
1983). In this paper, we offer empirical evidence for a complementary explanation and em-
pirically test for the importance of electoral considerations in public contracting, specifically
in issuing city bonds.
2

We draw on recent theoretical work about the threats imposed by “third-party/political
opportunists” on public officials and conjecture on several reasons why elected officials select
revenue bonds when elections are tight. First, by choosing revenue bonds city officials signal
“probity” (i.e., transparency and trustworthiness to deliver a project) and limit speculation
on the discretionary use of public monies to enrich themselves and buy political favors.
Second, earmarked proceeds limit the discretion of a successful challenger in the event that
the incumbent loses the next elections. For example, consider a city where the incumbent’s
constituents care about roads, but the challenger’s constituents care about schools. If the
incumbent’s winning margin is close (so the mayor’s seat is more contestable), she will issue
revenue bonds to lower the challenger’s discretion of use of funds for, say, schools ex post.1
Third, unsecured debt (i.e., G.O. bonds) requires more information disclosure to lenders on
municipal financials than secured debt (Myers and Majluf 1984), which a public agent in a
politically contested position maybe less likely willing to provide.
This article proceeds as follows. We first motivate this topic with a discussion of the
theoreticalliterature. Wethendescribethemodelaswellastheinstitutionalsettinginwhich
we will test it. A description of the data and proposed empirical test follows, and then the
results of this estimation exercise. Finally, we provide some concluding thoughts.
2 Conceptual Framework
2.1 Relevant Literature and Proposed Contribution
This study relates to two streams of research on contracts. One common view in economic
literature is that in the context of contracts for goods and services, competition (auctions)
gives firms strong incentives to be efficient and reveal their private costs, relative to negotia-
tions (Bulow and Klemperer 1996). Moreover, because open auctions are a transparent sale
procedure, they are considered less vulnerable to either corruption or favoritism. This view
explains why competitive auctions are often used to award large contracts in public procure-
ment. Recent work suggests, however, that the trade-off between auctions and negotiations
in procurement may be more accurately determined by the complexity of the project. When
dealing with complex projects, buyers may have difficulties specifying all possible contin-
1 Analogously to a selective debt overhand effect (Myers 1977).
3