NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIQUIDITY AS SOCIAL EXPERTISE
Pablo Kurlat
Working Paper 21118
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21118
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2015
An early version of parts of this paper circulated under the title Lemons, Market Shutdowns and Learning.
I am grateful to Marios Angeletos, Manuel Amador, Ricardo Caballero, Bengt Holmström, Juan Pablo
Nicolini, Peter Kondor, Fabrizio Perri, Victor Rios-Rull, Iván Werning and various seminar participants
for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Pablo Kurlat. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Liquidity as Social Expertise
Pablo Kurlat
NBER Working Paper No. 21118
April 2015
JEL No. D82,D83,G14
ABSTRACT
This paper proposes a theory of liquidity dynamics. Illiquidity results from asymmetric information.
Observing the historical track record teaches agents how to interpret public information and helps
overcome information asymmetry. There can be an illiquidity trap: too much asymmetric information
leads to the breakdown of trade, which interrupts learning and perpetuates illiquidity. Liquidity falls
in response to unexpected events that lead agents to question their valuation models, especially in
newer markets, may be slow to recover after a crisis and is higher in periods of stability.
Pablo Kurlat
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
pkurlat@stanford.edu

1 Introduction
This paper proposes a theory of what determines market liquidity and how liquidity evolves
over time. The theory is based on the interplay between information asymmetry and social
learning.
Liquidity is an elusive concept and the literature on it is plagued by challenges of both
definition and measurement.1 The theory in this paper refers to one particular notion of
liquidity: the liquidity of an asset class is the fraction of the potential gains from trade in
that asset class that are realized in equilibrium. If the potential gains from trade are large,
it is therefore tautologically true that asset liquidity has important consequences for social
welfare.
The theory is based on a minor modification of an otherwise standard model of trade
under asymmetric information in the spirit of Akerlof (1970). The assumption is that, rather
thanbeingpurelyuninformed, assetbuyershaveaccesstosomeinformation, buttheirability
to make use of that information depends on their collective experience. The model abstracts
from the specific features of the assets that are traded. However, to fix ideas it is useful to
think of it as applying to markets like IPOs, the primary market for asset backed securities
or the primary market for sovereign bonds.
The model works as follows. Every period, “investors” can create assets of heterogeneous
quality; these are more productive if held by “managers” rather than investors, so there are
gains from trade. Investors know the asset qualities but managers do not observe them, so
a classic lemons problem ensues.
Managerscanalleviatetheirinformationaldisadvantagebyobservingpublic,asset-specific
signals. However, for these signals to be useful, managers need to know how they correlate
with asset qualities. The key assumption in the model is that the joint distribution of signals
and asset qualities, summarized by the single parameter µ, is not known exactly. Agents
can learn about µ from commonly-observed past data. This data is based on a sample of
past assets and for each of them contains the signal it produced when it was created and an
indicator of how it turned out. The idea, then, is that agents turn to the historical track
record to guide them in making sense of the information available on any given asset, which
is standard practice among financial analysts. Damodaran (2008) offers a guide on the use of
“comparables” to determine which pieces of information about a particular asset one should
focus on and how to use them in valuation. One of the key challenges in practice is finding
1SeeBrunnermeierandPedersen(2009)foradiscussionoftheconceptualissuesandGoyenkoetal.(2009)
for a discussion of measurement.
2

a sufficiently large and sufficiently similar sample of historical precedents. In terms of the
model, the key question is at what rate observations are added to the historical sample.
This rate is assumed to depend positively on the level of investment and trade, a form of
learning-by-doing.
The model delivers several predictions about the relationship between investment, infor-
mation, and liquidity. The first result is that liquidity is increasing in the precision of agents’
estimates of µ. Knowing µ makes traders better able to extract information from signals,
reducing the degree of information asymmetry and increasing liquidity. Hence, liquidity is a
function of traders’ expertise. Asset prices, the level of investment and the volume of trade
are increasing in liquidity.
Depending on parameters, the model may feature an “illiquidity trap”. If at any point
in time, estimates of µ are sufficiently imprecise, then assets will be completely illiquid
and trade will break down. Depending on the parameters of the learning process and the
investment technolgy, this may imply that markets generate no data for agents to learn from,
which perpetuates the illiquidity. Whether or not the economy falls into an illiqudity trap
depends on the sample realizations during the first few periods. If the first observations
lead to precise and correct estimates of µ, then this will increase liquidity and reinforce the
learning process, which becomes self-sustaining. If instead they lead to imprecise estimates
of µ, because they conflict with each other or with agents’ prior, then signals will become
uninformative, leading to the illiquidity trap. Even under parameters such that there is no
permanent illiquidity trap, markets liquidity can be slow to recover after a disruption.
The model also predicts that markets will tend to become more liquid over time, as
traders accumulate more observations with which to estimate µ. Several studies have docu-
mented this feature of market maturation. Buckley (1997a,b) describes how this took place
in emerging market debt markets; Anderson and Gascon (2009) do so for the commercial
paper market.
In the model, unexpected events disrupt liquidity in the short term because they increase
buyers’uncertaintyastowhethertheyareusingthecorrectmodel(i.e. thecorrectvalueofµ)
to evaluate assets. This increases informational asymmetry and lowers liquidity. Adrian and
Shin (2009) and Brunnermeier (2008) document how liquidity in the market for asset-backed
securities fell sharply after an unexpected increase in mortgage defaults in 2007. Further-
more, according to the model, unexpected events will be more disruptive in newer markets,
where traders have not had time to accumulate a long track record of observations and thus
revise their beliefs strongly in light of new information. Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2008)
3