NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE U.S. LISTING GAP
Craig Doidge
G. Andrew Karolyi
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 21181
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21181
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2015
We thank participants at the Florida State University SunTrust Beach Conference, and at seminars
at Cornell University, Dimensional Fund Advisors, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve,
and the University of Oklahoma for helpful comments. We are grateful to Brian Baugh, Andrei Gonçalves,
and Xiaofei Zhao for excellent research assistance, to Scott Yonker for valuable comments, and to
Frank Hatheway (NASDAQ) for a useful conversation. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸˛¸˛
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21181.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Craig Doidge, G. Andrew Karolyi, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The U.S. listing gap
Craig Doidge, G. Andrew Karolyi, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 21181
May 2015
JEL No. G15,G20,G24,G30,G34,G38,O16
ABSTRACT
The U.S. had 14% fewer exchange-listed firms in 2012 than in 1975. Relative to other countries, the
U.S. now has abnormally few listed firms given its level of development and the quality of its institutions.
We call this the “U.S. listing gap” and investigate possible explanations for it. We rule out industry
changes, changes in listing requirements, and the reforms of the early 2000s as explanations for the
gap. We show that the probability that a firm is listed has fallen since the listing peak in 1996 for all
firm size categories though more so for smaller firms. From 1997 to the end of our sample period in
2012, the new list rate is low and the delist rate is high compared to U.S. history and to other countries.
High delists account for roughly 46% of the listing gap and low new lists for 54%. The high delist
rate is explained by an unusually high rate of acquisitions of publicly-listed firms compared to previous
U.S. history and to other countries.
Craig Doidge René M. Stulz
University of Toronto The Ohio State University
105 St. George St. Fisher College of Business
Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E6 806A Fisher Hall
Canada Columbus, OH 43210-1144
craig.doidge@rotman.utoronto.ca and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu
G. Andrew Karolyi
Johnson Graduate School of Management
Cornell University
348 Sage Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
gak56@cornell.edu

1. Introduction.
In a famous article, Jensen (1989) wrote that “the publicly held corporation has outlived its usefulness
in many sectors of the economy.” He went on to predict the eclipse of the public corporation.1 His view
was that the conflict between owners and managers can make public corporations an inefficient form of
organization. He argued that new private organizational forms promoted by private equity firms reduce
this conflict and are more efficient for firms in which agency problems are severe. The evolution of
listings in the U.S. is consistent with the view that public corporations are now less important. While the
number of U.S. listed firms peaked in 1996, that number is now 39% lower than when Jensen wrote his
article. However, this evolution is specific to the U.S. as listings in the rest of the world increased sharply
over the same period. As a result, the U.S. has developed a “listing gap.” In this paper, we demonstrate
the existence of the listing gap and examine potential explanations for it.
Jensen’s view stands in sharp contrast to the literature on financial development. This literature views
the size of the stock market as a measure of financial development and provides evidence that greater
development leads to greater economic growth (see La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny,
1997, hereafter LLSV, and Levine, 1997). Since 1996, U.S. listings per capita have fallen. By this
measure the U.S. is less financially developed now than it was in 1996, or even in 1975. In 1996, the U.S.
had 30 listings per million inhabitants; by 2012, it had only 13, a 50% decline. Thus, evidence that the
U.S. has a listing gap and has fewer listed firms now than anytime during the last 40 years is a source of
concern as it implies lower potential economic growth. However, it may not be a concern if, as suggested
by Jensen, the U.S. has evolved so that public corporations are replaced with more efficient organizational
forms that lead to higher growth. Understanding why the U.S. now has a listing gap and has so many
fewer listed firms is critical to uncovering whether such a deficit should be a source of concern or is just a
natural evolution as the economy moves towards more efficient forms of corporate organization.
Many studies focus on legal institutions as an important factor that affects stock market development
(see LLSV, 1997, and Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 2008, hereafter DLLS).
Countries with stronger investor protections have better developed stock markets. We show that the U.S.
1 The quoted sentence is from the abstract of the SSRN version of the paper. The published version in the Harvard Business
Review does not have an abstract.
1

has a listing gap relative to other countries with similar investor protection, economic growth, and overall
wealth. The listing gap arises in the late 1990s and widens over time. It is statistically significant,
economically large, and robust to different measurements. We also find that the U.S. has a listing gap
when compared to its own recent history and after controlling for changing capital market conditions.
The number of U.S. listings fell from 8,025 in 1996 to 4,101 in 2012, whereas non-U.S. listings
increased from 30,734 to 39,427.2 To understand the U.S. listing gap, we focus our investigation on why
the U.S. now has so few listed firms. We consider two types of explanations: composition-related and
flow-related. Composition-related explanations make predictions about the evolution of the composition
of the population of listed firms. We examine whether it has changed as predicted. To study flow-related
explanations, we examine the evolution of net listing flows. The net listing flow is the difference between
new lists and delists.3 For listing counts to fall, net flows have to be negative. We investigate why net
flows became negative after the listing peak in 1996 and why they stayed negative from 1997 to 2012.
We refer to this as the post-peak period in contrast to the pre-peak period before 1996.
We investigate four potential composition-related explanations. The first is that the decline in listings
can be explained by a decrease in the total number of firms (public and private) and/or by a decrease in
firm creation (startups), so that there are fewer firms eligible to be listed. If the number of listed firms is a
constant percentage of the total number of firms, listings decrease if the total number of firms falls.
However, we find that the total number of firms increased. We also find that the percentage of the total
number of firms that list is relatively constant during the pre-peak period but decreases sharply thereafter.
Similarly, the decline in startups (Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda, 2014) cannot explain the
low number of listed firms. We find that the relation between new lists and startups experienced a
structural break after 1996. Had the relation between new lists and startups stayed the same after 1996,
the U.S. would have had 9,000 more new lists in the post-peak period than it actually had. Thus, the
2 The decline in U.S. listings has been noted by others, including “Wall Street’s Dead End”, The New York Times (February 13,
2011), “Missing: Public Companies – Why is the Number of Publicly Traded Companies in the US Declining?” CFO Magazine
(March 22, 2011), “The Endangered Public Company: The Big Engine that Couldn’t”, The Economist (May 19, 2012), and “The
State of the Public Corporation: Not So Much an Eclipse as an Evolution”, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance (Fall 2014).
3 We use “new listings” and its shorter form “new lists” interchangeably. Similarly, we refer to both “delistings” and “delists” as
departures of publicly listed companies from stock exchanges.
2