NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MAINTAINING CENTRAL-BANK FINANCIAL STABILITY UNDER NEW-STYLE
CENTRAL BANKING
Robert E. Hall
Ricardo Reis
Working Paper 21173
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21173
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2015
Hall's research was supported by the Hoover Institution and Reis's by a grant from the Institute for
New Economic Thinking. This research is part of the National Bureau of Economic Research's Economic
Fluctuations and Growth and Monetary Economics Programs. We are grateful to David Archer, Marco
Bassetto, Marco Del Negro, Jeff Huther, John Leahy, Dirk Niepelt, Monika Piazzesi, Chris Sims, Carl
Walsh, and Michael Woodford for helpful comments. This is a significantly revised version of a paper
with a similar title that circulated in February of 2013. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21173.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Robert E. Hall and Ricardo Reis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Maintaining Central-Bank Financial Stability under New-Style Central Banking
Robert E. Hall and Ricardo Reis
NBER Working Paper No. 21173
May 2015, Revised July 2015
JEL No. E42,E58
ABSTRACT
Since 2008, the central banks of advanced countries have borrowed trillions of dollars from their commercial
banks in the form of interest-paying reserves and invested the proceeds in portfolios of risky assets.
We investigate how this new style of central banking affects central banks' solvency. A central bank
is insolvent if its requirement to pay dividends to its government exceeds its income by enough to
cause an unending upward drift in its debts to commercial banks. We consider three sources of risk
to central banks: interest-rate risk (the Federal Reserve), default risk (the European Central Bank),
and exchange-rate risk (central banks of small open economies). We find that a central bank that pays
dividends equal to a standard concept of net income will always be solvent—its reserve obligations
will not explode. In some circumstances, the dividend will be negative, meaning that the government
is making a payment to the bank. If the charter does not provide for payments in that direction, then
reserves will tend to grow more in crises than they shrink in normal times. To prevent this buildup,
the charter needs to provide for makeup reductions in payments from the bank to the government.
We compute measures of the financial strength of central banks, and discuss how different institutions
interact with quantitative easing policies to put these banks in less or more danger of instability. We
conclude that the risks to financial stability are real in theory, but remote in practice today.
Robert E. Hall
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
rehall@gmail.com
Ricardo Reis
Department of Economics, MC 3308
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, Rm. 1022 IAB
New York NY 10027
and NBER
rreis@columbia.edu

The Bank of Japan in the 1990s, followed in the 2000s by the Federal Reserve, the
European Central Bank, the Bank of England, and the Swiss National Bank, made dramatic
changes in the conduct of monetary policy in response to financial crises. They borrowed
trillions of dollars from commercial banks by expanding reserves and paying positive or
receiving negative interest on them, while using the proceeds to enlarge their holdings of
government bonds and other risky investments. Critics of the new style of central-bank
policy worry that, either once market interest rates begin to rise as the crisis recedes, or
if the bonds in the central bank’s portfolio default, or if the exchange rate rises suddenly,
these central banks will come under stress. Might the double burden of capital losses on
central banks’ portfolios and the rising cost of paying market interest on trillions of dollars
of reserves threaten the banks’ financial stability?
In Appendix A, we survey the literature on central bank financial stability. Studies have
so far fallen into two strands. The first investigates how central-bank capital may affect
monetary policy and inflation. This research takes as given that the central bank remains
solvent, and explores the effect of different policies on inflation, under that constraint. The
second strand characterizes circumstances when the central bank capital can be negative,
focussing on the peculiar accounting rules of central banks and on the items in their balance
sheet. Because of this focus, that literature’s lessons apply only to the central bank under
study, usually the Federal Reserve, but do not extend to other institutional setups.
Our approach is different. We take as given the commitment to a target for inflation,
and explore whether the central bank is financially stable. We provide an economic analysis
of how the central bank’s charter determines whether the bank faces the danger of exploding
reserves. Our theory is simple but flexible enough to accommodate most central banks
in the world. Our formal model of central bank risk, founded in modern finance theory,
describes the evolution of a central bank’s financial position, and shows when can it become
unsustainable. We spell out why a central bank’s reserves may be on an exploding path and
which institutions and policies protect against exploding reserves and guarantee financial
stability.
We start by laying out the resource constraint faced by the central bank, focusing on
the path of reserves. Central banks are unique among financial institutions in their power
to compel banks to make loans to the central bank in the form of reserves. We introduce
three forms of risk to the assets of the central bank: interest-rate risk that comes with the
2

central bank holding long-term bonds that fall in value when interest rates rise; default risk
that comes with holding bonds that may become impaired in some states of the world; and
exchange-rate risk that arises when central banks hold foreign currency and gold in their
assets.
Section 2 spells out the meaning of central-bank financial stability. A central bank is
an independent arm of government whose relation to the government is contractual. In
particular, the bank has a dividend rule in its charter governing the cash flows from the
bank to the government and—potentially—the cash flows from the government to the bank.
There is a bias toward cash flowing from the bank to the government because the char-
ter generally specifies that the bank can issue growing volumes of currency and thus earn
seignorage. A central bank can always meet its obligation to deliver the mandated dividend
to the government because it has the unlimited power to borrow from commercial banks by
issuing reserves. But a central bank cannot continue as a functioning financial institution
independent of the government if it appears to be on a path of issuing an exploding volume
of reserves. In that case, a central bank would be engaging in a Ponzi scheme. A principal
objective of the paper is to derive conditions under which a central bank is financially stable,
in the precise sense that its volume of reserves is a stationary function of the state of the
economy. To put it differently, we ask what dividend rules prevent a central-bank Ponzi
scheme.
We apply the theory in section 3 to appraise the current financial strength of the Federal
Reserve. We show that the new obligation to pay rising interest rates as the economy returns
to normal barely has an effect on outstanding reserves and does not threaten an explosion
of reserves. However, quantitative easing in response to a financial crisis, by expanding
the Fed’s portfolio of government bonds and significantly lengthening its maturity, exposes
the Fed to capital losses during the recovery from the crisis, when interest rates rise. We
find that in almost all conditions the Fed would be able to withstand this interest-rate risk
and would resume paying a substantial positive dividend to the Treasury after some years
of zero dividend. At that point, reserves would be back to their normal level, so there is
no threat that the crisis would trigger a permanent increase in reserves. The answer to
the question—is the Fed at risk for losing the ability to stabilize prices because it becomes
financially unstable?—is an unambiguous no, given the historical volatility of interest rates
and bond prices.
3