NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOUSE PRICE VOLATILITY AND THE HOUSING LADDER
James Banks
Richard Blundell
Zoé Oldfield
James P. Smith
Working Paper 21255
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21255
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2015
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Economic and Social Research Council
through the research grant RES-000-22-0513. The work of Banks, Blundell and Oldfield, was also
supported by ESRC Centre for the Microeconomic Analysis of Public Policy at IFS (RES-544-28-0001).
James Smith’s research was supported by grants from the National Institute on Aging and benefited
from the expert programming assistance of David Rumpel and Iva Maclennan. This paper was presented
at the biannual NBER Conference on the Economics of Aging at Carefree, Arizona in May 2015. We
would like to thank our discussant Steven Venti and participants in the meeting for very helpful comments.
The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by James Banks, Richard Blundell, Zoé Oldfield, and James P. Smith. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

House Price Volatility and the Housing Ladder
James Banks, Richard Blundell, Zoé Oldfield, and James P. Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 21255
June 2015
JEL No. D12,D91
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the effects of spatial housing price risk on housing choices over the first half
of the life-cycle. Housing price risk can be substantial but, unlike other risky assets which people can
avoid, most people want to eventually own their home thereby creating an insurance demand early
in life. Our contribution focuses on the importance of home ownership as a hedge against future house
price risk for individuals that plan to move up the housing ladder. We use a simple theoretical model
to show that people living in places with higher housing price risk should own their first home at a
younger age, live in larger homes, and be less likely to refinance. These predictions are shown to hold
using panel data from the United States and United Kingdom.
James Banks Zoé Oldfield
Arthur Lewis Building-3.020 Institute for Fiscal Studies
School of Social Sciences 7 Ridgemount
The University of Manchester London, WC1 7AE U.K.
Manchester M13 9PL zoe_o@ifs.org.uk
United Kingdom
and Institute for Fiscal Studies James P. Smith
j.banks@ifs.org.uk RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
Richard Blundell P.O. Box 2138
University College London Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
Department of Economics smith@rand.org
Gower Street
London, ENGLAND
r.blundell@ucl.ac.uk

One of the most critical consumption and investment decisions that individuals and families
make over their life-cycle involves the amount of housing services to consume and whether or
not to combine consumption with ownership. Housing is an important component of
consumption, but not simply because it absorbs a large fraction of the household budget—which
it does. Where we live and how much we decide to spend on housing is a key ingredient to the
amenities and life-style we have chosen for our families and ourselves. But housing, or more
particularly housing wealth, can be even more critical as an investment as it is typically by far
the biggest marketable asset in the household portfolio for most people.
The contribution of this paper is to bring together two key elements of housing
consumption and home ownership decisions into an empirical model of housing outcomes. The
first of these is the housing ladder. Rather than modeling home ownership as a one-time durable
purchase, we model it as a series of purchase decisions, or a housing ladder, where the desired
flow of housing services rises with family formation and growing family size over the life cycle.
The second is the acknowledgement of the role of future house price risk. In some geographic
markets, housing can be a risky asset with high levels of unpredictable price volatility while in
other places the prospect of capital gains or losses in housing are understandably not the subject
of much social conversation.
Our contribution is to focus on the importance of ownership as a hedge against future
house price risk as individuals move up the ladder. We use a stylized model to show that
increasing house price risk acts as an incentive to become a homeowner earlier in the life-cycle
and, once an owner, to move more rapidly up the housing ladder. Increases in volatility are
shown to increase ownership and to increase the quantity of housing wealth conditional on
2

ownership in earlier periods of the life-cycle. We then establish that these relationships hold
empirically using panel data on families in different geographic markets in Britain and in the US.
Housing needs change over the life-cycle and the decision of when to buy the first
property and at what point to move up the ladder is a key life-cycle decision. For example,
Ortalo-Magne and Rady (2004, 2006) note the importance of new entrants at the bottom of the
ladder for the determination of housing transactions along the whole ladder. Ermisch and Pevalin
(2004) document the importance of childbearing and family formation decisions on housing
choices. We follow this lead by allowing the demand for housing consumption and movements
up the ladder to depend directly on the demographic profile of the family. We then add to this the
enhanced incentive to own and to move up the ladder created by more volatile house prices.
The idea that home ownership can be seen as a hedge against uncertainty in the price of
housing services has many precedents. For example, Sinai and Souleles (2005) use this
observation to carefully show the increased demand for ownership when rental price uncertainty
is higher. Our contribution instead is to focus on the importance of ownership and the quantity of
housing owned as a hedge against future house price risk as individuals move up the ladder. We
examine the impact of volatility on both ownership and on measures of the quantity of housing
wealth conditional on ownership. Both are shown to rise with increased house price volatility.
In contrast to other risky assets in which risk-averse individuals can simply choose to
avoid them, everyone must consume housing, and the vast majority of people desire to and
eventually do end up owning their own home. In addition, for most individuals the demand for
housing will rise over the life-cycle as family size increases. The combination of these factors
results in an insurance role for housing wealth in early adult life that drives the predictions we
investigate in our empirical analysis.
3