NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE STRESS COST OF CHILDREN
Hielke Buddelmeyer
Daniel S. Hamermesh
Mark Wooden
Working Paper 21223
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21223
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2015
We thank Michael Burda, Luise Goerges, Matthias Krapf, and participants in seminars at a number
of universities and conferences for helpful comments. This study uses unit record data from the Household,
Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) Survey and German Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP).
The HILDA Survey project was initiated and is funded by the Australian Government Department
of Social Services and is managed by the Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic and Social Research
(at the University of Melbourne). The German data used in this publication are from the German Socio-Economic
Panel Study (SOEP) and made available to us by the German Institute for Economic Research (DIW),
Berlin. No funding was received by any of the authors in support of this study. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21223.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Hielke Buddelmeyer, Daniel S. Hamermesh, and Mark Wooden. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Stress Cost of Children
Hielke Buddelmeyer, Daniel S. Hamermesh, and Mark Wooden
NBER Working Paper No. 21223
May 2015
JEL No. I31,J12,J13
ABSTRACT
We use longitudinal data describing couples in Australia from 2001-12 and Germany from 2002-12
to examine how demographic events affect perceived time and financial stress. Consistent with the
view of measures of stress as proxies for the Lagrangean multipliers in models of household production,
we show that births increase time stress, especially among mothers, and that the effects last at least
several years. Births generally also raise financial stress slightly. The monetary equivalent of the costs
of the extra time stress is very large. While the departure of a child from the home reduces parents’
time stress, its negative impacts on the tightness of the time constraints are much smaller than the positive
impacts of a birth.
Hielke Buddelmeyer Mark Wooden
University of Melbourne University of Melbourne
111 Barry Street 111 Barry Street
Carlton, Melbourne, Australia Carlton, Melbourne, Australia
hielke_buddelmeyer@hotmail.com m.wooden@unimelb.edu.au
Daniel S. Hamermesh
Department of Economics
Royal Holloway University of London
Egham, TW20 0EX
UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER
Daniel.Hamermesh@rhul.ac.uk

Insanity is inherited—we get it from our children. [Mark Twain]
I. Background
We ask whether the addition of a child to a family imposes costs that are not accounted for in
the immense literatures on the cost of children and on equivalence scales, and thus whether there are
hitherto unaccounted factors that affect the decision to have a child or that increase the perceived
costs of rearing a child. The literature on equivalence scales focuses solely on the monetary costs of
children (e.g., Muellbauer, 1977; Pollak and Wales, 1979; Bourguignon, 1999). The sparser literature
on the time costs of children (e.g., Gustafsson and Kjulin, 1994; Bradbury, 2008) engages in
accounting exercises, totalling up the amounts of time that each parent devotes to child care, and
perhaps valuing them, and examining gender differences and secular changes in time allocated to
child care.
Hamermesh and Lee (2007) constructed and estimated a model describing cross-section
differences in the extent of expressed time stress. The theoretical basis was Becker’s (1965) model of
the use of time and goods to produce commodities that contribute to a household’s utility. The
theoretical part of the study identified time stress as the Lagrangean multiplier on a household’s time
constraint and linked financial worries to the Lagrangean multiplier on its goods constraint. Using
cross-section data from Australia, Germany, Korea and the U.S., they found that individuals with
higher Beckerian full incomes expressed greater feelings of time stress, consistent with a more tightly
binding time constraint, and that they were less likely to express concerns about money (consistent
with a looser goods constraint).1
Our approach here combines these two strands of the literature: We examine the extent to
which people find that the time and goods constraints in their utility maximization bind more tightly
when a child is added to the household. We are not examining generalized responses to a birth, such
as happiness or life satisfaction (for the mixed results on these see, e.g., Stanca, 2012, Baetschmann et
al, 2012, Pedersen and Schmidt, 2014), nor are we examining emotional responses to particular
aspects of child-rearing (e.g., Connelly and Kimmel, 2013). Instead, we study how a specific life
1DeVoe and Pfeffer (2011) use several waves of the Australian data set to demonstrate the relationship between
income and time stress.
1

event—the birth of a child—affects the empirical analogs of parameters that arise within a family’s
welfare maximization. We thus develop a new dimension of the cost of children; and, because
additional time loosens the time constraint while additional income loosens the goods constraint, our
approach allows us to extend the measurement of the monetary and time costs of children. We
complement the examination of the impact of births on the household’s utility maximization by
studying what might be viewed as the obverse of a birth—the departure of a child from the household.
To obtain these estimates we need data sets that contain respondents’ views of the time and
monetary stress that they perceive, our analogs to the Lagrangean multipliers in their utility
maximization. Longitudinal data are also required, since in order to identify the effect of an addition
to the household we need a household-specific baseline against which to compare the empirical
counterparts to the multipliers. Fortunately, since 2001 the Household, Income and Labour Dynamics
in Australia (HILDA) Survey has collected annual information from a panel of respondents on their
perceptions of time and financial stress. Also, since 2002 the German Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP)
has collected similar information biennially. We use both data sets in the empirical work here, thus
providing a check on the specific cognitive implications of the questions and on culture-specific
differences in couples’ responses to the birth of a child.
II. Theoretical Motivation and Considerations
Consider a household that combines goods (a vector x) and the time of each spouse (vectors
j
TM and TF) to produce a vector of commodities Z (j=1, …, N) that determines its current utility:
j j j
(1) U = U(Z (x ,TM TF ), … , Z (x , TM TF )).
1 1 1, 1 N N N, N
The maximization of this utility function, given the technologies of household production and the
household’s wage rates, WM and WF, unearned income I, and the vector of goods prices that it faces,
P, yields a utility-maximizing vector of demands for both time and goods inputs into the production
j
of each commodity.2
2Equation (1) describes current-period utility, but clearly a planned birth must, if parents are rational, raise
lifetime utility. Thus a complete model would append a term like e-rTU(.), indicating the present value of the
infinite stream of satisfaction from creating a dynasty. This extension rationalizes the possible increase in
happiness engendered by children with the possible tightening of the time and goods constraints on which we
focus. The utility function implies pooling of resources in household production. More complex assumptions
2