NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CROSS-BORDER ACQUISITIONS AND LABOR REGULATIONS
Ross Levine
Chen Lin
Beibei Shen
Working Paper 21245
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21245
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2015
We received helpful comments from Douglas Arner, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Yona Rubinstein,
David Sraer, Bernard Yeung and seminar and conference participants at the University of California,
Berkeley, the HKIMR-HKU International Conference on Finance, Institutions and Economic Growth
and the 2015 CEIBS finance conference in Shanghai. We thank the Clausen Center for International
Business and Policy at the University of California, Berkeley, for financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Beibei Shen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Cross-border Acquisitions and Labor Regulations
Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Beibei Shen
NBER Working Paper No. 21245
June 2015
JEL No. F2,G34,G38,J6,J8
ABSTRACT
Do labor regulations influence the reaction of stock markets and firm profitability to cross-border acquisitions?
We discover that acquiring firms enjoy smaller abnormal stock returns and profits when targets are
in countries with stronger labor protection regulations, i.e., in countries where laws, regulations, and
policies increase the costs to firms of adjusting their workforces. These effects are especially pronounced
when the target is in a labor-intensive or high labor-volatility industry. Consistent with labor regulations
shaping the success of cross-border deals, we find that firms make fewer and smaller cross-border
acquisitions into countries with strong labor regulations.
Ross Levine Beibei Shen
Haas School of Business Chinese University of Hong Kong
University of California at Berkeley Hong Kong
545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685) beibei@baf.cuhk.edu.hk
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu
Chen Lin
Faculty of Business and Economics
The University of Hong Kong
chenlin1@hku.hk

1. Introduction
Cross-border acquisitions account for a large and growing proportion of all acquisitions.
The dollar value of cross-border acquisitions rose from an average of $300 billion per annum
during the 1990s to an average of almost $800 billion per annum since 2000. Furthermore, the
proportion of all acquisitions, domestic and international, accounted for by cross-border deals
rose from 24% to 39%. Firms increasing look beyond national borders in conducting mergers
and acquisitions.
Researchers have focused on the financial and corporate governance determinants of
cross-border acquisitions. Erel et al. (2012) show that exchange rate changes and changes in
relative stock market valuations influence the incidence and direction of international deals.
Rossi and Volpin (2004), Bris and Cabolis (2008), and Chari et al. (2009) demonstrate that firms
in countries with stronger corporate governance systems have a higher likelihood of purchasing
firms in other countries. The nationalities of owners and directors matter too. Ferreira et al. (2010)
find that foreign institutional owners facilitate cross-border acquisitions, and Masulis et al. (2012)
find that firms with foreign independent directors make better cross-border acquisitions when the
target firms are from the directors’ home economies.
But, researchers have not yet studied how the broad set of laws, regulations, and policies
that shape labor markets—“labor regulations”— influence cross-border acquisitions. Researchers
have dissected the impact of offshoring and multinational firms on wages and employment (e.g.,
Revenga 1992; Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg 2008; Desai et al. 2009; and Harrison and
McMillan 2011). But, they have not evaluated whether differences in the degree to which
countries protect the employed and assist the unemployed influence cross-border acquisitions.
This is surprising. Besides influencing a large corporate expense—expenditures on wages
and benefits, labor regulations shape the costs of hiring, firing, and adjusting the hours of
workers, with potentially large effects on firm performance (Botero et al., 2004). Labor market
flexibility could be especially important for the success of acquisitions since acquiring firms
often restructure targets to minimize labor costs and maximize synergies. Thus, cross-country
! "!
!

differences in labor markets might influence cross-border acquisitions and the profitability of
those deals.
In this paper, we provide the first assessment of the relationship between cross-country
differences in labor regulations and cross-border mergers and acquisitions. Specifically, we
address the following questions: Are cross-country differences in labor regulations associated
with (1) how an acquiring firm’s stock price responds to a cross-border acquisition and (2) how
an acquiring firm’s profits change after a cross-border deal?
To address these questions, we use a sample of cross-border transactions in the Securities
Data Company database across 50 countries over the period from 1991 through 2012. This
includes transactions between 2,450 (=50! 49) country-pairs. We examine individual deals. We
assess the cumulative abnormal stock returns (CARs) and the abnormal return on assets (ROAs)
of acquiring firms following cross-border acquisitions. To calculate CARs, we follow Bris and
Cabolis (2008) and use a two-factor international market model in which one factor is the local
market returns and the second factor is the world market return. To compute abnormal ROA, we
follow Lin et al. (2011) and Harford et al. (2012) and adjust the firm’s ROAs by median industry
ROAs. Before the cross-border deal, we calculate the abnormal ROAs of the (artificially)
combined firm based on the relative sizes and industrial compositions of the two firms. After the
acquisition, we use the acquiring firm’s abnormal ROA.
We use three measures of labor regulations. First, Botero et al. (2004) provide cross-
country measures of the degree to which laws impede employers from firing workers, increasing
work hours, or using part-time workers. Such interventions increase the costs to employers of
adjusting their workforces. Second, the OECD provides panel measures of the strictness of
regulations on dismissals, including procedural inconveniences, notice and severance pay, and
the difficulty of firing workers. Third, Aleksynska and Schindler (2011) provide panel data on
the proportion of the unemployed covered by unemployment benefits. More generous
unemployment benefits might increase labor costs by boosting the reservation wages of the
unemployed. For brevity, we use the phrases “stronger” and “weaker” labor regulations to
! #!
!