NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RUNS VERSUS LEMONS:
INFORMATION DISCLOSURE AND FISCAL CAPACITY
Miguel Faria-e-Castro
Joseba Martinez
Thomas Philippon
Working Paper 21201
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21201
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2015
We thank Andres Almazan, Willie Fuchs, Guido Lorenzoni, Alp Simsek, Harald Uhlig and Wei
Xiong, as well as participants in seminars at MIT, NYU, Minneapolis Fed, Stanford, UT-Austin,
the NBER Summer Institute, the Wharton Conference on Liquidity and Financial Crises, the
AEA Annual Meeting 2015, the 11th Cowles Conference on General Equilibrium and its
Applications, and the Nemmers Prize Conference on Liquidity, Bubbles and Crises in honor of
Jean Tirole. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Miguel Faria-e-Castro, Joseba Martinez, and Thomas Philippon. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Runs versus Lemons: Information Disclosure and Fiscal Capacity
Miguel Faria-e-Castro, Joseba Martinez, and Thomas Philippon
NBER Working Paper No. 21201
May 2015, Revised July 2016
JEL No. E44,E5,E6,G01,G21,G28,H12,H2
ABSTRACT
We study the optimal use of disclosure and fiscal backstops during financial crises. Providing
information can reduce adverse selection in credit markets, but negative disclosures can also
trigger inefficient bank runs. In our model governments are thus forced to choose between runs
and lemons. A fiscal backstop mitigates the risk of runs and allows a government to pursue a high
disclosure strategy. Our model explains why governments with strong fiscal positions are more
likely to run informative stress tests, and, paradoxically, how they can end up spending less than
governments that are more fiscally constrained.
Miguel Faria-e-Castro Thomas Philippon
New York University New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6 FL Stern School of Business
New York, NY 10012 44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
mdf348@nyu.edu New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
Joseba Martinez tphilipp@stern.nyu.edu
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6 FL
New York, NY 10012
joseba.martinez@nyu.edu

Governmentsinterveneinvariouswaysduringfinancialcrises(Gorton,2012). Somepolicies,suchasliquidity
support, credit guarantees, and capital injections are explicitly backed by the balance sheet of the government.
Other policies, such as stress tests and asset quality reviews, do not rely directly on the fiscal capacity of the
government but rather on its ability to (credibly) disclose information. Governments almost always use both
types of interventions, yet the existing literature has only studied one or the other. Our goal is to provide a
joint theory of optimal interventions.
One motivation for our analysis is the striking difference between the stress tests implemented in the U.S.
and in Europe following the 2008-2009 financial crisis. In May 2009, the Federal Reserve publicly reported the
results of the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP). The SCAP was an assessment of the capital
adequacy, under adverse scenarios, of a large subset of U.S. financial firms. The exercise is broadly perceived as
having reduced uncertainty about the health of U.S. banks and helped restore confidence in financial markets.
European policy makers were keenly aware of the U.S. experience, and yet, after much hesitation, ended up
designingsignificantlyweaker stresstests. TheCommitteeofEuropeanBankingSupervisors(CEBS)conducted
E.U.-widestresstestsfromMay toOctober2009butchosenottodisclosetheresults. Theexercisewasrepeated
a year later and the results were published, but the scope of the test was limited, especially with regard to
sovereign exposures. Our theory suggests that the lack of a credible backstop made it risky for individual
governments to conduct rigorous stress tests. Our theory is also consistent with the fact that the Asset Quality
Review (AQR) run by the European Central Bank in 2014, after the introduction of financial backstops (ESM,
OMT), was significantly more rigorous and probably on par with the American stress tests.1
We also argue, from a theoretical perspective, that fiscal backstops and information disclosure should be
jointly studied because this comprehensive approach leads to new predictions and can overturn existing results.
Most strikingly, we find that, once endogenous disclosure choices are taken into account, governments with
strong fiscal positions can end up spending less on bailouts than governments with weak fiscal positions. This
prediction is exactly the opposite of what one would conclude when considering only one policy at a time. Our
main theoretical result is that governments with strong fiscal position are more likely to run aggressive stress
tests. These stress tests can then make bailouts unnecessary. This is an important empirical prediction, but
also a relevant point when studying time consistency issues and the balance between rules and discretion.
Disclosure Disclosure is typically motivated by the need to restore investor confidence in the health of fi-
nancial firms. We capture this idea using a simple model of adverse selection, following Akerlof (1970) and
1Ongand Pazarbasioglu (2014) provideathorough overviewof thedetails and perceived success of SCAP and theCEBS stress
tests. See V´eron (2012) for a discussion of thechallenges facing European policy makers.
2

Myers and Majluf (1984). Our economy is populated by financial intermediaries (“banks”) who privately ob-
serve the quality of their existing assets, which may be high (type H) or low (L). The main state variable in
our economy is the fraction of banks with high quality assets. Both types of banks have valuable investment
opportunities and can raise external funds in credit markets. The riskiness of lending to a particular bank,
however, dependson the quality of its existing assets, and this creates the potential for adverse selection. When
perceived asset quality is high, adverse selection is limited and credit markets operate efficiently. When the
fraction of type H banks is believed to be low, credit markets are likely to freeze, and the government may be
able to improve welfare by disclosing information about asset quality.
Alleviating adverse selection therefore pushes the government to disclose information about banks’ balance
sheets. Why, then, not disclose as much as possible? We argue that an important cost of disclosure is the
risk of triggering a run on weak banks. We follow the standard approach of Diamond and Dybvig (1983) in
modeling banks as being funded with runnable liabilities.2 If short term creditors (depositors) learn that a
particular bank is weak, they might decide to run. Runs are inefficient because they entail deadweight losses
from liquidation and missed investment opportunities.
Disclosure then involves a trade-off between runs and lemons. We first solve for optimal disclosure without
any fiscal intervention. We model disclosure as in the Bayesian persuasion model of Kamenica and Gentzkow
(2011). The government and the private sector share some prior belief about the health of financial firms. The
government chooses the precision of the signals that are generated. Each signal contains information about the
quality of an individual bank.
Disclosure vs. Guarantees Governments also extend guarantees to stop financial crises. In our model, the
benefit from insuring runnable liabilities is to prevent the inefficient liquidation of long-term assets. However,
guarantees expose the government to potential losses and, therefore, to deadweight losses from taxation.
The main contribution of our paper is then to analyze the interaction between fiscal capacity and optimal
disclosure. We obtain two main results. First, we characterize optimal disclosure and deposit insurance in the
“runs versus lemons” model. To do so, we map the model into a Bayesian persuasion framework and we show
2We have in mind all types of short-term runnable liabilities: MMF, repo, ABCP, and, of course, large uninsured deposits. In
the model, for simplicity, we always refer to all intermediaries as banks and to all runnable liabilities as deposits. We take the
existenceoftheserunnableclaimsasgiven. Ourmodelcompletelyignoresthedeepandimportantissueofwhyfinancialfirmsissue
these unstable liabilities in the first place. See Zetlin-Jones (2014) for a model where a bank optimally chooses a fragile capital
structure that is subject to bank runs. See also Williams (2015) for an analysis of portfolio choice. A critical issue is then whether
the privately chosen level of runnable claims is higher than the socially optimal one, which obviously depends on fire sales and
other types of externalities. The goal of our paper is not to study these externalities, but it is easy to incorporate them, as in
Philippon and Schnabl (2013) for instance. They would only change the optimal level of intervention without changing the design
of how to intervene,which is thefocus of our paper.
3