NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CUSTOMERS AND INVESTORS:
A FRAMEWORK FOR UNDERSTANDING FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
Robert C. Merton
Richard T. Thakor
Working Paper 21258
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21258
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2015
We thank Doug Diamond and Stavros Zenios for helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research. Robert C. Merton is Resident Scientist at Dimensional Holdings, Inc. He
has at various times in the last three years made compensated presentations at meetings hosted by
various financial and government institutions.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Robert C. Merton and Richard T. Thakor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Customers and Investors: A Framework for Understanding Financial Institutions
Robert C. Merton and Richard T. Thakor
NBER Working Paper No. 21258
June 2015, Revised May 2016
JEL No. D81,D83,G01,G20,G21,G23,G28,H12,H81
ABSTRACT
Financial institutions have both investors and customers. Investors, such as those who invest in
stocks and bonds or private/public-sector guarantors of institutions, expect an appropriate risk-
adjusted return in exchange for the financing and risk-bearing that they provide. Customers of a
financial intermediary, in contrast, provide financing in exchange for a specific set of services,
and do not want the fulfillment of these services to be contingent on the credit risk of the
intermediary, even when they are not small, uninformed agents lacking in sophistication. This
paper develops a framework that defines the roles of customers and investors in intermediaries,
and uses the framework to provide an economic foundation for the aversion to intermediary credit
risk on the part of its customers. This customer-investor nexus has implications for a host of
issues related to how contracts between financial intermediaries and their customers are
structured and how risks are shared between them, as well as the consequences of (unanticipated)
deviations from the ex ante efficient contractual arrangement for institutional design, regulatory
practices, and financial crises. Moreover, customers and investors are often intertwined in
practice, and so this intertwining provides insights into the adoption of “too-big-to-fail” policies
and bailouts by regulators in general.
Robert C. Merton
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-634
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
rmerton@mit.edu
Richard T. Thakor
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-615
Cambridge, MA 02142
rthakor@mit.edu

1 Introduction
In three papers, Merton (1989, 1993, 1997) introduced the idea that many types of financial
intermediaries provide “credit-sensitive” financial services, i.e., the effective delivery of these
services depends on the credit-worthiness of the provider.1 The intermediary's credit standing can
generate externalities for the different business activities of the intermediary, even when they are
not directly interconnected through common customers or other such elements. A concrete
example is an investment bank that expresses an interest in participating in a bridge loan as an
attempt to start a merchant banking business and in doing so runs the risk of having institutional
customers flee its over-the-counter derivatives business (e.g. long-dated swap contracts) because
of concerns about the ability of the bank to fulfill its contractual obligations on its derivative
products were it to suffer losses on its bridge loans (see Merton (1997)).2 In various theories of
financial intermediation, the raison d’etre of a financial institution is to serve its customers
(depositors and borrowers in the case of a bank, for example), so the potential sensitivity of the
perceived value of the intermediary’s services to its own credit risk has important implications.
Our main goal in this paper is to study how this aspect of the relationship between a financial
intermediary and its customers affects the design of contracts between intermediaries and their
customers, and how it helps us to better understand commonly-observed features in a wide variety
of real-world contracts, institutions, and regulatory practices.
Financial institutions differ from non-financial firms in many significant respects. First,
1 See also Merton (1992a).
2 A specific example of such a scenario is the case of Salomon Brothers and RJR Nabisco. When Salomon expressed
interest in undertaking a leveraged buyout of RJR Nabisco in 1988, many of Salomon’s credit-sensitive customers
fled because of concerns of how such moves may affect its overall creditworthiness. Salomon’s response to mitigate
this concern in subsequent years was to create a “ring-fenced” AAA-rated subsidiary called Salomon-Swapco as a
counterparty for its OTC customers’ derivatives trades.
2

what investors in a financial institution purchase looks very similar to what its customers purchase.
For example, investors who buy a bank’s subordinated debt have a financial claim that is similar
to the claim of the bank’s depositors in that both are debt claims on the bank’s cash flows. In
contrast, customers and investors in non-financial firms look quite different—a customer who buys
a General Motors car is transparently different from an investor who buys the company’s bonds.
A second distinguishing feature of financial intermediaries is that their assets and liabilities are
closely related. For example, in a bank one group of customers—borrowers—provide financing to
the bank in the form of deposits (also structured as debt contracts). Thus, the bank has customers
with debt contracts on both sides of its balance sheet. The fact that much of a bank’s assets and
liabilities are comprised of forms of debt also contributes to much higher leverage in banks (and
other financial institutions) compared to non-financial firms. In contrast, in a non-financial firm,
assets and liabilities typically appear to be very different. In an automobile company, for instance,
the assets are manufacturing plant and equipment and its inventory of cars, whereas liabilities are
the money the company has borrowed from investors.
A third important distinction is that in financial institutions both investors and customers
provide financing to the intermediary.3 Investors, such as stockholders or bondholders of an
intermediary, provide risky financing—they expect the payoffs of their claims to be linked to the
intermediary’s outcomes. Included among investors are also external guarantors of an
intermediary’s liabilities. Thus, investors provide financing as well as risk-bearing. Customers,
on the other hand, expect services in exchange for the financing they provide, but prefer to not
3 In non-financial firms, suppliers provide the firm with trade credit, which is short-term financing in the form of
payables. However, customers end up being consumers of finance rather than providers of it. In contrast, in the case
of commercial banks, deposits represent customer-financing and make up typically 70%-80% of the bank’s total
financing.
3