NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE MORTALITY COST OF POLITICAL CONNECTIONS
Raymond Fisman
Yongxiang Wang
Working Paper 21266
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21266
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2015
We thank the Kent Daniel, Harry DeAngelo, Wouter Dessein, David Hirshleifer, Harrison Hong, Emir
Kamenica, John Matsusaka, Kevin Murphy, Jay Ritter, Amit Seru, Rene Stulz, Wei Xiong and Jiang
Wang, as well as seminar participants at a number of institutions for insightful comments; Eric Hardy,
Jane Zhao, Jun Xiao and Rong Xu provided excellent RA support. Wang also thanks the China National
Science Foundation and (Grant Number: 71472180) and the Australian Research Council (DP150102339)
for financial support. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Raymond Fisman and Yongxiang Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Mortality Cost of Political Connections
Raymond Fisman and Yongxiang Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 21266
June 2015
JEL No. D73,J81,P26
ABSTRACT
We study the relationship between the political connections of Chinese firms and workplace fatalities.
In our preferred specification we find that the worker death rate for connected companies is two to
three times that of unconnected firms (depending on the sample employed), a pattern that holds for
within-firm estimations. The connections-mortality relationship is attenuated in provinces where safety
regulators' promotion is contingent on meeting safety targets. In the absence of fatalities, connected
firms receive fewer reports of major violations for safety compliance, whereas in years of fatal accidents
the rate of reported violations is identical. Moreover, fatal accidents produce negative returns at connected
companies and are associated with the subsequent departure of well-connected executives. These results
provide suggestive evidence that connections enable firms to avoid (potentially costly) compliance
measures, rather than using connections to avoid regulatory response after accidents occur. Our findings
emphasize the social costs of political connections, and suggest that appropriate regulatory incentives
may be useful in mitigating these costs.
Raymond Fisman
School of Business
Columbia University
622 Uris Hall
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
rf250@columbia.edu
Yongxiang Wang
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089
Yongxiang.Wang@marshall.usc.edu
A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21266

There exists a longstanding debate on the social impact of rent-seeking by politically
connected (cid:28)rms. The overall e(cid:27)ect hinges to a large extent on whether political ties allow
businesses to circumvent needlessly onerous bureaucratic constraints or to get around regu-
lationsthataresociallybene(cid:28)cialbutresultinlower(cid:28)rmpro(cid:28)ts. Yetthereislittleempirical
evidence to inform our views on this tradeo(cid:27). In this paper, we examine the link between
(cid:28)rms’ political ties and workplace fatalities in China, thus highlighting the cost side of this
tradeo(cid:27); we also examine the e(cid:27)ect of regulator incentives in mitigating these costs.
There have been many anecdotal accounts of substandard working conditions across a
range of industries in China. As some indication of the scale of the problem, China’s worker
death rate is over 20 times that of the United Kingdom (Wang, 2011). This poor safety
record is generally attributed to weak enforcement rather than the absence of adequate laws
and regulations (Phillips, 2010). For example, a scathing assessment by the International
Labour Organization in 2012 stated that (cid:28)rms in China’s construction industry (cid:16)do not meet
international standards, national laws and regulations due to a lack of prevention, illegal
operations, poor preventive and protective measures, lack of provision of personal protection
equipment and e(cid:27)ective and regular safety inspections, audits and training.(cid:17)1 Bribery is
often implicated in cases of poor safety compliance: following an explosion at a Nanjing
chemical factory that killed 12 workers, the Wall Street Journal suggested that (cid:16)corruption
and collusion between...factory owners and local inspectors limit the likelihood that laws
protecting workers will be enforced.(cid:17) This view is echoed by statements from the national
ministry charged with production safety, whose spokesman stated as recently as 2013 that
(cid:16)protectionfromlocalgovernmentandcorruption...arebehindmanymajordeadlyaccidents.(cid:17)
Othershavetakenthecontraryview-politiciansplausiblyputmoreweightonworkerwelfare
relative to pro(cid:28)ts than businessmen, so that political ties could lead to better treatment of
workersatpoliticallyconnected(cid:28)rms(seeDonget.al. (2014)forrecentevidencefromChina).
We use data from publicly traded Chinese (cid:28)rms during 2008 - 2013 to examine the em-
pirical relationship between (cid:28)rms’ political connections and workplace safety. We begin by
documenting a robust positive correlation between the political ties of executives and worker
deaths. We de(cid:28)ne a company to be politically connected if its CEO or another (cid:16)C-suite(cid:17)
executive previously held a high-level government post; the number of workplace deaths per
employee at connected (cid:28)rms is two to three times higher than at unconnected (cid:28)rms (depend-
ing on the sample we employ). This pattern holds in regression speci(cid:28)cations, both in the
cross-sectionandalsoina(cid:28)rm-yearpanelwith(cid:28)rm(cid:28)xed-e(cid:27)ects,wheretheconnection-fatality
relationship is identi(cid:28)ed from executive turnover. Political connections are not exogenously
assigned, so our main results need be interpreted with some caution. We consider some of
1Seehttp://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:13100:0::NO::P13100_COMMENT_ID:3085598,
lastdownloadedSeptember5,2014.
2

the most prominent mechanisms through which this might bias our estimates, including dif-
ferential rates of death underreporting for connected versus unconnected (cid:28)rms, di(cid:27)erences in
management talent, and the di(cid:27)erential selection of connected executives, and (cid:28)nd limited
support for any of these possibilities.
We go on to examine workplace enforcement actions as a function of political ties. Con-
sistent with our thesis that connections insulate (cid:28)rms from regulatory compliance, we (cid:28)nd
that despite their relatively poor safety records there has never been a public report of a
major workplace safety audit at a connected company (the rate is just under 5 percent at
comparable unconnected (cid:28)rms). We also show that connected (cid:28)rms are (cid:28)ned for pollution
less often, providing further suggestive evidience that that connections help (cid:28)rms circumvent
costly regulations more broadly.
Such insulation from oversight may account, at least in part, for the relatively high prof-
itability that we document among connected (cid:28)rms in our sample. We delve more deeply
into the link between connections, lax safety compliance, and pro(cid:28)tability by examining the
e(cid:27)ectoffatalaccidents onfuturepro(cid:28)ts. Sharepricesofconnected(cid:28)rmsfallbyasmuchas9
percent (relative to unconnected (cid:28)rms) in the 30 trading days following a fatal accident. In
the year following such accidents, the pro(cid:28)t premium of connected (cid:28)rms disappears, indicat-
ing that investors’ expectations are validated by subsequent accounting pro(cid:28)ts. Further, we
show that in the year following worker fatalities, (cid:28)rms are signi(cid:28)cantly less likely to employ
connectedexecutives,indicatingonedirectchannelthroughwhichfatalaccidentsmayreduce
or eliminate connected (cid:28)rms’ pro(cid:28)t premium.
Overall,whilenosinglepieceofevidenceisdispositive,wearguethatourfullsetof(cid:28)ndings
are most easily reconciled with the use of political relationships to (pro(cid:28)tably) circumvent
safety oversight and regulation, and that this protection is lost in the wake of accidents that
result in worker deaths.
Finally, we explore the e(cid:27)ect of strengthened incentives for regulators on worker safety at
connected(cid:28)rmsbyexaminingthepassageoflawswhichmadeo(cid:30)cials’promotioncontingent
on meeting safety targets. Exploiting the di(cid:27)erent timing of passage of so-called (cid:16)No safety,
no promotion(cid:17) (NSNP) laws across provinces, we show that stronger regulator incentives
are associated with lower worker death rates, primarily among connected companies. This
relationshipholdswhenweinclude(cid:28)rm(cid:28)xede(cid:27)ects,province-year(cid:28)xede(cid:27)ects,andprovince-
speci(cid:28)c time trends to control for unobserved trends or shocks to (cid:28)rms or provinces. We
also (cid:28)nd a drop in pollution (cid:28)nes for connected (cid:28)rms following the passage of NSNP laws,
consistent with substitution amongst forms of rent-seeking by connected (cid:28)rms. (Given the
lack of random assignment of NSNP laws, these results should be seen as suggestive.)
We present a Becker-style audit model that is useful for organizing and interpreting our
fullsetofresults. Inourmodel,regulatorstradeo(cid:27)thecostsofsafetymonitoringagainstthe
3