NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DARK TRADING AT THE MIDPOINT:
PRICING RULES, ORDER FLOW, AND HIGH FREQUENCY LIQUIDITY PROVISION
Robert P. Bartlett, III
Justin McCrary
Working Paper 21286
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21286
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2015
We are grateful to a great number of colleagues and seminar participants, including those at the NYU/Penn
Law and Finance Conference, the University of California, Berkeley, the University of Carlos III of
Madrid, the Center for Monetary and Financial Studies (CEMFI), Columbia University, the Conference
on Empirical Legal Studies, Duke University, Erasmus University, Fordham Law School, the University
of Gothenburg, the University of Rotterdam, the University of Texas, the University of Warwick, and
Yale Law School. For helpful comments, we particularly thank Jim Angel, Ken Ayotte, Brian Broughman,
Steven Davidoff Solomon, Merritt Fox, Jesse Fried, Stavros Gadinis, Mira Ganor, John Golden, Jeff
Gordon, Larry Glosten, Sean Griffith, Kevin Haeberle, Joel Hasbrouck, Frank Hathaway, Terry Hendershott,
Christine Jolls, Jonathn Klick, Chris Naggy, Roberta Romano, Gordon Smith, Jesse Fried, Chester
Spatt, Alan Schwartz, Eric Talley, Steve Thel, and Heather Tookes. The bulk of this paper was written
while McCrary was visiting at the Bank of Spain, which provided research support, as did the University
of California, Berkeley. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Robert P. Bartlett, III and Justin McCrary. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Dark Trading at the Midpoint: Pricing Rules, Order Flow, and High Frequency Liquidity Provision
Robert P. Bartlett, III and Justin McCrary
NBER Working Paper No. 21286
June 2015
JEL No. G10,G15,G18,G23,G28,K22
ABSTRACT
Using over eight trillion observations of market data, we use a regression discontinuity design to analyze
the effect of increasing the minimum price variation (MPV) for quoting equity securities in light of
recent proposals to increase the MPV from $0.01 to $0.05. We show that a larger MPV encourages
investors to trade in dark venues at the midpoint of the national best bid and offer. Enhanced order
flow to dark venues reduces price competition by exchange liquidity providers, especially those using
high frequency trading (HFT). Trading in dark venues due to a wider MPV reduces volatility and increases
trading volume.
Robert P. Bartlett, III
890 Simon Hall
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
rbartlett@law.berkeley.edu
Justin McCrary
School of Law
University of California, Berkeley
586 Simon Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-7200
and NBER
jmccrary@berkeley.edu

1. Introduction
A central question for the organization of equity markets is how to provide incentives for
traders to provide liquidity on public stock exchanges while protecting the interests of traders
wanting to access it. By standing ready to buy or sell a security at disclosed prices, liquidity
providers allow liquidity takers to execute trades immediately, facilitate the continuous pricing
of securities on which markets depend, and most fundamentally, encourage the holding of
securities in the first place. Yet given well-known adverse selection and market risks for
standing ready to trade at a fixed price, liquidity providers demand compensation for doing so in
the form of the bid-ask spread (Glosten & Harris, 1988). By buying securities at a “bid” quote
that is always lower than the “ask” quote demanded for selling, liquidity providers effectively
force liquidity takers to compensate them for the public good of displayed liquidity. While in
theory this distributional conflict could be resolved through the price mechanism, rules
regulating the smallest allowable improvement to a bid or an ask—or a quote’s minimum price
variation (MPV)—effectively place a floor on the size of the bid-ask spread.1 The fact that the
MPV has always been regulated thus immediately places securities regulators in the position of
allocating gains from trade between liquidity providers and liquidity takers.
In this paper we investigate the effects of the current MPV rule on this allocation of gains in
light of mounting concerns that it sub-optimally impairs the provision of displayed liquidity (see,
e.g., Kwan, Masulis, and McInish, 2014; Weild, Kim and Newport, 2012; Buti, Rindi, and
Werner, 2011). The rule, which is contained in Rule 612 of Regulation National Market System
(NMS), requires all quotations submitted to exchanges and priced at or above $1.00 per share to
be priced in penny increments. As a result, the spread between the published national best bid
and offer (NBBO) for an actively traded security commonly hovers at or just above a penny.
More importantly, in promulgating Rule 612, the SEC explicitly permitted the ability to trade in
sub-penny increments (the “Trade Exclusion”) so that liquidity takers (e.g., retail traders using
market orders) might avoid paying even this penny spread by routing marketable orders to non-
exchange “dark” venues such as dark pools and broker-dealer internalizers.2 For instance, where
1 The MPV is currently a penny, but up until 20 years ago was an eighth of a dollar, or 0.125.
2 We adopt the conventional practice of classifying non-exchange trading venues as either dark pools or broker-dealer
internalizers (see Securities Exchange Commission, 2010). As described in more detail below, dark pools are equity trading
systems that do not display their best priced-orders for inclusion in the consolidated quotation feed that is used to calculate the
NBBO. While the precise structure of dark pools varies (Zhu, 2014), they generally provide a means to trade securities for
1

the NBBO for a security is $10.01 x $10.02, a trader might seek to sell at a price that is better
than the national best bid of $10.01 by routing a marketable sell order to a dark pool in hopes of
crossing with a buy order at the midpoint of the NBBO (e.g., $10.015). In this fashion, Rule
612’s Trade Exclusion induces liquidity takers and their brokers to route orders to dark trading
venues instead of exchanges, but at the cost of potentially undermining the incentive of liquidity
providers to display quotations on public exchanges. In light of these concerns, the SEC recently
finalized a pilot study that will widen the MPV from a penny to a nickel, including a
controversial “trade-at” rule that will prohibit any venue from trading a security unless it
previously quoted the security at the NBBO.
Motivated by the controversy surrounding the trade-at rule, this paper empirically explores
how Rule 612’s Trade Exclusion allocates gains from trade between liquidity providers and
liquidity takers and, consequently, how it affects the incentive to provide displayed liquidity.
Notwithstanding evidence that the Trade Exclusion facilitates off-exchange trading (Kwan,
Masulis, and McInish, 2014), the extent to which it actually redistributes gains from liquidity
providers to liquidity takers and how it affects the provision of displayed liquidity remain open
empirical questions. Because Rule 612 does not currently require a minimum amount of price
improvement over the NBBO for off-exchange trades, prevailing studies of this phenomenon
have generally emphasized that while traders might route orders to dark venues in hopes of
securing price improvement, liquidity providers in dark venues are under no obligation to
provide it. As such, liquidity providers in dark venues who use the Trade Exclusion to fill in-
bound marketable orders instead of competing for those orders on exchanges at the NBBO—a
practice commonly described as “queue-jumping”—are presumed to do so by “providing little or
no price improvement” (Kwan, Masulis, and McInish, 2014; p. 4). If accurate, such a practice
would represent a wealth transfer from providers of displayed liquidity to providers of non-
displayed liquidity in dark trading venues, thereby undermining the SEC’s purported goal of
reducing trading costs for liquidity takers. Yet as we show, the trading rules of the most active
dark venues are commonly designed to facilitate trades occurring at the midpoint of the
investors who seek to execute large transactions without displaying their trading interest to minimize the movement of prices
against them before a trade can occur. Broker-dealer internalizers represent broker-dealers that fill marketable orders received
from customers (or marketable orders purchased from other broker-dealers) using their own proprietary capital or by matching
customer orders against one another. Trades executed in either type of venue are, however, reported publicly on the consolidated
tape as having been executed at a FINRA trade reporting facility. We use the term “dark venue” to refer collectively to dark
pools and broker-dealer internalizers.
2