NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PROTECTING FINANCIAL STABILITY IN THE AFTERMATH OF WORLD WAR I:
THE FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF ATLANTA'S DISSENTING POLICY
Eugene N. White
Working Paper 21341
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21341
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2015
The author would like to thank the participants in conferences and seminars at the Banque de France,
the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, and New York University. Special appreciation for many comments
and suggestions goes to Michael D. Bordo, Gary Richardson, William Roberds, Hugh Rockoff, and
David C. Wheelock. Financial support from the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1127094,
Rutgers University’s ARESTY program and Rutgers’ Research Council grants is gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Eugene N. White. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Protecting Financial Stability in the Aftermath of World War I: The Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta's Dissenting Policy
Eugene N. White
NBER Working Paper No. 21341
July 2015
JEL No. E58,G01,N12,N22
ABSTRACT
During the 1920-1921 recession, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta resisted the deflationary policy
sanctioned by the Federal Reserve Board and pursued by other Reserve banks. By borrowing gold
reserves from other Reserve banks, it facilitated a reallocation of liquidity to its district during the
contraction. Viewing the collapse of the price of cotton, the dominant crop in the region, as a systemic
shock to the Sixth District, the Atlanta Fed increased discounting and enabled capital infusions to aid
its member banks. The Atlanta Fed believed that it had to limit bank failures to prevent a fire sale of
cotton collateral that would precipitate a general panic. In this previously unknown episode, the Federal
Reserve Board applied considerable pressure on the Atlanta Fed to adhere to its policy and follow
a simple Bagehot-style rule. The Atlanta Fed was vindicated when the shock to cotton prices proved
to be temporary, and the Board conceded that the Reserve Bank had intervened appropriately.
Eugene N. White
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
and NBER
white@economics.rutgers.edu

When inflation picked up speed after World War I, central banks responded by quickly
raising interest rates, leading to the severe recession of 1920-1921. The Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta (FRBA) could not offset the national deflationary policy, but it carried out an
important lender-of-last-resort (LOLR) function, as described by recent theoretical advances
(Freixas and Parigi, 2014). There would have been no need for the Atlanta Fed’s intervention, if
the interbank market for funds had worked perfectly to enable banks in all the Federal Reserve
districts to manage their differing demands for liquidity, attributable to the regionally uneven
recessionary shock (Allen and Gale, 2000; Freixas, Parigi and Rochet, 2000).1 The intense
shock to Atlanta’s Sixth District, arising from its dependence on cotton and agricultural
commodities, imposed a sharper contraction and a higher demand for liquidity from its banks.
As the commodity-collateralized assets on their balance sheets were opaque to other banks,
especially those outside of the region, troubled banks found it difficult to access the interbank
market for liquidity because of the information asymmetry. Finding themselves illiquid, Sixth
District banks refused to renew loans, forcing producers and factors to dump their stocks on the
market. This situation presented the possibility of a “fire sale” where cotton and cotton bills
might sell below their fundamental prices leading to a cascade of bank failures and a panic
(Shleifer and Vishy, 1992; Diamond and Rajan, 2009; Caballero and Simsek, 2009).2 To
prevent a fire sale, the FRBA, informed by bank examinations and by its discounting history
with each bank, used its discretion to provide liquidity and assist with capital injections.
To carry out this policy the FRBA needed to borrow gold reserves from Federal Reserve
banks that had surplus reserves. By borrowing heavily from other Reserve banks, the FRBA
acted where the interbank market did not, to reallocate liquidity, even as the money stock
contracted.3 If the commodity shock had been permanent, sweeping bank liquidations would
have eventually been required; but the recovery of cotton prices proved it to be a temporary
shock, where the FRBA-enabled reallocation of liquidity was consequently temporary. The
1 Allen and Gale (2000) and Freixas, Parigi and Rochet (2000) have modelled multi-region economies with
systemic risk where the interbank market provides liquidity short regions with funds from excess liquidity regions.
A shortage of aggregate liquidity can transmit a shock from one region to another, forcing unexpected liquidation of
long-term contracts and potentially creating a general crisis.
2 See Shleifer and Vishny (2011) for a survey of the literature on fire sales.
3The similarities between the gold settlement fund’s facilitation of inter-Reserve bank borrowing and the recent
Eurozone crisis where semi-autonomous financial systems are linked together by a common currency and face
profound imbalances are examined in Eichengreen et.al. (2014).
2

Atlanta Fed was not worried about moral hazard because it believed that the brutal recession was
an extraordinary, not-to-be repeated event that was understood by its member banks4. While the
Federal Reserve Board opposed the Atlanta Fed’s efforts, it later relented and publicly admitted
that the FRBA had acted appropriately as a LOLR. Its success may have emboldened the FRBA
to be more expansionary than other Federal Reserve banks during the 1929 Florida panic and
Great Depression, without incurring the wrath of the Federal Reserve Board that in 1920-1921
had pressed the Atlanta Fed to adhere more closely to rules as specified by the Board.
This episode shines a light on the pre-depression history of the Federal Reserve, which
has been generally treated as a period when the Fed did not act as a LOLR. The Federal Reserve
Act of 1913 did not contain any instructions on how the new central bank should act as a LOLR.
Some of the founding fathers of the Fed, like H. Parker Willis and Carter Glass believed that if
the Fed put the real bills doctrine into effect, there would be no panics in the future. Others like
Paul Warburg saw that there was a clear need for the new central bank to be prepared to act in
accordance with Bagehot’s (1873) 5 dictates. Bordo and Wheelock (2013) argue that the Federal
Reserve Act impeded the Fed’s ability to act as a LOLR by limiting its lending capacity, creating
a decentralized governance structure, and restricting its membership. These constraints on the
LOLR function appear to have been confirmed by historical accounts of the Fed that, for the
most part, center on decision-making by the Federal Reserve Board. Its first real LOLR
challenge is typically seen as occurring during the four banking panics of 1930-1933 (Friedman
and Schwartz, 1963). However, before the New Deal reform of the Fed, much of policy was
conducted by the twelve, semi-autonomous Reserve banks, each of whom had individual
responsibility for maintaining gold reserves above the minimum reserve ratios, supervising
member banks, and setting discount rates with the approval of the Federal Reserve Board.
Consequently, there was a diversity of LOLR experience, and a full history requires an inclusion
of the Federal Reserve banks’ actions as lenders-of-last-resort. Differences in policies during the
Great Depression between Federal Reserve banks have enabled Richardson and Troost (2009) to
examine a quasi-experiment that revealed the effectiveness of an easier liquidity policy,
4 Hautcoeur, Riva and White (2014) and Mishkin and White (2014) have found that even during the classical gold
standard era and in the early twentieth century, central banks exercised discretion to intervene when faced with the
collapse of what would be termed today SIFIs (systemically important financial institutions) while injecting liquidity
into the financial system as a whole. When successful, these interventions were accompanied by strong actions to
limit moral hazard.
5 Surveying the Bank of England’s responses to financial crises, Bagehot (1873) recommended that a central bank
should lend freely at a high rate against good collateral to supply liquidity.
3