NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANKS' RISK EXPOSURES
Juliane Begenau
Monika Piazzesi
Martin Schneider
Working Paper 21334
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21334
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2015, Revised August 2025
We thank Hui Chen, John Cochrane, Darrell Duffie, Isil Erel, Bob Hall, Lars Hansen, Anil
Kashyap, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Hanno Lustig, Jonathan Parker, Jean-Charles Rochet, David
Scharfstein, Chris Sleet, John Taylor, Harald Uhlig, and many conference participants. We
acknowledge financial support from an NSF grant and the MFM Project at the Becker Friedman
Center, University of Chicago. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Juliane Begenau, Monika Piazzesi, and Martin Schneider. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Banks' Risk Exposures
Juliane Begenau, Monika Piazzesi, and Martin Schneider
NBER Working Paper No. 21334
July 2015, Revised August 2025
JEL No. E4, E43, E58, G0, G2, G21
ABSTRACT
This paper measures interest rate and credit risk exposures in U.S. banks’ fixed-income positions
over the last 30 years. We exploit the factor structure in fixed-income returns to represent banks’
positions, including derivatives, as simple portfolios. The typical bank is long both risk factors, with
interest-rate exposure from derivatives reinforcing that from other business. Until recently, interest-
rate exposure hedged credit exposure in times of stress. The 2022-3 crisis was special because both
risk factors performed poorly at the same time, hurting especially less-regulated small banks that
had built up both exposures. Banks also systematically increase interest-rate risk exposure ahead
of low excess returns on long bonds, which we show to be consistent with a liquidity-centric
business model.
Juliane Begenau Martin Schneider
Stanford University Stanford University
Graduate School of Business Department of Economics
and NBER and NBER
begenau@stanford.edu schneidr@stanford.edu
Monika Piazzesi
Stanford University
Department of Economics
and NBER
piazzesi@stanford.edu

1 Introduction
Macro finance research has recently focused on the relationship between asset prices and risk ex-
posures of intermediaries, especially banks.1 While traditional asset pricing theory links prices to
macroeconomicfundamentalssuchasconsumptionandinflationthroughoptimalhouseholdbehav-
ior, recent work relates prices to banks’ risk exposures through their optimal portfolio strategies.
Similarly, much discussion of financial crises and the role of central bank asset purchases revolves
around changes in private banks’ risk exposures.
A challenge for evaluating new theories and assessing policy is that banks’ risk exposures are
difficulttomeasure. Thisisnotforlackofrawmicrodata: banksarerequiredtosupplyaccounting
measures for a large number of fixed-income positions that differ in maturity and credit quality.
However, there is no consensus way to summarize risk exposures contained in bank portfolios. Can
this vast amount of information be compressed to discuss banks’ portfolio dynamics, for example,
in response to policy, in a parsimonious way?
This paper represents the entire risk exposure of a bank’s fixed-income position as a simple
portfolio. Our starting point is that only two risk factors—asset returns that isolate interest
rate and credit risk—account for the overwhelming majority of quarterly return variation in any
instrument held by banks. For any balance-sheet position, we can thus construct a simple portfolio
with very similar risk characteristics. We find factor exposures—dollar values invested in each
factor asset—that move with factors exactly like the position itself. To match the overall position
value, we add a residual amount of cash.
We then use this methodology to develop a set of new stylized facts about bank risk that can
serve to assess models and guide policy discussion. We replicate the net fixed-income position,
that is, fixed-income assets less fixed-income liabilities, for every public US bank holding company
between 1995 and 2024. Our risk exposure measures are easy to compare and aggregate across
positions or banks. In particular, we compare exposures in a bank’s derivatives book to its other
business and assess the contributions of different size groups to aggregate risk. By subtracting the
value of the net fixed-income position and its net nonfinancial assets from the bank’s stock market
value, we also obtain a new measure of bank franchise value.
Our interest-rate risk factor is the return on a five-year bond without default risk. This factor
is low when the yield curve shifts up. Our credit-risk factor is the return on a leveraged portfolio
1For example, this theme is common to intermediary asset pricing models in the tradition of He and Krishna-
murthy(2013),BrunnermeierandSannikov(2014)orVayanosandVila(2021)),demandsystemsforintermediaries
followingKoijenandYogo(2019)aswellastheliteratureonmonetarypolicyandbankregulationbasedonGertler
and Karadi (2011).
2

that is long a five-year BBB-rated bond and short a five-year default-free bond. This factor is
low when credit spreads widen. During 1995-2024, the average net fixed-income position of US
public banks was worth 6% of assets, slightly below book equity at 9%. It was equivalent to a
long position in interest-rate risk worth 25% of assets, a long position in credit risk worth 7%,
and a 26% short position in cash. Averages mask large heterogeneity in the cross section and over
time. As one example, at the end of 2021, Silicon Valley Bank held interest-rate risk worth 42%
of assets, or 5.4 times book equity.
We present four main findings. First, once banks were allowed to combine broker-dealer and
traditional banking business after 1994, the extra interest-rate risk exposure from securities and
derivatives was positive: it reinforced, rather than hedged, exposure from traditional maturity
mismatch. On the eve of the 2008 crisis, the large universal banks stood out for their large
interest risk exposure, both historically and relative to smaller traditional banks. This stance
actually served them well in the crisis: when the Fed aggressively cut rates, gains from securities
and derivatives partly hedged losses from credit risk in the loan portfolio.
Second, after the 2008 crisis, large universal banks reduced credit risk, whereas smaller, less
regulated, traditional banks became more risky. On the eve of the 2022 crisis, the special feature of
big banks was their low credit risk exposure. In contrast, mid-sized banks—exempted from stress
testing and resolution planning by the 2018 Dodd-Frank rule rollback—stood out for their higher
credit-risk exposures and interest-rate risk exposures from securities and derivatives. Regarding
interest-rate risk specifically, small and large banks thus became more similar after the crisis. In
the Covid recession, when factors again comoved negatively, all banks profited from the hedge
provided by interest-rate risk.
Third, the 2022-3 banking crisis was special not only because of large losses on interest-rate
risk positions but also because credit-risk positions performed poorly at the same time, in sharp
contrast to previous episodes of stress. The shift in factor correlations from negative to positive
coincides with a switch in the bond-stock beta. We similarly document an unusually close comove-
ment between banks’ stock market values and their net fixed income positions, whereas franchise
values moved relatively little, in contrast to their earlier behavior.
Finally, larger interest-rate risk exposure relative to assets predicts lower excess returns on
long bonds over the next year. This finding is puzzling from a pure portfolio choice perspective:
banks appear to mistime the market systematically. It is consistent, however, with a desire to
smooth net interest margin (NIM). To show this, we use our framework to decompose changes
in risk exposure into capital gains and trades. Banks actively buy risk exposure ahead of low
excess returns, especially when interest rates are low and deposits flow in. When interest rates
3