NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TIME CONSISTENCY AND THE DURATION OF GOVERNMENT DEBT:
A SIGNALLING THEORY OF QUANTITATIVE EASING
Saroj Bhattarai
Gauti B. Eggertsson
Bulat Gafarov
Working Paper 21336
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21336
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2015
We thank Roberto Billi, Jim Bullard, Guillermo Calvo, Oli Coibion, Giuseppe Ferrero, Mark Gertler,
Marc Giannoni, Andy Levin, Emi Nakamura, Ricardo Reis, Tao Zha, seminar participants at HEC
Montreal, Emory University, University of Texas at Austin, and Brown University, and conference
participants at NBER ME spring meeting, HKIMR/New York Fed Conference on Domestic and International
Dimensions of Unconventional Monetary Policy, Society of Economic Dynamics Annual meeting,
Mid-west Macro spring meeting, CEPR European Summer Symposium in International Macroeconomics,
Annual Conference on Computing and Finance, NBER Japan Project Meeting, Annual Research Conference
at Swiss National Bank, ECB Workshop on Non-Standard Monetary Policy Measures, Annual Research
Conference at De Nederlandsche Bank, Latin American Meetings of Econometric Society, and Columbia
University Conference on Macroeconomic Policy and Safe Assets for helpful comments and suggestions.
First version: Sept 2013; This version: June 2015. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Saroj Bhattarai, Gauti B. Eggertsson, and Bulat Gafarov. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Time Consistency and the Duration of Government Debt: A Signalling Theory of Quantitative
Easing
Saroj Bhattarai, Gauti B. Eggertsson, and Bulat Gafarov
NBER Working Paper No. 21336
July 2015
JEL No. E31,E4,E42,E43,E5,E52,E62,E63
ABSTRACT
We present a signalling theory of Quantitative Easing (QE) at the zero lower bound on the short term
nominal interest rate. QE is effective because it generates a credible signal of low future real interest
rates in a time consistent equilibrium. We show these results in two models. One has coordinated monetary
and fiscal policy. The other an independent central bank with balance sheet concerns. Numerical experiments
show that the signalling effect can be substantial in both models.
Saroj Bhattarai Bulat Gafarov
University of Texas at Austin Pennsylvania State University
Department of Economics and National Research University
2225 Speedway, Stop C3100 Higher School of Economics
Austin, TX 78712-1690 gafarovb@gmail.com
saroj.bhattarai@austin.utexas.edu
Gauti B. Eggertsson
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
gauti_eggertsson@brown.edu

“The problem with Quantitative Easing (QE) is it works in practice, but it doesn’t work in
theory,”Ben Bernanke, Chairman of the Federal Reserve, Jan 16, 2014 just before leaving o¢ ce.
1 Introduction
Since the onset of the economics crisis in 2008, the Federal Reserve has expanded its balance sheet
by large amounts, on the order of 3 trillion mostly under the rubric of Quantitative Easing (QE).
To date the accumulated amount of QE corresponds to about 20% percent of annual GDP. The
enormous scale of this policy has largely been explained by the fact that the Federal Reserve was
unable to cut the Federal Fund rate further, due the zero lower bound on the short term nominal
interest rate. Meanwhile, high unemployment, slow growth, and low in‡ation desperately called
for further stimulus measures.
ManycommentatorsarguethatQEintheUnitedStatespreventedamuchstrongercontraction,
and that QE is a key reason for why the US has recovered more rapidly from the Great Recession
than some its counterparts. As pointed out by Ben Bernanke, however, one problem is that even
if this might be true in practice, a coherent theoretical rationale has been hard to formulate. This
paper contributes to …lling this gap. We providing an explicit theoretical underpinning for QE:
It works because it allows the central bank to credibly commit to expansionary future policy in a
zero lower bound situation. We not only explicitly account for QE in theory, but also show some
numerical examples in which the e¤ect is non-trivial.
What is QE? Under our interpretation, it is when the central bank buys long-term government
debt with money. We interpret this action though the lenses of two models. First, we treat the
central bank and the treasury as one agent, i.e. policy is coordinated and budget constraints of the
Treasuryandthecentralbankareconsolidated. Second,wetreatthecentralbankas“independent”
in the sense that it faces its own budget constraint (and thus cares about it own balance sheet)
and its objective may be di¤erent from social welfare.
Consider …rst QE under coordinated monetary and …scal policy, the main benchmark in the
paper.1 Since the nominal interest rate was zero when QE was implemented in the United States,
it makes no di¤erence if QE was done by printing money (or more precisely bank reserves) or by
issuing short-term government debt: both are government issued papers that yield a zero interest
rate. Fromtheperspectiveofthegovernmentasawhole,QEatzeronominalinterestratescanthen
simply be thought of as shortening the maturity of outstanding government debt. The government
is simply exchanging long term bonds in the hands of the public with short term ones.
Consider next QE from the perspective of the central bank in isolation. QE creates a “duration
mismatch”on the balance sheet of the central bank as it is issuing money/reserves (“short-term
debt”) in exchange for long term treasuries (“long term assets”). This opens up the possibility of
possible future balance sheet losses/gains by the central bank, because the price of its liabilities
1Here we will be abstracting from variation in real government spending, a focus of Christiano, Eichenbaum and
Rebelo (2011), Eggertsson (2010), Woodford (2011) and Werning (2012).
2

may fall/rise relative to its assets. We can interpret QE as simply increasing the size of the balance
sheet of the central bank, keeping the extent of the duration mismatch on its balance sheet …xed.
Alternatively we can interpret it as only increasing the duration on its asset side, keeping the
liability side and size of the balance sheet unchanged. Either interpretation is valid, and we will
look at the data to sort out which interpretation …ts the facts better for a particular QE episode.
Whether we consider QE from the perspective of a consolidated government budget constraint,
or an independent central bank, we arrive at the same conclusion. In both settings, QE operates
as a “signal”for lower future short term interest rates in a way we make precise.
ThemaingoalofQEintheUnitedStateswastoreducelong-terminterestrates, evenwhenthe
short-term nominal interest rate could not be reduced further, and thereby, stimulate the economy.
Indeed, several empirical studies …nd evidence of reduction in long-term interest rates following
these policy interventions by the Federal Reserve (see e.g. Gagnon et al (2011), Krishnamurthy
and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011), Hamilton and Wu (2012), Swanson and Williams (2013) and Bauer
and Rudebusch (2013)).2
Fromatheoreticalperspectivehowever,thee¤ectofsuchpolicyisnotobvioussinceopenmarket
operations of this kind are neutral (or irrelevant) in standard macroeconomic models holding the
future interest rate reaction function constant. This may have motivated Ben Bernanke’s quote
cited above. This was pointed out …rst in a well-known contribution by Wallace (1981) and further
extended by Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) to a model with sticky prices and an explicit zero
lower bound on nominal interest rates. These papers showed how absent some restrictions in asset
trade that prevent arbitrage, a change in the relative supplies of various assets in the hands of the
private sector has no e¤ect on equilibrium quantities and asset prices.
For this reason, some papers have recently incorporated frictions such as participation con-
straints due to “preferred habitat”motives in order to make assets of di¤erent maturities im-
perfect substitutes. This in turn negates the neutrality of open market operations as in such an
environment, QE can reduce long-term interest rates because it decreases the risk-premium, see
for example Chen, Curdia, and Ferrero (2012). Others, such as Gertler and Karadi (2012), provide
a framework in which these operations can have an e¤ect due to limits to arbitrage.3 Overall,
our reading of this literature is that the e¤ect of QE is modest in these models, with the possible
exception of QE1 when there were signi…cant disruptions in the …nancial markets.
AspointedoutbyEggertssonandWoodford(2003)(andfurtherillustratedinWoodford(2012)
in the context of the crisis) QE need not be e¤ective only because it reduces risk premiums or due
to limits on arbitrage. QE can also reduce long-term interest rates if it signals to the private
2Forexample,Gagnonetal(2011)estimatethatthe$1:75trillionworth2009programreducedlong-terminterest
ratesby58basispointswhileKrishnamurthyandVissing-Jorgensen(2011)estimatethatthe$600billionworth2010
program reduced long-term interest rates by 33 basis points. In addition, Hamilton and Wu (2012), Swanson and
Williams(2013),andBauerandRudebusch(2013)also…ndsimilare¤ectsonlong-terminterestrates. Notehowever
that empirical studies typically measure nominal interest rates, while theoretically, it is the ability to in‡uence real
interest rates that matter.
3Del Negro et al (2012) is another example which focuses more on QE1 which has an e¤ect in their model due to
imperfect liquidity of private paper. That work, however, is less suitable to think about QE2 and QE3.
3