NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE LABOR MARKET EFFECTS OF OPENING THE BORDER:
EVIDENCE FROM SWITZERLAND
Andreas Beerli
Giovanni Peri
Working Paper 21319
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21319
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2015, Revised May 2018
We thank the following for insightful discussions and helpful suggestions that improved prior
version of the paper: Andrea Ariu, Richard Blundell, Marius Brülhart, David Dorn, Christian
Dustmann, Sandro Favre, Dominik Hangartner, Jennifer Hunt, Felix König, Johannes Kunz,
Rafael Lalive, Guy Michaels, Tobias Müller, Jan Ruffner, Kjell Salvanes, Uta Schönberg,
Michael Siegenthaler, Jan Stuhler, Jan-Egbert Sturm, Dean Yang, Josef Zweimüller, Fabrizio
Zilibotti and seminar participants at the Universities of Zurich and Lausanne, at the CReAM/UCL
2015, the Milano Labor Lunch Series 2015, EALE 2016, NCCR on the move 2016, RWI/
CReAM conference 2017, the Dondena Workshop on Public Policy 2017 and the Immigration
Policy Lab/ETH Zurich. We are particularly grateful to Maurizio Bigotta for sharing the data on
the cross-border region identifiers. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21319.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Andreas Beerli and Giovanni Peri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Labor Market Effects of Opening the Border: Evidence from Switzerland
Andreas Beerli and Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 21319
July 2015, Revised May 2018
JEL No. J2,J24,J61
ABSTRACT
Between 1999 and 2004 Switzerland opened its border region (BR) to cross-border workers
(CBW), who are foreign residents commuting to Switzerland for work. In this paper, we exploit
the timing of implementation and the fact that CBW commute almost exclusively to
municipalities close to the border to estimate the effect of this policy on foreign labor supply and
on native labor market outcomes, using a difference-in-difference approach. We find that opening
the border to CBW increased their employment within 20 minutes of commuting time from the
border by four to five percentage points. The increased inflow was constituted of highly-educated
workers and it was associated with an increase in wages for highly-educated Swiss workers.
Native highly-educated workers became more likely to fill top managerial positions after the
liberalization. Moreover, we find increases in wages, employment and firm-creation, especially in
high-skilled manufacturing and knowledge-intensive services, which help explain the positive
wage effects of CBW on high skilled natives.
Andreas Beerli
ETH Zurich
KOF Swiss Economic Institute
LEE G 116
Leonhardstrasse 21
8092 Zürich
Switzerland
beerli@kof.ethz.ch
Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu
A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21319

1 Introduction
Some politicians in European countries are reconsidering their commitment to the free mobility
of workers within the European Union (EU), saying that immigration from the rest of Europe
has harmed the labor market opportunities of their native workers.1 Free mobility of workers,
however, means more opportunities for businesses to hire a wider variety of skills. This may
stimulate productivity and growth, offsetting the consequences of labor market competition so
that employment and wage effects for natives need not be negative.
Rarely have economists been able to study the consequences of a policy that permanently
and completely opened labor market access to foreign workers. This is what we do in this paper.
We consider the case of Switzerland, which–progressively, between 1999 and 2007–granted EU
citizens free access to its labor markets. In particular, we focus on a group of foreign workers
who were granted free access first. These “cross-border workers” (CBW) of Switzerland are
residents of the bordering countries (Italy, Germany, Austria and France) and are allowed to
work in Switzerland, commuting from their countries of residence. Agreements regulating the
flow of CBW date back to the first part of the 20th century, when Swiss employers could hire
them if no Swiss resident was found to fill a job opening. Beginning in 1999, with the signing of
the bilateral agreement for free labor mobility with the EU, the constraints on Swiss employers
to hire CBW were progressively reduced. In the border regions limitations to hire CBW were
fully abolished in 2004; in 2007 the other categories of EU immigrants were granted full labor
market access in Switzerland. Despite mounting discontent, full access of CBW to Swiss labor
markets has persisted to this day.2
The policy events affecting CBW in Switzerland are useful as a case-study of a policy that
permanently and fully removed legal barriers to labor market access for foreign labor. There
are important advantages and some caveats in studying this CBW liberalization with an eye
to the identification of its labor market impact. First, the liberalization policy had a clear
pre-event period. Before 1999 it was not even clear that Switzerland would have pursued free
mobility with the EU. During this period there were several restrictions on CBW. It also had a
clearpost-implementationperiod, beginningin2004, whenfullliberalizationofCBW(inBorder
regions) was allowed. 1999-2004 was a transitional period in which a gradual but still limited
liberalization took place, and expectations of complete liberalization developed.
1Followingthesetypeoffears,Britishcitizensvoted,onJune23rd2016,toleavetheEU(theso-called“Brexit”)
2TheTicinoregionofSwitzerlandvotedameasureinSeptember2016,tolimitagainthemovementofCBW.
That measure will not become law if it is not approved by the federal government. See “The Parable of Ticino”
in The Economist (2016), September 24th.
2

Second, as CBW commute to work from abroad–and most of them commute daily–the pol-
icy generated increased availability of CBW prevalently in regions very close to the border.
Employment of CBW sharply drops with distance from the border, as we will show. In loca-
tions beyond 30 minutes of driving distance from the border, their numbers were and remained
negligible throughout the considered period. This creates a natural framework for a difference-
in-difference analysis: If we compare labor markets very close to the border (treatment group)
with those farther away but similar (control group) before and after the liberalization policy,
we can identify a causal effect of the policy provided that the control group is a reasonable
“counterfactual” for the “treated municipalities”.
Third, while one could be concerned with the external validity of the estimated effects, two
features make it especially interesting. As with other immigrants, because CBW are employed
in Switzerland they constitute additional labor supply, but because they live abroad they likely
generate smaller local consumption/demand effects compared to other immigrants. As they
spendalargeportionoftheirincomesintheircountriesofresidence,severaldemand-sideeffects–
for example, on local housing prices (e.g. Saiz, 2003) and on local demand for non-tradable
consumption goods (e.g. Hong and McLaren, 2015)–are almost certainly weaker. Hence the
starkest effects of this policy should be on labor demand for native workers. Moreover, this
policy change was perceived as producing a permanent increase in the share of foreign-born
workers in areas close to the border. This is in contrast to the temporary push-driven surges in
immigrants (such as the Mariel Boatlift in Miami or the outflows from Russia to Israel at the
end of the cold war), and can provide particular insight into the long-run effects of permanently
changing immigration policies.
The main findings of this paper are the following: First, the full liberalization of CBW in
Switzerland(startingin2004)producedanincreaseofcross-borderworkersequaltobetweenfour
and five percentage points of total employment in municipalities within a 10 minute commute
from the border (treated group) relative to those farther than a 30 minute commute from the
border (control). Municipalities within 10 to 20 minutes of commuting time (treated but not
as intensely) experienced an increase of about 2 to 3 percentage points of the labor force, while
municipalities between 20 and 30 minutes of commuting time from the border experienced less
than a one percentage point change. There is mild, not statistically significant evidence of
an increase in CBW during the transitional 1999-2004 period; the increase became larger and
statisticallysignificantonlyafterthefullliberalizationof2004. Wealsodocumentthattheinflow
of CBW was strongly concentrated among highly- and middle-educated workers. Low-educated
3