NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SHOULD WE GIVE UP AFTER SOLYNDRA? OPTIMAL TECHNOLOGY R&D
PORTFOLIOS UNDER UNCERTAINTY
Mort Webster
Karen Fisher-Vanden
David Popp
Nidhi Santen
Working Paper 21396
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21396
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2015
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of U.S. National Science Foundation, grant
# 0825915. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Mort Webster, Karen Fisher-Vanden, David Popp, and Nidhi Santen. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Should We Give Up After Solyndra? Optimal Technology R&D Portfolios under Uncertainty
Mort Webster, Karen Fisher-Vanden, David Popp, and Nidhi Santen
NBER Working Paper No. 21396
July 2015
JEL No. O38,Q42,Q48,Q54,Q55
ABSTRACT
Global climate change and other environmental challenges require the development of new energy
technologies with lower emissions. In the near-term, R&D investments, either by government or the
private sector, can bring down the costs of these lower emission technologies. However, the results of
R&D are uncertain, and there are many potential technologies that may turn out to play an effective role
in the future energy mix. In this paper, we address the problem of allocating R&D across technologies
under uncertainty. Specifically, given two technologies, one with lower costs at present, but the other
with greater uncertainty in the returns to R&D, how should one allocate the R&D budget? We develop
a multi-stage stochastic dynamic programming version of an integrated assessment model of climate
and economy that represents endogenous technological change through R&D decisions for two
substitutable non-carbon backstop technologies. Using the model, we demonstrate that near-term
R&D into the higher cost technology is justified, and that the amount of R&D into the high cost
technology increases with both the variance in the uncertainty in returns to R&D and with the skewness
of the uncertainty. We also present an illustrative case study of wind and solar photovoltaic technologies,
and show that poor R&D results in early periods do not necessarily mean that investment should not
continue.
Mort Webster David Popp
Department of Energy and Department of Public Administration
Mineral Engineering and International Affairs
Pennsylvania State University Syracuse University
123 Hosler The Maxwell School
State College, PA 16802 426 Eggers Hall
mort@psu.edu Syracuse, NY 13244-1020
and NBER
Karen Fisher-Vanden dcpopp@maxwell.syr.edu
Department of Agricultural Economics
and Rural Soiology Nidhi Santen
112-E Armsby Building Synapse Energy Economics, Inc
Pennsylvania State University 485 Massachusetts Avenue, Suite 2
University Park, PA 16802 Cambridge, MA 02139
fishervanden@psu.edu nrsanten@synapse-energy.com

1. Introduction
A response to global climate change will necessarily include reducing the carbon
emissions from energy production in the future. There are many potential fuels and technologies
that may contribute to future energy production with lower greenhouse gas emissions. For
electric power, candidates include nuclear power, carbon capture and sequestration from coal or
natural gas combustion, solar power (photovoltaic (PV) or concentrated solar thermal), wind
power (on-shore or off-shore), and biomass-fueled combustion. Similarly, for transportation
lower carbon technologies include efficient diesel engines, electric vehicles, hybrid electric
vehicles, compressed natural gas (CNG) vehicles, and biofuels.
Potential low carbon technologies vary widely in their current relative costs,
technological maturity, and commercial viability. One current policy challenge is how to
efficiently allocate scarce resources for research and development (R&D) across different
technologies. Public and private entities that fund R&D must choose how to allocate their efforts
among these disparate technologies. For example, in the U.S., the Department of Energy (DOE)
is a major source of public funding for energy R&D (DOE, 2015). Each year, DOE allocates
funding for R&D across technology areas as part of their input into the budget and
appropriations process. However, there is limited objective or quantitative guidance for agencies
on how to choose among possible allocations (Pugh et al., 2011).
To focus the discussion, consider the simple case of two low-carbon energy technologies
that are relatively easily substitutable. Although no technology is a perfect substitute for
another, the ease of substitution in some circumstances may be significant. For example, solar
PV and on-shore wind power constitute one such pair within the electric power system. Both are
intermittent renewable sources of electricity that emit no carbon. Although their relative
1

potential in any specific location may vary depending on the solar and wind resource that exists,
they play a similar role within the power system. Other possible examples include nuclear
power and coal-fired electricity with carbon capture for electricity production (both are baseload
technologies), or hybrid, battery electric, and CNG vehicles for transportation.
In each of these examples, one technology is currently significantly lower cost than the
alternative(s). For example, the 2015 estimates of levelized cost from the U.S. Energy
Information Administration is $73.6 per MWh (2012 U.S. $) for on-shore wind as compared to
$125.3 per MWh for solar PV (EIA, 2015). In this case, solar PV is still higher cost than wind
despite decades of significant public and private R&D in many industrialized countries into solar
PV technology, which has lowered its costs by several orders of magnitude (Barbose et al.,
2014). A reasonable question, therefore, is whether continued R&D investments in solar PV are
justified and at what level of funding, given that wind is lower cost and can fill a similar niche.
This question, as applied to solar, has become particularly relevant since the high-profile
bankruptcies of two solar technology companies in the U.S. that had received substantial public
investment. Solyndra, a California-based company that manufactured solar panels, received
$539 million in guaranteed government loans in 2009, but by August 2011 had gone bankrupt
(Weiner, 2012). Around the same time, Evergreen Solar, a Massachusetts-based solar panel
manufacturer also declared bankruptcy (Church, 2011). In both cases, the reasons for the firms’
failures were due to a number of factors, but certainly include competition from lower-cost
manufacturers in China. Nevertheless, these failures have been cited in debates over public
R&D, and some continue to argue that further investments in solar technology are not cost-
effective (e.g., U.S. News & World Report, 2012), or at least that public investment in solar
should be scaled back.
2