NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF FUNDING COSTS SPILLOVERS IN THE EURO-ZONE
WITH APPLICATION TO SYSTEMIC RISK
Pietro Bonaldi
Ali Hortaçsu
Jakub Kastl
Working Paper 21462
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21462
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2015
The paper was previously circulated under the title "An Empirical Analysis of Systemic Risk in the
EURO-zone." We thank Aureo de Paula, Vasco Carvalho, Thomas Phillipon, Marzena Rostek, Jose-Luis
Peydro, David Skeie, Charles M. Kahn, Christian B. Hansen, Azeem Shaikh, Fernando Alvarez and
seminar participants at Berkeley, EUI, Minneapolis Fed, NYU, Princeton, Stanford, UCLA, UCL,
Wisconsin, 2013 GSE Summer Forum, 2013 Wharton Conference on Liquidity and Financial Crises,
2013 Asian Meeting of the Econometric Society, 2014 NBER Summer Institute, 50th Annual Conference
on Bank Structure and Competition, Bank of England's Conference on Systemic Risk and Macro-Prudential
Regulation and 3rd European Meeting on Networks for helpful comments. We are also grateful to
Winnie van Dijk for valuable research assistance. Hortacsu acknowledges financial support from the
NSF (SES-1124073 and ICES-1216083). Kastl acknowledges financial support from the NSF (SES-1123314
and SES-1352305) and the Sloan Foundation. The views expressed in this paper are our own and
do not necessarily reflect the view of the European Central Bank or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. All remaining errors are ours.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Pietro Bonaldi, Ali Hortaçsu, and Jakub Kastl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

An Empirical Analysis of Funding Costs Spillovers in the EURO-zone with Application to
Systemic Risk
Pietro Bonaldi, Ali Hortaçsu, and Jakub Kastl
NBER Working Paper No. 21462
August 2015
JEL No. G1,G2,L0
ABSTRACT
We propose a framework for estimation of spillovers between funding costs of individual banks. The
estimation proceeds in three steps: First, using data from liquidity auctions of the European Central
Bank, we estimate the funding costs in a given week for each individual bank. In the second step, we
apply the adaptive elastic net (a LASSO type estimator) to this panel to estimate the financial network.
Finally, using the estimated network we propose new measures of the systemicness and vulnerability
of each bank. Our measure of systemicness has quite a natural interpretation, since it can roughly be
viewed as the total externality a bank would impose on the funding costs of all other banks in the system.
We estimate that most of the banks have fairly weak links and, therefore, if one were to suffer an adverse
shock there would likely be a rather limited effect on the other ones. On the other hand, there are a
few banks that are quite central: an increase in their funding costs would result in a very significant
increase (up to 95 bp per 100 bp shock) in the funding costs of the other banks. Our vulnerability scores
estimated using data from 2007-2008 are positively correlated with the probability of a bank being
bailed out later.
Pietro Bonaldi Jakub Kastl
University of Chicago Department of Economics
bonaldi@uchicago.edu Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Ali Hortaçsu Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
Department of Economics a n d NBER
University of Chicago jkastl@princeton.edu
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
a n d NBER
hortacsu@uchicago.edu

JEL Classification: D44, E58, G01
1 Introduction
Starting with Rochet and Tirole (1996) and Allen and Gale (2000), the importance of the intercon-
nectivity structure of financial institutions for the stability of the financial system has been seen
as a topic of first-order importance. Additional theoretical research by Freixas, Parigi and Ro-
chet (2000), Eisenberg and Noe (2001), Elliot, Golub and Jackson (2013), Glasserman and Young
(2015) and Acemo˘glu, O¨zda˘glar and Tahbaz-Salehi (2013) among others, has shown that certain
network structures can lead to the presence of “systemic” institutions, i.e. institutions which, due
to their connectedness, can transmit adverse shocks to the entire system. The empirical character-
ization of the actual interconnectivity structure of banks, however, is relatively scarce. This delay
is undoubtedly related to the lack of direct data on interbank credit relations, save for informa-
tion available through intraday payment and settlement systems (see, for example, Boss, Elsinger,
Summer and Thurner (2004), Bech and Atalay (2008), Iori, Masi, Precup, Gabbi and Caldarelli
(2008), Wetherilt, Zimmerman and Soramki (n.d.) and Ashcraft, McAndrews and Skeie (2011)).
In this paper, we attempt to provide empirical tools that would allow Central Banks or poten-
tiallyotherregulatorstoinferthestructureofthenetworkofspillovereffectsbasedoncomovements
of banks’ short-term funding costs. Such comovements can be generated as the result of the prop-
agation of solvency shocks as modeled in Eisenberg and Noe (2001), and Acemo˘glu et al. (2013).
Once we estimate the financial network, we use centrality measures typically used in network anal-
ysis (e.g., Ballester, Calv-Armengol and Zenou (2006)) to estimate the extent to which a particular
bank is crucial for the working of the whole system, i.e., to determine the set of systemic banks.
Our method provides a measure of such “systemicness” as expressed by that bank’s impact on the
future cost of funding of other banks. Similarly, we measure to what extent each bank is affected
by shocks to the funding costs of other banks in the system, in other words, how vulnerable to
contagion each bank is.
Whiledifferentproxiesforfundingcostsofbanksmaybeutilized(CDSspreads,LIBOR/EURIBOR
quotes, imputed interest rates from overnight markets etc.), we focus on a particular measure that
2

is (i) revealed by actions that are directly affecting payoffs as opposed to stated willingness-to-pay
for credit as elicited in a survey, and (ii) available for a large set of banks at a fairly high frequency
(weekly). In particular, following our prior work (Cassola, Hortac¸su and Kastl (2013)) we use data
on European banks’ bids in the ECB’s short-term refinancing auctions and infer banks’ revealed
funding costs using a structural econometric model of strategic bidding in these auctions. In Cas-
sola et al. (2013), we looked at the evolution of banks’ behavior before and during the early part
of the financial crisis and argued that the bidding data from the main refinancing operations of
the ECB is predictive of the financial woes of system banks. We also argued that interpreting the
data through a structural model is important, since changes in the bidding behavior itself involve
also strategic adjustment to the changes in other bidders’ behavior (strategies), which in case of
a financial turmoil may be quite important. In other words, a bank i may be bidding higher not
because its underlying opportunity cost of funding increased, for example due to unfavorable de-
velopment of other banks’ perceptions of i’s default risk, but because other banks increased their
bids and i thus also increased its bid so as to optimally resolve the trade-off between the surplus on
the marginal amount of the loan and the probability of winning this marginal amount. That prior
paper also showed that the estimates of the changes in banks’ funding costs coming from the model
are consistent with the ex-post observed changes in accounting measures of banks’ performance
such as cost-to-income ratio or return on equity.
Given our panel of banks’ revealed short-term funding costs, we characterize the network struc-
ture by looking at the covariation of a given bank’s funding cost with other system banks’ (lagged)
funding costs, controlling for various sources of comovement due to common asset exposures, such
as holdings of sovereign bonds (we conduct numerous robustness exercises for our specification in
the paper and in the Appendix, including an instrumental variables strategy). Implementing this
through traditional linear regression, however, yields a dimensionality problem: the number of co-
variates in our regressions potentially exceeds the number of data points we have for each bank in
our data set. To combat this problem, which is commonly encountered in Genetics and Machine
learning, we utilize the adaptive elastic net method of Zou and Zhang (2009) and Zou and Hastie
(2005). As will be discussed in Section 4.3, the elastic net is a modification of the Least Absolute
3