NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXTERNAL AND PUBLIC DEBT CRISES
Cristina Arellano
Andrew Atkeson
Mark Wright
Working Paper 21456
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21456
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2015
We thank Martin Eichenbaum and Jonathan Parker for helpful comments and Aaron Kirkman for excellent
research assistance. Wright thanks the National Science Foundation for support under grant SES-1059829.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Cristina Arellano, Andrew Atkeson, and Mark Wright. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

External and Public Debt Crises
Cristina Arellano, Andrew Atkeson, and Mark Wright
NBER Working Paper No. 21456
August 2015
JEL No. F3,H7,K1
ABSTRACT
The recent debt crises in Europe and the U.S. states feature similar sharp increases in spreads on government
debt but also show important differences. In Europe, the crisis occurred at high government indebtedness
levels and had spillovers to the private sector. In the United States, state government indebtedness
was low, and the crisis had no spillovers to the private sector. We show theoretically and empirically
that these different debt experiences result from the interplay between differences in the ability of
governments to interfere in private external debt contracts and differences in the flexibility of state
fiscal institutions.
Cristina Arellano Mark Wright
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
Research Department 230 South LaSalle St.
90 Hennepin Avenue Chicago, IL 60604
Minneapolis, MN 55401 a n d University of California, Los Angeles
a n d NBER and also NBER
arellano.cristina@gmail.com mwright@frbchi.org
Andrew Atkeson
Bunche Hall 9381
Department of Economics
UCLA
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
a n d NBER
andy@atkeson.net

1 Introduction
At the end of the first decade of the 21st century, the members of two advanced monetary
and economic unions, the nations of the Eurozone and the U.S. states, experienced debt
criseswithspreadsongovernmentborrowingrisingdramatically: inashortperiodoftime,
Californian spreads rose six-fold, Italian rose ten-fold, Illinois fifteen-fold, and Portuguese
twenty-five-fold. Despite the similar behavior of spreads on public debt, these crises
were fundamentally different in nature. In Europe, the crisis occurred after a period of
significant increases in government indebtedness from levels that were already substantial,
whereas in the United States, state government borrowing was limited and remained
roughly unchanged. Moreover, whereas the most troubled nations of Europe experienced
a sudden stop in private capital flows and private sector borrowers also faced large rises
in spreads, there is little evidence that private borrowing in U.S. states was differentially
affected by the creditworthiness of state governments. In this sense, we can say that the
US states experienced a public debt crisis, whereas the nations of Europe experienced an
external debt crisis affecting both public and private borrowers.
Why did Europe experience an external debt crisis and the U.S. states only a public
debt crisis? And why did the members of other economic unions, such as the provinces of
Canada, not experience a debt crisis at all despite high and rising provincial public debt
levels? In this paper, we argue that these different experiences result from the interplay
between the ability of governments to interfere in the private external debt contracts
of their citizens and the flexibility of state fiscal institutions. The governments of U.S.
states, for example, are less fiscally flexible than the members of other economic unions as
a result of state and federal limitations on their ability to change taxes and borrow, but
are prevented by the U.S. Constitution from interfering in private contracts. Together,
these factors result in public debt intolerance and yet also limit the likelihood of an
external debt crisis affecting private sector borrowers within the state. Eurozone nations
are more fiscally flexible but have a greater ability to interfere with the contracts of their
citizens, particularly if one of them exits the eurozone, which together allows for more
public borrowing but also raises the likelihood for external debt crises occurring together
with public debt crises. Canadian provincial governments are both fiscally flexible and
limited in their ability to interfere in private contracts, which both allows for more public
borrowing and limits the likelihood that either a public or an external debt crisis will
occur.
We establish this argument both empirically and theoretically. Empirically, we docu-
ment variation in both possibilities for government interference in private contracts and
1

fiscal flexibility across economic unions. We show that interference in private contracts—
which can include direct interference such as moratoria on repayments of external debt or
the imposition of controls on capital outflows, as well as indirect interference such as de-
positfreezeswhichhindertheabilityofprivateborrowerstorepaytheirexternaldebts—is
a common occurrence in debt crises. We also show that ratings agencies incorporate the
risk of sovereign interference when rating private sector bonds in both emerging markets
and in Europe, but do not consider the risk of state and provincial government inter-
ference when rating private borrowers in the United States and Canada. We next show
that fiscal flexibility of the governments of members of economic unions—the ability to
vary their tax rates and levels of public expenditure in response to economic shocks—also
varies across unions.
Theoretically, we model the decisions of a benevolent government to spend, tax, bor-
row, default on public debts, and interfere in private debt contracts in a world where
the private sector can also issue external debt but cannot independently default on its
own debts. In our economy, the efficient benchmark under full commitment and full fis-
cal flexibility has the country borrowing externally to smooth both public and private
consumption, and setting public expenditures to equate the marginal utilities of public
and private expenditures within each period. We examine how governments with limited
commitment to repay public debt and to refrain from interfering in private debts, and
facing potential constraints on fiscal flexibility, might find themselves and their citizens
unable to borrow enough to smooth consumption over time and across the public and
private sectors.
First, we show that if the government is fiscally flexible in the sense that it is un-
constrained in its ability to vary taxes and if it can commit to not interfere with private
contracts (which we think of as the Canadian case), then neither public debt crises nor
external debt constraints can bind. In equilibrium, the citizens of the country and the
government can raise the resources they need to smooth consumption, regardless of the
government’s ability to commit to repay its public debts. The reason no public debt
crisis can occur is that, if the government can vary taxes, it prefers to close fiscal gaps
with taxes rather than with default on domestically held public debt. As a result, the
government can commit to repay its domestically held public debts and hence can im-
plement its optimal borrowing strategy domestically, whereas the private sector does the
required borrowing externally. With commitment not to interfere in private external debt
contracts, this private external borrowing is unconstrained.
Second, we show that if the government can tax flexibly but cannot commit to refrain
from interfering in private debt contracts (the European case), all crises are external debt
2