NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
USING SCIENTIFIC PUBLICATIONS TO EVALUATE GOVERNMENT R&D SPENDING:
THE CASE OF ENERGY
David Popp
Working Paper 21415
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21415
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2015
This work was supported by NSF grant # SMA-1064161. Jung Eun Kim, Qing Miao and Tian Tang
all provided excellent research assistance on this project. I thank Andrew Toole and seminar participants
at Syracuse University, Resources for the Future, and the London School of Economics for helpful
comments on earlier versions of this research. Finally, I thank Ann Kushmerick and Lauren Seltzer
of Thomson Reuters for their assistance in obtaining the publication data used in this paper. Certain
data included herein are derived from the Web of Science ® prepared by THOMSON REUTERS ®,
Inc. (Thomson ®), Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA: the noted data is © Copyright THOMSON REUTERS
® 2012. All rights reserved. Thomson Reuters reserves the right to review the paper prior to dissemination
to ensure that the confidentiality of the data is not unintentionally compromised. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by David Popp. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Using Scientific Publications to Evaluate Government R&D Spending: The Case of Energy
David Popp
NBER Working Paper No. 21415
July 2015
JEL No. O21,O38,Q42,Q48,Q55
ABSTRACT
The mix of public and private research funding investments in alternative energy presents a challenge
for isolating the effect of government R&D funding. Factors such as energy prices and environmental
policy influence both private and public R&D decisions. Moreover, because government R&D is further
upstream from the final commercialized product, it may take several years for its effect on technology
to be realized. Combining data on scientific publications for alternative energy technologies with
data on government R&D support for these technologies, we address these challenges. First, we ask
how long it takes for energy R&D to provide successful research outcomes. We both provide information
on the lags between research funding and new publication and link these articles to citations in U.S.
energy patents. One million dollars in additional government R&D funding leads to 1-2 additional
publications, but with lags as long as ten years between initial funding and publication. Second, we
ask whether adjustment costs associated with large increases in research funding result in diminishing
returns to government R&D. There is no evidence of diminishing returns on the level of publication
output, but some evidence that additional funding leads to lower quality publications, using citations
as a measure of publication quality.
David Popp
Department of Public Administration
and International Affairs
Syracuse University
The Maxwell School
426 Eggers Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244-1020
and NBER
dcpopp@maxwell.syr.edu

I. Introduction
Because of the long-term, uncertain nature of climate change, government R&D funding
plays an important role in long-term strategies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The mix of
public and private research funding for technologies to reduce emissions presents a challenge for
estimating the effect of government-funded R&D. Because it is further upstream from the final
commercialized product, government R&D should take longer to have an observable effect on
outcomes than private R&D. At the same time, both private and public R&D are driven by the
same demand-side influences, such as energy prices and environmental policy, making it difficult
to disentangle the effect of each.
Such funding is particularly important for alternative energy sources, many of which are
still too costly to be competitive with fossil fuels without policy support. Generation of electricity
and heat is the largest source of carbon emissions, accounting for 42% of carbon emissions
worldwide in 2012 (IEA 2014). Meeting the climate policy goals currently under consideration,
such as European Union discussions to reduce emissions by 40 percent below 1990 levels by 2030,
will not be possible without replacing much of this electric generating capacity with alternative,
carbon-free energy sources.1
In this paper, we use data on scientific publications to assess the effect of government-
sponsored energy R&D. While many economists now use patent data to evaluate energy R&D
(Popp 2001, 2002, 2006; Johnstone et al. 2010 Verdolini and Gaelotti, 2011), publication data are
used less frequently within the field. For evaluating public research funding efforts, publication
data provide a more appropriate outcome measure than patents. Moreover, while direct evidence
on the relationship between public R&D funding and energy costs is desirable, the long lags
1 These limits come from http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/international/negotiations/future/index_en.htm, accessed
January 7, 2015.

between basic research support and commercial outcomes make measuring the final impact of
basic research difficult (Lane, 2009). For example, the costs of renewable energy sources depend
not only on knowledge accumulated from public R&D, but also on advances due to private R&D,
both of which are driven by many of the same demand signals. By looking at the effect of public
R&D funding on publications, this paper attempts to isolate the effect of public R&D to shed light
on the process through which public R&D helps develop scientific knowledge. In addition,
publication data are available for a wide range of countries and technologies. In contrast, studies
using direct measures of energy research outcomes, such as changes in renewable energy costs,
use data from only a few countries (e.g. Söderholm and Klaasen 2007).
However, compared to patents, publication data bring additional challenges to evaluate
properly. Scientific publications are observed for papers that have been accepted by a journal
editor. Editors not only judge the potential article for quality, but also must consider whether it
will be of interest to readers. Thus, our econometric model accounts for factors influencing both
the willingness of scientists to study renewable energy and the willingness of editors to publish
such articles. Using this framework, we combine data on scientific publications for alternative
energy technologies, such as wind and solar power, with data on government R&D support for
specific energy technologies and controls such as energy prices and the nature of electricity
production in each country. Such controls are important to assess the marginal impact of additional
government R&D. We use these data to address two research questions.
First, we ask how long it takes for energy R&D to provide successful research outcomes.
Within the energy R&D literature, most studies consider only a single year of energy R&D or
construct aggregated stocks of past R&D efforts using predetermined rates of decay. By focusing
on both inputs and outputs of the research process, this study provides new evidence on the timing
2