NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE PRICING OF SHORT-TERM MARKET RISK:
EVIDENCE FROM WEEKLY OPTIONS
Torben G. Andersen
Nicola Fusari
Viktor Todorov
Working Paper 21491
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21491
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2015
Andersen gratefully acknowledges support from CREATES, Center for Research in Econometric Analysis
of Time Series (DNRF78), funded by the Danish National Research Foundation. Todorov's work was
partially supported by NSF Grant SES-0957330. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Torben G. Andersen, Nicola Fusari, and Viktor Todorov. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Pricing of Short-Term market Risk: Evidence from Weekly Options
Torben G. Andersen, Nicola Fusari, and Viktor Todorov
NBER Working Paper No. 21491
August 2015
JEL No. C01,C14,C52,C58,G12,G13,G17,G32
ABSTRACT
We study short-term market risks implied by weekly S&P 500 index options. The introduction of weekly
options has dramatically shifted the maturity profile of traded options over the last five years, with
a substantial proportion now having expiry within one week. Economically, this reflects a desire among
investors for actively managing their exposure to very short-term risks. Such short-dated options provide
an easy and direct way to study market volatility and jump risks. Unlike longer-dated options, they
are largely insensitive to the risk of intertemporal shifts in the economic environment, i.e., changes
in the investment opportunity set. Adopting a novel general semi-nonparametric approach, we uncover
variation in the shape of the negative market jump tail risk which is not spanned by market volatility.
Incidents of such tail shape shifts coincide with serious mispricing of standard parametric models for
longer-dated options. As such, our approach allows for easy identification of periods of heightened
concerns about negative tail events on the market that are not always "signaled" by the level of market
volatility and elude standard asset pricing models.
Torben G. Andersen Viktor Todorov
Kellogg School of Management Department of Finance
Northwestern University Kellogg School of Management
2001 Sheridan Road Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208 2001 Sheridan Road
and NBER Evanston, IL
t-andersen@kellogg.northwestern.edu v-todorov@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Nicola Fusari
Department of Finance
Carey School of Business
The Johns Hopkins Univer
Baltimore, MD 21202
nicola.fusari@jhu.edu

1 Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a rapid increase in the trading of short-dated options. For instance,
S&P 500 option contracts with about one week or less to maturity have seen their share of trading
at the Chicago Board of Options Exchange (CBOE) rise steadily from about 12% in 2010 to 25%
in 2014. Furthermore, the volume in shorter-dated options is skewed disproportionate towards out-
of-the-money (OTM) options relative to the pattern for longer-dated options. Qualitatively similar
developmentsareobservedinmanyotherindexoptionmarketsandforoptionsonindividualnames.
This process has been facilitated by the introduction of a new option category, featuring sequential
issuance of contracts expiring one week apart, the so-called weekly options, or “weeklies.”
This begs the question of what economic function these newly popular instruments serve. The
primarydistinguishingfeature,relativetoregularlonger-datedoptions,istheintimatelinkbetween
the pricing of options close to expiry and the state of the underlying asset return process.1 When
tenor is short, the volatility and jump intensity are not expected to vary much over the remaining
life of the option. This implies, in particular, that the prices of deep OTM options are largely
independent of the level of diffusive volatility. They reflect solely the characteristics of the risk-
neutral jump process. Likewise, the pricing of short-dated at-the-money (ATM) options depends
primarily on spot volatility. These arguments fail in the case of longer-dated instruments for which
theexpectedvariationinthefuturevolatilityandjumpintensitycannotbeignoredinvaluation. In
fact,realisticmodelsforthejointvolatilityandjumpdynamicsinvolveacomplexinteractionamong
these distinct components, rendering semi-closed form option pricing and traditional statistical
inference feasible only under strong parametric assumptions, e.g., the specifications reside within
the affine jump-diffusion model class of Duffie et al. (2000).
Consequently, short-dated OTM options represent exposures tied closely to the possibility of an
abrupt shift, or jump, in the near future, i.e., such instruments are well suited for short-term crash
(or boom) protection. In contrast, a position in short-dated ATM options reflects an exposure to
regular (diffusive) price movements, whose size scale with spot volatility. In other words, short-
dated options allow us to decompose the exposure to distinct features of the underlying return
process. They enable investors to trade securities representing jump or crash risk on the one hand,
and instruments with primary exposure to diffusive risks on the other.
Hence, the introduction of weeklies has improved on the spanning of market jump risk and
represents a step towards market completion. This topic has a long history, with Ross (1976)
1Asimilartypeofconnectionispresentforshort-maturitybondprices. Collin-Dufresneetal.(2008)explorethis
relation to identify the state vector driving the short-rate dynamics in a model-free way.
1

emphasizing the enhanced spanning and the associated potential for efficiency gains from options
trading, and Breeden and Litzenberger (1978) stressing the ability to replicate a wide range of
payoffs through a static option portfolio.2
Reversing the above reasoning, we infer that prices for actively traded short-dated options
may simplify the task of identifying the concurrent spot volatility and pertinent features of the
risk-neutral jump process, subject to only minimal assumptions on the return generating process.
Specifically, short-maturity ATM options should help pin down spot volatility while the relative
prices of deep OTM options assist in determining the jump intensity and jump distribution. The
emergenceoftheweeklyoptionshasmovedthisobservationfromtherealmoftheorytothedomain
of practical empirical work. The requisite quotes for short-dated options are now available on a
daily basis. The goal of the current paper is to capitalize on the new opportunities afforded by
the trading of weeklies to explore the characteristics of the risk-neutral distribution of equity-index
returns as implied directly by the option data, largely avoiding reliance on parametric restrictions.
The current paper is, as far as we know, the first to explore the information content of weekly
optionsfortheunderlyingrisk-neutralreturndynamicsinasystematicway. Inpart,thisreflectsthe
very recent emergence of near-continuous trading in very short-dated options. Therefore, we first
carefully review the basic features of our weekly option sample and provide detailed descriptions
of our filtering procedures, imposed to control for excessive noise or errors.
In order to exploit all available information in our short-dated option sample, we develop a new
asymptoticpricingapproximation,operativeacrossallstrikes,andnotjustforATManddeepOTM
options. Exploiting this novel approximation, we proceed semi-nonparametrically and impose only
weak parametric restrictions on the jump distribution, but remain silent about the dynamics of
the volatility and jump intensity. The approach allows us to infer the spot characteristics for the
risk-neutralreturndistributionexclusivelyfromtheshort-datedoptions. Inparticular, wegenerate
separate estimates of the underlying state of the volatility and jump intensity process as well as
the current jump size distribution at the conclusion of each single trading day.
Our approach bears superficial resemblance to calibration procedures commonly applied in
approximating option-implied volatility surfaces. The differences are critical and fundamental,
however. Our approach explicitly imposes no-arbitrage constraints in estimation and synthesizes
the option price information into consistent estimates for the spot volatility and the key jump
characteristics, amenable to direct econometric analysis. In contrast, standard calibration delivers
a smoothed risk-neutral density for a specific horizon, but provides no direct guidance for the ex-
2The latter statement is more formally explored in Green and Jarrow (1987) and Nachman (1988). For further
developments, see, e.g., Bakshi and Madan (2000) and Pan and Liu (2003), among many others.
2