NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
JUMP STARTING THE EURO AREA RECOVERY:
WOULD A RISE IN CORE FISCAL SPENDING HELP THE PERIPHERY?
Olivier Blanchard
Christopher J. Erceg
Jesper Lindé
Working Paper 21426
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21426
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2015
We thank Andrew Berg, Martin Eichenbaum, Emmanuel Farhi, Josef Hollmayr, Andrew Levin,
Jonathan Parker, Ricardo Reis, Pedro Teles, Harold Uhlig, and Volker Wieland for helpful
comments, as well as participants at the CEPR's ESSIM conference, the ECB Public Finance
conference, the NBER Summer Institute, the EABCN conference in Cambridge (U.K.), and the
2016 NBER Macroeconomics Annual conference, and at seminars at the Federal Reserve Board,
the IMF, the Bank of Portugal, the San Francisco Federal Reserve Bank, the OFCE in Paris, the
JRC in Ispra, the University of Glasgow, and the Sveriges Riksbank. We especially thank Mazi
Kazemi, Patrick Moran, Aaron Markiewitz, and Sher Singh for providing excellent research
assistance. The views expressed in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and
should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the IMF, the Riksbank,the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System, any other person associated with the Federal Reserve System, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Olivier Blanchard, Christopher J. Erceg, and Jesper Lindé. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Jump Starting the Euro Area Recovery: Would a Rise in Core Fiscal Spending Help the Periphery?
Olivier Blanchard, Christopher J. Erceg, and Jesper Lindé
NBER Working Paper No. 21426
July 2015, Revised October 2016
JEL No. E62,F41,F45
ABSTRACT
We show that a fiscal expansion by the core economies of the euro area would have a large and
positive impact on periphery GDP assuming that policy rates remain low for a prolonged period.
Under our preferred model specification, an expansion of core government spending equal to one
percent of euro area GDP would boost periphery GDP by over 1 percent in a liquidity trap lasting
three years, nearly half as large as the effect on core GDP. Accordingly, under a standard ad hoc
loss function involving output and inflation gaps, increasing core spending would generate
substantial welfare improvements, especially in the periphery. The benefits are considerably
smaller under a utility-based welfare measure, reflecting in part that higher net exports play a
material role in raising periphery GDP.
Olivier Blanchard Jesper Lindé
Peterson Institute for International Economics Sveriges Riksbank
1750 Massachusetts Avenue, NW SE-103 37 Stockholm
Washington, DC 20036 Sweden
and NBER jesper.l.linde@gmail.com
oblanchard@piie.com
Christopher J. Erceg
The Federal Reserve Board
Mail Stop 20
20th and C Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20551
Christopher.Erceg@frb.gov

1. Introduction
If the euro area were a …scal union like the United States, there would be a strong case for …scal
expansion: the unemployment rate remains in double digits, in‡ation has run persistently too low,
and monetary policy has limited scope to provide additional stimulus. However, the euro area is
not a …scal union, and …scal expansion has to be carried out by member states. Given that the
periphery economies most likely to bene…t from domestic …scal expansion are constrained from
doing because of concerns about high public debt and …scal solvency, any sizeable …scal expansion
has to come from the euro area’s core economies.
In this paper, we analyze the e¤ects of an expansion of …scal spending in the euro area’s core
economies. Rather than limiting attention to the e¤ects on the euro area as a whole, we focus
on how the stimulative e¤ects would be distributed between core and periphery: Would a core
…scal expansion have sizeable positive “spillovers”to periphery output and in‡ation, or would the
stimulus mostly be limited to those core economies opting to raise public spending? The answer is
clearly critical to evaluating potential welfare bene…ts. Even if core …scal expansion increased euro
area output and in‡ation, it may not be desirable if it caused core economies to overheat while
imparting little positive impetus to the periphery.
The …scal consolidations that began in 2010 in Greece, Portugal, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain
o¤ers some clues about the channels through which a prospective core …scal expansion might play
out. On the one hand, the deep …scal cuts carried out from 2010 to 2013 had strong adverse
e¤ects on the periphery countries’domestic demand, due at least in part to the zero lower bound
on monetary policy (Blanchard and Leigh, 2014). On the other hand, the large negative output
gaps in those countries led to a decrease in relative price levels, and some improvement in external
1

demand. In this vein, Figure 1 illustrates the positive relationship between the average output gap
andpricein‡ationforeuroareaeconomiesintheaftermathofthe…nancialcrisis: thehighdegreeof
resourceslackincountriessuchasSpainandPortugal,partlydrivenbymassive…scalconsolidation,
translated into lower average in‡ation than in Germany. The euro area’s recent experience makes
clear that the net result of …scal consolidation, for both periphery and core countries, depends
on the stance of monetary policy and the relevance of the zero lower bound, on the size of the
multipliers, on the e¤ect of output gaps on in‡ation and by implication on relative prices, and on
the e¤ect of relative prices on imports and exports.
The same considerations are likely to play a key role in in‡uencing the macroeconomic e¤ects
of a rise in core government spending, and suggest the importance of both aggregate (euro-wide)
and compositional channels.
Fromanaggregateperspective, thee¤ectsarelikelytodependonhowstronglymonetarypolicy
reacts to the induced rise in euro area output and in‡ation. Outside of a liquidity trap, the ECB
would raise interest rates in real terms, which would dampen private demand in both the core and
periphery; and unless periphery net exports rose enough to compensate, periphery GDP would
likely fall. But in a liquidity trap, higher core spending boosts in‡ation in both the core and
periphery, and potentially reduces real interest rates enough to provide a signi…cant boost both to
periphery and core GDP. From a compositional perspective, while the demand stimulus is likely
to a¤ect primarily core countries, the increase in in‡ation in core relative to periphery countries
leads to an increase in core relative prices, and to some reallocation of demand toward periphery
countries.
To gauge the strength of the various channels and make an assessment of the likely e¤ects of a
core …scal expansion on core and periphery GDP, we use two variants of a New Keynesian model
of a currency union. Our benchmark model is quite simple –extending Gali and Monacelli (2008)
2