NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OPTIMAL DEBT AND PROFITABILITY IN THE TRADEOFF THEORY
Andrew B. Abel
Working Paper 21548
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21548
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2015
I thank Jeff Campbell, Vincent Glode, Joao Gomes, Christian Goulding, Richard Kihlstrom, Bob
Mc-Donald, Adriano Rampini, Scott Richard, Michael Roberts, Ali Shourideh, Toni Whited and
seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Kellogg Finance, MIT Finance,
Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance, and Wharton Finance, and the Tepper/LAEF
Conference on Macro-Finance and the Tel Aviv University Finance Conference for helpful
comments and discussion. I also thank the editor, associate editor, and two referees for helpful
comments. Part of this research was conducted while I was a Visiting Scholar at Chicago Booth
and I thank colleagues there for their hospitality and support. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Andrew B. Abel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Optimal Debt and Profitability in the Tradeoff Theory
Andrew B. Abel
NBER Working Paper No. 21548
September 2015, Revised January 2017
JEL No. G3,G32
ABSTRACT
I develop a dynamic model of leverage with tax deductible interest and an endogenous cost of
default. The interest rate includes a premium to compensate lenders for expected losses in default.
A borrowing constraint is generated by lenders’ unwillingness to lend an amount that would
trigger immediate default. When the borrowing constraint is not binding, the tradeoff theory of
debt holds: optimal debt equates the marginal tax shield and the marginal expected cost of
default. Contrary to conventional interpretation, but consistent with empirical findings, increases
in current or future profitability reduce the optimal leverage ratio when the tradeoff theory holds.
Andrew B. Abel
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2315 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
abel@wharton.upenn.edu

The tradeoff theory of capital structure is the longest standing theory of capital struc-
ture1 and underlies much of the large body of empirical work that studies capital structure.
In the tradeoff theory, the optimal amount of debt equates the marginal benefit of a dollar
of debt arising from the tax deductibility of interest payments with the marginal cost of
a dollar of debt arising from increased exposure to default. This framework implies that
changes in leverage over time, or variation in leverage across firms, can be attributed to dif-
ferences in the marginal interest tax shield and/or differences in the marginal cost of default.
The tradeoff theory has been conventionally interpreted2 to imply that more profitable firms
should have higher leverage ratios–a prediction that is contrary to the empirical fact3 that
more profitable firms tend to have lower leverage ratios.4 Notable exceptions to this conven-
tional interpretation are presented in quantitative models by Hennessy and Whited (2005)
and Strebulaev (2007). In the stochastic dynamic model presented here, I analytically
demonstrate an alternative explanation of the negative relationship between profitability
and leverage that is found empirically.
In this paper, I develop and analyze a model of capital structure that incorporates an
interesttaxshieldaswellasthepossibilityofdefault. Insomesituations,theoptimalamount
of debt will be determined by the equality of the marginal benefit of debt arising from the
interest tax shield and the marginal cost of debt associated with increased probability of
default–that is, optimal debt will be characterized by the tradeoff theory. However, in
other situations within the model, optimal debt will not be characterized by the equality of
marginal benefit and marginal cost that epitomizes the tradeoff theory. Because the model
allows for situations in which the tradeoff theory holds and situations in which it does not
hold, themodel hasthepotential toguideempirical testsbyincludingbothanull hypothesis
in terms of the tradeoff theory and an alternative hypothesis that offers an explanation of
leverage other than the tradeoff theory. In particular, I show that the model developed
here accommodates situations in which higher profitability (either current profitability or
expected future profitability) is associated with lower leverage, specifically, a lower value of
1Robichek and Myers (1966), Kraus and Litzenberger (1973), and Scott (1976).
2Scott (1976), Fama and French (2002), Frank and Goyal (2007).
3Fama and French (2002).
4Forinstance,Myers(1993,p.6)states"Themosttellingevidenceagainstthestatictradeofftheoryisthe
strong inverse correlation between profitability and financial leverage.... Yet the static tradeoff story would
predict just the opposite relationship. Higher profits mean more dollars for debt service and more taxable
income to shield. They should mean higher target debt ratios."
1

market leverage, which is the ratio of debt to the market value of the firm. Furthermore, if
the probability of default is nonzero, these situations arise when and only when the tradeoff
theory is operative. That is, the empirical finding that more profitable firms tend to have
lowerleverageratios,whichhasbeenviewedbyothersasevidenceagainstthetradeofftheory,
is viewed as evidence in favor of the tradeoff theory when seen through the lens of the model
presented here.
Asthetradeofftheoryhasdevelopedoverthepasthalfcentury,ithasbecomeincreasingly
complex, especially in empirical structural models of the firm that are designed to capture
realistic features of a firm’s environment.5 The model I develop here is stripped of these
complexities so that I can focus on its new features and implications in a framework that
admitsanalyticresultswithoutrelyingonnumericalsolution. Themodel’sbiggestdeparture
from standard models of debt concerns the maturity of the debt. Many standard models
of debt6 assume that debt has infinite maturity and pays a fixed coupon over the infinite
future, or until the firm defaults. Clearly, the assumption of infinite maturity is extreme,
but it has been used productively over the years. I also make an extreme assumption about
maturity, but in the opposite direction. I assume that debt must be repaid an instant after
it is issued. The standard specification with infinite maturity can be viewed as the limiting
case of long-termdebt and my specification with zero maturity can be viewed as the limiting
case of short-term debt, such as commercial paper, much of which has a maturity of only 1
to 4 days,7 as well as overnight repurchase agreements.
The specification of zero-maturity debt is motivated by two considerations. First, this
specification makes salient the recurrent nature of the financing decision, in contrast to the
once-and-for-all financing decision in many models of debt.8 At each instant of time, the
firm decides whether to repay its debt or to default, and if it decides to repay its debt, it
choosestheamountofdebttoissueanew. BecauseIdonotincludeanyflotation,issuance,or
adjustmentcosts,theamountofdebtissuedrespondsimmediatelyandcompletelytochanges
in the firm’s environment, and will not have the rich dynamics documented empirically and
5Hennessy and Whited (2007).
6Modigliani and Miller (1958), Leland (1994), and Gorbenko and Strebulaev (2010).
7InMarch2016,theaveragedailyissuanceofnonfinancialAAcommercialpaperwas210issuesamounting
to $5.3 billion. 53% of these issues, accounting for 55% of the dollar volume, had a maturity of 1-4 days.
Source: BoardofGovernorsoftheFederalReserveSystem,VolumeStatisticsforCommercialPaperIssuance,
Data as of April 12, 2016.
8Merton (1974), Leland (1994), and Gorbenko and Strebulaev (2010).
2