NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GRADUALISM IN MONETARY POLICY:
A TIME-CONSISTENCY PROBLEM?
Jeremy C. Stein
Adi Sunderam
Working Paper 21569
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21569
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2015
We are grateful to Adam Wang-Levine for research assistance and to seminar participants at Stanford
and the NBER Summer Institute MEFM meeting for their comments. A special thanks to Mike Woodford
for an extremely helpful discussion of the paper at the NBER Summer Institute. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21569.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Jeremy C. Stein and Adi Sunderam. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Gradualism in Monetary Policy: A Time-Consistency Problem?
Jeremy C. Stein and Adi Sunderam
NBER Working Paper No. 21569
September 2015
JEL No. E44,E52,E58
ABSTRACT
We develop a model of monetary policy with two key features: (i) the central bank has private information
about its long-run target for the policy rate; and (ii) the central bank is averse to bond-market volatility.
In this setting, discretionary monetary policy is gradualist, or inertial, in the sense that the central
bank only adjusts the policy rate slowly in response to changes in its privately-observed target. Such
gradualism reflects an attempt to not spook the bond market. However, this effort ends up being thwarted
in equilibrium, as long-term rates rationally react more to a given move in short rates when the central
bank moves more gradually. The same desire to mitigate bond-market volatility can lead the central
bank to lower short rates sharply when publicly-observed term premiums rise. In both cases, there
is a time-consistency problem, and society would be better off appointing a central banker who cares
less about the bond market. We also discuss the implications of our model for forward guidance once
the economy is away from the zero lower bound.
Jeremy C. Stein
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer 209
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeremy_stein@harvard.edu
Adi Sunderam
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 359
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
asunderam@hbs.edu

I. Introduction
In this paper, we attempt to shed some light on the well-known phenomenon of gradualism in
monetary policy. As described by Bernanke (2004), gradualism is the idea that “the Federal Reserve
tends to adjust interest rates incrementally, in a series of small or moderate steps in the same
direction.” This behavior can be represented empirically by an inertial Taylor rule, with the current
level of the federal funds rate modeled as a weighted average of a target rate—which is itself a
function of inflation and the output gap as in, e.g., Taylor (1993)—and the lagged value of the funds
rate. In this specification, the coefficient on the lagged funds rate captures the degree of inertia in
policy. In recent U.S. samples, estimates of the degree of inertia are strikingly high, on the order of
0.85 in quarterly data.1
Several authors have proposed theories in which this kind of gradualism can be thought of as
optimal behavior on the part of the central bank. One influential line of thinking, due originally to
Brainard (1967) and refined by Sack (1998), is that moving gradually makes sense when there is
uncertainty about how the economy will respond to a change in the stance of policy. An alternative
rationale comes from Woodford (2003), who argues that committing to move gradually gives the
central bank more leverage over long-term rates for a given change in short rates, a property which is
desirable in the context of his model.
In what follows, we offer a different take on gradualism. In our model, the observed degree
of policy inertia is not optimal from an ex ante perspective, but rather reflects a fundamental time-
consistency problem. The distinguishing feature of our approach is that the Fed is assumed to have
private information about its preferred value of the target rate. In other words, the Fed knows
something about its reaction function that the market does not. Although this assumption is not
standard in the literature on monetary policy, it should be emphasized that it is necessary if one wants
to address the basic fact that financial markets respond to monetary policy announcements. 2
1 Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012) provide a comprehensive recent empirical treatment; see also Rudebusch (2002,
2006). Campbell, Pflueger, and Viceira (2015) argue that the degree of inertia in Federal Reserve rate-setting became
more pronounced after about 2000.
2 Said differently, if the Fed mechanically followed a policy rule that was a function only of publicly observable variables
(e.g., the current values of the inflation rate and the unemployment rate), then the market would react to news releases
about movements in these variables but not to Fed policy statements.
1

We also assume that the Fed behaves as if it is averse to bond-market volatility. We model
this concern in reduced form, by simply putting the volatility of long-term rates into the Fed’s
objective function, but note that a preference of this sort can ultimately be rooted in an effort to
deliver on its traditional dual mandate. For example, a bout of bond-market volatility may be
undesirable not just in its own right, but rather because it is damaging to the financial system and
hence to real economic activity and employment.
Nevertheless, in a world of private information and discretionary meeting-by-meeting
decision-making, an attempt by the Fed to moderate bond-market volatility can be welfare-reducing.
The logic here is similar to that in signal-jamming models (Holmstrom, 1999; Stein, 1989). Suppose
the Fed observes a private signal that its long-run target value for the funds rate has permanently
increased by 100 basis points. If it adjusts policy fully in response to this signal, raising the funds
rate by 100 basis points, long-term rates will move by a similar amount. If it is averse to such a
movement in long-term rates, the Fed will be tempted to announce a smaller change in the funds rate,
thereby trying to fool the market into thinking that its private signal was less dramatic. Hence, it will
under-adjust to its signal, perhaps raising the funds rate by only 25 basis points.
However, if bond-market investors come to understand this dynamic, the Fed’s efforts to
reduce volatility will be frustrated in equilibrium. The market will see the 25 basis-point increase in
the funds rate and understand that it is likely to be just the first in a series of similar moves, so long-
term rates will react more than one-for-one to the change in short rates. Indeed, in a rational-
expectations equilibrium, the Fed’s private signal will always be fully inferred by the market,
regardless of the degree of gradualism. Still, if it acts on a discretionary basis, the Fed will always
keep trying to fool the market. This is because when it decides how much to adjust the policy rate, it
takes as given the market’s conjecture about the degree of inertia in its rate-setting behavior. As a
result, the Fed’s behavior is inefficient from an ex ante perspective: by moving gradually, it does not
succeed in its attempts to reduce bond-market volatility, but gradualism means that the policy rate is
further from its long-run target than it otherwise would be.
This inefficiency reflects a commitment problem. In particular, the Fed cannot commit to not
trying to smooth the private information that it communicates to the market via its changes in the
2