NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF LIBERAL DEMOCRACY
Sharun Mukand
Dani Rodrik
Working Paper 21540
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21540
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2015
This paper was written at the Institute for Advanced Study, to which we are grateful for support. We
also thank Carles Boix, William Ferguson, Sumon Majumdar , Jan-Werner Müller, and Ira Katznelson
for helpful suggestions and members of the School of Social Science lunch table for useful discussions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Sharun Mukand and Dani Rodrik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Political Economy of Liberal Democracy
Sharun Mukand and Dani Rodrik
NBER Working Paper No. 21540
September 2015
JEL No. P48
ABSTRACT
We distinguish between three sets of rights – property rights, political rights, and civil rights – and
provide a taxonomy of political regimes. The distinctive nature of liberal democracy is that it protects
civil rights (equality before the law for minorities) in addition to the other two. Democratic transitions
are typically the product of a settlement between the elite (who care mostly about property rights)
and the majority (who care mostly about political rights). Such settlements rarely produce liberal democracy,
as the minority has neither the resources nor the numbers to make a contribution at the bargaining
table. We develop a formal model to sharpen the contrast between electoral and liberal democracies
and highlight circumstances under which liberal democracy can emerge. We discuss informally the
difference between social mobilizations sparked by industrialization and decolonization. Since the
latter revolve around identity cleavages rather than class cleavages, they are less conducive to liberal
politics.
Sharun Mukand
Dept. of Economics
University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL
U.K.
S.Mukand@warwick.ac.uk
Dani Rodrik
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 J.F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dani_rodrik@harvard.edu

I. Introduction
By many measures, democracy has conquered the world. Since the fall of the Berlin Wall
in 1989, the number of democracies has risen rapidly and cross-national tabulations suggest
that, for the first time in history, more countries now qualify as democracies than as non-
democracies (Figure 1). Moreover, the discrediting of fascism and communism means that
democracy has no serious ideological competitors at present. Democracy, as a form of political
rule, has become a true global norm.
While the spread of democracy is something to cheer about, the majority of today’s
democracies are electoral rather than liberal democracies. That is, they are political regimes
which allow political competition and generally fair elections, but exhibit considerable
violations in the civil rights of minority and other groups not in power. For example, Hungary,
Ecuador, Mexico, Turkey, and Pakistan are all classified as electoral democracies (according to
the Freedom House1). But in these and many other countries, harassment of political
opponents, censorship or self-censorship in the media, and discrimination against minority
ethnic/religious groups run rampant.
Consider some examples from the OECD club of democracies. In Hungary, “Roma and
other minorities have become frequent targets of harassment and of hate speech.” In Croatia,
the judicial system not only “moves slowly,” but “displays an institutional bias in favor of ethnic
Croat suspects.” Israel exhibits a wide range of civil-rights violations “related to minority rights
such as those accorded non-Jewish citizens, particularly Arab citizens, women’s rights, and
regarding civil protest.” In Mexico, “in practice the Mexican military and other security forces
are notorious for breaching human rights and the courts do not provide adequate protection.”
In Turkey, “the rights of the defense, lengthy pre-trial detention and excessively long and catch-
all indictments” constitute major problems facing opponents of the government and members
of the Kurdish minority.2 Elsewhere, in countries such as Russia and Venezuela, rights violations
are even more blatant, even though elections remain in principle free and competitive.
Fareed Zakaria coined the term “illiberal democracy” for political regimes such as these
that hold regular elections but routinely violate rights (Zakaria 1997). More recently, political
scientists Steve Levitsky and Lucan Way (2010) have used the term “competitive
authoritarianism” to describe what they view as hybrid regimes between democracy and
autocracy. Zakaria and others note that democracy developed in Western Europe out of a
liberal tradition which emphasized individual rights and placed limits on state coercion. In
Britain, France, Germany, and even the United States, mass franchise arrived only after liberal
thought had become entrenched. Most of the world’s new democracies, by contrast, emerged
1 Freedom House, List of Electoral Democracies, downloadable from https://freedomhouse.org/report-
types/freedom-world#.VVIZc5PVEZw.
2 The quotes come from the 2014 Civil Rights and Political Liberties Report (Bertelsmann Stiftung 2014).

-2-
in the absence of a liberal tradition and did little to foster one. As the shortcomings of these
democracies have become more evident, it has become commonplace to talk about a
“democratic recession” (Diamond 2015).
We provide in this paper a taxonomy of political regimes, distinguishing in particular
between electoral and liberal democracy. We take the main distinctive feature of a liberal
regime to be the restraints placed on those in power to prevent discrimination against
minorities and ensure equal treatment.3 The restraints can be legal or administrative; they can
be maintained by constitutional strictures or self-enforcing agreements. What matters is that
these checks, which we associate with “civil rights” for short, are effective in practice. Our focus
is squarely on these missing restraints – the relative weakness of civil rights – in illiberal
electoral democracies.
We argue that the failure to protect minority rights is a readily understood consequence
of the political logic behind the emergence of democracy. What requires explanation is not the
relative paucity of liberal democracy, but its existence – rare as it may be. The surprise is not
that few democracies are liberal, but that liberal democracies exist at all.
To make our point, we distinguish specifically between three sets of rights: property
rights, political rights, and civil rights. We define these as follows:
 Property rights protect asset holders and investors against expropriation by the
state or other groups.
 Political rights guarantee free and fair electoral contests and allow the winners
of such contests to determine policy subject to the constraints established by
other rights (when provided).
 Civil rights ensure equality before the law – i.e. non-discrimination in the
provision of public goods such as justice, security, education and health.
We classify political regimes according to which (combination) of these rights are provided. In
dictatorships, it is only the property rights of the elite that are protected. Classical liberal
regimes protect property and civil rights, but not necessarily electoral rights. Electoral
democracies, which constitute the majority of present-day democracies, protect property and
political rights, but not civil rights. Liberal democracies protect all three sets of rights. Note that
we operationalize the non-discrimination constraint under liberalism as equal treatment by the
state in public goods provision in different domains – legal, religious, educational, etc.
3 There is no single definition of liberalism. But as we discuss in section V below, historically liberalism grew out of
opposition to royal privilege and to discrimination against religious minorities. Most definitions emphasize that in a
liberal democracy there are built in protections for the individual/minority against the tyranny of the ruler (the
sovereign or the electoral majority, as the case may be). Classical liberals such as John Stuart Mill were
preoccupied with the “tyranny of majority” that they feared electoral democracies would produce.