NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANKS’ INTERNAL CAPITAL MARKETS AND DEPOSIT RATES
Itzhak Ben-David
Ajay Palvia
Chester Spatt
Working Paper 21526
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21526
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2015
We thank Allen Berger, Isil Erel, Alberto Pozzolo, and Christian Rauch for helpful comments.
We benefited from comments of seminar participants at the ASSA (IBEFA session on Banks,
Government Intervention and Deregulation), Carnegie Mellon University, Case Western Reserve
University, University of Cincinnati, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland, FMA meetings (Atlanta), the Office of the Comptroller of the
Currency, The Ohio State University, NBER Corporate Finance meeting, and a webinar
organized by the Global Association of Risk Professionals (GARP). The views presented in the
paper do not necessarily reflect those of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency or the U.S.
Department of the Treasury. Ben-David and Spatt acknowledge the financial support of the
GARP Foundation. Ben-David’s research is supported by the Dice Center at the Fisher College of
Business and by the Neil Klatskin Chair in Finance and Real Estate. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Itzhak Ben-David, Ajay Palvia, and Chester Spatt. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Banks’ Internal Capital Markets and Deposit Rates
Itzhak Ben-David, Ajay Palvia, and Chester Spatt
NBER Working Paper No. 21526
September 2015, Revised August 2016
JEL No. G21
ABSTRACT
A common view is that deposit rates are determined primarily by supply: depositors require
higher deposit rates from risky banks, thereby creating market discipline. An alternative
perspective is that market discipline is limited (e.g., due to deposit insurance and/or enhanced
capital regulation) and that internal demand for funding by banks determines rates. Using branch-
level deposit rate data, t we find little evidence for market discipline as rates are similar across
bank capitalization levels. In contrast, banks’ loan growth has a causal effect on deposit rates:
e.g., branches’ deposit rates are correlated with loan growth in other states in which their bank
has some presence, suggesting internal capital markets help reallocate the bank’s funding.
Itzhak Ben-David Chester Spatt
Department of Finance Tepper School of Business
Fisher College of Business Carnegie Mellon University
The Ohio State University 5000 Forbes Avenue
2100 Neil Avenue Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890
Columbus, OH 43210 and NBER
and NBER cspatt@andrew.cmu.edu
bendavid@fisher.osu.edu
Ajay Palvia
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
400 7th St SW
Washington, DC 20024
Ajay.Palvia@occ.treas.gov

1 Introduction
Bank deposit rates are determined by the supply of deposits by households and firms and
the demand for deposits by banks. The literature has emphasized the role of the supply of
deposits: since depositors are concerned about the safety of their deposits, they demand a higher
premium from banks that they deem risky, and thus impose deposit market discipline on risky
banks. Researchers have found empirical support for this view, much of it from foreign markets
and the 1980s U.S. banking crisis. Park and Peristiani (1998) and Cook and Spellman (1994)
explore data from the savings and loans (S&L) crisis of the 1980s and document that riskier
institutions paid higher deposit rates, especially for deposits with uncertain insurance guarantees.
Peria and Schmukler (2001) use a sample of banks from South America to document that banks
pay higher deposit rates when the quality of their loan portfolios is low. Despite these findings, it
is questionable whether deposit market discipline is a decisive determinant of deposit rates in
countries such as the United States, where deposit insurance plays such a central role.
Furthermore, there have been enhancements to capital regulation in the last two decades, which
have led to substantially higher bank capital (see time series of bank capital in Figure 1) and
potentially lower bank default risk.1
The other factor that can affect deposit rates—demand for deposits by banks—has not
received as much attention in the literature. This channel suggests that a bank’s opportunities to
increase lending may lead to an increase in deposit rates in order to attract new deposits and fund
the new loans. Some studies find evidence consistent with this view; however, it is difficult to
reach conclusions about causality. For example, Jayaratne and Morgan (2000) find that loan
1 Diamond and Rajan (2000) argue that higher capital levels lead to lower bank default risk. This hypothesis is tested
empirically by Berger and Bouwman (2013) and Brown and Dinc (2011). Of course, higher bank capital could be a
consequence of higher risk.
1

growth is highly correlated with deposit growth, especially for banks that are poorly capitalized.
Gatev and Strahan (2006) present evidence from the syndicated loan market that the spread on
commercial paper is correlated with deposit flows to banks. Related to this hypothesis, Acharya
and Mora (2015) present evidence that banks that faced a liquidity shortage (their lending
commitments exceeded their deposits) during the Global Financial Crisis increased deposit rates
in order to attract more deposits.
Discerning the supply and demand channels that determine deposit rates is important in
order to understand the extent to which market discipline exists and to evaluate the mechanism
through which banks’ internal capital markets help liquidity creation (e.g., Berger and Bouwman
2009, Bouwman 2013). So far, however, there has not been an effort to compare the relative
importance of the supply and demand channels in determining deposit rates. One obstacle that
many studies faced was the lack of micro-level data about the deposit rates.
We use branch-level deposit rates of U.S. banks (money-market deposits as well as
certificate of deposit (CD) data) between 2007 and 2012 to analyze the determinants of deposit
rates. We find no evidence of market discipline in deposit rates in the United States during this
period. Our results suggest, however, that internal capital markets drive deposit rates and that
banks’ lending activity is a strong determinant of deposit rates. Hence, our results suggest that in
recent years rates have been driven by banks’ demand for deposits rather than by the supply of
deposits.
We begin the empirical analysis by estimating the relation between deposit rates and
bank risk. The view that depositors can impose market discipline on banks through deposit rates
is motivated by prior research indicating that banks knowingly choose to shift risks to the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) by seeking risky lending opportunities and
2