NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DARK COSTS, MISSING DATA:
SHEDDING SOME LIGHT ON SERVICES TRADE
James E. Anderson
Ingo Borchert
Aaditya Mattoo
Yoto V. Yotov
Working Paper 21546
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21546
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2015
Research for this paper has been supported in part by the governments of Norway, Sweden, and the
United Kingdom through the Multidonor Trust Fund for Trade and Development, and by the UK Department
for International Development (DFID). The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in
this paper are entirely those of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and its affiliated organizations, or those of
the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent, or any of the aforementioned
individuals or institutions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by James E. Anderson, Ingo Borchert, Aaditya Mattoo, and Yoto V. Yotov. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Dark Costs, Missing Data: Shedding Some Light on Services Trade
James E. Anderson, Ingo Borchert, Aaditya Mattoo, and Yoto V. Yotov
NBER Working Paper No. 21546
September 2015
JEL No. F10,F14
ABSTRACT
A structural gravity model is used to estimate barriers to services trade across many sectors, countries
and time. Since the disaggregated output data needed to flexibly infer border barriers are often missing
for services, we derive a novel methodology for projecting output data. The empirical implementation
sheds light on the role of institutions, geography, size and digital infrastructure as determinants of
border barriers. We find that border barriers have generally fallen over time but there are differences
across sectors and countries. Notably, border effects for the smallest economies have remained stable,
giving rise to a divergent pattern across countries.
James E. Anderson Aaditya Mattoo
Department of Economics The World Bank
Boston College amattoo@worldbank.org
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER Yoto V. Yotov
james.anderson.1@bc.edu School of Economics
Drexel University
Ingo Borchert Philadelphia, PA 19104
Department of Economics and ERI-BAS
University of Sussex yotov@drexel.edu
Brighton, BN1 9SL, United Kingdom
I.Borchert@sussex.ac.uk

1 Introduction
Given the economic importance of services trade, surprisingly little is known about trade
costs in services. Transparent border measures like tariffs are less important in services than
relatively opaque regulations that affect trade, for example, in professional and (cid:12)nancial
services. In addition, transport costs do not take the form of well-de(cid:12)ned freight rates but
hard-to-measure forms such as the costs of electronically delivering business services. The
absenceofexplicitmeasuresofeitherprotectionortransportcostssuggeststhatananalytical
model of trade (cid:13)ows can help reveal information about barriers to services trade.
We use the structural gravity model and a newly constructed dataset on production and
trade in services to provide much new information about inferred services trade barriers.
The paper makes three principal contributions. First, we estimate a rich pattern of border
barriers at an unprecedented level of detail, varying by country, sector and over time. Such
elaborate estimates of border barriers are predicated on the availability of services output
dataatacorrespondinglydisaggregatedlevel. Second,sincesuchservicesoutputdataarenot
typically available outside the developed country realm, we develop a projection method that
can, in principle, generate the required information, thereby facilitating the estimation of
tradecostsinserviceswhenkeyunderlyingdataaremissingorsuspect. Third, thestructural
gravity theory employed for this procedure also helps us decompose border barriers. The
empirical results are of interest in their own right as they shed light on the role of domestic
institutions, geography, size, and digital infrastructure as determinants of border barriers
and international trade of services.
We start by estimating a gravity model, described in Section 2, for 12 service sectors and
28 countries. For that purpose, weconstruct of a database combininginformation on services
trade and production, respectively, covering the period 2000 to 2007. The broad sectoral
and geographical coverage as well as the inclusion of intra-national trade (cid:13)ows sets this
dataset apart from previous gravity estimations.1 The data are described in Section 3. The
1The gravity model has previously been used to explain the pattern of services trade. For instance, to
1

results offer benchmark gravity estimates for sectoral cross-border services trade, alongside a
detailed set of border effects.2 Gravity works well with sectoral services data: most estimates
are signi(cid:12)cant with expected signs and reasonable magnitudes. We document important
differences in estimated coefficients of standard gravity variables between goods and services
and across services sectors, respectively. For example, we obtain highly non-linear effects of
distance on services trade with strong negative effects for short distances and insigni(cid:12)cant
effectsforlong distances. In addition, our estimatesrevealthatcontiguityand colonialties|
traditionally strong predictors for goods trade|have more nuanced effects, with the effect
of contiguity depending strongly on the particular sector and colonial ties being generally
insigni(cid:12)cant. Incontrast, languageeffectsaremuchstrongerforservicestradethanforgoods
trade. We also demonstrate empirically that accounting properly for internal trade costs is
important for proper estimation of international trade costs. These results are presented in
Section 4.2.
Akeyoutputofthisanalysisisamulti-dimensionalsetofrelativeborderbarrierestimates
by sector, country and year for cross-border services trade. Border barriers in services
trade are large, signi(cid:12)cant, and vary widely. (i) Across countries, our estimates reveal that
economic size reduces border barriers in services trade. (ii) Across sectors, border barriers
vary in an intuitive way. (iii) Over time, border barriers in services trade have fallen, even
though the decrease varies considerably across sectors and across countries. Border barriers
havefalleninallsectorsbutmoresoinsectorswithlowerinitialborders. Thus,borderbarrier
estimatethedeterminantsofservicestradecomparedtothoseofgoodstrade(KimuraandLee,2006;Lejour
and de Paiva Verheijden, 2004; Tharakan et al., 2005), to estimate the time trend in distance effects (Head
et al., 2008) or the effect of Internet penetration in partner countries on US services imports (Freund and
Weinhold,2004). Miroudotet al.(2012)provideevidencelinkinglowerinternationaltradecostswithhigher
productivity in services sectors.
2FollowingtheGeneralAgreementonTradeinServices(GATS),ithasbecomecustomarytotakeabroad
view of trade in services to include not just cross-border trade but also international transactions through
foreign investment or the movement of people. This paper, however, focuses only on trade costs associated
with cross-border services trade and travel (i.e. people travelling abroad as consumers of services) because
these are the only international transactions covered in trade statistics available for a signi(cid:12)cant number
of countries. The focus on cross-border services trade, driven by data availability, also implies that we are
abstracting from any potential correlation of cross-border trade with the ease of trading a particular service
viaothermodes,inparticularviaestablishingcommercialpresenceabroad. Ontheinterdependenceofmodes
see eg. Christen and Francois (2010). Our estimates of trade barriers should be interpreted accordingly.
2