NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO BANKS PASS THROUGH CREDIT EXPANSIONS TO CONSUMERS WHO
WANT TO BORROW?
Sumit Agarwal
Souphala Chomsisengphet
Neale Mahoney
Johannes Stroebel
Working Paper 21567
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21567
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2015, Revised April 2017
This paper was previously circulated as "Do Banks Pass Through Credit Expansions? The
Marginal Profitability of Consumer Lending During the Great Recession." For helpful comments,
we are grateful to Viral Acharya, Scott Baker, Eric Budish, Charles Calomiris, Chris Carroll,
Liran Einav, Alex Frankel, Erik Hurst, Anil Kashyap, Theresa Kuchler, Randall Kroszner, Marco
di Maggio, Matteo Maggiori, Atif Mian, Rick Mishkin, Christopher Palmer, Jonathan Parker,
Thomas Philippon, Amit Seru, Andrei Shleifer, Amir Sufi, Alessandra Voena, and ArleneWong,
as well as seminar and conference participants at the 2017 AEA Meetings, Bank of England,
Banque de France, Bank for International Settlements, Bank of Italy, Baruch, Berkeley Econ,
Berkeley Haas, Brown University, Chicago Booth, Columbia University, Columbia GSB, Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Financial Conduct Authority,
Goethe University Frankfurt, HEC Paris, Ifo Institute, ITAM, LMU Munich, Mannheim
University, MIT, NBER Summer Institute, NYU Stern, Northwestern University, SAIF, SED
2015, Stanford University, University of Chicago, University of Minnesota, UT Austin, and Yale
University. We thank Regina Villasmil, Mariel Schwartz, Yin Wei Soon, Andreas Weber, and
Hanbin Yang for truly outstanding and dedicated research assistance. The views expressed are
those of the authors alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Office of the Comptroller of
the Currency or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Sumit Agarwal, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Neale Mahoney, and Johannes Stroebel.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Banks Pass Through Credit Expansions to Consumers Who Want to Borrow?
Sumit Agarwal, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Neale Mahoney, and Johannes Stroebel
NBER Working Paper No. 21567
September 2015, Revised April 2017
JEL No. D82,E5,G01,G2,L1
ABSTRACT
We propose a new approach to studying the pass-through of credit expansion policies that focuses
on frictions, such as asymmetric information, that arise in the interaction between banks and
borrowers. We decompose the effect of changes in banks’ cost of funds on aggregate borrowing
into the product of banks’ marginal propensity to lend (MPL) to borrowers and those borrowers’
marginal propensity to borrow (MPB), aggregated over all borrowers in the economy. We apply
our framework by estimating heterogeneous MPBs and MPLs in the U.S. credit card market.
Using panel data on 8.5 million credit cards and 743 credit limit regression discontinuities, we
find that the MPB is declining in credit score, falling from 59% for consumers with FICO scores
below 660 to essentially zero for consumers with FICO scores above 740. We use a simple model
of optimal credit limits to show that a bank’s MPL depends on a small number of "sufficient
statistics" that capture forces such as asymmetric information, and that can be estimated using our
credit limit discontinuities. For the lowest FICO score consumers, higher credit limits sharply
reduce profits from lending, limiting banks’ optimal MPL to these consumers. The negative
correlation between MPB and MPL reduces the impact of changes in banks’ cost of funds on
aggregate household borrowing, and highlights the importance of frictions in bank-borrower
interactions for understanding the pass-through of credit expansions.
Sumit Agarwal Neale Mahoney
McDonough School of Business Booth School of Business
Room 427 University of Chicago
Georgetown University 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
3700 O Street NW Chicago, IL 60637
Washington, DC 20057 and NBER
ushakri@yahoo.com Neale.Mahoney@chicagobooth.edu
Souphala Chomsisengphet Johannes Stroebel
Economics Department Stern School of Business
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency New York University
400 7th Street SW 44 West 4th Street
Washington, DC 20219 New York, NY 10012
souphala.chomsisengphet@occ.treas.gov and NBER
johannes.stroebel@nyu.edu

During the Great Recession, policymakers sought to stimulate the economy by providing banks
with lower-cost capital and liquidity. One goal was to encourage banks to expand credit to households
and firms that would, in turn, increase their borrowing, spending, and investment.1 Yet, empirically
analyzingthestrengthofthis"banklendingchannel"ischallenging. Forexample,therewasalargedrop
inU.S.banks’costoffundsinthefallof2008,whentheFederalFundsRatewascuttozeroinresponse
tothefinancialcrisis. However,thiswasexactlytheperiodwhenlendersandborrowerswereupdating
their expectations about the economy, making it practically impossible to use time-series analysis to
isolatetheeffectofthechangeinmonetarypolicyonborrowingvolumes.
In this paper, we propose a new empirical approach to studying the bank lending channel that fo-
cuses on frictions, such as asymmetric information, that arise in bank-borrower interactions. Our ap-
proachisbasedontheobservationthattheeffectonaggregateborrowingofachangeinbanks’(shadow)
costoffunds–e.g.,duetoaneasingofmonetarypolicy,areductionincapitalrequirements,oramarket
intervention that reduces financial frictions – can be expressed as a function of the supply and demand
for credit by different agents in the economy. This approach is empirically useful because it allows us
to quantify the pass-through of credit expansion policies by decomposing the overall effect into objects
thatcanbeestimatedusingmicro-dataonlendingandquasi-exogenousvariationincontractterms. This
approachisalsoconceptuallyusefulbecauseunderstandingtherelativeimportanceofthesesupplyand
demandfactorsisindependentlyimportantfordesigningeffectivepolicies.
We apply our framework to the U.S. credit card market. As we discuss below, in this market credit
limitsareakeydeterminantofcreditsupplyandtheprimarymarginofadjustmenttochangesinthecost
offunds. Letcdenotethebanks’costoffunds,CL thecreditlimitofconsumeri,andq theborrowingof
i i
thatconsumer. Theeffectofachangeincontotalborrowingqcanbeexpressedastheproductofbanks’
marginal propensity to lend (MPL) to consumer i and that consumer’s marginal propensity to borrow
(MPB),aggregatedacrossalltheconsumersintheeconomy:
dq (cid:90) dCL dq
− = − i × i (1)
dc
i
dc dCLi
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125)
MPL MPB
WeoperationalizeourframeworkbyestimatingheterogeneousMPBsandMPLsusingpaneldataonall
1Forexample,whenintroducingtheFinancialStabilityPlan,Geithner(2009)arguedthat"thecapitalwillcomewithcon-
ditionstohelpensurethateverydollarofassistanceisusedtogeneratealeveloflendinggreaterthanwhatwouldhavebeen
possibleintheabsenceofgovernmentsupport."InEurope, similarschemeswereputinplaceinordertoreducethecostof
capitalforbanksthatexpandlendingtonon-financialfirmsandhouseholds(e.g., the"FundingforLendingScheme"ofthe
BankofEngland,andthe"TargetedLonger-TermRefinancingOperation"oftheECB).SeeAppendixAformoreinformation.
1

creditcardsissuedbythe8largestU.S.banks. Thesedata,assembledbytheOfficeoftheComptrollerof
the Currency (OCC), provide us with monthly account-level information on contract terms, utilization,
payments, and costs for more than 400 million credit card accounts between January 2008 and Decem-
ber 2014. The data are merged with credit bureau information, allowing us to track balances across
consumers’broaderunsecuredcreditportfolios.
Our research design exploits the fact that banks sometimes set credit limits as discontinuous func-
tions of consumers’ FICO credit scores. For example, a bank might grant a $2,000 credit limit to con-
sumerswithaFICOscorebelow720anda$5,000creditlimittoconsumerswithaFICOscoreof720or
above. We show that other borrower and contract characteristics trend smoothly through these cutoffs,
allowing us to use a regression discontinuity strategy to identify the causal impact of providing extra
creditatprevailinginterestrates. Weidentifyatotalof743creditlimitdiscontinuitiesinourdata,which
aredistributedacrosstherangeoftheFICOscoredistribution. Weobserve8.5millionnewcreditcards
issuedtoborrowerswithin50FICOscorepointsofacutoff.
Usingthisregressiondiscontinuitydesign,weestimatesubstantialheterogeneityinMPBsacrossthe
FICO score distribution. For the least credit-worthy consumers (FICO ≤ 660), a $1 increase in credit
limits raises borrowing volumes on the treated credit card by 58 cents at 12 months after origination.
This effect is due to increased spending and is not explained by a shifting of borrowing across credit
cards. ForthehighestFICOscoreconsumers(>740),weestimatea23%effectonthetreatedcardthatis
entirelyexplainedbyashiftingofborrowingacrosscreditcards,withanincreaseincreditlimitshaving
noeffectontotalborrowing.
We next analyze how banks pass through credit expansions to different consumers. As discussed
above, estimating the MPL directly using observed changes in the cost of funds is challenging, because
suchchangesaretypicallycorrelatedwithshiftsintheeconomicenvironmentthatalsoaffectborrowing
and lending decisions. We use economic theory and our quasi-exogenous variation in credit limits to
addressthisidentificationproblem. Inparticular,wewritedownasimplemodelofoptimalcreditlimits
to show that a bank’s MPL depends on a small number of "sufficient statistics" that can be estimated
directly using our regression discontinuities. Our approach involves a tradeoff. To avoid the standard
identificationproblem,weneedtoassumethatbanksrespondoptimallytochangesinthecostoffunds
andthatwecanmeasuretheincentivesfacedbybanks. Wethinkbothassumptionsarereasonable: credit
card lending is highly sophisticated and our estimates of bank incentives are fairly precise. Indeed, we
showthatobservedcreditlimitsareclosetotheoptimalcreditlimitsimpliedbythemodel.
2