NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES FOREIGN ENTRY SPUR INNOVATION?
Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Jan Svejnar
Katherine Terrell
Working Paper 21514
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21514
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2015, Revised November 2019
Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Jan Svejnar would like to dedicate this paper to Katherine Terrell, who
passed away while the authors were working on the paper. They would like to thank Michael
Olabisi, Aaron Baum, and Yury Yatsynovich for valuable research assistance. In carrying out this
research, they benefitted from grant no. P402-15-24642S of the Grant Agency of the Czech
Republic. Yuriy Gorodnichenko also thanks National Science Foundation for financial support.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Jan Svejnar, and Katherine Terrell. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Foreign Entry Spur Innovation?
Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Jan Svejnar, and Katherine Terrell
NBER Working Paper No. 21514
September 2015, Revised November 2019
JEL No. F2,M16,O16,P23
ABSTRACT
Using large firm-level and industry-level data sets from eighteen countries, we find that foreign
direct investment (FDI) and trade have positive spillover effects on product and technology
innovation by domestic firms in emerging markets. The FDI effect is more pronounced for firms
from advanced economies. However, while we detect the spillover effects with micro data at the
firm-level, when we use linkage variables computed from input-output tables at the industry level
we find much weaker, and usually insignificant, effects. These patterns are important for policy,
suggesting that spillovers are localized to firms engaged directly with multinationals and in trade,
rather than affecting all domestic firms in industries with FDI presence.
Yuriy Gorodnichenko Katherine Terrell
Department of Economics Ross School of Business
530 Evans Hall #3880 and Ford School of Public Policy
University of California, Berkeley University of Michigan
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880 3234 Weill Hall, 735 South State Street
and IZA Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and also NBER terrell@umich.edu
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu
Jan Svejnar
School of International and Public Affairs
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, Room 1401E
New York, NY 10027
and IZA
js4085@columbia.edu

1. Introduction
A major question that has arisen in the last few decades is whether domestic firms have become stronger
or weaker with the opening up of most economies to foreign trade and investment. More specifically, has
the efficiency of firms in emerging market economies improved with the growing presence of foreign
direct investment (FDI) within their borders and the opening of these economies to trade? While there is
substantial evidence that multinational enterprises (MNEs)1 are more productive than domestic firms,2 the
0F 1F
evidence on productivity spillovers of FDI and trade remains mixed.3
2F
The mixed evidence points to the need to understand better the mechanisms through which
horizontal and vertical relationships with foreign firms and international trade improve or hamper
efficiency of domestic firms. Innovation is the presumed conduit through which globalization affects
productivity, yet there has been little research testing the relationship between globalization and
innovation. In this paper, we provide the first analysis based on industry-level (“indirect”) and firm-
level (“micro”) data to address this question.
Foreign firms may have efficiency and other “spillover” effects on local competitors (horizontal
spillovers) as well as on upstream and downstream domestic firms (vertical spillovers).4 Most studies
3F
1 In this paper the term MNEs refers to foreign-owned firms, although we recognize that domestically owned firms can also
be multinational in their production and sourcing.
2 See e.g., the seminal work of Caves (1974) and the more recent work of Djankov and Hoekman (2000), Haskel, Pereira
and Slaughter (2007) and Sabirianova, Svejnar and Terrell (2005).
3 Various literatures examine the impact of globalization on efficiency of firms in emerging markets. For a review of the literature
on foreign direct investment, see e.g., Gorg and Greenaway (2004); for a review of the trade literature, see e.g., Wagner (2007).
4
The spillover (broadly defined as a transfer of managerial practices, production methods, marketing techniques or any
other knowledge embodied in a product or service) may occur through a number of channels. Local firms may for instance
learn to imitate a new process or improve the quality of their products or services through observation, or find out about
better processes or marketing methods through interaction with foreign managers in business chambers and from former
employees of MNEs. Local firms may also benefit from the entry of new professional services or suppliers as a result of
the MNE entry. Foreign firms may act as catalysts for domestic suppliers to improve quality or time efficiency by
demanding higher standards. On the other hand, foreign firms may have a negative effect on domestic firms’ output and
efficiency if they “steal” their market or best human capital. If domestic firms cut back production in the face of foreign
competition, they may experience a higher average cost as fixed costs are spread over a smaller scale of production (Aitken
and Harrison, 1999). Similarly, if the best employees leave for foreign firms, efficiency declines.
2

examine “horizontal spillovers” and do so at the industry level within a production function framework.5
4F
The effect of foreign presence on the productivity of domestic firms in a given industry is captured by the
coefficient on the share of foreign firms’ output or employment in that industry. The evidence from this
research is mixed. Most studies of developing countries suggest that the horizontal spillover effect is nil
or negative.6 On the other hand, several studies find positive horizontal spillovers in the more developed
5F
economies such as the UK.7 Hence, there is a puzzle that is of considerable interest.
6F
While studies of horizontal productivity spillovers are numerous, until recently there were few
empirical studies on vertical spillovers. This is surprising given the early analysis by Lall (1980) of the
positive backward linkage effects of foreign firms on the Indian trucking industry.8 Moreover, vertical
7F
spillovers are more likely to be positive than horizontal spillovers since MNEs have an incentive to
improve the productivity of their suppliers rather than that of their competitors.9 The empirical papers
8F
that have appeared more recently do indeed find evidence that is consistent with the view of technology
transfer through backward linkages in the manufacturing sectors of for example, Hungary (Schoors and
van der Tol, 2001), Indonesia (Blalock and Gertler, 2005), Lithuania (Javorcik, 2004), Czech Republic
(Stancik, 2007) and the United Kingdom (Girma, Gorg and Pisu, 2008). However, these studies rely only
on a variable that is constructed from input-output (I-O) tables at the industry level, rather than a direct
5 The literature on FDI spillovers has been burgeoning in recent years. We do not attempt to summarize the large and rapidly
growing literature, but simply highlight the work that has motivated the analysis in this paper. We refer the interested
reader to a survey by Gorg and Greenaway (2004).
6 See for example studies of Morocco by Haddad and Harrison (1993); Venezuela by Aitken and Harrison (1999); Bulgaria
and Romania by Konings (2000); Russia by Yudaeva et al. (2003); the Czech Republic by Kosova (2004); and China by
Abraham, Konings and Slootmaekers (2006). In the Chinese case, Abraham, Konings and Slootmaekers (2006) find positive
horizontal spillovers for certain types of firms. More recently, using firm-level data from ten transition economies, Damijan
et al. (2012) find that horizontal spillovers tend to be positive in more productive firms and negative in less productive and
smaller ones. Moreover, Davies, Lamla, and Schiffbauer (2016) find that spillovers tend to be temporary in that they depend
on MNEs continuous presence.
7 See e.g., Haskel et al. (2007) and Keller and Yeaple (2003).
8 On the other hand, there are numerous case studies which provide specific examples of how MNEs provide training and
assistance to their suppliers. See for example, Moran (2001).
9 Blalock and Gertler (2005) point out that MNEs may establish a relationship with multiple suppliers to reduce dependency
on a single supplier and that this will then benefit all firms that purchase these vendors’ output. Consistent with this view, Lin
and Saggi (2007) show theoretically how exclusivity in the contractual relationship between a multinational and its local
supplier reduces the competition among local suppliers and can lower backward linkages and local welfare relative to autarky.
3