NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EFFICIENTLY INEFFICIENT MARKETS FOR ASSETS AND ASSET MANAGEMENT
Nicolae B. Gârleanu
Lasse H. Pedersen
Working Paper 21563
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21563
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2015
We are grateful for helpful comments from Jules van Binsbergen, Ronen Israel, Stephen Mellas, Jim
Riccobono, Andrei Shleifer, and Morten Sorensen, as well as from seminar participants at Harvard
University, New York University, UC Berkeley-Haas, CEMFI, IESE, Toulouse School of Economics,
MIT Sloan, Copenhagen Business School, and the conferences at Queen Mary University of London,
the Cowles Foundation at Yale University, the European Financial Management Association Conference,
the 7th Erasmus Liquidity Conference, the IF2015 Annual Conference in International Finance, the
FRIC'15 Conference, and the Karl Borch Lecture. Pedersen gratefully acknowledges support from
the European Research Council (ERC grant no. 312417) and the FRIC Center for Financial Frictions
(grant no. DNRF102) The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21563.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Nicolae B. Gârleanu and Lasse H. Pedersen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Efficiently Inefficient Markets for Assets and Asset Management
Nicolae B. Gârleanu and Lasse H. Pedersen
NBER Working Paper No. 21563
September 2015
JEL No. D4,D53,D83,G02,G12,G14,G23,L10
ABSTRACT
We consider a model where investors can invest directly or search for an asset manager, information
about assets is costly, and managers charge an endogenous fee. The efficiency of asset prices is linked
to the efficiency of the asset management market: if investors can find managers more easily, more
money is allocated to active management, fees are lower, and asset prices are more efficient. Informed
managers outperform after fees, uninformed managers underperform after fees, and the net performance
of the average manager depends on the number of "noise allocators." Finally, we show why large investors
should be active and discuss broader implications and welfare considerations.
Nicolae B. Gârleanu
Haas School of Business
F628
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
garleanu@haas.berkeley.edu
Lasse H. Pedersen
Copenhagen Business School
Solbjerg Plads 3, A5
DK-2000 Frederiksberg
DENMARK
and NYU
lpederse@stern.nyu.edu

In the real world, asset managers play a central role in making markets efficient as their
size allows them to spend significant resources on acquiring and processing information.
The asset management market is subject to its own frictions, however, since investors must
search for informed asset managers. Indeed, institutional investors — e.g., pension funds
and insurance companies — literally fly around the world to examine asset managers in
person. They seek to assess the manager’s investment process, the number and quality of the
investment professionals, the trading infrastructure, information flow, and risk management,
and perform due diligence on the back office, valuation practices, the custody of the assets,
IT security, disaster recovery plan, and so on. Similarly, individual investors search for asset
managers, some via local branches of financial institutions, others with the aid of investment
advisors, and yet others via the internet or otherwise. How do the search frictions in the
market for asset management affect the efficiency of the underlying security market? Which
types of securities are likely to be priced efficiently? What determines asset management
fees? How large of an outperformance can investors expect from asset managers before and
after fees? Which type of investors should use active, rather than passive, investing?
We seek to address these questions in a model with two levels of frictions: (a) investors’
search frictions of finding and vetting asset managers and (b) asset managers’ cost of col-
lecting information about assets. The levels of inefficiency in the security market and the
market for asset management are closely linked, yielding several new predictions: (1) In-
formed managers outperform after fees, uninformed managers underperform after fees, and
the net performance of the average manager depends on the number of “noise allocators.”
(2) If investors can find managers more easily, more money is allocated to active manage-
ment, fees are lower, and security prices are more efficient. (3) As search costs diminish,
asset prices become efficient in the limit, even if information-collection costs remain large.
(4) Managers of complex assets earn larger fees and are fewer, and such assets are less ef-
ficiently priced. (5) Allocating to active managers is attractive for large or sophisticated
investors with small search cost, while small or unsophisticated investors should be passive.
(6) Finally, we discuss the economic magnitude of our predictions and welfare considerations.
2

Asawayofbackground, thekeybenchmarkisthatsecuritymarketsareperfectlyefficient
(Fama (1970)), but this leads to two paradoxes: First, no one has an incentive to collect
information in an efficient market, so how does the market become efficient (Grossman and
Stiglitz (1980))? Second, if asset markets are efficient, then positive fees to active managers
implies inefficient markets for asset management (Pedersen (2015)).
GrossmanandStiglitz(1980) show thatthefirstparadoxcanbe addressedbyconsidering
informed investing in a model with noisy supply, but, when an agent has collected informa-
tion about securities, she can invest on this information on behalf of others, so professional
asset managers arise naturally as a result of the returns to scale in collecting and trading on
information (Admati and Pfleiderer (1988), Ross (2005), Garcia and Vanden (2009)). There-
fore, we introduce professional asset managers into the Grossman-Stiglitz model, allowing
us to study the efficiency of asset markets jointly with the efficiency of the markets for asset
management.
One benchmark for the efficiency of asset management is provided by Berk and Green
(2004), who consider the implications of perfectly efficient asset-management markets (in
the context of exogenous and inefficient asset prices). In contrast, we consider an imperfect
market for asset management due to search frictions, consistent with the empirical evidence
of Sirri and Tufano (1998), Jain and Wu (2000), Horta¸csu and Syverson (2004), and Choi,
Laibson, and Madrian (2010). We focus on investors’ incentive to search for informed man-
agers and managers’ incentives to acquire information about assets with endogenous prices,
abstracting from how agency problems and imperfect contracting can distort asset prices
(Shleifer and Vishny (1997), Stein (2005), Cuoco and Kaniel (2011), Buffa, Vayanos, and
Woolley (2014)).
Our equilibrium works as follows. Among a large group of asset managers, an endoge-
nous number decide to acquire information about a security. Investors must decide whether
to expend search costs to find one of the informed asset managers. In an interior equilib-
rium, investors are indifferent between passive investing (i.e., investing that does not rely
on information collection) and searching for an informed asset manager. Investors do not
3