NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TRADING DOWN AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE
Nir Jaimovich
Sergio Rebelo
Arlene Wong
Working Paper 21539
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21539
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2015, Revised October 2017
This research was conducted with restricted access to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) data.
The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
BLS, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. We thank our project coordinator at the BLS, Ryan Ogden, for
help with the data, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Michael Weber for making their data and code
available to us. We are grateful for comments from David Berger, Erik Hurst, Guido Menzio,
Emi Nakamura, Aviv Nevo, Raphael Schoenle, Henry Siu, and Jon Steinsson.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Nir Jaimovich, Sergio Rebelo, and Arlene Wong. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Trading Down and the Business Cycle
Nir Jaimovich, Sergio Rebelo, and Arlene Wong
NBER Working Paper No. 21539
September 2015, Revised October 2017
JEL No. E1,E2,E3
ABSTRACT
We document two facts. First, during the Great Recession, consumers traded down in the quality
of the goods and services they consumed. Second, the production of low-quality goods is less
labor intensive than that of high-quality goods. When households traded down, labor demand fell,
increasing the severity of the recession. We find that the trading-down phenomenon accounts for
a substantial fraction of the fall in U.S. employment in the recent recession. We show that
embedding quality choice in a business-cycle model improves the model's amplification and
comovement properties.
Nir Jaimovich Arlene Wong
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of Zurich Princeton University
Office: SOF H-16 192A Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Zurich, Switzerland Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER and NBER
nir.jaimovich@uzh.ch arlenewong@princeton.edu
Sergio Rebelo
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
Department of Finance
Leverone Hall
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and CEPR
and also NBER
s-rebelo@northwestern.edu

1 Introduction
One of the classic research areas in macroeconomics is the study of how households
make consumption choices and how these choices impact the economy. There is a large
empirical literature on this topic going as far back as the work of Burns and Mitchell
(1946). This literature has received renewed attention after the Great Recession.1
In this paper, we contribute to this line of research as follows. First, we show that
during the Great Recession, consumers traded down in the quality of the goods and
services they consumed. Second, we show that the production of low-quality goods is
generally less labor intensive than that of high-quality goods. These two facts imply
that when households traded down, labor demand fell, increasing the severity of the
Great Recession.
To quantify the implications of “trading down” for employment during the Great
Recession, we combine various data sources to construct a data set with firm-level
measuresofproductquality, laborintensity, andmarketshare. Formostofouranalysis,
we use prices as a proxy for quality. Our assumption is that, if consumers are willing
to pay more for an item, they perceive it to be of higher quality. We corroborate the
plausibility of this assumption using data with independent measures of quality and
price.
We obtain price measures from two sources: data scraped from the Yelp!, a website
where consumers post information about different goods and services, and the confiden-
tial micro data set used to construct the Producer Price Index (PPI). We merge these
data with Compustat data to measure labor intensity and market share for each firm
in our sample. We estimate that around half of the decline in employment in the Great
Recession is accounted for by consumers trading down in the quality of the goods and
services they purchased.
1Recent contributions to this literature include Aguiar, Hurst, and Karabarbounis (2013), Kaplan
and Menzio (2015), Stroebel and Vavra (2015), and Nevo and Wong (2015).
1

Tostudytheeffectsoftradingdownfromatheoreticalperspective,weembedquality
choice into an otherwise standard business-cycle model. We find that the presence of
quality choice magnifies the response of these economies to shocks, generating larger
booms and deeper recessions. To understand this amplification mechanism consider
a negative shock that reduces the household’s income. This fall in income, leads the
household to trade down in the quality of the goods it consumes. Since lower quality
goods use less labor, trading down reduces labor demand.
The quality-augmented model has two other interesting properties. First, it can
generate comovement between employment in the consumption and investment sectors,
a property that is generally difficult to obtain (see Christiano and Fitzgerald (1998)).
Second, the model produces an endogenous, countercyclical labor wedge. As Shimer
(2009) emphasises, this type of wedge is necessary in order to reconcile business-cycle
models with the empirical behavior of hours worked.
Our paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe our data and present
our empirical results. We study the quantitative properties of two models with quality
choice in Section 3. The first model has a representative agent while the second has
heterogenous agents. Section 4 concludes.
2 Empirical findings
In this section, we analyze the impact of trading down on labor demand. By trading
down we mean shifts in the composition of consumption across firms within narrowly
defined sectors towards lower quality goods. To study the effect of trading down on em-
ployment, we estimate the labor intensity of different quality levels within each sector.
We then study how shifts in the market share of the different quality levels affects em-
ployment. This within-sector trading-down channel differs from other channels through
which demand can affect employment, such as shifts in spending across sectors (e.g.
2