NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SUPERSTITIONS, STREET TRAFFIC, AND SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING
Michael L. Anderson
Fangwen Lu
Yiran Zhang
Jun Yang
Ping Qin
Working Paper 21551
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21551
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2015
Funding for this research was provided by the National Institute of Food and Agriculture, U.S. Department
of Agriculture, under Project No. CA-B-AEC-7785-H. Any errors in the paper are the authors’. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Michael L. Anderson, Fangwen Lu, Yiran Zhang, Jun Yang, and Ping Qin. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Superstitions, Street Traffic, and Subjective Well-Being
Michael L. Anderson, Fangwen Lu, Yiran Zhang, Jun Yang, and Ping Qin
NBER Working Paper No. 21551
September 2015
JEL No. R41,R48
ABSTRACT
Congestion plays a central role in urban and transportation economics. Existing estimates of congestion
costs rely on stated or revealed preferences studies. We explore a complementary measure of congestion
costs based on self-reported happiness. Exploiting quasi-random variation in daily congestion in Beijing
that arises because of superstitions about the number four, we estimate a strong effect of daily congestion
on self-reported happiness. When benchmarking this effect against the relationship between income
and self-reported happiness we compute implied congestion costs that are several times larger than
conventional estimates. Several factors, including the value of reliability and externalities on non-travelers,
can reconcile our alternative estimates with the existing literature.
Michael L. Anderson Jun Yang
Department of Agricultural and Beijing Transportation Research Center
(cid:3) Resource Economics yangj@bjtrc.org.cn
207 Giannini Hall, MC 3310
University of California, Berkeley Ping Qin
Berkeley, CA 94720 Renmin University of China
and NBER pingqin2009@gmail.com
mlanderson@berkeley.edu
Fangwen Lu
Renmin University of China
lufangwen@gmail.com
Yiran Zhang
Renmin University of China
ruczyr1992@126.com

Traffic congestion is a leading quality-of-life issue in most urban areas. Conventional
estimates of traffic congestion costs aggregate the value of lost time and wasted fuel due to
congestion. In the United States (US) these estimates total $121 billion per year (Schrank,
Lomax, and Eisele 2012), and the costs are particularly large in urban areas. For example, the
Los Angeles metro area accrued $10.8 billion of congestion costs in 2011, representing 3%
of income or 14% of housing costs. Congestion costs in other countries may be larger as a
share of income; Creutzig and He (2009) estimate that congestion costs in Beijing represent
4% to 7% of municipal gross domestic product (GDP).
A critical element in determining congestion costs is motorists’ value of time. Most
estimates set the value of time at a fraction of the hourly wage (Liu et al. 2009), with the
fraction typically determined by results from stated preferences (SP) studies or, less often,
revealed preferences (RP) studies. Two recurring patterns in the literature are that SP
estimates are often smaller than RP estimates and that motorists report a higher value of
time in congested conditions than in free-flow conditions. These patterns suggest that the
costs of traffic congestion are highly salient – motorists may not fully appreciate them until
they directly experience them – and that driving in traffic entails some degree of psychic
disutility. A related literature on travel reliability finds that motorists value reliability
improvements – typically measured in standard deviations or interquantile differences of
travel time – as much as they value reductions in mean travel time (Small 2012). These
factors suggest that even reliable estimates of in-vehicle value of time are insufficient for
calculating congestion costs.
In this work we estimate the effects of traffic congestion on subjective well-being in
Beijing, China. In response to heavy congestion and pollution, Beijing restricts vehicle usage
on the basis of license plate numbers. On any given weekday, private vehicles with plates
ending in one of two digits may not drive within the 5th Ring Road from 7 am to 8 pm. As a
result each vehicle is restricted one day per week. However, superstitions regarding the
number four – which is homonymous with “death” in Chinese – dramatically reduce the
proportion of vehicles with license plates ending in four. We thus expect, and find, large
increases in traffic congestion on days on which plates ending in four are restricted. We
combine data on congestion with data from the Chinese General Social Survey (CGSS) to
estimate the effect of daily congestion levels – instrumented using a measure of the share of
plates that are restricted each day – on self-reported happiness.
To further interpret our estimates we apply an alternative method for valuing
congestion costs. This method, based on self-reported levels of happiness, is novel to the
! 1

transportation literature but has seen application in other contexts involving public goods or
externalities. Our method compares the happiness effects of quasi-random daily changes in
congestion levels to the happiness effects of additional income. If we treat happiness as a
proxy for utility, this comparison reveals the utility-constant tradeoff between congestion
and income. The method has both advantages and disadvantages vis-à-vis existing methods.
It leverages quasi-random variation in congestion levels to estimate effects on subjective
well-being. In this sense it avoids a frequent problem in RP studies, the potential
confounding of travel-time differences with unobserved attributes. It measures subjective
well-being for a random sample of the entire population, allowing inferences about the value
of congestion costs for non-marginal individuals and individuals who are not travelers. It
draws its outcome from a survey unrelated to transportation topics, avoiding SP-specific
issues of framing bias, strategic response bias, or lack of information on the part of
respondents.
There are natural disadvantages to the method as well. It treats subjective well-being
as a proxy for utility. If it is a poor proxy – in particular if there is a systematic error term
relating utility and subjective well-being – then our estimates will be biased. A related issue,
endemic to many studies applying this method, is the lack of clearly exogenous wealth
variation in our sample. Finally, to the extent that happiness is mean-reverting over the long
run – i.e. individuals habituate to new life circumstances – comparisons between short-run
changes in congestion and long-run changes in income may overstate the marginal rate of
substitution between congestion and income. For these reasons we view our research design
as complement to conventional approaches, and we note that shortcomings of the different
approach are in general orthogonal to each other.
These caveats notwithstanding, we find that traffic congestion has a large negative
effect on self-reported happiness. This “reduced form” result strongly suggests that
congestion is a major determinant of quality-of-life, even in countries with moderate levels
of GDP per capita. If we treat subjective well-being as a reasonable proxy for utility, our
results imply that Beijing motorists’ WTP to avoid an hour of congestion substantially
exceeds the hourly wage rate. Although our WTP estimates are higher than those from the
existing literature, several factors – including the value of reliability and potential external
effects of congestion on non-travelers – can reconcile the two sets of estimates. Consistent
with the large impact of congestion on quality-of-life, our estimates suggest significant
potential welfare gains from congestion pricing.
! 2