NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IMPROVING RISK EQUALIZATION WITH CONSTRAINED REGRESSION
Richard van Kleef
Thomas McGuire
Rene van Vliet
Wynand van de Ven
Working Paper 21570
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21570
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2015
We gratefully acknowledge the Dutch Ministry of Health, the Association of Health Insurers and Statistics
Netherlands for providing the administrative and survey data (see section 3). McGuire is grateful to
support from the National Institute of Mental Health (R01 MH094290) and the Laura and John Arnold
Foundation. The views expressed here are not necessarily those of the Foundation’s officers, directors
or staff. We also gratefully acknowledge the valuable comments on previous versions of this paper
by Konstantin Beck, Frank Eijkenaar, Randall Ellis, Laura Hatfield, Timothy Layton, Erzo Luttmer,
Joseph Newhouse, Sharon-Lise Normand, Sherri Rose, Erik Schut, Mark Shephard and Suzanne van
Veen. In addition, we thank Andrew Hicks for creating the figures. The responsibility for the content
of this article rests fully with the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Richard van Kleef, Thomas McGuire, Rene van Vliet, and Wynand van de Ven. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Improving Risk Equalization with Constrained Regression
Richard van Kleef, Thomas McGuire, Rene van Vliet, and Wynand van de Ven
NBER Working Paper No. 21570
September 2015
JEL No. I10,I11,I13,I18
ABSTRACT
Several countries rely on regulated health plan competition to combine affordability of health plans
with incentives for cost containment and quality improvement. Typically, these policies include premium
regulation supplemented with risk equalization to compensate health plans for predictable variation
in medical spending. An extensive empirical literature shows, however, that even the state-of-the-art
risk equalization models undercompensate some risk groups and overcompensate others, leaving systematic
incentives for risk selection. A natural approach to reducing under or overcompensation for a group
is to include membership in that group as an indicator in the risk equalization model. For several types
of indicators, however, inclusion can be problematic or infeasible. This paper introduces and illustrates
an alternative approach to reducing over or undercompensation in such cases: constraining the estimated
coefficients of the risk equalization model so as to limit over or undercompensation. Our empirical
illustration is based on administrative data on medical spending and risk characteristics of nearly all
individuals with basic health insurance in the Netherlands. We evaluate empirically the benefits of
constraints in terms of reduced under or overcompensation on indicators omitted from the Dutch risk
equalization model and their costs in terms of increased under or overcompensation on indicators included
in the model. Our findings imply that the benefits of introducing constraints can be worth the costs.
Constrained regression adds a tool for developing risk equalization models that can improve the overall
economic performance of health plan payment schemes.
Richard van Kleef Rene van Vliet
Erasus University Erasmus University
PO Box 1738 PO Box 1738
3000 DR Rotterdam 3000 DR Rotterdam
The Netherlands The Netherlands
vankleef@bmg.eur.nl r.vanvliet@bmg.eur.nl
Thomas McGuire Wynand van de Ven
Department of Health Care Policy Erasmus University
Harvard Medical School PO Box 1738
180 Longwood Avenue 3000 DR Rotterdam
Boston, MA 02115 The Netherlands
and NBER vandeven@bmg.eur.nl
mcguire@hcp.med.harvard.edu

1. Introduction
Several countries have adopted elements of Alain Enthoven’s model of regulated health plan
competition (Enthoven, 1993), which combines affordability of health plans with incentives for
cost containment and quality improvement.1 A crucial element of Enthoven’s model is the
adjustment of health plan payments to predictable variation in medical spending, also referred to
as risk equalization (RE). In the absence of premium regulation, RE mitigates incentives for
health plans to risk rate their premiums and thereby improves affordability of health plans for the
sick. In the presence of premium regulation – as is common in practice – RE mitigates incentives
for risk selection and thereby improves incentives for health plans to accept and serve the sick as
well as the healthy (Newhouse, 1996).2
Recent research has shown that even the state-of-the-art RE models – such as those used under
the Affordable Care Act in the United States or those used under the Health Insurance Act in the
Netherlands – systematically undercompensate groups of consumers in relatively poor health and
overcompensate the complementary groups of consumers in relatively good health (Layton et al.
2015; Van Kleef et al., 2013), exposing health plans and consumers to incentives for risk
selection. Risk selection threatens the performance of (regulated) health plan markets since it
may reduce 1) the quality of care (because plans may have a disincentive to meet the preferences
of the sick), 2) the efficiency of care (because risk selection may be a more cost-effective strategy
1 By ‘health plan competition’ we mean competition among health insurers who offer one or multiple
health plans. A ‘health plan’ refers to a health insurance product. All consumers who have the same
‘health plan’ have an identical contract with the same insurer concerning benefits coverage, cost-sharing,
quality, services, etc. Since objectives and strategies of insurers can differ across health plans, this paper
will speak of health plans instead of insurers as decision makers.
2 Newhouse (1996) defines risk selection as actions by consumers and health plans to exploit unpriced risk
heterogeneity and break pooling arrangements. Often the term selection is also used to refer to the
outcome of these actions.
1

for plans to reduce medical spending than improving the efficiency of care), 3) the efficient
sorting of consumers among plans (when market segmentation by risk elevates premiums for
particular plans), and 4) the affordability of health plans to the sick (when the same market
segmentation causes the sick to face higher premiums). To contend with these potential
problems, researchers and policy makers work to improve the properties of health plan payment
schemes.3 In general, three strategies can be applied to reduce incentives for risk selection in
regulated health plan markets: improving RE, increasing risk sharing (e.g. via mandatory
reinsurance or risk corridors) and relaxing premium-rate restrictions. This paper focusses on the
first strategy.
The conventional approach to improving RE adds new/better risk indicators to the RE model,
thereby improving the fit at the individual level, as measured by an R-squared, and improving the
fit at the group level, as measured by the degree of under or overcompensation for particular
groups. If a group of interest (for example, persons with congestive heart failure) is included with
a single yes/no indicator in an ordinary least squares (OLS) RE model, the properties of least
squares ensure that the payment for this group will equal the average medical spending of this
group.4 For some groups, however, it can be problematic to include an indicator of membership
in the RE model. Clear examples are groups based on prior use of medical services: if indicators
for these groups are included in the RE model, increased utilization in one year may increase plan
payment in the following year, which reduces health plans’ incentives for efficiency. In this paper
we study two concrete examples of such groups: users of ‘home care’ in the previous year and
3 By ‘health plan payment scheme’ we mean the total set of payment features, which can include risk
equalization, reinsurance, risk corridors and premiums among other features.
4 The expected value of an OLS residual conditional on a dummy variable regressor is zero. The statistical
residual from an OLS model is the individual-level over or underpayment in a RE model based on the
regression coefficients.
2