NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TRI-PARTY REPO PRICING
Grace Xing Hu
Jun Pan
Jiang Wang
Working Paper 21502
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21502
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2015
We have benefited from comments from and discussions with Darrell Duffie, Haoxiang Zhu, Dmitry
Orlov, Fan Yu, and seminar participants at the WFA 2015 and CICF 2015 meetings. We thank Bo
Meng, Ai He, Xiang Yun and Yue Hu for excellent research assistance. The financial support from
a Hong Kong RGC Research Grant (Project #17501014) is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Grace Xing Hu, Jun Pan, and Jiang Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Tri-Party Repo Pricing
Grace Xing Hu, Jun Pan, and Jiang Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 21502
August 2015
JEL No. G1,G12
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we examine the pricing determinants in the systemically important tri-party repo market.
Taking advantage of the recently available N-MFP reports filed by money market funds, we construct
a novel dataset that contains tri-party repo transactions between money market funds and dealer banks.
We find a large cross-sectional heterogeneity in repo pricing, reflected most significantly in the haircuts
of repos backed by equity and corporate bonds. Surprisingly, it is the fund families, not bank dealers,
who are the dominant factor in determining the pricing. Moreover, the repo market exhibits significant
segmentation, with fund families adopting three different pricing schemes: counter-party sensitive,
counter-party and collateral sensitive, and uniform. Most fund families use uniform haircuts by fixing
a constant haircut, which itself varies across families, for all repos within each asset class, regardless
of the quality of collateral or counter-party. Investigating further on the lending/borrowing relationship
between fund families and dealers, we find that, when faced with such a rich pricing pattern, dealers
do not shop around for a better haircut and are inclined to maintain a stable relationship with their
lenders. Finally, for repos backed by Treasury securities, there is little variation in both haircuts and
spreads, regardless of the fund family.
Grace Xing Hu Jiang Wang
818 K.K.Leung MIT Sloan School of Management
University of Hong Kong 100 Main Street, E62-614
Hong Kong Cambridge, MA 02142
gracexhu@hku.hk and NBER
wangj@mit.edu
Jun Pan
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-624
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
junpan@mit.edu

1 Introduction
Repurchase agreements (repos) are considered to be the largest and the most important
short-term (cid:12)nancing channel for a variety of (cid:12)nancial institutions.1 For these institutions,
the loss of access to the repo market could be devastating. Moreover, there exists a strong
spillover effect due to the highly interconnected structure of the repo market. As we experi-
enced in the recent (cid:12)nancial crisis, disruptions in the repo market could impose a great risk
to the broad (cid:12)nancial sector, adversely affecting not only repo market participants but also
other investors holding similar assets. Despite of its systemic importance, the repo market
remains opaque to most market participants, including even the regulators. Because no of-
(cid:12)cial data on repos exists, questions as basic as the overall size of the market are difficult to
answer, let alone (cid:12)nding information on the market structure, activity and pricing. Lack of
data is the main reason why empirical work lags behind theoretical discussions in this area.2
Using the recently available N-MFP reports (cid:12)led by U.S. money market funds (MMFs),
we construct a novel data set that contains a large sample of monthly tri-party repo trans-
actions with key information on counter-parties, amount, haircut, rate, tenor and collateral.
Tri-party repos, with details discussed in Copeland, Duffie, Martin, and McLaughlin (2012),
are an important segment of the repo market.3 The main advantage of our tri-party repo
data is that the information is at the transaction-level and contains details of the underlying
collateral, including descriptions of issuer names, types of securities, coupons and maturity
dates. Using these descriptions, we hand match the collateral to the relevant databases,
security by security. The entire collateral pool covers a wide range of asset classes, but we
1Because repo deals are transacted over-the-counter, the exact size of the aggregate repo volume is
unknown. Several papers, including Gorton and Metrick (2010), Gorton and Metrick (2012) and FRBNY
(2010), estimate the total outstanding amount to be approximately $10 trillion in the U.S. before the 2008
(cid:12)nancial crisis.
2The theoretical discussions include Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), He and Xiong (2012), Martin,
Skeie, and Thadden (2014), Zhang (2014), Lee (2015), among others.
3Tri-party repos are an important form of secured short-term lending for money market funds. Money
marketfundsarealwayscashlenders,anddealerbanksarealwayscashborrowersinoursample. Collectively,
money market funds account for around one-third of the total lending in the tri-party repo market. Money
marketfundsaregenerallyregardedassafeinvestmentsbecausetheycanonlyholdshort-term, high-quality
and high-liquidity assets. The weakness of industry was revealed by the Reserve Primary Fund’s \breaking
the buck" event in September 2008 and the subsequent \run" on money market funds. In the wake of the
crisis, money market funds in the U.S. went through a major regulatory reform in 2010, which aims to
strengthen the regulatory requirement for the industry and better protect investors. Under the new rules,
all U.S. money market funds need to disclose the details of their portfolio holdings with the SEC, through
the monthly N-MFP (cid:12)lings.
1

focus on matching repos on equities, corporate bonds and Treasuries, which have standard
and publicly accessible databases.4
To our best knowledge, this level of granular collateral information has never been col-
lected and studied before. There are only two existing data sets on tri-party repos that we
are aware of.5 The one most related to ours is discussed in Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Orlov
(2014), which is based on the top 20 money market fund families’ quarterly (cid:12)lings (N-CSR,
N-CSRS and N-Q) before the 2010 MMF reform. Since money market funds disclose only
the general asset classes in their quarterly (cid:12)lings, their repo data doesn’t have the collateral
information at the security level. The focus on only the top 20 fund families also raises the
question of how representative these repo transactions are. By contrast, our data covers the
repo transactions of all U.S. money market funds, totaling 751 individual funds from 160
fund families. Another set of tri-party repo data is collected by the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, as discussed in Copeland, Martin, and Walker (2014). Their data contains aggre-
gate quantity numbers across lender-dealer pairs for various collateral asset classes. Due to
the aggregation, transaction-level repo information is lost. Hence the authors focus on the
average haircuts faced by each dealer in each collateral asset class.
Taking advantage of our unique data, we investigate the determinants of tri-party repo
pricing, namely, haircuts and interest rates. We are particularly interested in how theoret-
ically important factors, such as the collateral characteristics, counter-party risk, lending
relationship and credit market conditions, affect repo prices. Our repo data is ideal for these
pricing tests because the collateral details make it possible for us to quantify the risk of the
collateral pool and thereby examine the repo price sensitivity with regards to the collat-
eral. Moreover, we are able to control the collateral characteristics when investigating the
relations between repo prices and other potential factors such as counter-party risk. This is
important because results would be inconclusive and potentially misleading if the collateral
characteristics are left uncontrolled.
4For the equity securities, we match them to the Compustat/CRSP database according to the issuer
names, and then use the historical returns to calculate volatilities and obtain other (cid:12)rm-level information
such as size and industry. For the corporate bonds, we match them to the Mergent FISD database by a
combinationofissuernames, maturitydatesandcoupons. Forthematchedbonds, weobtainthebond-level
characteristics including ratings, issuance size, age and maturities. Similarly, for the Treasury securities, we
match them to the CRSP database according to the maturity dates and coupons.
5In Gorton and Metrick (2010) and Gorton and Metrick (2012), the authors use a private repo data
provided by an anonymous dealer. However, the data covers only bilateral repos in the interbank market,
different from the tri-party repos that we discuss in this paper.
2