NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PRINCIPAL COMPONENT ANALYSIS OF HIGH FREQUENCY DATA
Yacine Aït-Sahalia
Dacheng Xiu
Working Paper 21584
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21584
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2015
We thank Hristo Sendov for valuable discussions on eigenvalues and spectral functions. In addition,
we benefited much from comments by Torben Andersen, Tim Bollerslev, Oleg Bondarenko, Marine
Carrasco, Gary Chamberlain, Kirill Evdokimov, Jianqing Fan, Christian Hansen, Jerry Hausman, Jean
Jacod, Ilze Kalnina, Jia Li, Yingying Li, Oliver Linton, Nour Meddahi, Per Mykland, Ulrich Müller,
Andrew Patton, Eric Renault, Jeffrey Russell, Neil Shephard, George Tauchen, Viktor Todorov, Ruey
Tsay, and Xinghua Zheng, as well as seminar and conference participants at Brown University, CEMFI,
Duke University, Harvard University, MIT, Northwestern University, Peking University, Princeton
University, Singapore Management University, University of Amsterdam, University of Chicago,
University of Illinois at Chicago, University of Tokyo, the 2015 North American Winter Meeting of
the Econometric Society, the CEME Young Econometricians Workshop at Cornell, the NBER-NSF
Time Series Conference in Vienna, the 10th International Symposium on Econometric Theory and
Applications, the 7th Annual SoFiE Conference, the 2015 Financial Econometrics Conference in Toulouse
and the 6th French Econometrics Conference. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Yacine Aït-Sahalia and Dacheng Xiu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Principal Component Analysis of High Frequency Data
Yacine Aït-Sahalia and Dacheng Xiu
NBER Working Paper No. 21584
September 2015
JEL No. C22,C55,C58,G01
ABSTRACT
We develop the necessary methodology to conduct principal component analysis at high frequency.
We construct estimators of realized eigenvalues, eigenvectors, and principal components and provide
the asymptotic distribution of these estimators. Empirically, we study the high frequency covariance
structure of the constituents of the S&P 100 Index using as little as one week of high frequency data
at a time. The explanatory power of the high frequency principal components varies over time. During
the recent financial crisis, the first principal component becomes increasingly dominant, explaining
up to 60% of the variation on its own, while the second principal component drives the common variation
of financial sector stocks.
Yacine Aït-Sahalia
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
yacine@princeton.edu
Dacheng Xiu
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlaswn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
dachxiu@chicagobooth.edu

Principal Component Analysis of High Frequency Data∗
Yacine A¨ıt-Sahalia† Dacheng Xiu‡
Department of Economics Booth School of Business
Princeton University and NBER University of Chicago
This Version: September 16, 2015
Abstract
We develop the necessary methodology to conduct principal component analysis at high frequency.
We construct estimators of realized eigenvalues, eigenvectors, and principal components and provide the
asymptoticdistributionoftheseestimators. Empirically,westudythehighfrequencycovariancestructure
of the constituents of the S&P 100 Index using as little as one week of high frequency data at a time.
The explanatory power of the high frequency principal components varies over time. During the recent
financial crisis, the first principal component becomes increasingly dominant, explaining up to 60% of the
variationonitsown,whilethesecondprincipalcomponentdrivesthecommonvariationoffinancialsector
stocks.
Keywords: ItˆoSemimartingale,HighFrequency,SpectralFunction,Eigenvalue,Eigenvector,Principal
Components, Three Factor Model.
JEL Codes: C13, C14, C55, C58.
1 Introduction
Principalcomponentanalysis(PCA)isoneofthemostpopulartechniquesinmultivariatestatistics,providing
a window into any latent common structure in a large dataset. The central idea of PCA is to identify a small
number of common or principal components which effectively summarize a large part of the variation of the
data, and serve to reduce the dimensionality of the problem and achieve parsimony.
Classical PCA originated in Pearson (1901) and Hotelling (1933) and is widely used in macroeconomics
and finance among many other fields. One example is Litterman and Scheinkman (1991), who document a
∗We thank Hristo Sendov for valuable discussions on eigenvalues and spectral functions. In addition, we benefited much
fromcommentsbyTorbenAndersen,TimBollerslev,OlegBondarenko,MarineCarrasco,GaryChamberlain,KirillEvdokimov,
Jianqing Fan, Christian Hansen, Jerry Hausman, Jean Jacod, Ilze Kalnina, Jia Li, Yingying Li, Oliver Linton, Nour Meddahi,
Per Mykland, Ulrich Mu¨ller, Andrew Patton, Eric Renault, Jeffrey Russell, Neil Shephard, George Tauchen, Viktor Todorov,
Ruey Tsay, and Xinghua Zheng, as well as seminar and conference participants at Brown University, CEMFI, Duke University,
Harvard University, MIT, Northwestern University, Peking University, Princeton University, Singapore Management University,
UniversityofAmsterdam,UniversityofChicago,UniversityofIllinoisatChicago,UniversityofTokyo,the2015NorthAmerican
Winter Meeting of the Econometric Society, the CEME Young Econometricians Workshop at Cornell, the NBER-NSF Time
SeriesConferenceinVienna,the10thInternationalSymposiumonEconometricTheoryandApplications,the7thAnnualSoFiE
Conference,the2015FinancialEconometricsConferenceinToulouseandthe6thFrenchEconometricsConference.
†Address: 26ProspectAvenue,Princeton,NJ08540,USA.E-mailaddress: yacine@princeton.edu.
‡Address: 5807SWoodlawnAvenue,Chicago,IL60637,USA.E-mailaddress: dacheng.xiu@chicagobooth.edu. Xiugratefully
acknowledgesfinancialsupportfromtheIBMFacultyScholarFundattheUniversityofChicagoBoothSchoolofBusiness.
1

three-factor structure of the term structure of yields using PCA. PCA has also been applied to analyze the
dimension of volatility dynamics, e.g., Egloff, Leippold, and Wu (2010), suggesting a two-factor model of
volatility, capturing the long and short-term fluctuations of the volatility term structure. Another example
is the development of economic activity and inflation indices by Stock and Watson (1999) using PCA and a
factor model. A sentiment measure, reflecting the optimistic or pessimistic view of investors, was created by
BakerandWurgler(2006)usingthefirstprincipalcomponentofanumberofsentimentproxies,whileapolicy
uncertainty index was created by Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2013).
The estimation of the eigenvalues of the sample covariance matrix is the key step towards PCA. Classical
asymptotic results, starting with Anderson (1958) and Anderson (1963), show that eigenvalues of the sample
covariance matrix are consistent and asymptotically normal estimators of the population eigenvalues, at least
when the data follow a multivariate normal distribution. Even under normality, the asymptotic distribution
becomes rather involved when repeated eigenvalues are present. Waternaux (1976) showed that a similar
centrallimitresultholdsforsimpleeigenvaluesaslongasthedistributionofthedatahasfinitefourthmoment,
while Tyler (1981) obtains the asymptotic distribution of eigenvectors under more general assumptions; see
also discussions in the books by Jolliffe (2002) and Jackson (2003).
TheclassicalPCAapproachtostatisticalinferenceofeigenvaluessuffersfromthreemaindrawbacks. First
is the curse of dimensionality. For instance, it is well known that even the largest eigenvalue is no longer
consistently estimated when the cross-sectional dimension grows at the same rate as the sample size along
the time domain. Second, the asymptotic theory is essentially dependent on frequency domain analysis under
stationarity (and often additional) assumptions, see, e.g., Brillinger (2001). Third, the principal components
are linear combinations of the data, which fail to capture potentially nonlinear patterns therein.
These three drawbacks create difficulties when PCA is employed on asset returns data. A typical portfolio
mayconsistofdozensofstocks. Forinstance,aportfoliowith30stockshas465parametersintheircovariance
matrix, if no additional structure is imposed, while one with 100 stocks contain 5,050 parameters. As a
result, years of time series data are required for estimation, raising issues of survivorship bias, potential non-
stationarity and parameter constancy. Moreover, asset returns are known to exhibit time-varying volatility
and heavy tails, leading to deviations from the assumptions required by the classical PCA asymptotic theory.
In addition, prices of derivatives, e.g., options, are often nonlinear functions of the underlying asset’s price
and volatility. Ruling out nonlinear combinations disconnects their principal components from the underlying
factors that drive derivative returns.
TheseissuesmotivatethedevelopmentinthispaperofthetoolsnecessarytoconductPCAforcontinuous-
time stochastic processes using high frequency data and high frequency or “in-fill” asymptotics, whereby the
numberofobservationsgrowswithinafixedtimewindow. Thisapproachnotonlyaddstheimportantmethod
of PCA to the high frequency toolkit, but it addresses the three drawbacks mentioned above. First, the large
amountofintradaytimeseriesdatavastlyimprovethetimeseriesvs. cross-sectionaldimensionalitytrade-off.
And these are not redundant observations for the problem at hand. Unlike for expected returns, it is well
established theoretically that increasing the sampling frequency improves variance and covariance estimation,
at least until market microstructure concerns start biting. Yet market microstructure noise is not a serious
concern at the one minute sampling frequency we will employ empirically, for liquid stocks which typically
trade on infra-second time scales. As a result of the large increase in the time series dimension, it is plausible
to expect high frequency asymptotic analysis with the cross-sectional dimension fixed to serve as accurate
approximations.1 Infact, wewillshowbothinsimulationsandempiricallythatPCAworksquitewellathigh
1At low frequency, in the case of large dimensional data, Geman (1980) and Bai, Silverstein, and Yin (1988) investigated
the strong law of the largest eigenvalue, when the cross-sectional dimension of the data grows at the same rate as the sample
size. Johnstone (2001) further analyzed the distribution of the largest eigenvalue using random matrix theory. These analyses
2