NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ASSESSING INCENTIVES FOR ADVERSE SELECTION IN HEALTH PLAN PAYMENT
SYSTEMS
Timothy J. Layton
Randall P. Ellis
Thomas G. McGuire
Working Paper 21531
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21531
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2015
Research for this paper was supported by the National Institute of Mental Health (R01 MH094290)
and the Laura and John Arnold Foundation. The views expressed here are the authors’ own and not
necessarily those of the Foundation’s officers, directors or staff. In addition, Layton was supported
by NIMH T32 019733. We are grateful to Konstantin Beck, David Cutler, Mike Geruso, Laura Hatfield,
Lukas Kauer, Albert Ma, Joe Newhouse, Sherri Rose, Christian Schmid, Mark Shepard, Richard van
Kleef, Wenjia Zhu, and participants at the BU-Harvard-MIT Seminar and the NBER Summer Institute
for comments on a previous version. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Timothy J. Layton, Randall P. Ellis, and Thomas G. McGuire. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Assessing Incentives for Adverse Selection in Health Plan Payment Systems
Timothy J. Layton, Randall P. Ellis, and Thomas G. McGuire
NBER Working Paper No. 21531
September 2015
JEL No. I11,I13,I18
ABSTRACT
Health insurance markets face two forms of adverse selection problems. On the demand side, adverse
selection leads to plan price distortions and inefficient sorting of consumers across health plans. On
the supply side, adverse selection creates incentives for plans to inefficiently distort benefits to attract
profitable enrollees. These problems can be addressed by features of health plan payment systems
such as reinsurance, risk adjustment, and premium categories. In this paper, we develop Harberger-
type measures of the efficiency consequences of price and benefit distortions under a given payment
system. Our measures are valid, that is, based on explicit economic models of adverse selection. Our
measures are complete, in that they are able to incorporate multiple features of plan payment systems.
Finally, they are practical, in that they are based on the ex ante data available to regulators and researchers
during the design phase of payment system development, prior to observing actual insurer and consumer
behavior. After developing the measures, we illustrate their use by comparing the performance of the
payment system planned for implementation in the ACA Marketplaces in 2017 to several policy alternatives.
We show that, in protecting against both types of selection problems, a payment system that incorporates
reinsurance and prospective risk adjustment out-performs the planned payment system which includes
only concurrent risk adjustment.
Timothy J. Layton Thomas G. McGuire
Department of Health Care Policy Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard Medical School Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Avenue 180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115 Boston, MA 02115
layton@hcp.med.harvard.edu and NBER
mcguire@hcp.med.harvard.edu
Randall P. Ellis
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, Mass 02215
ellisrp@bu.edu

1. Introduction
Public policy in the U.S. relies on private individual health insurance markets to provide coverage to
about one third of the elderly in Medicare and to all those eligible for the new Marketplaces
(formerly called Exchanges) created by the Affordable Care Act (ACA). As is well-known,
individual health insurance markets are vulnerable to adverse selection, the tendency of sicker,
higher-cost consumers to choose more generous coverage.1 This natural pattern of demand causes
two problems: 1) equilibrium premiums reflect selection as well as coverage differences, leading to
price distortions that cause consumers to choose the “wrong” plans (Einav and Finkelstein, 2011),
and 2) insurers distort the coverage of their health plans to make them less attractive to sicker
enrollees (Glazer and McGuire, 2000). Economic analysis contends with these selection-related
inefficiencies by ex ante study of the incentives embedded in insurance markets under alternative
policy environments2 and by ex post evaluation of the performance of implemented policies based on
actual consumer and insurer behavior.3
This paper develops and implements a general methodology for assessing the ex ante
selection-related incentives created by a health plan payment system. Our perspective is at the
market design phase: with data on patterns of utilization representative of the population to be
covered, we want to develop an approach to assessing how well a payment system – meaning the set
of policies regulating both the premium structure and the plan payment scheme – will contend with
selection problems. Ex ante analysis and simulations are the primary way regulators evaluate and
decide on payment systems for the new Marketplaces, Medicare’s payment system for private health
plans, and plan payment systems in the Netherlands, Switzerland, Israel and Germany.4 Studies in
this literature focus almost entirely on just one component of health plan payment systems: the risk
adjustment scheme, using statistical measures such as the R-squared of a regression of actual costs
on the predicted costs output by the risk adjustment formula. Some papers in this literature also
1 Table 9 in Cutler and Zeckhauser (2000) summarizes thirty studies documenting adverse selection in health
insurance. For a more recent review emphasizing studies relevant to the state-level Marketplaces, see
McGuire et al. (2014).
2 An example we discuss later is the ex ante evaluation of the risk adjustment system used to pay plans in the
new Marketplaces by federal contractors (Kautter et al., 2014).
3 See Erickson and Starc (2012) for an early evaluation of insurance pricing in the precursor to national
reform in Massachusetts, and Kowalski (2014) for an evaluation of selection inefficiencies in plan choice in
state health care reforms. We discuss a number of these ex post evaluation studies below.
4 See as examples, Kautter et al., (2014) on US Marketplaces; Pope, et al., (2011) on US Medicare; Shmueli, et
al. (2010) on Israel; Beck, Trottman and Zweifel (2010) on Switzerland; Breyer, Heineck and Lorenz (2003)
on Germany; Van Kleef, Van Vliet and Van de Ven (2013) on the Netherlands.
1

include “predictive ratios,” the ratio of predicted costs to actual costs for selected groups in the
population, such as those with a chronic illness.5 Although widely used, neither an R-squared nor a
predictive ratio has been shown to have a direct interpretation in terms of economic inefficiency.
We derive alternative measures for ex ante evaluation of payment system performance,
requiring three things from the measures we propose: First, they should be valid, i.e., the measures
should follow from formal analysis of the economic behavior causing the selection problems the
payment system is designed to correct and they should be based on the effects of a payment system
on consumer welfare rather than just the size of the distortion created by the selection problem.
Second, measures should be complete in the sense of accommodating all relevant features of payment
systems used to pay health plans including multiple premium categories and reinsurance, not just the
risk adjustment formula. Third, the measures should be practical, that is, readily computable from the
large claims databases available at the design phase for ex ante evaluation of payment system
alternatives. We do not require that the measures evaluate payment system performance using a
standard metric such as the total dollars of welfare loss. Instead, we only require that the measures
we develop allow for the comparison of payment systems according to their implications for social
welfare, providing policymakers with a basis for determining which payment systems are “better”
than others.
While the standard measure used for ex ante analysis of payment system performance, the R-
squared from a regression of costs on risk adjustor variables, is both practical (requirement 3) and
allows for the comparison of payment system performance, it does not accommodate the complete
set of payment system features (requirement 2), nor has it been shown to measure any parameter of
economic importance (requirement 1). The same could be said of predictive ratios. Other more
economically valid welfare metrics, such as the certainty equivalent measure used by Einav et al.
(2010) and others, require estimates of key behavioral parameters among the population of interest,
causing them to lack the practicality (or feasibility) of the more popular R-squared and predictive
ratio metrics and to not be used in actual payment system design. In a nutshell, our paper intends to
equip researchers and regulators with a methodology, or a “toolkit,” for evaluating payment system
alternatives to replace the R-squared/predictive ratio analyses that have been conducted in this
literature for more than 30 years.
5 European researchers more commonly study over- and undercompensation – the difference between
projected revenues and cost rather than their ratio. See Van Kleef et al. (2013).
2