NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IN-KIND TAXES, BEHAVIOR, AND COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE
Casey B. Mulligan
Working Paper 21586
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21586
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2015
I appreciate discussions with Gary Becker, John List, Kevin Murphy, Andrei Shleifer, Kevin Tsui,
John Warner, seminar participants at DePaul, Clemson, Chicago, Purdue and the financial support
of the University of Chicago’s Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and the State. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Casey B. Mulligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

In-Kind Taxes, Behavior, and Comparative Advantage
Casey B. Mulligan
NBER Working Paper No. 21586
September 2015
JEL No. H56,K2,L51
ABSTRACT
This paper treats taxation in kind (IKT) as an example of price regulation, emphasizing IKT-avoidance
behavior, and its interactions with the other costs of price controls. This emphasis fundamentally changes
efficiency conclusions, and adds new ones. IKTs do not in fact randomly sample suppliers. Large-
scale IKTs, and not small-scale ones, may have especially large average efficiency costs. Ransoms
or “commutation fees” are an IKT policy option, but are only efficiency enhancing in specific situations:
more heterogeneity among suppliers, and avoidance technologies that result in avoidance behaviors
that are poor signals of a supplier’s opportunity cost. Avoidance behaviors are one reason why the
social costs of wars and other public projects involving IKTs may have been underestimated.
Casey B. Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu

I. Introduction
In-kind taxes – obligations of citizens owed in goods or services, rather than money – are
some of the most important taxes in human history, and even in recent times are used in
significant ways. For example, according to The Military Balance, 59 percent of countries in the
world in 1995 obtained military manpower by conscription: forcing citizens into military service.
More than six dozen countries, including the United States, have constitutional provisions for
taking private land using the power of eminent domain. Eminent domain is also used to
redistribute intellectual property, and may be employed more frequently in the future as that type
of property becomes more valuable. In-kind “public service” labor payments to local
governments can be a major part of the tax burden faced by the poor in developing countries.
Another example: two dozen countries compel their citizens to participate in civic elections.1
In-kind taxes are administered with a price ceiling: otherwise the supply of goods and
services would be voluntary. This is not to say that all price ceilings are in-kind taxes, but in-
kind taxes might naturally result from price regulation as regulators become frustrated with a low
level of supply. New York, Brookline, and Cambridge, for example, are among cities and towns
that amended their rent control laws to prevent landlords from converting rental units to
1 On international comparisons of military recruitment, see International Institute for
Strategic Studies (various issues). Van der Walt (1999) has a comparative analysis of
constitutional property clauses. See Miceli (2011, p. 61) for a famous example and McClure
(2007) on the evolving legal relationship between eminent domain and intellectual property.
Olken and Singhal (2011) measure in-kind labor payments and other informal taxes in ten
developing countries circa the year 2000. See Jackman (2001) on compulsory voting, which is
another example of mandating civic duties rather than rewarding them through a voluntary labor
market.

condominiums, keeping units vacant, or personally occupying units that they own.2
Although public finance deals extensively with the question of cash versus in-kind
transfers, in-kind taxes are almost completely neglected. For example, neither of the public
finance textbooks by Stiglitz (2000) and Rosen (2001) mentions in-kind taxes in general, or labor
conscription in particular. The purpose of this paper is to examine the efficiency properties of
in-kind taxation (hereafter, IKT), with special emphasis on avoidance behaviors.
Behaviors for avoiding the Vietnam War draft are still famous today. They include entry
into protected occupations, obtaining political favors, moving to Canada, or embellishing
medical conditions. Quantitative work on avoidance behaviors has shown that the Vietnam War
draft induced a significant increase in college enrollments (Baskir and Strauss 1978, Card and
Lemieux 2001). Desertion by conscripts can be rampant, and draftees are less likely than
volunteers to reenlist when their required tour is finished.3 Leon Friedman (1969, pp. 1545-6)
describes evasion of the Union Army’s draft, “enrolling officers … were frequently lied to,
avoided, and even physically attacked… new towns sprang up just across the northern borders in
Canada … some men maimed themselves in order to fail the physical requirements for the
army.” Landowners are known to modify their property in order to avoid being targeted for
condemnation or other limits on land rights. Stroup (1997, p. 57) describes how landowners
have reacted to the Endangered Species Act by “managing their land … in a way that almost
2 See Fine (1980). For Cambridge specifically, where a vacant apartment can be taken
“by power of eminent domain in order to restore the unit(s) to serve as housing for people with
low and moderate incomes,” see City of Cambridge (2015) and Cavellini (2001).
3On desertions, see Forest (1989) and Costa and Kahn (2003) and the references cited
therein. Costa and Kahn cite high desertion rates as recently as World War II. On reenlistment,
see Becker (1957) and Oi (1967).
2