NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SIZE DISCOVERY
Darrell Duffie
Haoxiang Zhu
Working Paper 21696
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21696
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2015
For helpful discussions and comments, we thank Bruno Biais, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, Songzi Du,
Michael Fleming, Benjamin Junge, Eiichiro Kazumori, Pete Kyle, Emmanuel Moench, Sophie
Moinas, Giang Nguyen, Romans Pancs, Adriano Rampini, Mark Ready, Anders Trolle, Dimitri
Vayanos, and Robert Wilson, as well as participants at the American Economics Association
annual meeting, University of Bonn, University of Geneva, INSEAD, University of Zurich, Swiss
National Bank, HEC Paris, Federal Reserve Board, CFTC, University of Lugano, European
University Institute, Toulouse School of Economics, Wilfred Laurier University, EIEF (Banca
d'Italia), the Deutsche Bundesbank, AQR, Yale School of Management, Rice University, Georgia
State University, CKGSB (Beijing), Imperial College, London Business School, PaulWoolley
Conference, and SEC.We are especially grateful for research assistance by Jun Yan of the
Stanford Statistics Department and Hyungjune Kang of the MIT Sloan School of Management.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Darrell Duffie and Haoxiang Zhu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Size Discovery
Darrell Duffie and Haoxiang Zhu
NBER Working Paper No. 21696
November 2015
JEL No. D47,D82,G14
ABSTRACT
Size-discovery trade mechanisms allow large quantities of an asset to be exchanged at a price that
does not respond to price pressure. Primary examples include “workup” in Treasury markets,
“matching sessions” in corporate bond and CDS markets, and block-trading “dark pools” in
equity markets. By freezing the execution price and giving up on market-clearing, size-discovery
mechanisms overcome concerns by large investors over their price impacts. Price-discovery
mechanisms clear the market, but cause investors to internalize their price impacts, inducing
costly delays in the reduction of position imbalances. We show how augmenting a price-
discovery mechanism with a size-discovery mechanism improves allocative efficiency.
Darrell Duffie
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-7298
and NBER
duffie@stanford.edu
Haoxiang Zhu
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-623
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
zhuh@mit.edu

1 Introduction
This paper characterizes equilibrium behavior in size-discovery mechanisms, by which
large transactions can be quickly arranged at fixed prices. We show that size discovery
can significantly improve allocative efficiency in markets with imperfect competition and
private information over latent supply or demand imbalances.
The issue of market liquidity has received intense attention in the last few years. The
Securities and Exchange Commission (2010) and the U.S. Department of the Treasury
(2016) raise important questions and concerns about the liquidity and design of markets
for U.S. equities and Treasuries. The “Flash Crash” on May 6, 2010 in U.S. equity and
futuresmarketsandthe“FlashRally”onOctober15, 2014inU.S.Treasurymarketswere
wake-up calls that even deep liquid markets may experience extreme price movements
without obvious fundamental news (Joint CFTC-SEC Advisory Committee, 2011; Joint
Staff Report, 2015). There are widespread concerns that dealers are less willing or likely
toabsorblargetradeflowsontotheirbalancesheets(Adrian, Fleming, Shachar, andVogt,
2015).
An important aspect of market liquidity is the ability to quickly buy or sell large
quantities of an asset with a small price impact. By definition, price impact is primarily a
concern of large strategic investors—such as mutual funds, pension funds, and insurance
companies—and not of small or “price-taking” investors. Price impact is a particular con-
cernofmajorfinancialintermediariessuchasbroker-dealers, whooftenabsorbsubstantial
inventory positions in primary issuance markets or from their client investors, and then
seek to offload these positions in inter-dealer markets. Duffie (2010) surveys widespread
evidence of substantial price impact around large purchases and sales, even in settings
with relatively symmetric and transparent information.
To mitigate price impact, investors often split large orders into many smaller pieces
and execute them slowly over time. Order splitting is done by computer algorithms in
electronic markets and manually in voice markets. As we explain shortly, such piecemeal
execution is inefficient from an allocative perspective, given the associated costly delay
in reducing undesired positions. Investors could alternatively pass a large position to a
dealer at a price concession, but this strategy has become more costly in recent years, as
bank-affiliated dealers are subject to tighter capital and liquidity regulation.
We show that size discovery is an effective way to mitigate the allocative inefficiency
causedbystrategicavoidanceofpriceimpact. Sizediscoveryisthereforeavaluablesource
of block liquidity that can complement order-splitting execution strategies and market-
makingservicesbymajordealers. Examplesofsize-discoverymechanismsusedinpractice
include:
• Workup, a trading protocol by which buyers and sellers successively increase, or
1

“work up,” the quantities of an asset that are exchanged at a fixed price. Each
participant in a workup has the option to drop out at any time. In the market for
U.S. Treasuries, Fleming and Nguyen (2015) find that workup accounts for 43% to
56%oftotaltradingvolumeonthelargestU.S.Treasuriestradeplatform,BrokerTec,
on a typical day.
• “Matching sessions,” a variant of workup found in markets for corporate bonds
and credit default swaps (CDS). For the most actively traded CDS product, Collin-
Dufresne, Junge, and Trolle (2016) find that matching sessions or workup account
for 38% of trade volume on GFI, a major swap execution facility.
• Block-crossing“darkpools,”suchasLiquidnetandPOSIT,whicharepredominantly
used in equity markets. In a typical “midpoint” dark pool, buyers and sellers match
ordersatthemidpointofthebestbidpriceandbestofferpriceshownontransparent
exchanges. Dark pools account for about 15% of trading volume in the U.S. equity
markets (Zhu, 2014). Certain dark pools offer limited price discovery. Others do not
use price discovery at all.
Despite some institutional differences discussed in Section 2, these various forms of
size discovery share the key feature of crossing orders at fixed prices, thus without price
impact. Although aware of the trade price, market participants conducting size discovery
areuncertainofhowmuchoftheassettheywillbeabletotradeatthatprice, whichisnot
sensitive to their demands. One side of the market is eventually rationed, being willing to
trade more at the given price. Thus, a size-discovery mechanism cannot clear the market,
and is therefore inefficient on its own. Size discovery stands in sharp contrast to “price
discovery” trading mechanisms, which find the market-clearing price that matches supply
and demand. Nevertheless, precisely by giving up on market clearing, a size-discovery
mechanism reduces investors’ strategic incentives to dampen their immediate demands.
We show, as a consequence, that a market design combining size discovery and price
discovery offers substantial efficiency improvement over a market that relies only on price
discovery.
Our modeling approach and the intuition for our results can be roughly summarized
as follows. An asset pays a liquidating dividend at a random future time. Before this
time, double auctions for the asset are held among n strategic traders at evenly spaced
time intervals of some length ∆. Thus, the auctions are held at times 0, ∆, 2∆, and so
on. Before the first of these auctions, the inventory of the asset held by each trader has an
undesired component, positive or negative, that is not observable to other traders. Each
trader suffers a continuing cost that is increasing in his undesired inventory imbalance.
In each of the successive double auctions, traders submit demand schedules. The market
operator aggregates these demand schedules and calculates the market-clearing price, at
which total demand and supply are matched.
2