NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIQUIDITY RISK, BANK NETWORKS, AND THE VALUE OF JOINING THE FEDERAL
RESERVE SYSTEM
Charles W. Calomiris
Matthew Jaremski
Haelim Park
Gary Richardson
Working Paper 21684
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21684
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2015
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21684.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Charles W. Calomiris, Matthew Jaremski, Haelim Park, and Gary Richardson. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Liquidity Risk, Bank Networks, and the Value of Joining the Federal Reserve System
Charles W. Calomiris, Matthew Jaremski, Haelim Park, and Gary Richardson
NBER Working Paper No. 21684
October 2015
JEL No. G21,G28,N22
ABSTRACT
Reducing systemic liquidity risk related to seasonal swings in loan demand was one reason for the
founding of the Federal Reserve System. Existing evidence on the post-Federal Reserve increase in
the seasonal volatility of aggregate lending and the decrease in seasonal interest rate swings suggests
that it succeeded in that mission. Nevertheless, less than 8 percent of state-chartered banks joined the
Federal Reserve in its first decade. Some have speculated that nonmembers could avoid higher costs
of the Federal Reserve’s reserve requirements while still obtaining access indirectly to the Federal
Reserve discount window through contacts with Federal Reserve members. We find that individual
bank attributes related to the extent of banks’ ability to mitigate seasonal loan demand variation predict
banks’ decisions to join the Federal Reserve. Consistent with the notion that banks could obtain indirect
access to the discount window through interbank transfers, we find that a bank’s position within the
interbank network (as a user or provider of liquidity) predicts the timing of its entry into the Federal
Reserve System and the effect of Federal Reserve membership on its lending behavior. We also find
that indirect access to the Federal Reserve was not as good as direct access. Federal Reserve member
banks saw a greater increase in lending than nonmember banks.
Charles W. Calomiris Haelim Park
Graduate School of Business Office of Financial Research
Columbia University Department of the Treasury
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall 717 14th Street, NW
New York, NY 10027 Washington, D.C. 20220
and NBER haelim.park@treasury.gov
cc374@columbia.edu
Gary Richardson
Matthew Jaremski Department of Economics
Colgate University University of California, Irvine
Department of Economics 3155 Social Sciences Plaza
13 Oak Drive Irvine, CA 92697-5100
Hamilton, NY 13346 and NBER
and NBER garyr@uci.edu
mjaremski@colgate.edu

I believe that, through the Federal Reserve Banks, … the better shall we be equipped to cope
with the problems ahead of us, of helping ourselves and of helping the world; I believe it to be
the duty of every bank in the country to contribute its share in equipping our nation for this task;
I believe that State institutions which are strong enough should come in now and do their share,
no matter whether or not they are in full accord with every detail of the Federal Reserve
machinery; I believe that, as we proceed and gain in experience, whatever may prove harmful
will be remedied. … I firmly believe that the future will belong to those banks—national or
state—that are members of the Federal Reserve System.
Paul Warburg, Speech at the New York State Bankers’ Association Convention, 9 June 1916.
The [Federal Reserve] Act as first passed in December, 1913, contained certain provisions which
in our judgment from the standpoint of state banks and trust companies rendered membership in
the System undesirable. … As the Federal Reserve Act stands today, practically every serious
objection to membership, which was evident at the time the law was passed has been removed,
and therefore … the Guaranty Trust Company of New York decided to apply for membership in
the System.
Charles Sabin, President of the Guaranty Trust Company of New York, 4 October 1917.
1. Introduction
Lenders of last resort today face a common moral-hazard problem: offering systemic
protection without encouraging bad behavior by those who enjoy protection. Prudential
regulation accompanies bank safety nets for precisely that reason, albeit not always successfully.
But what if some market players — typically referred to as “shadow banks” — avoid regulation
while still enjoying the benefits of protection? There is evidence from recent regulatory
experience that stricter regulation of one group of banks tends to produce shifts in market share
toward other, less strictly regulated banks (Aiyar, Calomiris and Wieladek 2014). The Federal
Reserve’s membership problem during its initial decades of operation is an early example of this
moral hazard problem of shadow banking.
The Federal Reserve System was founded in 1913 to stabilize the American banking
system by offering banks access to liquidity through its discount window. The Fed’s founders
1

understood that seasonal and cyclical illiquidity triggered many of the financial panics of the
National Banking era (Calomiris and Gorton 1991).1 They designed the System to solve this
problem, and succeeded to an extent. Miron (1986) showed that the Federal Reserve’s founding
was associated with reduced seasonal variability of interest rates and increased seasonal
variability of lending. Bernstein et al. (2010) provide additional evidence that the Federal
Reserve reduced seasonal liquidity risk. Carlson, Mitchener, and Richardson (2011) show that
the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta could, by credibly committing to inject liquidity, arrest
panics flowing through the interbank network.
The United States was particularly prone to liquidity risk problems in its banking system
because of its unit (single-office) banking structure, which gave rise to a unique pyramidal
network of interbank relationships. The reserve pyramid connected country bank “respondents”
which deposited funds in “correspondent” banks located in “reserve cities.” Both reserve city and
country banks deposited banks in the “central reserve cities” of New York City and Chicago.2
Interbank connections within the network served to channel both interregional payments and
interbank loans to fund seasonal peaks in local lending that exceeded local retail deposits.
Liquidity risk, however, was an unintended by product of the network. Country banks suffered
liquidity risk because their correspondent banks might suspend convertibility of deposits into
cash, leaving the country banks without a means to fund their withdrawals. Central reserve city
banks suffered liquidity risk because they might be faced with sudden demands for withdrawals
of deposits by respondent banks. Reserve city correspondents suffered liquidity risk from both
sides. The importance of the correspondent network for creating liquidity risk is illustrated by a
1 Systemic liquidity crises may arise from the withdrawal of deposits by interior banks or unexpected financial
shocks in financial centers (Wicker, 2000). At the time, policymakers were more concerned with the withdrawal of
deposits by interior banks, which occurred due to harvest cycles.
2 Prior to 1920, St. Louis was also a central reserve city.
2