NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ENLARGING THE CONTRACTING SPACE:
COLLATERAL MENUS, ACCESS TO CREDIT, AND ECONOMIC ACTIVITY
Murillo Campello
Mauricio Larrain
Working Paper 21690
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21690
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2015
We thank Kevin Aretz, Patrick Bolton, Charles Calomiris, Geraldo Cerqueiro (discussant), Jess Cornaggia,
Bruno Ferman, Miguel Ferreira (discussant), Erasmo Giambona, Andrew Hertzberg, Jens Josephson
(discussant), Andres Liberman, Maria-Teresa Marchica, Rafael Matta, João Melo (discussant), Gabriel
Natividad, Tomek Piskorski, Katharina Pistor, Jacopo Ponticelli, Wenlan Qian (discussant), Adriano
Rampini, Jose Scheinkman, Philipp Schnabl, and Daniel Wolfenzon for their useful discussions and
suggestions. We also appreciate comments from seminar participants at Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Columbia Business School, Columbia--NYU Junior Corporate Finance Meeting, DePaul University,
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, European Finance Association Meeting (Lugano),
FGV--São Paulo, Financial Intermediation Research Society Conference (Reykjavik), Georgetown
University, LUBRAFIN Meeting, Michigan State University, Symposium on Emerging Financial
Markets (Beijing), University of Houston, University of New South Wales, University of Notre Dame,
University of Queensland, and the World Bank. Felipe Silva and Pablo Slutzky provided excellent
research assistance. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Murillo Campello and Mauricio Larrain. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Enlarging the Contracting Space: Collateral Menus, Access to Credit, and Economic Activity
Murillo Campello and Mauricio Larrain
NBER Working Paper No. 21690
October 2015
JEL No. G32,K22,O16
ABSTRACT
Recent reforms across Eastern European countries gave more flexibility and information for parties
to engage in secured debt transactions. The menu of assets legally accepted as collateral was enlarged
to include movable assets (e.g., machinery and equipment). Generalized difference-in-differences
tests show that firms operating more movable assets borrowed more as a result of such reforms. Those
firms also invested more, hired more, and became more efficient and profitable following the changes
in the contracting environment. The financial deepening we document triggered important reallocation
effects: Firms affected by the reforms increased their share of fixed assets and employment in the economy.
Murillo Campello
Johnson Graduate School of Management
Cornell University
114 East Avenue
369 Sage Hall
Ithaca, NY 148531-6201
and NBER
campello@cornell.edu
Mauricio Larrain
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, 813 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
mlarrain@columbia.edu

1 Introduction
A large literature has looked at links between creditors’ rights and financial development, docu-
menting a positive relationship between creditor protection and the size of credit markets (e.g., La
Porta et al., 1997, 1998; Levine, 1998, 1999). Notably, existing analyses are often conducted with
country-level data, making it difficult to identify how different elements of financial contracting ul-
timatelyworkinpromotingcreditexpansion. Againstthebackdropofthisresearch,creditreforms
in emerging economies have focused on the allocation of control rights over assets in liquidation as
a way to facilitate contracting. We extend this literature by providing evidence on the micro-level
foundations of the connections between the contracting environment and credit expansion.
Theory suggests that access to credit in imperfect capital markets depends on the menu of
assets that can be credibly offered as collateral by borrowers (Aghion and Bolton, 1992; Hart and
Moore,1994). Inthispaper, westudyreformsthatemphasizetheideaofenlargingthecontracting
space (larger “collateral menus”) available to parties as a way to promote secured credit transac-
tions. We look not only at credit taking by firms, but also at how reform-enabled credit expansion
ultimately affects real aspects of economic activity. A recent reform in Romania is considered a
textbook example of a change that enlarged the menu of assets that can be used as collateral in
credit transactions (Fleisig et al., 2006). We thus start our analysis with the Romanian setting as
a basis to understand how the reform worked and to analyze the economic responses it triggered.
We subsequently generalize our analysis to a broader group of Eastern European countries, some
of which witnessed similar legal changes, but at different points in time.
Throughout the 1990s, Romania’s Commercial Code only allowed for secured transactions
involving “immovable assets” (e.g., land and buildings). For practical purposes, “movable assets”
(e.g., machinery and equipment) could not be pledged as collateral. Around the world, firms’
movable assets comprise about half of their total fixed assets (Alvarez de la Campa, 2011); yet
in Romania, as well as in other Eastern European countries, firms had a hard time using those
assets to secure credit. In light of a legal framework that favored debtors, Romanian firms faced
difficultiesinfinancinginvestmentinmachineryandequipmentthroughalternativessuchasleasing
and unsecured lending with contractual provisions. In the year 2000, the Romanian government
implemented Law 99, which transformed the framework in which debt contracts could be written,
giving Romanian firms a new alternative for financing machinery and equipment.
In its essence, Law 99 eliminated the possessory nature of security interests. As an intended
consequence, the contracting framework no longer required the physical transfer of movable assets
1

to the creditor and made it possible for firms to give creditors “substitute” assets (e.g., similar
assets or cash equivalents) if mutually agreed. It also introduced a uniform electronic system of
real-time information on seniority of security interests over movable assets. Law 99 gave lenders
much larger latitude in the origination of credit facilities (e.g., varying syndication, subordination,
andmaturitystructure),allowingformoreloanstobetakenoutofanewclassoflegallypledgeable
assets.
Fromanempiricalstandpoint, theRomaniansettingisuniqueinidentifyingthetypes ofassets
that could allow for credit expansion under the collateral reform. As the law made it possible to
pledge movable assets as collateral for the first time, it would affect firms that make intensive
use of machinery and equipment in their operations. Immovable assets, on the other hand, were
used as collateral before 2000, and the reform had no bearing on contracts secured by real estate
assets. This institutional wrinkle helps us pin point the link between collateral menus and access
to credit.
To estimate the effects of the collateral-menu-enlarging reform, we take advantage of the fact
that some sectors of the economy naturally use more machinery and equipment than others. We
conduct a difference-in-differences test in which we contrast firms operating in sectors with high
versus low demand for movable assets, before and after the passage of the law. To minimize
potential confounders (e.g., concurrent credit supply shocks) we benchmark the results from this
test against a test that measures pre–post reform changes along the high versus low demand for
immovable assets, which were not contemplated by the legal reform. We gauge the external valid-
ity of our inferences by extrapolating our tests to other Eastern European countries. While these
economies are comparable in relevant dimensions, the timing of the collateral reforms was not
contemporaneous (or did not happen at all), owing to idiosyncrasies affecting the speed of various
political processes.1 This time variation in the wave of reforms across Eastern Europe allows us
to exploit both within-country and cross-country contrasts.
Our base tests show that firms operating in sectors more intensive in overall tangible assets
(the sum of movable and immovable assets) observe an increase in their leverage ratios after the
reform. Aswebreaktheseeffectsacrossmovableandimmovableassets, however, wefindthatonly
thosefirmsoperatinginsectorsintensiveinmovableassetsobserveanenhancementintheirability
to borrow. We look not only at the amount of debt firms raise, but also at the likelihood firms
1During our 1996–2005 sample period, two other Eastern European countries enacted collateral reforms that
resembled Romania’s Law 99 (Latvia and Poland). Three other countries failed to pass any such laws during this
period (Czech Republic, Ukraine, and Russia). Finally, four other countries in the region had already reformed
their collateral laws prior to the beginning of our sample period (Bulgaria, Estonia, Hungary, and Lithuania).
2