NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INCOME INEQUALITY AND ASSET PRICES UNDER REDISTRIBUTIVE TAXATION
Lubos Pastor
Pietro Veronesi
Working Paper 21668
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21668
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2015
This paper was presented at the November 2015 Carnegie-Rochester-NYU Conference on Public Policy.
The views in this paper are the responsibility of the authors, not the institutions they are affiliated with.
We are grateful to the Brevan Howard Centre for Financial Analysis at Imperial College London, which
we visited while writing this paper. For helpful comments, we are grateful to our discussant Philippe
Mueller, our editors Marvin Goodfriend and Burton Hollifield, Doug Diamond, John Heaton, Marcin
Kacperczyk, Stavros Panageas, Jacopo Ponticelli, Raman Uppal, Adrien Verdelhan, the audience at
the 2016 Jackson Hole Finance Conference, and seminar participants at Bocconi, Chicago, Imperial,
LBS, LSE, MIT, Torino, and York. We are also grateful to Menaka Hampole, Oscar Eskin, and Melissa
Ortiz for excellent research assistance and to the Fama-Miller Center for Research in Finance and
the Center for Research in Security Prices, both at Chicago Booth, for research support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Lubos Pastor and Pietro Veronesi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Income Inequality and Asset Prices under Redistributive Taxation
Lubos Pastor and Pietro Veronesi
NBER Working Paper No. 21668
October 2015, Revised January 2016
JEL No. E24,G1,H2,J24,J31,J38
ABSTRACT
Our simple model features agents heterogeneous in skill and risk aversion, incomplete financial markets,
and redistributive taxation. In equilibrium, agents become entrepreneurs if their skill is sufficiently
high or risk aversion sufficiently low. Under heavier taxation, entrepreneurs are more skilled and less
risk-averse, on average. Through these selection effects, the tax rate is positively related to aggregate
productivity and negatively related to the equity risk premium. Both income inequality and stock prices
initially increase but eventually decrease with the tax rate. Investment risk, stock market participation,
and skill heterogeneity all contribute to inequality. Cross-country empirical evidence supports the
model’s predictions.
Lubos Pastor
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
lubos.pastor@chicagobooth.edu
Pietro Veronesi
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
pietro.veronesi@chicagobooth.edu

1. Introduction
In recent decades, income inequality has grown in most developed countries, triggering
widespread calls for more income redistribution.1 Yet the effects of redistribution on in-
equality are not fully understood. We analyze those effects through the lens of a simple
model with heterogeneous agents and incomplete markets. We find that redistribution af-
fectsinequalitynotonlydirectly,bytransferringwealth,butalsoindirectlythrough selection,
by changing the composition of agents who take on investment risk. Through the same se-
lectionmechanism,redistribution also affects aggregate productivityand asset prices,which,
in equilibrium, feed back into inequality.
Incomeinequalityhas been analyzedextensivelyinlabor economics, witha primaryfocus
on wage inequality.2 While wages are clearly the main source of income for most households,
substantialincomealsoderivesfrombusinessownershipandinvestmentsinfinancialmarkets,
whose sizehasgrown alongsideinequality.3 Weexaminethechannelsthrough whichfinancial
markets and business ownership affect inequality. To emphasize those channels, we develop
a model in which agents earn no wages; instead, they earn business income, capital income,
and tax-financed pensions. In our model, investmentrisk and differences in financial market
participation are the principal drivers of income inequality.
Ourmodelfeaturesagentsheterogeneousinboth skilland riskaversion. Agentsoptimally
choosetobecomeoneoftwotypes,“entrepreneurs”or“pensioners.” Entrepreneursareactive
risk takers whose income is increasing in skill and subject to taxation. Pensioners live off
taxes paid by entrepreneurs. Financial markets allow entrepreneurs to sell a fraction of their
own firm and use the proceeds to buy a portfolio of shares in other firms and risk-free bonds.
Since entrepreneurs cannot diversify fully, markets are incomplete.
In equilibrium, agents become entrepreneurs if their skill is sufficiently high or risk aver-
sion sufficiently low, or both. Intuitively, low-skill agents become pensioners because they
would earn less as entrepreneurs, and highly risk-averse agents become pensioners because
they dislike the idiosyncratic risk associated with entrepreneurship. These selection effects
are amplifiedby higher tax rates because those make entrepreneurshipless attractive. When
the tax rate is high, only agents with the highest skill and/or lowest risk aversion find it
optimal to become entrepreneurs. Therefore, under heaviertaxation, entrepreneursare more
1Forexample,Alvaredoet al. (2013),Atkinson,Piketty,andSaez (2011),andmanyothers documentthe
growth in inequality. Piketty (2014), the Occupy WallStreet movement, and others call for redistribution.
2See, for example, Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2008), among many others.
3Non-wage income is earned by households across the whole income distribution, and it is the dominant
source of income at the top. Kacperczyk, Nosal, and Stevens (2015) show that non-wage income represents
44% of total income for households that participate in financial markets in 1989 to 2013.
1

skilled and less risk-averse, on average, and total output is lower.
Inequality initially increases but eventually decreases with the tax rate. When the tax
rate is zero, all agents choose to be entrepreneursbecause pensioners earn no income. As the
rate rises, inequality rises at first because agents who are extremely risk-averse or unskilled
become pensioners. Such agents accept the low consumption of pensioners in exchange for
shedding idiosyncraticrisk, therebyincreasing consumption inequality.4 As thetax rate rises
further, inequality declines due to the direct effect of redistribution.
There are three sources of inequality: investment risk, stock market participation, and
heterogeneityin skill. Investmentrisk causes differences in ex-post returns on entrepreneurs’
portfolios, in part due to idiosyncratic risk and in part because entrepreneurs with different
risk aversions have different exposures to stocks. While entrepreneurs participate in the
stock market, pensioners do not. Entrepreneurs consume more than pensioners on average,
in part due to higher skill and in part as compensation for taking on more risk. Finally, not
surprisingly, more heterogeneity in skill across entrepreneurs implies more inequality.
To explore the welfare implications of redistribution, we analyze inequality in expected
utility,whichwemeasurebycertaintyequivalentconsumption. Inequalityinexpectedutility
is smallerthan consumption inequality,in part because pensioners not only tend to consume
less than entrepreneurs but also face less risk. An increase in the tax rate reduces inequality
in expected utility but it also reduces the average level of expected utility. In addition, the
model yields a right-skewed distribution of consumption across agents.
The model’s asset pricing implications are also interesting. First, the expected stock
market return is negativelyrelated to the tax rate. The reason is selection: a higher tax rate
implies lower average risk aversion among stockholders, which in turn implies a lower equity
risk premium. Second, the level of stock prices exhibits a hump-shaped relation to the tax
rate. On the one hand, a higher tax rate reduces stock prices by reducing the after-tax cash
flow to stockholders. On the other hand, both selection effects mentioned earlier push in the
opposite direction. When the tax rate is higher, entrepreneurs are more skilled, on average,
resulting in higher expected pre-tax cash flow, and they are also less risk-averse, resulting
in lower discount rates. Both selection effects thus induce a positive relation between stock
prices and the tax rate. The net effect is such that the stock price level initially rises but
eventually falls with the tax rate. This asset price pattern feeds back into income inequality
through the investment risk component, contributing to its hump-shaped pattern.
Last but not least, the model implies a positive relation between the tax rate and aggre-
4In our simple model, consumption equals income, so consumption inequality equals income inequality.
2