NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW DO PATENTS AFFECT FOLLOW-ON INNOVATION? EVIDENCE FROM
THE HUMAN GENOME
Bhaven Sampat
Heidi L. Williams
Working Paper 21666
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21666
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2015
Daron Acemoglu, Josh Angrist, David Autor, Pierre Azoulay, Stefan Bechtold, Nick Bloom, Tim Bresnahan,
Joe Doyle, Dan Fetter, Amy Finkelstein, Alberto Galasso, Nancy Gallini, Joshua Gans, Aaron Kesselheim,
Pat Kline, Amanda Kowalski, Mark Lemley, Josh Lerner, Petra Moser, Ben Olken, Ariel Pakes, Jim
Poterba, Arti Rai, Mark Schankerman, Scott Stern, Mike Whinston, and seminar participants at Analysis
Group, Brown, Chicago Booth, Clemson, Dartmouth, Duke, the Federal Reserve Board, Harvard,
HBS, MIT, Northwestern Kellogg, the NBER (Law and Economics, Productivity and Public Economics),
Stanford, UC-Berkeley Haas, UC-Santa Barbara, the USPTO, and Williams College provided very
helpful comments. We are very grateful to Ernie Berndt for help with accessing the Pharmaprojects
data; to Osmat Jefferson, the CAMBIA Lens initiative, Lee Fleming, and Guan-Cheng Li for sharing
USPTO-related data; and to Joey Anderson, Jeremy Brown, Lizi Chen, Alex Fahey, Cirrus Foroughi,
Yunzhi Gao, Grant Graziani, Tamri Matiashvili, Kelly Peterson, Lauren Russell, Mahnum Shahzad,
Sophie Sun, Nicholas Tilipman, Myles Wagner, and Hanwen Xu for excellent research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Bhaven Sampat and Heidi L. Williams. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

How Do Patents Affect Follow-On Innovation? Evidence from the Human Genome
Bhaven Sampat and Heidi L. Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 21666
October 2015, Revised August 2018
JEL No. I10,I18,O34
ABSTRACT
We investigate whether patents on human genes have affected follow-on scientific research and product
development. Using administrative data on successful and unsuccessful patent applications submitted
to the US Patent and Trademark Office, we link the exact gene sequences claimed in each application
with data measuring follow-on scientific research and commercial investments. Using this data, we
document novel evidence of selection into patenting: patented genes appear more valuable—prior
to being patented—than non-patented genes. This evidence of selection motivates two quasi-experimental
approaches, both of which suggest that on average gene patents have had no quantitatively important
effect on follow-on innovation.
Bhaven Sampat
Department of Health Policy and Management
Columbia University
600 West 168th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10032
and NBER
bns3@columbia.edu
Heidi L. Williams
Department of Economics, E52-440
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02139
and NBER
heidiw@mit.edu

How Do Patents Affect Follow-on Innovation?
Evidence from the Human Genome∗
Bhaven Sampat Heidi L. Williams
Columbia and NBER MIT and NBER
August 14, 2018
Abstract
We investigate whether patents on human genes have affected follow-on scientific research and
product development. Using administrative data on successful and unsuccessful patent applications
submitted to the US Patent and Trademark Office, we link the exact gene sequences claimed in each
application with data measuring follow-on scientific research and commercial investments. Using this
data, we document novel evidence of selection into patenting: patented genes appear more valu-
able—prior to being patented—than non-patented genes. This evidence of selection motivates two
quasi-experimentalapproaches, bothofwhichsuggestthatonaveragegenepatentshavehadnoquan-
titatively important effect on follow-on innovation.
∗DaronAcemoglu,JoshAngrist,DavidAutor,PierreAzoulay,StefanBechtold,NickBloom,TimBresnahan,JoeDoyle,
DanFetter,AmyFinkelstein,AlbertoGalasso,NancyGallini,JoshuaGans,AaronKesselheim,PatKline,AmandaKowalski,
Mark Lemley, Josh Lerner, Petra Moser, Ben Olken, Ariel Pakes, Jim Poterba, Arti Rai, Mark Schankerman, Scott Stern,
Mike Whinston, and seminar participants at Analysis Group, Brown, Chicago Booth, Clemson, Dartmouth, Duke, the
Federal Reserve Board, Harvard, HBS, MIT, Northwestern Kellogg, the NBER (Law and Economics, Productivity and
Public Economics), Stanford, UC-Berkeley Haas, UC-Santa Barbara, the USPTO, and Williams College provided very
helpful comments. We are very grateful to Ernie Berndt for help with accessing the Pharmaprojects data; to Osmat
Jefferson, the CAMBIA Lens initiative, Lee Fleming, and Guan-Cheng Li for sharing USPTO-related data; and to Joey
Anderson, Jeremy Brown, Lizi Chen, Alex Fahey, Cirrus Foroughi, Yunzhi Gao, Grant Graziani, Tamri Matiashvili, Kelly
Peterson, Lauren Russell, Mahnum Shahzad, Sophie Sun, Nicholas Tilipman, Myles Wagner, and Hanwen Xu for excellent
research assistance. Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Institute on Aging and the NIH
Common Fund, Office of the NIH Director, through Grant U01-AG046708 to the National Bureau of Economic Research
(NBER);thecontentissolelytheresponsibilityoftheauthorsanddoesnotnecessarilyrepresenttheofficialviewsoftheNIH
orNBER.Thiswork/researchwasalsofundedbytheEwingMarionKauffmanFoundation;thecontentsofthispublication
aresolelytheresponsibilityoftheGrantee. FinancialsupportfromNIAGrantNumberT32-AG000186totheNBER,NSF
GrantNumber1151497,theNBERInnovationPolicyandtheEconomyprogram,andtheToulouseNetworkforInformation
Technology is also gratefully acknowledged. Contact: bns3@columbia.edu, heidiw@mit.edu.

1
1 Introduction
Competitive markets may under-incentivize innovation due to the public good nature of new ideas. In-
tellectual property rights, such as patents, aim to address this under-investment problem by allowing
inventors to capture a higher share of the social returns to their research investments. By awarding inven-
tors a temporary right to exclude others from marketing their invention, patents aim to allow inventors to
earn quasi-rents—temporarily—as a way to re-coup their research and development costs, thus providing
dynamicincentivesforinvestmentsinnewtechnologies. DatingbackatleasttoanalysessuchasNordhaus
(1969), optimal patent policy design has traditionally been framed as a trade-off between this benefit of
providing incentives for the development of new technologies and the cost of deadweight loss from higher
prices during the life of the patent.
Nordhaus-style models of optimal patent policy design have traditionally modeled innovations as iso-
lated discoveries. However, in practice many or most innovations are cumulative, in the sense that a
given discovery may be an input into later follow-on discoveries. When innovation is cumulative, optimal
patent policy design also depends on how patents on existing technologies affect follow-on innovation.
One prominent example in recent policy debates is a patented human gene sequence. Sequenced genetic
data is a research input into subsequent follow-on discoveries: by analyzing sequenced genetic data sci-
entists may discover links between genetic variations and diseases, and such knowledge can be applied to
commercialize medical technologies such as pharmaceutical treatments and diagnostic tests. If patents
on discoveries such as human genes affect follow-on innovation, that effect is a key additional input into
optimal patent policy design. In this paper, we investigate whether patents on human genes have af-
fected follow-on scientific research and product development. Our broad goal is to inform whether the
Nordhaus-style trade-off between ex ante incentives and deadweight loss is sufficient for optimal patent
policy design, or whether—at least in this context—the effects of patents on follow-on innovation need to
be considered.
Investigating how patents on existing technologies affect follow-on innovation requires addressing two
key challenges. First, in most markets it is difficult or impossible to take a given set of technologies which
are claimed as intellectual property in patents and measure follow-on innovation on those technologies.
Follow-on innovations which infringe the original patent legally require a license from the original innova-
tor. Butbecauselicensesareveryrarelypubliclydisclosed,constructingappropriatemeasuresoffollow-on
innovation for any given patented invention is quite difficult. Second, a priori we expect a selection bias
problem to arise if inventors are more likely to file for or to obtain patents on technologies that are inher-
ently more valuable. This type of selection raises the concern that any measured differences in follow-on