NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PATENT RIGHTS, INNOVATION AND FIRM EXIT
Alberto Galasso
Mark Schankerman
Working Paper 21769
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21769
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2015, Revised May 2017
Previously circulated as "Patents Rights and Innovation by Small and Large Firms." We are
grateful to two anonymous referees and the Editor for very constructive suggestions that greatly
improved the paper. We also thank Philippe Aghion, Iain Cockburn, Petra Moser, Florian
Schuett, Carlos Serrano, Mariagrazia Squicciarini, Heidi Williams and participants in seminars at
Bocconi University, Cattolica University, CEPR Conference on Applied IO, Duke, Einaudi
Institute in Rome, IESE Barcelona, Tel Aviv University, UC Berkeley, University of Toronto,
ZEW Mannheim, NBER and Paris School of Economics for helpful comments. We thank John
Golden and David Schwartz for their help in clarifying points regarding the legal doctrine and
procedure governing patent invalidation suits. Joanne Evangelista provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Alberto Galasso and Mark Schankerman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Patent Rights, Innovation and Firm Exit
Alberto Galasso and Mark Schankerman
NBER Working Paper No. 21769
December 2015, Revised May 2017
JEL No. K41,L24,O31,O32,O34
ABSTRACT
We study the causal impact of patent invalidation on subsequent innovation and exit by the patent
holder. The analysis is based on patent litigation at the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal
Circuit, and exploits the random allocation of judges to control for endogeneity of the judicial
decision. Invalidation causes the patent holder to reduce subsequent patenting over a five-year
window by 50 percent on average, but the effect is heterogeneous. The impact is large for small
and medium-sized firms, particularly in technology fields where they face many large
competitors, and for patents central to their technology portfolio. We find no significant effect for
large firms. Invalidation also significantly increases the likelihood that small firms exit from
patenting entirely.
Alberto Galasso
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
alberto.galasso@rotman.utoronto.ca
Mark Schankerman
Department of Economics, R.516
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UK
M.Schankerman@lse.ac.uk

1 Introduction
Innovationliesattheheartofhigh-techentrepreneurshipandeconomicgrowth. Modernmacro-
economic growth models give a central role to innovation and the competition that generates
incentives for it, including the interaction between small entrants and large incumbents in this
process (Aghion and Howitt, 1992; Acemoglu, Akcigit, Bloom and Kerr, 2013). At the same
time, a large body of microeconomic evidence shows that there is underinvestment in R&D,
with social rates of return being more than twice as large as the private rates (Jones and
Williams 1998; Bloom, Schankerman and Van Reenen, 2013). This is a primary justification
for government support of innovation, and patent rights are one of the key policy instruments
for this purpose. It is important to understand whether patents are actually an effective in-
novation incentive and, importantly, whether they work equally well for small and large firms
and in different competitive environments.
Anumberofeconomicandlegalscholarshaveraisedseriousdoubtsaboutwhetherpatent
rights actually promote innovation, and there is a widespread view that current patent policy,
and debates over patent reform, are not based on empirical evidence (Boldrin and Levine,
2013; Burk, 2016). One of the most prominent legal scholars in the area argues that much of
the patent policy discussion is ‘faith-based’, with “participants on both sides of the IP debates
increasinglytakingoutpositionsthatsimplydonotdependonevidenceatall.”(Lemley, 2015).
In a recent paper, Williams (forthcoming) provides a thoughtful and balanced analysis of the
issues and the evidence on how patent rights affect innovation and welfare, and identifying the
gaps in our empirical knowledge that need to be filled to reach definitive conclusions. As she
putsit,“Whilepatentsystemshavebeenquitewidelyusedbothhistoricallyandinternationally,
there is nonetheless a tremendous amount of controversy over whether the patent system is —
in practice — improving the alignment between private returns and social contributions.”
To address this need for more empirical evidence, in this paper we analyze how the loss
of patent rights affects a firm’s level of subsequent innovation, and the likelihood that a firm
exits from patenting activity entirely, for small and large firms across a range of technology
fields. Todothis, westudytheimpactofjudicialinvalidationofexistingpatentsontheowner’s
subsequent patenting activity over a five year window. Our analysis shows that patents have
an impact on future patenting for small and medium-sized firms, but we find no evidence of
significant impact on large firms. We also show how the effectiveness of patent rights depends
on specific features of competition in the technology markets.
1

From a theoretical perspective, the impact of patent invalidation on future innovation
is not obvious. The conventional view is that patents enhance the ability of firms to capture
innovation rent, but at the cost of creating a static efficiency loss from higher prices (Arrow,
1962). We show that more complex interactions arise from two sources when innovation is
cumulative. The first is complementarity between the current and subsequent generation of
innovation: the ability of a firm to innovate in the future and capture the rents from that
innovation will depend on the firm’s current stock of patents. Second, patent invalidation
triggers a potential patent race building on the innovation by opening up the technology to
potential competitors. The model developed in this paper highlights the trade-offs involved
and shows that the qualitative effect of patent rights on future patenting is ambiguous, as it
depends on features of the firm and the technological competition they face. Thus empirical
analysis is essential to inform patent policy.
Despite its central importance, there are relatively few studies with causal evidence
on whether patent rights are an effective incentive for innovation, and the existing studies
do not speak with one voice.1 For example, Budish, Roin and Williams (2015) show that
there is more innovation, as measured by clinical trials, on late-stage cancer drugs that have
longereffectivepatentlives(duetoshorterregulatoryscreeningtimes). Similarly,Farre-Mensa,
HegdeandLjungqvist(2015)usethequasi-randomassignmentofpatentexaminerstostudythe
impact of patent rights on new start-up firms. They find that a patent grant strongly increases
subsequent patent applications and growth, and also raises the probability of an IPO. On the
other hand, Sampat and Williams (2015) use quasi-random assignment of patent examiners to
study whether human gene patents affect subsequent innovation by the patentee (and others)
and find no significant effect. Even more surprising, Baten, Bianchi and Moser (2015) show
that the imposition of compulsory licensing on chemical patents by German firms after WWI
increased subsequent patenting by the (large) chemical firms that owned them. Our paper
develops a model which reconciles these apparently contradictory findings in the literature.
Patent rights can affect innovation, especially for small firms, through several channels.
First, patents shape the nature of competition in product and technology markets, especially
in settings where small firms interact with large incumbents (Spulber, 2013; Aghion, Howitt
1In a related strand of the literature, there are studies that use patent renewal data and other approaches
to measure the incremental incentives provided by patent rights (Schankerman and Pakes, 1986; Schankerman,
1998; Arora, Ceccagnoli and Cohen, 2008). They show that patents are associated with greater private value
derivedfrominventions. However,thesestudiesdonotprovidecausalevidenceonthelinkbetweenpatentrights
and the level of innovation.
2