NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GET WITH THE PROGRAM:
SOFTWARE-DRIVEN INNOVATION IN TRADITIONAL MANUFACTURING
Lee G. Branstetter
Matej Drev
Namho Kwon
Working Paper 21752
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21752
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2015
The authors would like to thank participants of the 2015 REER Conference, 2015 NBER Summer
Institute, and the 2014-15 WOPR Seminar Series at Georgia Tech for helpful comments and suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Lee G. Branstetter, Matej Drev, and Namho Kwon. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Get With the Program: Software-Driven Innovation in Traditional Manufacturing
Lee G. Branstetter, Matej Drev, and Namho Kwon
NBER Working Paper No. 21752
November 2015, Revised January 2016
JEL No. O14,O31,O32,O33
ABSTRACT
This paper documents the increasing importance of software for successful innovation in manufacturing
sectors well beyond the traditional definition of electronics and information technology. Using panel
data for 229 publicly listed firms from 18 countries across four manufacturing industries over the period
1981-2005, we find significant variation across firms in the software intensity of their innovative activity.
Firms that exhibit a higher level of software intensity generate more patents per R&D dollar, and their
investment in R&D is more highly valued by equity markets. We present evidence that geographic
differences in the abundance of skilled software labor are an important factor in determining sample
firms’ software intensity and performance.
Lee G. Branstetter Namho Kwon
Heinz College Heinz College
School of Public Policy and Management Carnegie Mellon University
Department of Social and Decision Sciences Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Carnegie Mellon University nkwon@andrew.cmu.edu
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and the Peterson Institute for International Economics
and also NBER
branstet@andrew.cmu.edu
Matej Drev
School of Public Policy
Georgia Institute of Technology
685 Cherry Street
Atlanta, GA 30332
matej.drev@pubpolicy.gatech.edu
A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21752

I. Introduction
“We believe that every industrial company will become a software company.”
- GE CEO Jeffrey Immelt, in his annual letter to GE shareholders, 2014.1
This paper documents a significant change in the nature and direction of invention in four “traditional”
manufacturing industries. In autos and auto parts, aerospace and defense, medical devices, and
pharmaceuticals, inventors and product developers are increasingly using software, rather than more
traditional mechanical or chemical engineering, to differentiate products, enhance product performance,
and increase user utility. Engineers and industry experts in these sectors have provided anecdotal
evidence of a software-biased shift in the trajectory of innovation, but this evidence has generally rested
on a relatively small number of possibly unrepresentative firms and products. Using much more
comprehensive patent and patent citation data, we present new statistical evidence showing that this
software-biased shift is persistent, systematic, and increasingly pervasive. We also point to other
indicators suggesting that this shift extends far beyond the boundaries of our four target industries.
If software has indeed become an increasingly important input into the creation of new inventions,
then firms that take advantage of this software-biased shift should become better innovators than their
industry peers who do not. Our empirical analysis suggests this is exactly what has happened. Using an
unbalanced panel of publicly traded firms in our four target industries over the period 1981-2005, we
show that the firms in these industries that have taken a more software-intensive approach to innovation
have increasingly outperformed their less software-intensive peers in terms of patent productivity (patents
per R&D dollar) and the market value of their R&D investment.2 We also show that the relative
performance of software-intensive firms improves at the same time that the software-intensity of
1 GE also recently announced that it is moving its company headquarters to Boston in order to be a part of an
“ecosystem that shares its aspirations” to become a “top 10 software company” by 2020. For details, see Lohr
(2016).
2 This is distinct from (but complementary to) the idea that the adoption and use of IT has made firms more
productive in their manufacturing and service processes. A large literature explores this the extent, persistence, and
variance of this relationship across firms and countries. Brynjolfsson and Hitt (1995), Bloom, Sadun, and Van
Reenen (2012), Huang, Ceccagnoli, Forman, and Wu (2015), Brynjolfsson and Saunders (2010), Aral and Weill
(2007), and McElheran (2015) are just a few of the important papers in this literature. For an interesting study on
the impact of “data analytics” on firm productivity, see Brynjolfsson and McElheran (2015).
1

innovation in these sectors grows. Using a variety of robustness checks, we demonstrate that we can
exclude several competing explanations for the observed outperformance of the software-intensive firms.
Why is it that some firms were able to take advantage of this software-biased shift in technological
change while others were not? We provide suggestive evidence that geographic differences in the
abundance of skilled software engineers have been an important factor in determining sample firms’
software intensity and innovation performance. Drawing upon multiple data sources, we present new
estimates of the numbers of IT / software engineers available for hire in the major national labor markets
where our sample firms are based. We supplement these estimates with data on flows of immigrant IT
professionals and the magnitude of offshoring of software engineering. We find large and growing
asymmetries across countries in the endowments of software engineering human resources, providing a
partial explanation for the differences in the software intensity of R&D that we observe in firms
headquartered in different countries.
This paper is structured as follows. Section II reviews research from the engineering and management
literatures that points to a significant increase in the importance of software as an enabler of innovation in
four “traditional” manufacturing sectors. While suggestive, this research tends to be somewhat anecdotal,
relying heavily on the experience of a small number of firms and a highly selected sample of recent
product development efforts. Section III presents new statistical evidence based on patent citation data
that suggests the software-biased shift in the direction of technological change suggested by the
engineering and managerial literatures is real, broad-based, and economically and statistically significant.
Section IV empirically examines the implications of this shift in software intensity for the innovation
performance of firms in the four manufacturing sectors that are the focus of our study. Section V
discusses several possible explanations for the trends we observe in our data and ties them to the existing
literature. Section VI concludes with a summary of key results and avenues for future research.
II. The Changing Technology of Technological Change in Four Manufacturing Sectors
A survey of the engineering literature suggests a pronounced increase in the importance of software
for product development and innovation across a range of manufacturing industries. In this paper, we
focus on automobiles and auto parts, aerospace and defense, medical devices, and pharmaceuticals.
However, there is evidence indicating this trend extends to construction equipment, farm implements, IT
2