NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IN SEARCH OF IDEAS:
TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION AND EXECUTIVE PAY INEQUALITY
Carola Frydman
Dimitris Papanikolaou
Working Paper 21795
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21795
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2015
We thank Francisco Buera, Andrea Eisfeldt, Francois Gourio, Amit Seru, Andrei Shleifer, Per Stromberg,
and the seminar participants at Boston College, FRB Chicago, Copenhagen Business School, University
of Geneva, NYU Economics, Stockholm School of Economics for helpful comments and discussions.
Dimitris Papanikolaou thanks Amazon (AWS in Education Grant award), the Zell Center for Risk
and the Jerome Kenney Fund for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Carola Frydman and Dimitris Papanikolaou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

In Search of Ideas: Technological Innovation and Executive Pay Inequality
Carola Frydman and Dimitris Papanikolaou
NBER Working Paper No. 21795
December 2015
JEL No. E22,G10,G30,J24,J3,M52
ABSTRACT
We develop a general equilibrium model that delivers realistic fluctuations in both the level as well
as the dispersion in executive pay as a result of changes in the technology frontier. Our model recognizes
that executives add value to the firm not only by participating in production decisions, but also by
identifying new investment opportunities. The economic value of these two distinct components of
the executive's job varies with the state of the economy. Improvements in technology that are specific
to new vintages of capital raise the skill price of discovering new growth prospects -- and thus raise
the compensation of executives relative to workers. If most of the dispersion in managerial skill lies
in the ability to find new projects, dispersion in executive pay will also rise. Our model delivers testable
predictions about the relation between executive pay and growth opportunities that are quantitatively
consistent with the data.
Carola Frydman
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
cfrydman@bu.edu
Dimitris Papanikolaou
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
d-papanikolaou@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Dispersioninpaybetweentopexecutivesandworkers,aswellasamongexecutives,hasfluctuated
considerably over the last century. These large changes over time have sparked a considerable
debate among economists and policymakers.1 Advocates of a ‘market-based’ view of executive
compensation argue that the level of pay is the efficient outcome from firms competing for scarce
managerial talent in the market for executives. In contrast, proponents of a ‘rent-extraction’ view
of compensation propose that executive pay is instead the result of weak corporate governance and
acquiescent corporate boards that allow executives to (at least partly) set their own pay and extract
compensation in excess relative to the value that they add to the firms that they manage. However,
most of the current explanations model executive skills (such as managerial talent, or their ability
to extract rents) as one-dimensional. Instead, we argue that executives contribute to their firms
along multiple dimensions, and importantly, that the marginal value of those skills could change
with economic conditions. In this paper, we focus on one important aspect of an executive’s job –
the ability to identify new investment opportunities – and show that the interaction of this skill
with technological progress can lead to substantial fluctuations in both the level and the dispersion
in executive pay.
We build a dynamic general equilibrium model with heterogenous firms that employ executives
and workers. Executives add value to the firm along two dimensions. First, similar to workers, they
provide labor services that are complementary to the firms’ existing assets. However, executives
are distinct from workers in that they also participate in the creation of new capital. Specifically,
executives have the ability to identify new investment opportunities for the firm. The efficiency of
an executive in identifying these opportunities depends on the quality of the match between the
firm and the executive. Matching between executives and firms is random, and so the quality of
the match is initially unobservable. Over time, as executives make investment decisions, all market
participants update their beliefs about the quality of the match from her performance, and those
with poor performance are fired. In equilibrium, executives are rewarded for both of their skills,
while workers are only rewarded for their efforts in production. Similar to worker compensation,
executive pay includes a component that is related to their direct contribution to the production
process, which is proportional to aggregate output. But the compensation of executives includes a
second component that depends on the marginal return to new investments, which in turn depends
on the perceived quality of the match and the bargaining power of executives. Thus, our framework
departs from canonical models of executive pay that relate compensation to a single measure of
firm size, and allows us to explain why observed levels of pay differ substantially across firms even
after controlling for firm size.
Our model generates time variation in both the level of executive pay – scaled by either the
earningsoftheaverageworker, orbytotaloutput–aswellasthedispersioninpayamongexecutives.
The key mechanism is that the marginal returns of these two skills are neither constant nor comove
1For instance, starting in August 2015, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) requires all public firms to
disclose the ratio of the pay of the CEO to the median compensation of their employees.
1

perfectly with each other. This result arises naturally in our model in the presence of two forms of
technological progress. Some advances take the form of improvements in labor productivity, and are
complementary to existing investments. This type of technological progress, which we refer to as
disembodied technical change, benefits both workers and executives. Other types of innovations
are embodied in new vintages of capital–we refer to this shock as embodied technical progress.
This form of technical change leads to fluctuations in the marginal return of new investments
that are contemporaneously uncorrelated with aggregate output. That is, these technological
advances increase output only after they are implemented through the formation of new capital
stock. Since executives take part in discovering new investment opportunities, their compensation
reacts immediately to embodied technical progress, but the remuneration of workers does not. Thus,
the level of pay of the average executive relative to the earnings of the average worker increases with
the ratio of the marginal return to new investments relative to current output. Since the quality
of the executive-firm match determines the managers’ ability to identify new growth prospects for
their firms, the dispersion in pay across also comoves with the level of relative pay.
We estimate the parameters of the model using the simulated method of moments. We target
moments of aggregate investment and consumption, and the dispersion in firm-level investment
rates, valuations and profitability. In addition, we also target features of executive pay. Our model
generates a realistic dispersion of executive pay across firms, and substantial time variation in
both the level and dispersion of executive pay. Our model also delivers testable predictions about
the relation between executive pay and firm growth. We examine these predictions by using two
main datasets on executive pay. First, we use Execucomp, which provides information on executive
compensation for a large number of publicly-traded firms since 1992. Second, we use the long-run
dataset from 1936 to 2005 constructed by Frydman and Saks (2010). A main advantage of these
data for our purposes is that they allow us to study a much longer time period, and provide more
variation in aggregate conditions. However, they cover a much smaller number of firms, and have
limited industry variation. When possible, we present our analysis using both datasets.
We examine the relation between the level of executive pay and firm growth opportunities in
several ways. First, we show that, controlling for firm size, an increase in executive pay predicts
future firm growth. Second, we show that executive compensation is correlated with various ex-ante
measures of growth opportunities at the firm level, including investment, Tobin’s Q or the estimated
value of new innovations of Kogan, Papanikolaou, Seru, and Stoffman (2012). Third, we exploit
changes in tax policy that created exogenous variation in the investment tax credit (ITC) at the
industry level as an instrument for an exogenous shift in the value of investment opportunities
availabletofirms. Overall,wefindastatisticallysignificantandeconomicallysubstantialrelationship
between the level of executive pay and firm growth opportunities, even after we control for a variety
of firm observable characteristics, including firm size and current profitability (as well year and
industry or firm fixed effects). To evaluate the quantitative plausibility of our proposed mechanism,
2