NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FORWARD GUIDANCE IN THE YIELD CURVE:
SHORT RATES VERSUS BOND SUPPLY
Robin Greenwood
Samuel Hanson
Dimitri Vayanos
Working Paper 21750
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21750
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2015
We thank Simone Manganelli (discussant), Mike Woodford, and participants at the Central Bank of
Chile Annual Conference for helpful comments. Young Min Kim and Tiago Florido provided helpful
research assistance. This research was funded by the Division of Research at Harvard Business School.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Additional and up-to-date author disclosures about outside
activities are provided on the authors' personal websites.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21750.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Robin Greenwood, Samuel Hanson, and Dimitri Vayanos. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Forward Guidance in the Yield Curve: Short Rates versus Bond Supply
Robin Greenwood, Samuel Hanson, and Dimitri Vayanos
NBER Working Paper No. 21750
December 2015
JEL No. G12,G18
ABSTRACT
We present a model of the yield curve in which the central bank can provide market participants with
forward guidance on both future short rates and on future Quantitative Easing (QE) operations, which
affect bond supply. Forward guidance on short rates works through the expectations hypothesis, while
forward guidance on QE works through expected future bond risk premia. If a QE operation is expected
to be undone in the near term, then its announcement will have a hump-shaped effect on the yield and
forward-rate curves; otherwise the effect may be increasing with maturity. Humps associated to QE
announcements typically occur at maturities longer than those associated to short-rate announcements,
even when the effects of the former are expected to last over a shorter horizon. We use our model
to re-examine the empirical evidence on QE announcements in the US.
Robin Greenwood Dimitri Vayanos
Harvard Business School Department of Finance, OLD 3.41
Baker Library 267 London School of Economics
Soldiers Field Houghton Street
Boston, MA 02163 London WC2A 2AE
and NBER UNITED KINGDOM
rgreenwood@hbs.edu and CEPR
and also NBER
Samuel Hanson d.vayanos@lse.ac.uk
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 361
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
shanson@hbs.edu

1 Introduction
Since late 2008, when short-term interest rates reached their zero lower bound, central banks have
been conducting monetary policy through two primary instruments: quantitative easing (QE), in
which they buylong-term government bondsand other long-term securities, and so-called “forward
guidance,” in which they guide market expectations about the path of future short rates. Because
QE alters the maturity structure of the government debt that is available to the public, it changes
the amount of duration risk that market participants must bear, thereby impacting bond risk
premia and long-term interest rates. Forward guidance may also impact long rates because it
contains information about the central bank’s willingness to keep short rates low in the future.
Although the term “forward guidance” is normally used in reference to central-bank policy on
future short rates, QE operations typically involve some forward guidance as well. This is because
announcements that the central bank will purchase long-term securities are made well in advance
of the actual purchases, which are spread out over a period of months or years. For example, on
March 18, 2009, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) announced that to “help improve
conditions in private credit markets,” the Federal Reserve would increase the scale of its previously
announced asset purchase program from $600 billion to $1.75 trillion and that these purchases
would be carried out over the next six to twelve months. At the same time, the FOMC provided
forward guidance on short rates, stating that it “anticipates that economic conditions are likely to
warrant exceptionally low levels of the Federal Funds rate for an extended period.” The impact
of announcements such as these on the yield curve has been substantial. Following the March 18,
2009 announcement, for example, ten-year zero-coupon Treasury yields fell by 51 basis points over
the course of two days.
How should forward guidance on short rates and forward guidance on QE be reflected in the
yield curve? Policymakers have taken the implicit view that forward guidance on short rates is
easy to interpret. If the expectations hypothesis of the yield curve holds, then the expected future
path of short rates coincides with the curve of instantaneous forward rates. But forward guidance
on QE is inherently more difficult to assess because it depends on how future bond risk premia
change in response to QE and how these changes are incorporated into current bond prices. For
example, suppose that market participants believe the central bank plans to acquire large amounts
of long-term government bonds, but then plans to sell these bonds in five years. How should these
beliefs impact long rates today? What if the market revises its expectations about how long the
central bank will maintain its elevated holdings of long-term bonds?
To make these questions concrete, consider the so-called “Taper Tantrum” of May-June 2013,
a period in which market participants feared that the Fed might reduce the pace of future bond
1

purchases. On May 22, 2013, Federal Reserve Chairman Bernanke testified in front of Congress
that the Fed would slow or “taper” its QE program if the economy showed signs of improving.
Within a week, yields of ten-year government bonds had increased by 21 basis points. On June 19,
2013, bond yields increased further following a Federal Reserve press conference, as markets feared
an end to the Fed’s balance-sheet expansion.
Figure 1 shows the evolution of the zero-coupon Treasury yield curve between May 21 and June
28, 2013 (nine days after the Fed press conference). Panel (a) shows yields and Panel (b) shows
changes in yields between the two dates. The peak increase in yields occurred at a maturity of
seven years, wherethe yield to maturity increased by a total of 60 basis points (bps). Panel (c) and
Panel (d)show the sameinformation forthe forwardrate curve. Thepeak increase in forwardrates
occurred at five years to maturity: the one-year yield four-year ahead increased by over 100bps
between the two dates. The change in forward rates was large even as far as ten years into the
future.
How should we interpret the yield curve changes in Figure 1? Were they mainly driven by
market participants’ revised expectations about the path of future short rates? If so, then under
the expectations hypothesis of the yield curve, expectations were revised the most about short
rates five years into the future, and revisions were significant even over a ten-year horizon. Were
the changes in the yield curve instead driven by expectations about future purchases of long-term
bonds by the Fed? If so, then over what horizon did expectations have to change to generate the
observed yield curve changes?
In this paper, we build a no-arbitrage model of the yield curve that allows us to characterize
and compare the effects of forward guidance on short rates and forward guidance on QE. Among
other results,weshowthatforwardguidanceonQEtendstoimpactlongermaturities thanforward
guidance on shortrates, even whenexpectations aboutbondpurchases by thecentral bank concern
ashorterhorizonthanexpectationsaboutfutureshortrates. Usingourmodelweinterpretreactions
of the US yield curve to policy announcements during the QE period.
Our model builds on Vayanos and Vila (2009) and Greenwood and Vayanos (2014). There is a
continuum of default-free, zero-coupon bonds that are available in positive supply. For simplicity,
we consolidate the central bank and the fiscal authority, so that the only relevant quantity is the
supply of bonds that must beheld by the public. Themarginal holders of the bonds are risk-averse
arbitrageurswithshortinvestmenthorizons. Thesearbitrageursdemandariskpremiumforholding
bonds, because of the possibility that unexpected shocks will cause the bonds to underperform
relative to the short rate. Following a long line of research on the portfolio-balance channel (Tobin
(1958), Tobin (1969)), declines in bond supply lower the amount of duration risk that is borne by
arbitrageurs, reducing bond risk premia and raising bond prices.
2