NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CENTRAL BANK CREDIBILITY BEFORE AND AFTER THE CRISIS
Michael D. Bordo
Pierre L. Siklos
Working Paper 21710
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21710
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2015
Part of the research for this paper was done while the second author was a National Fellow at the
Hoover Institution and a Visiting Scholar at the University of Tasmania. An appendix to the
paper is available on request. An earlier version of this paper was presented at the XVIII Annual
Inflation Targeting seminar, Banco Central do Brasil, Rio de Janeiro (May 2016). Comments by
José Renato Haas Ornelas are gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Michael D. Bordo and Pierre L. Siklos. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Central bank Credibility Before and After the Crisis
Michael D. Bordo and Pierre L. Siklos
NBER Working Paper No. 21710
November 2015, Revised July 2016
JEL No. C31,E31,E58
ABSTRACT
A new measure of credibility is constructed as a function of the differential between observed
inflation and some estimate of the inflation rate that the central bank targets. The target is
assumed to be met flexibly. Credibility is calculated for a large group of both advanced and
emerging countries from 1980 to 2014. Financial crises reduce central bank credibility and
central banks with strong institutional feaures tend to do better when hit by a shock of the
magnitude of the 2007-2008 financial crisis. The VIX, adopting an inflation target and central
bank transparency, are the most reliable determinants of credibility. Similarly, real economic
growth has a significant influence on central bank credibility even in inflation targeting
economies.
Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu
Pierre L. Siklos
Wilfrid Laurier University
75 University Ave
Waterloo, ON, CANADA, N2L 3C5
psiklos@wlu.ca

Q: How consequential is the difference between promising 2 percent and delivering
1 percent? (Appelbaum)
A: I think it’s very consequential in terms of central bank credibility. If you say I’m
going to hit a 2 percent inflation target and you’re unable to do it, that’s very
consequential in terms of confidence in the central bank and your ability to meet
your commitments. (Bullard)
Appelbaum (2016)
1. Introduction
In the past two decades the credibility of central banks has been high, at least until the global
financial crisis (GFC) of 2007-2008. An important contributor to achieving credibility has been
the introduction of inflation targeting by many countries.1 In other words, institutional
considerations play a potentially crucial role in defining credibility. However, as Blinder (2000)
points out, the profession has a difficult time measuring it. His approach relies on a survey of
central banks. Since then economic theory effectively amounts to stating that credibility is
something of the nature ‘we know it when we see it’ (Cukierman 1986) but is crucially
dependent on the relationship between observed and expected inflation that is also part and
parcel of the Phillips curve and the Taylor rule approach to understanding monetary policy.
Many of the policies implemented in 2007 and 2008 moved central banks away from their
traditional role of protecting deposit taking institutions and the payments mechanism (Bordo
2014). For example, the US Federal Reserve (Fed), Bank of England (BOE), and others began
adopting credit policy that targets certain segments of the financial system. These responses
are usually viewed as a form of fiscal policy (Goodfriend 2012).
In response to the crisis many central banks have also elevated the objective of financial
stability to the same level of importance as macro stability. This is based on arguments that the
1 Regressions in Bordo and Siklos (2016) show that key determinants of credibility include the policy regime
followed (especially the gold standard), central bank independence from the fiscal authorities and financial crises.
Since the 1980s credibility has been enhanced by adhering to inflation targeting (IT) which is associated with better
communication and transparency.
2

credit cycle leads to significant imbalances involving credit and asset price booms, which can
burst leading to serious recessions. Some have argued that central banks should also use their
monetary policy tools to prevent credit and asset booms from getting out of control. This
strategy creates problems for the use of the central bank’s single instrument of monetary
policy, the policy rate, in meeting multiple objectives.
The question of the much awaited exit strategy toward the restoration of normal monetary
policy also has crucial implications for central bank credibility. Central banks with large balance
sheets are exposed to credit risk when short–term rates rise and worry about the implications
of conventional tightening (Cochrane 2014). Equally problematic is that a return to an interest
rate as the principal policy instrument must be accompanied by an explanation of the role
policy rate changes will play alongside macro-prudential tools. Indeed, some central banks
backtracked on earlier policy rate increases, or delayed planned rate rises, triggered in part by
inflating asset prices (viz., housing) because of the implications of raising interest rates when
the real economy is weak (e.g., Swedish Riksbank, Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA)).
In this paper we construct a new measure of credibility. It is a function of the differential
between observed inflation and some estimate of the inflation rate that the central bank
targets. The target is assumed to be met flexibly in a manner to be described more fully below.
For inflation targeting (IT) economies the implied target is either the numerical announced
objective or is tied to it in view of the fact that such objectives are to be flexibly attained over
some horizon or is subject to a pre-specified target range.
We then ask empirically what determines movements in credibility based on a set of economic,
institutional and financial variables, as well as accounting for endogeneity. We investigate the
drivers of credibility for a large group of both advanced and emerging countries over the period
1980 to 2014. The approach we take is different from, but complementary to, our earlier work
where we constructed measures of credibility for a smaller panel of advanced countries over a
120 year time span. We also consider how the crisis of 2007-2008 as well as other economic
and financial determinants affected credibility.
3