NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERNATIONAL COORDINATION AND PRECAUTIONARY POLICIES
Joshua Aizenman
Working Paper 21793
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21793
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2015
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Joshua Aizenman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

International Coordination and Precautionary Policies
Joshua Aizenman
NBER Working Paper No. 21793
December 2015
JEL No. F36,F41,F42
ABSTRACT
This paper highlights the rare conditions leading to international cooperation, and the reasons why
eliciting this cooperation may be beneficial in preventing adverse tail shocks from spiraling into global
depressions. In normal times, deeper macro cooperation among countries is associated with welfare
gains akin to Harberger’s second-order magnitude triangle, making the odds of cooperation low. When
bad tail events induce imminent and correlated threats of destabilizing financial markets, the perceived
losses have a first-order magnitude of terminating the total Marshalian surpluses. The apprehension
of these losses in times of peril may elicit rare and beneficial macro cooperation. We close the paper
by overviewing the obstacles preventing cooperation, and the proliferation of precautionary policies
of emerging market economies as a second-best outcome of limited cooperation.
Joshua Aizenman
Economics and SIR
USC
University Park
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043
and NBER
aizenman@usc.edu

1. Introduction
The Global Financial Crisis (GFC) has renewed the debate on the benefits and limitations
of international coordination of macro policies. This paper takes stock of the GFC lessons
regarding the usefulness and limitations of international macro cooperation in perilous times.
The history of international cooperation during the GFC resembles a glass that is half full
according to some or mostly empty to others. Remarkably, the U.S. Federal Reserve Bank (Fed)
fostered international cooperation by an unprecedented expansion of swap lines from December
2007.1 Yet, in January 30, 2014, Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India noted
1 “In response to mounting pressures in bank funding markets, the FOMC announced in
December 2007 that it had authorized dollar liquidity swap lines with the European Central Bank
and the Swiss National Bank to provide liquidity in U.S. dollars to overseas markets, and
subsequently authorized dollar liquidity swap lines with each of the following central banks: the
Reserve Bank of Australia, the Banco Central do Brasil, the Bank of Canada, Danmarks
Nationalbank, the Bank of England, the European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan, the Bank of
Korea, the Banco de Mexico, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Norges Bank, the Monetary
Authority of Singapore, Sveriges Riksbank, and the Swiss National Bank. Those arrangements
terminated on February 1, 2010. In May 2010, the FOMC announced that in response to the
re-emergence of strains in short-term U.S. dollar funding markets it had authorized dollar
liquidity swap lines with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the European Central Bank,
the Bank of Japan, and the Swiss National Bank. In October 2013, the Federal Reserve and these
central banks announced that their existing temporary liquidity swap arrangements--including the
dollar liquidity swap lines--would be converted to standing arrangements that will remain in
place until further notice.” from The Boards of Governors Policy Overview, Dollar Liquidity
Swap Lines http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_liquidityswaps.htm (accessed
November 25, 2015)
2

that “international monetary cooperation has broken down… The U.S. should worry about the
effects of its policies on the rest of the world.”
The complex history of limited global cooperation was evaluated by Eichengreen (2014),
who conclude that successful cooperation is most likely when it centers on technical issues,
when cooperation is institutionalized, when it is concerned with preserving an existing set of
policies and behaviors, and when it occurs in the context of broad reciprocity among nations.
Frankel (2015) provided a synopsis of the history of international economic cooperation from the
Great Depression, analyzing episodes in which countries behaved cooperatively or non-
cooperatively in international fiscal and monetary games. Frankel concluded that perceptions of
the signs of spillovers and directions of coordination vary widely and inhibit cooperation.
Furthermore, the existence of different models and domestic interest groups is as important as
the difference between cooperative and non-cooperative equilibria. Complaints about
foreigners’ actions and calls for cooperation may obscure the need to settle disagreements
domestically.
A central policy lesson of these insightful papers is that international cooperation is rare,
and occurs mostly in exceptional circumstances. Hence, countries may invest more in
precautionary strategies and putting their house in order in anticipation of trouble. In this paper I
highlight the rare conditions leading to international cooperation, and the reasons why eliciting
such cooperation may be needed to preventing adverse tail shocks from spiraling into global
depressions. Section 3 presents an overview of the obstacles preventing cooperation, including
status quo biases and costly stakeholder wars of attrition that aim to minimize their share of
adjustment costs. Section 4 focuses on policy implications, linking the discussion to
precautionary policies of emerging markets economies (EMs) as the second-best outcome of
limited cooperation.
3