NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CABLES, SHARKS AND SERVERS:
TECHNOLOGY AND THE GEOGRAPHY OF THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET
Barry Eichengreen
Romain Lafarguette
Arnaud Mehl
Working Paper 21884
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21884
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2016, Revised April 2021
We are grateful to Mark Aguiar, Pol Antràs, Thorsten Beck, Geert Bekaert, Bruno Biais, Jérôme
Busca, Estelle Cantillon, Giancarlo Corsetti, Alexander Duering, Torsten Ehlers, Benoît Geller,
Jérôme Héricourt, Jean Imbs, Takatoshi Ito, Amit Khandelwal, Philip Lane, Istvan Mak, Guy-
Charles Marhic, Philippe Martin, Martin Uribe, Frank Packer, Hashem Pesaran, Romain
Rancière, Andrew Rose, Alan Taylor and Xavier Vives for comments and discussions, as well as
to seminar participants at the ECB, Goethe University Frankfurt and USC Dornsife and to
participants at the Clausen Center Conference on Global Economic Issues, Berkeley, and to the
Cambridge-INET conference on the microstructure of the FX market for comments. We thank
Ziqi Li for excellent research assistance. We are also grateful to Denis Pêtre and Philip
Wooldridge for providing unpublished Bank for International Settlements data on offshore
foreign exchange trading. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect those of the ECB, the Eurosystem, the IMF, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Barry Eichengreen, Romain Lafarguette, and Arnaud Mehl. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Cables, Sharks and Servers: Technology and the Geography of the Foreign Exchange Market
Barry Eichengreen, Romain Lafarguette, and Arnaud Mehl
NBER Working Paper No. 21884
January 2016, Revised April 2021
JEL No. F30
ABSTRACT
We analyze the impact of technology on the production and trade in services, focusing on the
location of foreign exchange transactions and the effect of submarine fiber-optic cable
connections. Cable connections between local markets and major financial centers reduce the
costs of trading currencies locally and increase the share of currency transactions taking place in
the issuing country. But they also attenuate the effect of existing spatial frictions that prevent
transactions from moving offshore to take advantage of agglomeration economies and thick-
market advantages of major financial centers. In practice, this second effect dominates. Our
estimates suggest that the advent of cable connections boosted the share in global turnover of
London, the world’s largest trading venue, by as much as one-third.
Barry Eichengreen Arnaud Mehl
Department of Economics Sonnemannstrasse 20
University of California, Berkeley 60314 Frankfurt am Main
549 Evans Hall 3880 Europe
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880 Arnaud.Mehl@ecb.int
and NBER
eichengr@econ.Berkeley.edu
Romain Lafarguette
International Monetary Fund
700 19th St, NW
Washington, D.C.
U.S.A.
Romain.Lafarguette@ecb.europa.eu

I. INTRODUCTION
High-speed, low-cost communication is one of the distinguishing features of the
21st century world. What it implies for the geography of trade and production is unclear,
however. It has been argued that ubiquitous communication encourages service-sector
activities that benefit from agglomeration, spillovers and thick markets to concentrate
in a handful of major centers and then for their products to be all but costlessly
distributed to the rest of the world.1 But cheap, high-speed communications also allow
activities not benefiting from agglomeration to be spread more widely across the global
economy, without significant sacrifice of managerial control, in response to rising costs
in particular locations.2 One can point to the City of London for finance and Silicon
Valley for technology and innovation as examples of the former, and assembly
operations and global value chains as instances of the latter.
In this paper we investigate these questions in the specific case of the global
foreign exchange market. We ask whether advances in information and
communications technology, specifically the advent of submarine fiber optic cables, led
to a greater geographical dispersion or concentration of foreign exchange trading
worldwide.
This is an appealing case for several reasons. First, the foreign exchange market
is one of the largest financial markets in the world as measured by transactions, with an
average daily turnover in the order of $6 trillion. Second, it is a market in financial
services, as opposed to merchandise, which makes it relevant for thinking about the
geographical distribution of activity in a post-industrial age. Third, the foreign
exchange market has undergone a dramatic transformation since the late 1980s,
reflecting the availability of cheap and efficient information and communications and
the growth of electronic trading.
Investments in technology can affect the geographical distribution of economic
activity, but changes in the geographical distribution of economic activity also provide
an incentive for investments in technology. Examples of sharp, discontinuous,
exogenous changes in information and communication technology would help to pin
1 For theoretical treatments see Krugman (2011) and Duranton and Puga (2004).
2 As argued for example by Cairncross (1997).
2

down the causal effect, but technological progress tends to be continuous rather than
discrete, endogenous rather than exogenous. Instances where it is possible to identify
the diffusion of technology shocks over economic and geographical space are few and
far between.
In the case of the foreign exchange market, we have just such a source of
exogenous change and spatial variability. This is the laying of submarine cables starting
in the late 1980s. Since different submarine fiber-optic cables came into use at different
points in time, both the cross-section and time series dimensions enable us to identify
the effects of technology on the location of foreign exchange transactions.
We regard the presence of a cable link between two countries as exogenous with
respect to foreign exchange trading. Fiber-optic cables were laid for general
telecommunication needs, not for purposes related to the foreign exchange market.
They were laid by large telecommunication consortiums, not by financial institutions
active in the foreign exchange market. Nonetheless, we also apply an instrumental
variables strategy using the 3-dimension length of submarine fiber-optic cable routes.3
We use these features of the natural environment to extract the exogenous component
of whether and when countries were connected to the internet backbone.
A priori, the net effect on the geography of foreign exchange transactions is
unclear. The reduction in transactions costs associated with greater ease of placing buy
and sell orders on the large electronic platforms that exist only in the major financial
centers of London, New York and Tokyo may encourage transactions previously
completed onshore to move offshore to Britain, the U.S. and Japan. But fiber-optic
connections may also increase the attractiveness of transacting through a local sales
desk, insofar as that sales desk now has access to more timely information and a broader
set of quotes, given that it can now communicate more easily with the major financial
centers.
We find evidence of both effects in the data. On balance, however, we find that
the advent of cable connections increased the share of foreign exchange transactions in
3 This builds on work by Juhász and Steinwender (2018), who previously employed sea-floor topological
irregularities arising from nature, such as domes, canyons and faults, as a source of variations that is
exogenous to financial and economic activities.
3