NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SPECIALIZATION IN BANK LENDING:
EVIDENCE FROM EXPORTING FIRMS
Daniel Paravisini
Veronica Rappoport
Philipp Schnabl
Working Paper 21800
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21800
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2015
We thank Luana Zaccaria for outstanding research assistance. We thank Luis Garicano, Asim Khwaja,
Nicola Gennaioli, Rebecca Zarutskie, Johan Hombert, Gregor Matvos, and participants at Bank de
France, Cambridge University, CEMFI, ERWIT, Financial Intermediation Research Society Conference,
LBS Finance Symposium, LSE, NBER CF, NY Fed, Paris Trade Group, ICD Annual Conference
in Financial Economics, SED, Stanford University, Stanford University GSB, University of British
Columbia Sauder School of Business, UC Berkeley, UC Berkeley HAAS School of Business, UC
San Diego, University of Zurich seminars, workshops, and conferences for useful comments. All errors
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Daniel Paravisini, Veronica Rappoport, and Philipp Schnabl. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Specialization in Bank Lending: Evidence from Exporting Firms
Daniel Paravisini, Veronica Rappoport, and Philipp Schnabl
NBER Working Paper No. 21800
December 2015, Revised January 2020
JEL No. F14,G21
ABSTRACT
We develop an empirical approach for identifying specialization in bank lending using granular data
on borrower activities. We illustrate the approach by characterizing bank specialization by export market,
combining bank, loan, and export data for all firms in Peru. We find that all banks specialize in at
least one export market, that firms take the pattern of bank specialization into account when selecting
their lending banks, and that credit supply shocks disproportionately affect a firm’s exports to markets
where the lender specializes in. Thus, bank specialization makes credit difficult to substitute, which
has consequences for competition in credit markets and the transmission of credit shocks to the real
economy.
Daniel Paravisini Philipp Schnabl
Department of Finance Stern School of Business
London School of Economics New York University
Houghton Street 44 West Fourth Street
London WC2A 2AE New York, NY 10012
d.paravisini@lse.ac.uk and NBER
schnabl@stern.nyu.edu
Veronica Rappoport
London School of Economics
and Social Science
Houghton St.
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
v.e.rappoport@lse.ac.uk

1 Introduction
A central function of banks is to monitor and screen borrowers. Banks invest in collect-
ingborrower-specificinformation,oftenproprietaryinnature,andevaluatenewprojects
through repeated interactions with the same borrower. Over time, banks form relation-
shipswithborrowersthatconstituteanimportantsourceofabank’scomparativeadvan-
tage. Ontheonehand,suchrelationshiplendinggivebanksanex-anteincentivetoinvest
ininformationcollectiononnewborrowers. Ontheotherhand,itcreatesanex-postinfor-
mation monopoly that limits competition across banks and enables rent extraction. This
trade-off is at the center of much theoretical and empirical work on financial intermedia-
tionandconsideredaprimaryreasonwhybanksexistinthefirstplace.1
In this paper, we explore a complementary, but theoretically distinct, source of com-
parative advantage of banks. We ask whether banks specialize by lending to firms in
specific markets. We distinguish between bank specialization due to “market-specific”
information, such as expertise in evaluating projects in a specific market or in a specific
activity, and “firm-specific” information, such as the information gathered from relation-
ship lending. Importantly, we analyze whether there is a distinct role for market-specific
bank specialization independent of firm-specific information collected through relation-
shiplending.
To provide compelling evidence of market-specific bank specialization, one needs to
addressseveralchallenges. Thefirstisderivingatheoreticallysoundmeasureofmarket-
specific bank specialization that can be taken to the data. The second is to empirically
identify the consequences of market-specific bank specialization separately from other
bank characteristics that could affect lending directly. The third is to distinguish clearly
between the impact of market-specific specialization and firm-specific information gath-
eredthroughrelationshiplending.
1FortheimportanceofrelationshiplendinginfinancialintermediationseeBernanke,1983;James,1987;
Hoshietal.,1990;PetersenandRajan,1994;PetersenandRajan,1995;BergerandUdell,1995;Degryseand
Ongena,2005;ChavaandPurnanandam,2011;Boltonetal.,2013;forsurveys,seeBoot,2000andOngena
andSmith,2000.
1

Ouranalysisaddressesthesechallengesusinganewdatasetthatcombinesbank,loan,
and export data on all firms in Peru. We start by constructing a new measure of market-
specific bank specialization based on cross-country variation in firms’ export activities.
Wedefineabanktobespecializedinacountryifitsportfolioshareoflendingtoexporters
tothecountryisaright-tailoutlierinthedistributionofportfoliosharesoflendingbyall
banks. We show that this measure emerges naturally from a model in which firms op-
erate across different markets (e.g., exports to multiple geographical markets), and each
firm demands credit from banks that are differentiated in providing intermediation ser-
vices across markets (e.g., banks have an advantage in funding exports to specific coun-
tries). This approach captures market-specific bank specialization (e.g., better screening
andmonitoringoflocalrisk,morevalue-addedlocalservicesattachedtocreditissuances,
etc.) thatisindependentoffirm-specificinformation.
Usingournewmeasureofbankspecialization,weshowthatallbanksarespecialized
in at least one export market. We further find that market-specific bank specialization is
highly persistent. A bank that is specialized in a market today has a 50% probability of
beingspecializedinthesamemarketintenyears. Thesefindingsindicatethatbankshave
market-specificexpertiseandknowledgeregardingspecificexportmarkets.
We examine how firms’ choice of lender is related to market-specific bank specializa-
tion. A direct implication of market-specific bank specialization is that firms will dispro-
portionatelyfundexportstoaspecificcountrywithcreditfromabankspecializedinthat
country. We develop a revealed preference approach that directly tests this implication.
We exploit the disaggregated nature of the data to control for firm demand shocks (firm-
timefixed-effects)andbankcreditsupplyshocks(bank-timefixed-effects)thatmayaffect
lending for other reasons. Using our revealed preference approach, we find that when
firmsexpandexportstoacountry,theyincreaseborrowingby79%morefrombanksthat
are specialized in the destination country relative to non-specialized banks, suggesting
thatfirmsvaluemarket-specificbankspecialization.
Wefurtheranalyzehowmarket-specificbankspecializationaffectstheimpactofcredit
2