NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE 2008 FINANCIAL CRISIS AND THE LACK OF RETALIATORY TRADE INTERVENTION
Chunding Li
John Whalley
Working Paper 21853
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21853
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2016
We are grateful to the Ontario Research Fund and to The Centre for International Governance Innovation
(CIGI) for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Chunding Li and John Whalley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The 2008 Financial Crisis and the Lack of Retaliatory Trade Intervention
Chunding Li and John Whalley
NBER Working Paper No. 21853
January 2016
JEL No. C63,F11,F13
ABSTRACT
The 2008 financial crisis did not precipitate global retaliatory trade intervention, in seeming contrast
to the Great Depression in 1930s. This paper discusses the influence of model structure in optimal
tariff (OT) calculations in explaining this puzzle. We emphasize how earlier literature reports high
optimal tariffs in numerical calculation (of a hundred of percent) but only uses simple trade models.
We use numerical general equilibrium calibration and simulation methodology to calculate optimal
tariffs both with and without retaliation in a series of observationally equivalent models, and explore
the influence of model structures on optimal tariff levels. We gradually add more realistic features
into basic general equilibrium model, and show sharply decline optimal tariffs, which suggests that
trade retaliation incentives effectively disappear with the deepening of globalization in 2008 compared
to 1930.
Chunding Li
Institute of World Economics and Politics
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences
No.5 Jianguomenneidajie
Beijing, PRC
Postcode: 100732
chundingli@gmail.com
John Whalley
Department of Economics
Social Science Centre
University of Western Ontario
London, ON N6A 5C2
CANADA
and NBER
jwhalley@uwo.ca

1. Introduction
To trade economists it remains as a seeming puzzle that the global economy can
have passed through the 2008 financial crisis without an outbreak of retaliatory trade
intervention in the form of trade barriers being constructed to protect national markets
and employment. While it is the case that cooperative arrangements were in place to
present such occurrence, such as bound tariffs in the WTO and WTO codes in such
areas as government procurement and subsidies, the parallels drawn at the time to the
1930’s including the retaliatory beggar this neighbor trade policies suggested that the
pressures for intervention in the face of such a sharp trade shock would be
overwhelming.
In this paper we offer a possible explanation for this seeming non-occurrence of
trade retaliation. First, we point out that retaliatory trade measures in the 1930’s have
over the years been somewhat overstated in terms of their severity. The most dramatic
step occurred with the US Smoot-Hawley tariff in the spring of 1929 which was well
before the large trade shock which followed. This was then followed by a single round
of localized and product specific tariff retaliation in a number of European countries,
which, over time, triggered no further tariff response. Rather, what followed at the
height of the trade compression was a series of competitive devaluations designed to
protect employment.
Secondly, and as the heart of the paper, we suggest the prevalent view of the
imminence of an outbreak of trade retaliation in the 2008/2009 was in part based on a
3

literature that only analyzed trade retaliation in a sharply restricted set of models
which if modified to add more realism produce progressively less and less retaliation.
In essence, trade models with progressive features of realism added produce shrinking
optimal tariffs and so today’s globalized world compared to the 1930s produce no
retaliation.
We begin by reviewing literature both on the 1930’s and optimal tariffs, long
associated with the classic paper by Johnson (1953-1954). We then turn to the
literature from the 1970’s and later (up to today) which uses general equilibrium
models to compute optimal tariffs. These models, which all use the Armington
product heterogeneity by country assumption produce optimal tariffs in the global
economy which after retaliation are often in the range of a hundred percent.
We then turn to numerical simulation and first generate a data set of country trade,
production and consumption for 2013 which incorporates the US, the EU, China,
Japan, India, Brazil and ROW (rest of the world). This data set is used to calibrate a
series of nested but progressively more complex models which are all observation
equivalent in that they calibrate to the same data. We produce supporting
parameterizations for each model in the nested structure. For each model in the nest
we are able to compute optimal tariffs and in the process calibrate to literature based
import demand elasticities. Throughout the nesting hierarchy all models are calibrated
to the same data and elasticities. Our calculations of optimal tariffs with those models
show optimal tariffs fall from the hundreds of percent to single digits by using more
complex models and hence to trade barriers of little consequence. This suggests the
4