NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AND BLOCKCHAINS
David Yermack
Working Paper 21802
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21802
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2015
For helpful comments, I thank seminar and conference participants at the University of Adelaide,
University of Amsterdam, Bank of England, University of Bristol, Cambridge University Center
for Alternative Finance, Cardiff University, Erasmus University Rotterdam, University of Exeter,
Imperial College London, International Organization of Securities Commissions Committee on
Emerging Risk, Jesus College Cambridge, London Business School, Melbourne University,
University of New South Wales FIRN Corporate Finance Conference, Queensland University, the
University of South Australia, Texas A&M University, the University of Western Australia, and
the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, as well as Alex Edmans (the editor). Scott
Stornetta, Tim Swanson, and two anonymous referees. Part of this paper was written while I was
a visiting professor at Erasmus University Rotterdam. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by David Yermack. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Corporate Governance and Blockchains
David Yermack
NBER Working Paper No. 21802
December 2015, Revised October 2016
JEL(cid:0)No.(cid:0)G20,G3
ABSTRACT
Blockchains(cid:0) represent(cid:0) a(cid:0) novel(cid:0) application(cid:0) of(cid:0) cryptography(cid:0) and(cid:0) information(cid:0) technology(cid:0) to(cid:0) ag-eold
problems(cid:0) of(cid:0) financial(cid:0) record-keeping,(cid:0) and(cid:0) they(cid:0) may(cid:0) lead(cid:0) to(cid:0) far-reaching(cid:0) changes(cid:0) in(cid:0) corporate(cid:0)
governance. Many(cid:0) major(cid:0) players(cid:0) in(cid:0) the(cid:0) financial(cid:0) industry(cid:0) have(cid:0) began(cid:0) to(cid:0) invest(cid:0) in(cid:0) this(cid:0) new(cid:0)
technology,(cid:0) and(cid:0) stock exchanges(cid:0) have(cid:0) proposed(cid:0) using(cid:0) blockchains(cid:0) as(cid:0) a(cid:0) new(cid:0) method(cid:0) for(cid:0) trading(cid:0)
corporate(cid:0) equities(cid:0) and(cid:0) tracking their(cid:0) ownership.(cid:0) This(cid:0) essay(cid:0) evaluates(cid:0) the(cid:0) potential(cid:0) implications(cid:0) of(cid:0)
these(cid:0) changes(cid:0) for(cid:0) managers,(cid:0) institutional investors,(cid:0) small(cid:0) shareholders,(cid:0) auditors,(cid:0) and(cid:0) other(cid:0) parties(cid:0)
involved(cid:0) in(cid:0) corporate(cid:0) governance.(cid:0) The(cid:0) lower cost,(cid:0) greater(cid:0) liquidity,(cid:0) more(cid:0) accurate(cid:0) record-
keeping,(cid:0) and(cid:0) transparency(cid:0) of(cid:0) ownership(cid:0) offered(cid:0) by(cid:0) blockchains may(cid:0) significantly(cid:0) upend(cid:0) the(cid:0)
balance(cid:0)of(cid:0)power(cid:0)among(cid:0)these(cid:0)cohorts.
David(cid:0)Yermack
Stern(cid:0)School(cid:0)of(cid:0)Business
New(cid:0)York(cid:0)University
44(cid:0)West(cid:0)Fourth(cid:0)Street,(cid:0)Suite(cid:0)9-160
New(cid:0)York,(cid:0)NY(cid:0)10012
and(cid:0)NBER
dyermack@stern.nyu.edu

Corporate Governance and Blockchains
I. Introduction
This paper explores the potential corporate governance implications of blockchain
technology. A blockchain is a sequential database of information that is secured by methods of
cryptographic proof, and it offers an alternative to classical financial ledgers. After an explosion
of interest from industry in late 2015, blockchains have captured the attention of the business
world, as they offer a new way of creating, exchanging, and tracking the ownership of financial
assets on a peer-to-peer basis. Major stock exchanges are exploring the use of blockchains to
register and trade shares of stock issued by corporations. Blockchains also have the potential to
accommodate debt securities and financial derivatives, which can be executed autonomously as
“smart contracts,” possibilities which are the basis of ongoing pilot projects involving some of
the world’s largest financial institutions. Further applications may exist in government record-
keeping of databases for land titles, vital statistics, and many other areas.
These innovations may affect owners and managers of public companies in important
ways, potentially changing corporate governance as much as any event since the 1933 and 1934
securities acts in the United States. In this paper, I identify in more detail how the use of
blockchains could affect corporate governance from the perspective of corporate managers,
institutional investors, debt investors, auditors, and other groups. I also discuss issues related to
1

the internal governance of blockchains themselves, a topic that could become important to
corporations in the way that the organization of stock exchanges and other capital market
institutions is important today.
Blockchains were proposed by Nakamoto (2008) as a method of validating ownership of
the virtual currency bitcoin.1 After seven years of successful use with bitcoin, blockchains have
become recognized as an alternative to ownership ledgers based on classical double-entry
bookkeeping. Blockchains offer potential advantages in cost, speed, and data integrity compared
to classical methods of proving ownership, and the scale of these potential savings has motivated
investments by venture capitalists and by established players in the financial services industry.
Entrepreneurs are actively investigating blockchains’ suitability for recording ownership of a
wide range of assets, from stocks and bonds to real estate, automobile titles, luxury handbags
and works of art. Further applications under study by governments include using blockchains
for public records such as real estate titles, birth certificates, driver’s licenses and university
degrees.
Using blockchains to record stock ownership could solve many longstanding problems
related to companies’ inability to keep accurate and timely records of who owns their shares
(Kahan and Rock, 2008). Future extensions could allow blockchains to hold self-executing
smart contracts, such as stock options held by employees or warrants owned by outside
investors. These smart contracts could extend into areas such as the pre-contracted resolution of
financial distress. Perhaps most importantly, blockchains could provide unprecedented
1 The idea of a blockchain was introduced in Haber and Stornetta’s (1991) proposal for the digital time
stamping of documents to authenticate authorship of intellectual property, as discussed below. The first reference to this
data structure a “chain of blocks”appears to come from Nakamoto (2008), whose innovations with bitcoin included the
connection of the blockchain concept to a public ledger jointly updated by numerous participants in an open-source
network.
2