NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE DYNAMICS OF ADJUSTABLE-RATE SUBPRIME MORTGAGE DEFAULT:
A STRUCTURAL ESTIMATION
Hanming Fang
You Suk Kim
Wenli Li
Working Paper 21810
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21810
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2015
We thank Shane Sherlund and seminar/conference participants at the Econometric Society World Congress
(2015), University of New South Wales and University of Technology Sydney for their comments.
The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the Federal Reserve System, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Hanming Fang, You Suk Kim, and Wenli Li. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Dynamics of Adjustable-Rate Subprime Mortgage Default: A Structural Estimation
Hanming Fang, You Suk Kim, and Wenli Li
NBER Working Paper No. 21810
December 2015
JEL No. D12,D14,G2,G21,G33
ABSTRACT
We present a dynamic structural model of subprime adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM) borrowers making
payment decisions taking into account possible consequences of different degrees of delinquency from
their lenders. We empirically implement the model using unique data sets that contain information
on borrowers' mortgage payment history, their broad balance sheets, and lender responses. Our investigation
of the factors that drive borrowers' decisions reveals that subprime ARMs are not all alike. For loans
originated in 2004 and 2005, the interest rate resets associated with ARMs, as well as the housing
and labor market conditions were not as important in borrowers' delinquency decisions as in their decisions
to pay off their loans. For loans originated in 2006, interest rate resets, housing price declines, and
worsening labor market conditions all contributed importantly to their high delinquency rates. Counterfactual
policy simulations reveal that even if the Libor rate could be lowered to zero by aggressive traditional
monetary policies, it would have a limited effect on reducing the delinquency rates. We find that automatic
modification mortgage designs under which the monthly payment or the principal balance of the loans
are automatically reduced when housing prices decline can be effective in reducing both delinquency
and foreclosure. Importantly, we find that automatic modification mortgages with a cushion, under
which the monthly payment or principal balance reductions are triggered only when housing price
declines exceed a certain percentage may result in a Pareto improvement in that borrowers and lenders
are both made better off than under the baseline, with a lower delinquency and foreclosure rates. Our
counterfactual analysis also suggests that limited commitment power on the part of the lenders to loan
modification policies may be an important reason for the relatively small rate of modifications observed
during the housing crisis.
Hanming Fang Wenli Li
Department of Economics Research Department
University of Pennsylvania Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
3718 Locust Walk 10 N Independence Mall W,
Philadelphia, PA 19104 Philadelphia, PA 19106
and NBER wenli.li@phil.frb.org
hanming.fang@econ.upenn.edu
You Suk Kim
Division of Research and Statistics
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
20th & C Streets, NW,
Washington, D.C. 20551
you.kim@frb.gov

1 Introduction
The collapse of the subprime residential mortgage market played a crucial role in the recent
housing crisis that subsequently led to the Great Recession.1 At the end of 2007, subprime mort-
gages accounted for about 13 percent of all outstanding first-lien residential mortgages but over
half of the foreclosures. The majority of the subprime mortgages, both by number and by value,
were adjustable interest rates mortgages (ARMs); and these mortgages had a foreclosure rate of
17 percent, much higher than the 5 percent foreclosure rate for the fixed-rate subprime mortgages
(Frame, Lehnert, and Prescott 2008, Table 1). In response to these developments, many govern-
mentpoliciesweredesignedandimplementedtochangethedefaultincentivesofthesubprimeARM
borrowers.2 Few structural models, however, exist that can guide us in these efforts, and that can
help us understand why most of the programs had limited success.3
In this paper, we develop a dynamic structural model to study the incentives of the adjustable-
rate subprime borrowers to default, and investigate how these incentives change under various
policies. In our model, at each period, a borrower decides whether to pay the amount due (and
be current) or not pay (and stay in various delinquent status), taking into account the lender’s
responses such as mortgage modification, liquidation, or waiting (i.e., doing nothing). Relative to
the existing structural models on mortgage defaults which we review below, our model has two key
distinguishing features: first, in our model default is not the terminal and absorbing state as we
allow borrowers to self cure their delinquency; second, we consider loan modification as one of the
lenders’ loss mitigation practices while the existing models only allow for liquidation.
We empirically implement our model using unique mortgage loan level data sets that contain
not only detailed information on borrowers’ mortgage payment history and lenders’ responses, but
also credit bureau information about borrowers’ broader balance sheet. We are thus one of the first
to utilize borrowers’ credit bureau information to understand their mortgage payment decisions.4
To track movements in the local housing and labor markets, we further merge our data with zip
code level home price indices and county level unemployment rates.
1There is no standard definition of subprime mortgage loans. Typically, they refer to loans made to borrowers
with poor credit history (e.g., a FICO score below 620) and/or with ahigh leverage as measuredby either the debt-
to-income ratio or the loan-to-value ratio. For the data used in this paper, subprime mortgages are defined as those
in private-label mortgage-backed securities marketed as subprime, as in Mayer, Pence, and Sherlund (2009).
2To name a few of such programs, the FHASecure program approved by Congress in September 2007; the Hope
Now Alliance program (HOPENOW) created by then-Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson in October 2007; Hope for
HomeownersrefinancingprogrampassedbyCongressinthespringof2008;MakingHomeAffordable(MHA)initiative
inconjunctionwiththeHomeAffordableModificationProgram(HAMP)andtheHomeAffordableRefinanceProgram
(HARP)launchedbytheObamaadministrationinMarch2009(HAMP).SeeGerardiandLi(2010)formoredetails.
3Over the first two and a half years, HARP refinancing activity remained subdued relative to model-based
extrapolations from historical experience. From its inception to the end of 2011, 1.1 million mortgages refi-
nanced through HARP, compared to the initial announced goal of three to four million mortgages. In De-
cember, HARP 2.0 was introduced and HARP refinance volume picked up, reaching 3.2 million by June 2014.
http://www.fhfa.gov/AboutUS/Reports/Pages/Refinance-Report-February-2014.aspx. Similarly, HAMP was de-
signedtohelpasmanyas4millionborrowersavoidforeclosurebytheendof2012. ByFebruary2010,oneyearinto
the program, only 168,708 trial plans had been converted into permanent revisions. Through January 2012, a pop-
ulationof621,000loanshadreceivedHAMPmodifications. Seehttp://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/economic-
policy/Documents/HAMPPrincipalReductionResearchLong070912FINAL.pdf
4Elul,Souleles,Chomsisengphet,Glennon,andHunt(2010)alsousecreditbureauinformationtostudymortgage
default decisions in their empirical analysis.
1

Three main factors drive ARM borrowers’ mortgage payment decisions: home equity, income,
and monthly mortgage payment; importantly, both the current levels of these factors and the ex-
pectations of their future changes matter. Borrowers with negative home equity have little financial
gains from continuing with their mortgage payments, especially when they do not expect house
prices to recover and when costs associated with defaults and foreclosures are low. Changes in
incomes and expenses, including changes in monthly mortgage payments due to interest rate re-
sets for example, affect borrowers’ liquidity position. In principle, borrowers can refinance their
mortgages to lower interest rates or sell their houses to improve their liquidity positions, but these
options may not be available in the presence of declining house prices, increasing unemployment
rates, and/or tightened lending standards. These constrained borrowers thus may find it optimal
to default on their mortgages despite the possible consequences of foreclosure.
To quantify the relative importance of these different drivers of default, we simulate our struc-
turally estimated model under various counterfactual scenarios. Our simulation results suggest
that the factors that drive the borrower delinquency and foreclosure differ substantially by loan
origination year. For loans originated in 2004 and 2005, which preceded the severe downturn of the
housingandlabormarkets,theinterestrateresetsassociatedwithARMsaswellasthehousingand
labormarketconditionsdonotseemtobeasimportantfactorsforborrowers’delinquencybehavior
as they are in determining whether the borrowers would pay off their loans (i.e., sell their houses
or refinance). However, for loans that originated in 2006, interest rate reset, housing price declines,
and worsening labor market conditions all contributed to their high delinquency rates with housing
price declines being the most significant contributing factor.5 These results arise because for loans
originated in 2004 and 2005, interest rates did not reset until 2006 or 2007 at which time house
prices have just begun to decline. More importantly, since house prices continued to appreciate in
2004, 2005, and part of 2006, these borrowers have accumulated some home equity by the time of
their interest rates reset; in fact, in many places house price did not go all the way down to their
2004 levels until 2008. Additionally, the labor market did not deteriorate significantly until 2008 or
2009. In contrast, borrowers whose loans originated in 2006 had the perfect storm in 2008 or 2009
when their interest rates reset, as house prices had depreciated substantially and unemployment
rates had risen sharply.
Counterfactual policy simulations reveal that even if the Libor rate could be lowered to zero by
aggressive traditional monetary policies, it would have a limited effect on reducing the delinquency
rates. We find that automatic modification mortgage designs under which the monthly payment
or the principal balance of the loans are automatically reduced when housing prices decline can
be effective in reducing both delinquency and foreclosure. Importantly, we find that automatic
modification mortgages with a cushion, under which the monthly payment or principal balance
reductions are triggered only when housing price declines exceed a certain percentage may result
in a Pareto improvement in that borrowers and lenders are both made better off than under the
5Our finding is consistent with those in the literature including Bhutta, Dokko, and Shan (2010), Foote, Gerardi,
and Willen (2012), and Fuster and Willen (2015). Bhutta, Dokko, and Shan (2010) also find that 80 percent of the
defaults in their sample (2006 loans originated in the crisis states) are the results of income shocks combined with
negativehouseequity. Foote,Gerardi,andWillen(2012)findthatinterestrateresetraisedthedefaultratesof2006
loans.
2