NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ENDOGENOUS VOLATILITY AT THE ZERO LOWER BOUND:
IMPLICATIONS FOR STABILIZATION POLICY
Susanto Basu
Brent Bundick
Working Paper 21838
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21838
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2015
We thank Taisuke Nakata, Alexander Richter, Andrew Lee Smith, and Stephen Terry for helpful discussions,
and Martin Eichenbaum and several anonymous referees for insightful comments. We also appreciate
the feedback from participants at various conferences and seminars. We thank Daniel Molling for
excellent research assistance and Research Automation for computational support. The views expressed
herein are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Susanto Basu and Brent Bundick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Endogenous Volatility at the Zero Lower Bound: Implications for Stabilization Policy
Susanto Basu and Brent Bundick
NBER Working Paper No. 21838
December 2015
JEL No. E32,E52
ABSTRACT
At the zero lower bound, the central bank's inability to offset shocks endogenously generates volatility.
In this setting, an increase in uncertainty about future shocks causes significant contractions in the
economy and may lead to non-existence of an equilibrium. The form of the monetary policy rule is
crucial for avoiding catastrophic outcomes. State-contingent optimal monetary and fiscal policies
can attenuate this endogenous volatility by stabilizing the distribution of future outcomes. Fluctuations
in uncertainty and the zero lower bound help our model match the unconditional and stochastic volatility
in the recent macroeconomic data.
Susanto Basu
Department of Economics
Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
susanto.basu@bc.edu
Brent Bundick
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
Economic Research Department
1 Memorial Drive
Kansas City, MO 64198
brent.bundick@kc.frb.org

1 Introduction
Models with nominal rigidities allow aggregate demand to determine output. In response to
declines in aggregate demand, monetary policy plays a key role in stabilizing real activity and
inflation. Even in the face of significant exogenous shocks, an unconstrained central bank can
stabilize the economy using its nominal policy rate. Households internalize this ability of the
monetary authority to influence real activity and inflation in all states of the world. In this
setting, uncertainty about future exogenous shocks is irrelevant because monetary policy can
effectively offset all possible shocks.
At the zero lower bound, however, monetary policy cannot offset further negative shocks
but will offset sufficiently large positive shocks. This asymmetry reduces the mean of expected
future outcomes and increases their variance. Thus, the zero lower bound generates endoge-
nous volatility. This endogenous volatility leads households to increase their desired savings.
With flexible prices, higher desired savings by households would simply lower the real interest
rate but leave equilibrium output unchanged. With nominal rigidities, precautionary saving
by households reduces aggregate demand further, and keeps the economy at the zero lower
bound for a longer period of time. Under standard assumptions about monetary policy, this
destabilizing feedback mechanism leads to significant contractions in the economy. In fact, this
feedback mechanism may be so powerful that an equilibrium fails to exist. We show that the
form of the monetary policy reaction function is crucial for avoiding this catastrophic outcome.
Through this destabilizing feedback mechanism, the distribution of possible future shocks
becomescruciallyimportant. Expectationsofmorevolatileshocksfurtherincreasetheexpected
variance of future consumption and strengthen the destabilizing feedback loop. Through the
endogenous volatility generated by the zero lower bound, small amounts of uncertainty about
future exogenous shocks are transformed into large declines in aggregate demand.
This paper illuminates these interactions between the zero lower bound and the uncertainty
about future exogenous shocks. We begin by examining the positive economics of changes in
expected volatility when the economy is trapped at the zero lower bound. We then examine
the normative issues of choosing optimal monetary and fiscal policy to stabilize an economy
subject to stochastic volatility and the zero lower bound constraint.
Many policymakers and economists have cited increased uncertainty about the future as a
key driver in generating the Great Recession and the subsequent slow recovery. Empirical work
2

by Stock and Watson (2012) and Leduc and Liu (2014) and speeches by policymakers such
as Kocherlakota (2010) point to higher uncertainty as the reason for a sizable fraction of the
decline in real activity during the Great Recession and the slow subsequent recovery. Basu and
Bundick (2012) present a simple model where higher uncertainty about future shocks can cause
contractions in all major macroeconomic aggregates. But these papers raise a puzzle: why does
uncertainty sometimes have small and sometimes large macroeconomic effects? For example,
Bloom (2009) documents a variety of events that generate significant uncertainty about the
future. Prior to the Great Recession, however, these events did not seem to spill over dramati-
cally to the broader economy, especially in the post-1984 period.
Our model resolves this puzzle. We show that the level of background uncertainty about the
future – just the expectation of future shocks – can assume much greater importance depending
on the economic environment. We identify the constraint imposed by the zero lower bound as
the key culprit that can transform this normal background noise into a significant downturn.
The problematic element is the famous Taylor (1993) rule. This rule interacts with uncertainty
andthezerolowerboundconstrainttocreatewhatwetermthe“contractionarybias.” Thisbias
emerges when the zero lower bound prevents the monetary authority from attaining its inflation
target on average. We show that higher ex ante uncertainty at the zero lower bound increases
this bias and raises the expected average real interest rate. Higher expected real rates reduce
output and inflation, making the zero lower bound constraint bind more strongly and creating
a destabilizing feedback loop. Our paper thus explains why the effects of uncertainty can be
time-varying, and why the existence of uncertainty at the zero lower bound can be catastrophic.
To derive a full set of policy implications, we show that it is crucial to use global solution
methods that allow for ex ante uncertainty about future events. The existing literature often
fails to uncover the contractionary bias or conflates two conceptually distinct channels: (1)
the contractionary bias and (2) the effects of uncertainty per se at a given real interest rate.
To disentangle these two effects, we need to shift away from simple Taylor rules to rules that
allow the central bank to achieve its inflation target on average despite the zero lower bound
constraint. These history-dependent rules prevent the average expected real rate from rising
simply because the zero lower bound binds in more states of nature. We show that the negative
effects of uncertainty per se can be substantial when the economy is at the zero lower bound.
However, it is the interaction between ex ante uncertainty about future shocks, the zero lower
bound, and the Taylor rule that can be devastating. The implication is that monetary policy
must follow a rule that may emulate the Taylor rule during normal times, but stabilizes the
real interest rate when the zero lower bound constraint binds.
3