NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE GLOBALIZATION OF ANGEL INVESTMENTS:
EVIDENCE ACROSS COUNTRIES
Josh Lerner
Antoinette Schoar
Stanislav Sokolinski
Karen Wilson
Working Paper 21808
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21808
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2015
We thank numerous angel groups for their willingness to share data and their patience in
answering our many queries. Excellent research assistance was provided by Secil Altintas, Jamie
Beaton, Elaine Dai, Kenneth Fu, Ida Hempel, Zaahid Khan, Michelle Lin, and Ahmed Zaeem,
and the research team at Baker Library led by Sarah Eriksen. Seminar participants at the Angel
Capital Association, Boston University, London Business School, the National Bureau of
Economic Research, and the University of Texas, and especially Shai Bernstein, Thomas
Hellmann, Arthur Korteweg, and Ramana Nanda provided helpful comments. We thank the
Harvard Business School’s Division of Research and the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation
for financial support. All errors and omissions are our own. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Josh Lerner, Antoinette Schoar, Stanislav Sokolinski, and Karen Wilson. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Globalization of Angel Investments: Evidence across Countries
Josh Lerner, Antoinette Schoar, Stanislav Sokolinski, and Karen Wilson
NBER Working Paper No. 21808
December 2015, Revised March 2016
JEL No. G24,O31
ABSTRACT
This paper examines investments made by 13 angel groups across 21 countries. We compare
applicants just above and below the funding cutoff and find that these angel investors have a
positive impact on the growth, performance, and survival of firms as well as their follow-on
fundraising. The positive impact of angel financing is independent of the level of venture activity
and entrepreneur-friendliness in the country. However, we find that the development stage and
maturity of startups that apply for angel funding (and those that are ultimately funded) is
inversely correlated with the entrepreneurship-friendliness of the country, which may reflect self-
censoring by very early-stage firms that do not expect to receive funding in these environments.
Josh Lerner Stanislav Sokolinski
Harvard Business School Department of Economics
Rock Center 214 Harvard University
Boston, MA 02163 1805 Cambridge St
and NBER Cambridge, MA 02138
jlerner@hbs.edu sokolinski@fas.harvard.edu
Antoinette Schoar Karen Wilson
MIT Sloan School of Management Bruegel
100 Main Street, E62-638 and Organisation for Economic Cooperation
Cambridge, MA 02142 and Development
and NBER karen.wilson@bruegel.org
aschoar@mit.edu

1. Introduction
The last decade has seen a rapid expansion and deepening of the types of
vehicles that fund startup firms in the U.S. and worldwide. In particular, we have seen
a growing role of angel groups and other more “individualistic” funding options for
startups, such as super angels or crowdsourcing platforms. This trend has not only
been prevalent in the U.S. but also in many other nations (OECD, 2011; Wilson, 2105;
OECD, 2016). One could argue that the funding of new ventures by wealthy
individuals is one of the oldest forms of outside investment that exists, especially
where capital markets and financial institutions are less developed. In this paper,
however, we focus on the organized angel market as a growing form of startup
investing that is less formal than the VC market but more professional than receiving
funding from friends and family.
The precise measurement of the total size of the angel investment market is
difficult to ascertain due to the fact that most angel investments are made on an
individual basis and thus typically are not subject to regulatory disclosure
requirements. But estimates suggest that the total size of angel investment has long
surpassed venture capital investment in the U.S. and increasingly in some other
countries as well. For instance, survey estimates suggest the projected size of the total
angel market in the U.S. grew from $17.6B in 2009 to $24.1B in 2014.2 The estimated
2 These estimates are by Jeffery Sohl and the University of New Hampshire’s Center
for Venture Research:
http://paulcollege.unh.edu/sites/paulcollege.unh.edu/files/2009_Analysis_Report.
pdf and
2

capital deployed by angel groups in Europe has almost doubled over the past five
years, and in Canada, it almost tripled.3 Despite its rapid growth, we know very little
about the role that angels play internationally and the type of firms in which they
invest.
The appeal of angel investors is that they share many of the positive features
of venture capitalists. They fund early-stage entrepreneurs, undertake intensive due
diligence of potential investments, and serve as mentors and (sometimes) outside
directors for the entrepreneurs (Kaplan and Stromberg, 2003; Wong, Bhatia, and
Freeman, 2009). But because angels invest their own money, they should be less
prone to agency problems that have been documented for VC funds: for instance, fee-
based compensation structures can lead to excessive fundraising (Metrick and
Yasuda, 2010; Chung, et al., 2012) or sub-optimal investment and exit decisions
(Gompers, 1996). The consequences of these agency problems may be periods of
overfunding in certain sectors (Gompers and Lerner, 1999). Active involvement in the
investments and close social ties between angels and entrepreneurs may help to
overcome the lack of minority shareholder and legal protections that are important
for the development of more decentralized capital markets (see, e.g., La Porta et al.,
1998, 2002). Reflecting these patterns, governments are increasingly seeking to
encourage angel investment (Wilson, 2015). The hope is to encourage alternative
https://paulcollege.unh.edu/sites/paulcollege.unh.edu/files/webform/2014%20An
alysis%20Report.pdf.
3 According to data presented in reports from EBAN in Europe and NACO in Canada,
which is collected from angel groups via surveys.
3