NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CREDIT-MARKET SENTIMENT AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE
David López-Salido
Jeremy C. Stein
Egon Zakrajšek
Working Paper 21879
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21879
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2016
We are grateful to Olivier Blanchard, Claudia Buch, Bill English, Robin Greenwood, Sam Hanson,
Òscar Jordà, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Hélène Rey, Andrei Shleifer, and seminar participants at numerous
institutions for helpful comments. Miguel Acosta, Ibraheem Catovic, Gregory Cohen, Shaily Patel,
and Rebecca Zhang provided outstanding research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are
solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, anyone else associated with the Federal Reserve System,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21879.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by David López-Salido, Jeremy C. Stein, and Egon Zakrajšek. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Credit-Market Sentiment and the Business Cycle
David López-Salido, Jeremy C. Stein, and Egon Zakrajšek
NBER Working Paper No. 21879
January 2016
JEL No. E32,E44,G12
ABSTRACT
Using U.S. data from 1929 to 2013, we show that elevated credit-market sentiment in year t – 2 is
associated with a decline in economic activity in years t and t + 1. Underlying this result is the existence
of predictable mean reversion in credit-market conditions. That is, when our sentiment proxies indicate
that credit risk is aggressively priced, this tends to be followed by a subsequent widening of credit
spreads, and the timing of this widening is, in turn, closely tied to the onset of a contraction in economic
activity. Exploring the mechanism, we find that buoyant credit-market sentiment in year t – 2 also
forecasts a change in the composition of external finance: net debt issuance falls in year t, while net
equity issuance increases, patterns consistent with the reversal in credit-market conditions leading
to an inward shift in credit supply. Unlike much of the current literature on the role of financial frictions
in macroeconomics, this paper suggests that time-variation in expected returns to credit market investors
can be an important driver of economic fluctuations.
David López-Salido Egon Zakrajšek
Division of Monetary Affairs Division of Monetary Affairs
Federal Reserve Board Federal Reserve Board
20th and C Streets, N.W. 20th Street & Constitution Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20551 Washington, D.C. 20551
david.j.lopez-salido@frb.gov egon.zakrajsek@frb.gov
Jeremy C. Stein
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer 209
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeremy_stein@harvard.edu

1 Introduction
Can “frothy” conditions in asset markets create risks to future macroeconomic performance? If
so, which particular markets and measures of froth should receive the greatest attention from
policymakers? And what exactly are the underlying channels of transmission?
In this paper, we attempt to shed some empirical light on the above questions. In doing so, we
add to a large literature on the role of financial markets in business cycle fluctuations. However,
our conceptual approach differs from much recent formal work in this area, in that we highlight the
importance of time-variation in the expected returns to investors in credit markets and see these
fluctuations in investor sentiment as a key driver of the cycle, rather than simply a propagation
mechanism. By contrast, many of the modern theoretical models of the “financial accelerator” that
havefollowedtheseminalworkofBernanke and Gertler(1989)andKiyotaki and Moore(1997)are
setinasimpleefficientmarketsframework, inwhichtheexpectedreturnsonallassetsareconstant,
and there is time variation only in the cashflows associated with financial intermediation—that is,
the process of intermediation is more efficient at some times than others, say because of greater
availability of collateral. Our emphasis on the role of credit-market sentiment in the business cycle
is thus closer in spirit to the narrative accounts of Minsky (1977) and Kindleberger (1978), who
emphasize the potentially destabilizing nature of speculative movements in asset prices.1
We begin by documenting that measures of investor sentiment in the corporate bond market
have significant predictive power for future economic activity. In particular, in U.S. data running
from 1929 to 2013, we find that when corporate bond credit spreads are narrow relative to their
historicalnormsandwhentheshareofhigh-yield(or“junk”)bondissuanceintotalcorporatebond
issuanceiselevated, thisforecastsasubstantialslowingofgrowthinrealGDP,businessinvestment,
and employment over the subsequent few years. Thus buoyant credit-market sentiment today is
associated with a significant weakening of real economic outcomes over a medium-term horizon.
This result appears to be connected to the existence of predictable mean reversion in credit-
market conditions. That is, the following two relationships both hold: (1) when our sentiment
proxies—namely, credit spreads and the junk share in issuance—indicate that credit risk is being
aggressivelypriced,thistendstobefollowedbyasubsequentwideningofcreditspreads; and(2)the
timing of this increase in spreads is, in turn, closely linked to the onset of the decline in economic
activity.
We couch these basic findings in terms of a two-step regression specification. In the first step,
we use two-year lagged values of credits spreads and the junk share to forecast future changes in
credit spreads. We then take the fitted values from this first-step regression, which we interpret
as capturing fluctuations in credit-market sentiment, and use them in a second-step regression to
predict changes in various measures of economic activity, including real GDP (per capita), real
business fixed investment, and unemployment.2
1Recent work in a similar spirit includes Schularick and Taylor (2012); Jord`a, Schularick, and Taylor
(2013, 2014); Baron and Xiong (2014); Krishnamurthy and Muir (2015); Mian, Sufi, and Verner (2015); and
Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2015).
2 As described more fully below, the first- and second-step regressions are estimated jointly by nonlinear least
1

A simpler, one-step version of this approach is familiar from previous work. That earlier work
has established that movements in credit spreads—as opposed to forecasted changes in credit
spreads based on lagged valuation indicators—have substantial explanatory power for current and
future economic activity.3 Of course, results of this sort are open to a variety of causal interpre-
tations. For example, one possibility is that economic activity fluctuates in response to exogenous
nonfinancial factors, and forward-looking credit spreads simply anticipate these changes in real
activity. Our two-step results, however, weigh against this interpretation. In particular, we show
thatacomponentofcredit-spreadchangesthatreflectsnotnewsaboutfuturecashflows, butrather
an unwinding of past investor sentiment, still has strong explanatory power for future real activity.
Interestingly,theanalogoustwo-stepresultsdonotholdformeasuresofstock-marketsentiment.
Thus while variables such as the dividend-price ratio, the cyclically-adjusted earnings-price ratio,
and the equity share in total external finance have all been shown to forecast aggregate stock
returns, we show that they have essentially no predictive power for real activity. In this specific
sense, thecreditmarketisfundamentallydifferentfrom—andofpotentiallygreatermacroeconomic
significance than—the stock market.
In quantitative terms, our full-sample (1929–2013) estimates indicate that when our measure
of credit-market sentiment in year t−2 (that is, the fitted value of the year-t change in the credit
spread) moves from the 25th to the 75th percentile of its historical distribution, this change is
associated with a cumulative decline in real GDP growth (per capita) of about 3.0 percentage
points over years t and t+1 and with a cumulative increase in the unemployment rate of about
1.2 percentage points over the same period. However, these full-sample estimates are dispropor-
tionately influenced by a few large outliers in the 1930s and 1940s. Using a post-war sample from
1952 to 2013 that yields somewhat smaller and more stable estimates—which we take as our more-
conservativebaselineinmuchofthepaper—thecorrespondingeffectsonoutputandunemployment
are 1.2 percentage points and 0.7 percentage points, respectively.
Whileourtwo-stepeconometricmethodologycloselyresemblesaninstrumental-variables(IV)ap-
proach, we should emphasize that we do not make any strong identification claims based on these
results. Thisisbecausewedonotthinkthatthesentimentvariablesusedinourfirst-stepregression
would plausibly satisfy the exclusion restriction required for an IV estimation strategy. Ultimately,
the hypothesis that we are interested in is this: buoyant credit-market sentiment at time t−2 leads
toa reversal in creditspreads at timet, and this reversal isassociated with an inward shift in credit
supply, which, in turn, causes a contraction in economic activity. Now consider a natural alter-
native story: general investor over-optimism at time t−2 leads to economy-wide over-investment
squares,thustakingintoaccountthefactthatourcredit-sentimentproxyisageneratedregressorinthesecond-step
regression.
3 There is a long tradition in macroeconomics of using various sorts of credit spreads to forecast economic activ-
ity. For example, Bernanke (1990) and Friedman and Kuttner (1992, 1993a,b, 1998) examine the predictive power
of spreads between rates on short-term commercial paper and rates on Treasury bills. Gertler and Lown (1999),
Gilchrist, Yankov, and Zakrajˇsek (2009), and Gilchrist and Zakrajˇsek (2012), in contrast, emphasize the predictive
contentofspreadsonlong-termcorporatebonds. SeeStock and Watson(2003)foranoverviewoftheliteraturethat
uses financial asset prices to forecast economic activity.
2