NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHOLESALE BANKING AND BANK RUNS IN MACROECONOMIC MODELLING
OF FINANCIAL CRISES
Mark Gertler
Nobuhiro Kiyotaki
Andrea Prestipino
Working Paper 21892
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21892
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2016
National Science Foundation The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Mark Gertler, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, and Andrea Prestipino. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Wholesale Banking and Bank Runs in Macroeconomic Modelling of Financial Crises
Mark Gertler, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, and Andrea Prestipino
NBER Working Paper No. 21892
January 2016
JEL No. E44
ABSTRACT
There has been considerable progress in developing macroeconomic models of banking crises. However,
most of this literature focuses on the retail sector where banks obtain deposits from households. In
fact, the recent financial crisis that triggered the Great Recession featured a disruption of wholesale
funding markets, where banks lend to one another. Accordingly, to understand the financial crisis as
well as to draw policy implications, it is essential to capture the role of wholesale banking. The objective
of this paper is to characterize a model that can be seen as a natural extension of the existing literature
that provides a step toward accomplishing this objective. The model accounts for both the buildup
and collapse of wholesale banking, and also sketches out the transmission of the crises to the real sector.
We also draw out the implications of possible instaibility in the wholesale banking sector for lender-
of-last(cid:3)resort policy as well as for macroprudential policy.
Mark Gertler Andrea Prestipino
Department of Economics Federal Reserve System
New York University Washington DC, 20551
269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor andrea.prestipino@frb.gov
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
mark.gertler@nyu.edu
Nobuhiro Kiyotaki
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
kiyotaki@princeton.edu

1 Introduction
One of the central challenges for contemporary macroeconomics is adapting the core
models to account for why the recent financial crisis occurred and for why it then
devolved into the worst recession of the postwar period. On the eve of the crisis
the basic workhorse quantitative models used in practice largely abstracted from
financial market frictions. These models were thus largely silent on how the crisis
broke out and how the vast array of unconventional policy interventions undertaken
by the Federal Reserve and Treasury could have worked to mitigate the effects of
the financial turmoil. Similarly, these models could not provide guidance for the
regulatory adjustments needed to avoid another calamity.
From the start of the crisis there has been an explosion of literature aimed at
meeting this challenge. Much of the early wave of this literature builds on the fi-
nancial accelerator and credit cycle framework developed in Bernanke and Gertler
(1989) and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). This approach stresses the role of balance
sheets in constraining borrower spending in a setting with financial market frictions.
Procyclical movement in balance sheet strength amplifies spending fluctuations and
thus fluctuations in aggregate economic activity. A feedback loop emerges as con-
ditions in the real economy affect the condition of balance sheets and vice-versa.
Critical to this mechanism is the role of leverage: The exposure of balance sheets to
systemic risk is increasing in the degree of borrower leverage.
The new vintage of macroeconomic models with financial frictions makes progress
in two directions: First, it adapts the framework to account for the distinctive fea-
tures of the current crisis. In particular, during the recent crisis, it was highly lever-
aged financial institutions along with highly leveraged households that were most
immediately vulnerable to financial distress1. The conventional literature featured
balance sheet constraints on non-financial firms. Accordingly, a number of recent
macroeconomic models have introduced balance sheet constraints on banks, while
others have done so for households.2 The financial accelerator remains operative,
but the classes of agents most directly affected by the financial market disruption
differ from earlier work.
Another direction has involved improving the way financial crises are modeled.
For example, financial crises are inherently nonlinear events, often featuring a simul-
1To be sure, the financial distress also directly affected the behavior of non-financial firms. See
Giroud and Mueller (2015) for evidence of firm balance sheet effects on employment during the
crisis.
2See Gertler and Karadi (2011), Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010) and Curdia and Woodford (2010)
for papers that incorporate banking and Eggertsson and Krugman (2012), Geurreri and Lorenzoni
(2011) and Midrigan and Philippon (2011) for papers that incuded household debt.
2

taneous sudden collapse in asset prices and rise in credit spreads.3 A sharp collapse
in output typically ensues. Then recovery occurs only slowly, as it is impeded by a
slow process of develeraging. A number of papers have captured this nonlinearity by
allowing for the possibility that the balance sheet constraints do not always bind.4
Financial crises are then periods where the constraints bind, causing an abrupt con-
traction in economic activity. Another approach to handling the nonlinearity is to
allow for bank runs.5 Indeed, runs on the shadow banking system were a salient
feature of the crisis, culminating with the collapse in September 2008 of Lehman
Brothers, of some major money market funds and ultimately of the entire invest-
ment banking sector. Yet another literature captures the nonlinearity inherent in
financial crises by modeling network interactions (see, e.g., Garleanu, Panegeas, and
Yu, 2015).
One area the macroeconomics literature has yet to address adequately is the
distinctive role of the wholesale banking sector in the breakdown of the financial
system. Our notion of wholesale banks corresponds roughly, though not exactly,
to the shadow banking sector on the eve of the 2007-2009 financial crisis. Shadow
banking includes all financial intermediaries that operated outside the Federal Re-
serve’s regulatory framework. By wholesale banking, we mean the subset that (i)
was highly leveraged, often with short term debt and (ii) relied heavily on borrowing
from other financial institutions in ”wholesale” markets, as opposed to borrowing
from households in ”retail” markets for bank credit.
When the crisis hit, the epicenter featured malfunctioning of the wholesale bank-
ing sector. Indeed, retail markets remained relatively stable while wholesale funding
markets experienced dry-ups and runs. By contrast, much of the macroeconomic
modeling of banking features traditional retail banking. In this respect it misses
some important dimensions of both the run-up to the crisis and how exactly the
crisis played out. In addition, by omitting wholesale banking, the literature may be
missing some important considerations for regulatory design.
In this Handbook chapter we present a simple canonical macroeconomic model
of banking crises that (i) is representative of the existing literature; and (ii) extends
this literature to feature a role for wholesale banking. The model will provide some
insight both into the growth of wholesale banking and into how this growth led to
a build-up of financial vulnerabilities that ultimately led to a collapse. Because the
3SeeHeandKrishnamurthy(2014)forevidenceinsupportofthenonlinearityoffinancialcrises.
4See Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), He and Krishnamurthy (2013,2014) and Mendoza
(2010).
5See Gertler and Kiyotaki (2015), Ferrante (2015a), Robatto (2014) and Martin, Skeie and Von
Thadden (2014a,b).
3