NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERNATIONAL COORDINATION
Jeffrey A. Frankel
Working Paper 21878
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21878
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2016
This paper was written for the 2015 Asia Economic Policy Conference, November 19-20, 2015. Forthcoming,
2016, in Policy Challenges in a Diverging Global Economy, edited by Reuven Glick and Mark Spiegel
(Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco). The author acknowledges comments from Joshua Aizenmann
and Charles Engel. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
The author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research. Further information
is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21878.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Jeffrey A. Frankel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

International Coordination
Jeffrey A. Frankel
NBER Working Paper No. 21878
January 2016
JEL No. F42
ABSTRACT
After a 30-year absence, calls for international coordination of macroeconomic policy are back. This
time the issues go by names like currency wars, taper tantrums, and fiscal compacts. In traditional
game theory terms, the existence of spillovers implies that countries are potentially better off if they
coordinate policies than under the Nash non-cooperative equilibrium. But what is the nature of the
spillover and the coordination? The paper interprets recent macroeconomic history in terms of four
possible frameworks for proposals to coordinate fiscal policy or monetary policy: the locomotive
game, the discipline game, the competitive depreciation game and the competitive appreciation game.
(The paper also considers claims that monetary coordination has been made necessary by the zero
lower bound among advanced countries or financial imperfections among emerging markets.) Perceptions
of the sign of spillovers and the direction of proposed coordination vary widely. The existence of
different models and different domestic interests may be as important as the difference between cooperative
and non-cooperative equilibria. In some cases complaints about foreigners’ actions and calls for cooperation
may obscure the need to settle domestic disagreements.
Jeffrey A. Frankel
Harvard Kennedy School
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeffrey_frankel@harvard.edu

Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, January 30, 2014:
“International monetary cooperation has broken down… The U.S. should worry about the effects of its
policies on the rest of the world.”
Brisbane Action Plan, G-20, November 2014:
“…we have strengthened our policy cooperation. We have a shared assessment of our challenges and
policy priorities. We are determined to step up our cooperation to: provide significant new momentum to
the global economy; boost demand and jobs; and achieve sustained and more balanced growth, both
internally and externally. Our macroeconomic and structural policies are mutually reinforcing and address
both demand and supply challenges. Our integrated approach is focused on moving towards a more
balanced policy framework. We will continue our efforts to foster positive spillovers and we recognise the
need to avoid negative ones.”
I. Introduction
International macroeconomic policy coordination arguably achieved a peak three
decades ago, in the form of a set of initiatives undertaken by G-7 leaders. These initiatives
included the Bonn Summit of 1978, where G-7 leaders agreed cooperatively to reflate their
economies so as to strengthen recovery from the 1974-75 global recession; the Plaza Accord of
1985, where G-5 ministers agreed to cooperate to bring down an over-valued dollar; an
agreement at the Tokyo Leaders Summit of 1986 to jointly monitor a set of economic
indicators; and a 1987 G-7 ministers agreement at the Louvre to try to put a floor under the
newly depreciated dollar. A lively academic literature provided theoretical support for such
cooperative solutions, drawing on the tools of game theory.
Then coordination fell out of favor. Academically, critics found a variety of limitations to
the case for coordination.1 Historically, the Germans regretted what they had agreed to at the
Bonn Summit, as reflation turned out to be the wrong objective in the inflation-plagued late
1970s. Japanese came to regret the Plaza Accord when the yen reached historic heights. Many
of the other summit communiques never had much effect, for better or worse.
Another problem was that the structure of the G-7 did not allow a role for the Emerging
Market countries (EMs), whose share of the world economy rose rapidly. Increasingly after
2003 the topic of interest to the United States was manipulation of currencies by China and
other EM countries. It was not very useful to discuss such topics if the countries concerned
were not represented in the room.
1 For example, Feldstein (1988), Fischer (1988), Frankel (1988), Ghosh and Masson (1988), Kehoe (1987), Oudiz and
Sachs (1984), Rogoff (1985) and Tabellini (1990).
2

A. The G-20 and the return of coordination as a live policy topic
Recent years have seen the partial return of international coordination. The
representation problem has been addressed by expanding the membership of the meetings to
include the larger EM countries in the Group of Twenty. A G-20 club of finance ministers and
central bank governors, which had been founded in 1999 to deal with currency crises in East
Asia and other emerging markets, was elevated to the status of leaders’ summits, largely at the
impetus of UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown. The first two G-20 leaders’ summits took place in
Washington in November 14-15, 2008, and London in April 2, 2009. Their immediate task was
dealing with the Global Financial Crisis that had hit in September 2008 and the ensuing global
recession. But those meetings also represented a sea-change for global governance in that the
G-20 had now superseded the G-7, giving a voice to the large EM countries.
If the G7 members thought that the newly invited members would quietly follow their
lead, then they must have been disappointed. For example, EM representatives declined to
join the US Treasury in pressuring China to appreciate its currency. Instead, Brazilian leaders
accused the Americans of depreciating their currency as much as anyone. They coined the
now-popular term “currency wars.”
In light of currency war concerns, G-7 ministers in February 2013 agreed to refrain from
unilateral foreign exchange intervention. Though little-heralded at the time, this agreement,
which we might call a cease-fire in the currency wars, is the most important recent example of
international monetary coordination. It is striking to realize that policy coordination today
apparently means agreeing not to intervene in the foreign exchange market to lower the value
of any currency, whereas it meant the opposite at the time of the Plaza Accord. Many would
like to go beyond the G-7 “ceasefire” to achieve an agreement that is more permanent, covers
more countries, prohibits a wider ranging of currency-weakening actions, and imposes serious
penalties against currency manipulation.
The market “taper tantrum” of 2013 – when US long-term interest rates rose in
response to Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke’s signal that Quantitative Easing would soon be
phased out -- provoked another sort of complaint from Indian Central Bank Governor Raghuram
Rajan: “International monetary cooperation has broken down…The U.S. should worry about the
effects of its policies on the rest of the world” (1/30/14). The monetary part of this paper
considers both kinds of concerns, represented by currency wars and the taper tantrum.
A few scholars have begun to return to the subject of coordination.2 Some, such as Rey
(2015), have given new prominence to the point that floating exchange rates do not fully
2 E.g., Blanchard, Ostry, and Ghosh (2013), Ostry and Ghosh (2013), Subacchi and Van den Noord (2012), Taylor
(2013) and Engel (2014, 2015).
3