NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PRIVATE EQUITY'S UNINTENDED DARK SIDE:
ON THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF EXCESSIVE DELISTINGS
Alexander Ljungqvist
Lars Persson
Joacim Tåg
Working Paper 21909
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21909
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2016
Financial support from the Swedish Securities Dealers Association Support Foundation (Persson
and Tåg) and from the Marianne and Marcus Wallenberg Foundation (Ljungqvist) is gratefully
acknowledged. We thank Brent Goldfarb, Armando Gomes, Josh Lerner, Gustavo Manso,
Morten Sørensen, Thomas Tangerås, Sheridan Titman, and audiences at the Helsinki Center for
Economic Research, Lund University, the 2014 Distinguished Public Lecture at the Institute for
Advanced Study, the 2015 Dean’s Lecture at City University, the 2015 IFN Workshop on
Corporate Ownership, the 2016 Henry Grunfeld Lecture, and the 2016 LBS Private Equity
Symposium for excellent comments and suggestions. Fredrik Andersson, Charlotta Olofsson,
Arvid Hedlund, Malin Olsson Tallås, and Olga Pugatšova provided outstanding research
assistance. Ljungqvist gratefully acknowledges the generous hospitality of IFN while working on
this project. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Alexander Ljungqvist, Lars Persson, and Joacim Tåg. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Private Equity's Unintended Dark Side: On the Economic Consequences of Excessive Delistings
Alexander Ljungqvist, Lars Persson, and Joacim Tåg
NBER Working Paper No. 21909
January 2016, Revised December 2016
JEL No. G24,G34,P16
ABSTRACT
Over the past two decades, the U.S. stock market has been shrinking as the public firm model has
begun to fall out of favor. We develop a political economy model of delistings to study the wider
economic consequences of this trend. We show that the private and social incentives to delist
firms from the stock market need not be aligned. Delistings can inadvertently impose an
externality on the economy by reducing citizen-investors’ exposure to corporate profits and
thereby undermining popular support for business-friendly policies. By facilitating companies’
departures from the stock market, private equity firms can trigger a chain of events that may lead
to long-term reductions in aggregate investment, productivity, and employment.
Alexander Ljungqvist Joacim Tåg
Stern School of Business Research Institute of Industrial Economics
New York University joacim.tag@ifn.se
44 West Fourth Street, #9-160
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
aljungqv@stern.nyu.edu
Lars Persson
Research Institute of Industrial Economics
lars.persson@ifn.se

1 Introduction
ThenumberoffirmslistedontheU.S.stockmarkethasfallendramaticallyinrecentyears. Usingdatagoing
backto1946,Figure1showsthatthenumberoflistedfirmspeakedat7,428in1997andhassincedeclined
almost monotonically. By December 2015, it stands at 3,754—half the 1997 count. Doidge, Karolyi, and
Stulz (2016) attribute 46% of this decline to a historically high number of delistings (the remainder being
duetoanunusuallylowlevelofIPOactivity). Weestimatethatsincetheturnofthecentury,anaverageof
407firms(or8.3%oftheannualtotal)havedelistedeveryyear.1 DelistingshaveoutnumberedIPOsinevery
yearsincethenumberofU.S.listedfirmspeakedin1997,exceptin2014. Companiesdelistforavarietyof
reasons—theygobankrupt,aredelistedbyanexchangeforviolatinglistingstandards,orareacquired—but
inrecentyears,asDoidge,Karolyi,andStulznote,“[t]hehighdelistrateisexplainedbyanunusuallyhigh
rateofacquisitionsofpublicly-listedfirmscomparedtopreviousU.S.history.”
Figure1: Thenumberofliste d(cid:8)(cid:10)(cid:11)U(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:7).(cid:10)S.companies,1946–2015.
8000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
Notes.Thenumberoflistedcompaniesisextractedfromthemon(cid:4)t(cid:5)h(cid:7)l(cid:6)y(cid:1)(cid:2)CRSPfiles.WecountthenumberofU.S.companieslistedon
theNYSE,AmericanStockExchange,andNasdaqeachDecember.ToensurethatwecaptureonlyU.S.listedoperatingcompanies,
werestricttheanalysistoCRSPsharecodes10and11. Thesharpincreasein1962isanartifactoftheCRSPfiles: CRSPhasno
datafortheAmericanStockExchangebefore1962.Thejumpin1971reflectsthecreationoftheNasdaqstockexchange.
In this paper, we explore whether the shrinking of the stock market, were it to continue unchecked,
could impose a major externality on the economy, by undermining what economic historians have termed
1TheestimateisbasedonCRSPdatacomparingtheannualnumberofdelistingsofU.S.companiesfromtheNYSE,American
StockExchange,andNasdaqtothetotalnumberofU.S.companieslistedontheseexchangesinDecemberofthepreviousyear.
1

thehard-won“consensus”insupportofshareholdercapitalismthathasemergedinAnglo-Saxoneconomies
over the past 100 years: in return for participating in the gains from corporate activity, shareholder-voters
lendtheirsupporttobusiness-friendlypolicies.2
Tostudythepotentialeconomicconsequencesofashrinkingstockmarket,wedevelopapoliticalecon-
omy model of delistings that incorporates publicly listed and privately held firms, citizen-workers and
citizen-investors who vote for parties based on their political preferences, political parties that determine
thebusinessclimateintheeconomy,andcorporateinvestment. Weframeouranalysisintermsofaprivate
equity(PE)firm’sdecisiontobuyoutfirmsfromthestockmarket. Unlikeacquisitionsbystrategicbuyers
thatarethemselveslisted,buyouttransactionsinvolvingPEfirmsshrinkthestockmarket,atleastforanum-
berofyears.3 Fueledbycheapdebt4andtheperceptionthatthecostsofbeinglistedhavebeguntooutweigh
the benefits,5 PE firms account for a sizeable share of delisting activity in the U.S. Figure 2 shows that PE
buyout activity reached a peak in 2006, when it accounted for 23.3% of delistings by number and 47.9%
byvalue,equivalentto1.9%ofstockmarketcapitalizationand2%ofGDPthatyear. Since2000,PEfirms
have been involved in 9.2% of all U.S. delistings by number and 14.6% by value, taking companies worth
a combined 6% of GDP private. According to figures published in The Economist, one in four mid-sized
firmsandoneintenlargefirmsintheU.S.areunderPEownershipasof2016, withonePEfirm(Carlyle)
employing725,000people,secondonlytoWalmart.6
Ourpoliticaleconomymodelshowsthattheprivateincentivestodelistcompaniesfromthestockmarket
need not coincide with the social incentives to do so. In other words, the rate of delistings can become
excessive. Thiscanhappenbecauseshareholdersinpubliccompaniesdonotinternalizethatwhentheyagree
to sell out, their political preferences may change in a way detrimental to the interests of the shareholders
of other companies. Put differently, even though sellers understand that their behavior can lead to adverse
2Milestonesonthepathtothis“consensus”includetheWorldWarILibertyBondprogram,the1920s“NewProprietorship”
movementaimedatshapingpoliticalpreferencesthroughemployeeandcustomerownershipplansintheU.S.,Thatcher-erapolicies
to create a “shareholder democracy” in the U.K. through the sale of state assets, and George W. Bush’s mid-2000s attempts to
promotean“ownershipsociety.”SeeOtt(2004,2007,2008)foracomprehensivehistoricalanalysis.
3KaplanandStro¨mberg(2009)reportthatoncedelisted,only14%ofbuyouttargetsareeventuallyrelistedonthestockmarket.
Afurther38%aresoldtostrategicbuyers,someofwhicharethemselveslisted.TheremaininghalfofPEbuyouttargetsleavethe
stockmarketpermanently.
4PEactivityvariessystematicallywithconditionsinthedebtmarkets(Axelson,Stro¨mberg,andWeisbach2009,Axelsonetal.
2013).
5See,forexample,TheEconomist’srecentleadertitled“Floatlikeabutterfly”andthespecialbriefingtitled“Privateequity:
TheBarbarianestablishment”(bothOct. 22, 2016), arguingthat“managersgrumblethatbeinginthepubliceyehasbecomea
giganticheadache. Listedfirmsfaceevermoreredtape. Thenthereisthetreadmillofquarterlyresults,withtheever-presentrisk
thatWallStreetwillpunishevenshort-termslip-ups.”
6See“Floatlikeabutterfly”(Oct.22,2016).
2