NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHO DID THE ETHANOL TAX CREDIT BENEFIT? AN EVENT ANALYSIS OF
SUBSIDY INCIDENCE
David A. Bielen
Richard G. Newell
William A. Pizer
Working Paper 21968
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21968
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2016
The research described in this paper was supported in part by the Bipartisan Policy Center. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by David A. Bielen, Richard G. Newell, and William A. Pizer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Who Did the Ethanol Tax Credit Benefit? An Event Analysis of Subsidy Incidence
David A. Bielen, Richard G. Newell, and William A. Pizer
NBER Working Paper No. 21968
February 2016
JEL No. H22,Q11,Q41,Q42,Q48
ABSTRACT
Using commodity futures contract and spot prices, we estimate the incidence of the US ethanol subsidy
accruing to corn farmers, ethanol producers, gasoline blenders, and gasoline consumers at expiration
in 2011. We find compelling evidence that ethanol producers captured two-thirds of the subsidy, and
suggestive evidence that a small portion of this benefit accrued to corn farmers. The remaining one-third
appears to have been captured by blenders, as we find no evidence that oil refiners or gasoline consumers
captured any part of the subsidy. This paper contributes to understanding of biofuels markets and policy
and empirical estimation of economic incidence.
David A. Bielen William A. Pizer
Duke University Sanford School of Public Policy
Box 90467 Duke University
Durham, NC 27708 Box 90312
dabielen@gmail.com Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
Richard G. Newell billy.pizer@duke.edu
Duke University
Box 90467
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
richard.newell@duke.edu

1 Introduction
“It might cost you more to fill up with gas as early as New Year’s
Day. If all other variables stay the same, gas prices should be higher
since the tax credit oil companies have received to blend ethanol with
their petroleum won’t be available.”
Jeff Scates, Illinois Corn Growers Association President
“As a result, oil companies have been able to set demand and price
levels for ethanol, keeping prices low and pocketing much, if not
all, of the VEETC as profit.”
Natural Resource Defense Council Policy Fact Sheet
“While those who support the program put forth various reasons
for their support — that ethanol will reduce greenhouse gases or
curb our reliance on foreign oil — in reality, it is merely a wealth
transfer program from the general taxpayer to corn producers.”
Washington Examiner Op-Ed Piece
The energy sector in the United States is host to a myriad of policies — reg-
ulations, taxes, and subsidies — that shift behavior away from a free-market
outcome. Such policies are often motivated by the association of different
forms of energy use with significant non-market consequences related to the
environment and energy reliability. An important question is whether the
benefits from these policies exceed the costs, requiring a careful analysis of
non-market benefits (National Research Council, 2010).
Often missing from the aggregate benefit-cost analysis are distributional
assessments of who pays or, in the case of a subsidy, who benefits. Incidence
is not obvious, as burdens and benefits can accrue to both producers and con-
sumers depending on relative elasticities of response, and may be passed up
2

and down a particular supply chain. Moreover, for market-based policies, in-
cluding taxes and subsidies, the distinct consequences for winners and losers
can be many times the aggregate net cost or benefit (Burtraw and Palmer,
2008). In many policy debates, it is these consequences for particular stake-
holders that help determine both enactment and survival, regardless of the
aggregate net benefit analysis. For both equity in its own right and equity’s
link to acceptance, it is important to consider these distributional effects.
Perhaps nowhere is this more evident than ethanol, which was the object
of the single most expensive energy subsidy in recent history, the Volumetric
Ethanol Excise Tax Credit (VEETC).1 Regardless of one’s stance on whether
more ethanol is or is not desirable, or whether the subsidy was effective at
encouraging more ethanol, advocates claimed the subsidy lowered motor fuel
prices for consumers while critics claimed the subsidy simply enriched ethanol
producers. Which view does the evidence support? The answer is relevant
not only for the subsidy, but also for understanding the market structure un-
derlying an industry that continues to be the subject of considerable policy
intervention through the federal Renewable Fuel Standard.
Policy effects are often difficult to measure because the no-policy coun-
terfactual cannot be observed. Further complicating matters, multiple policies
often target the same objective, making it difficult to disentangle the effects
of any single policy. This is particularly evident in the case of policies that
promoted ethanol, where three different policies were in place from 2005, when
both ethanol mandates and an effective ban on MTBE as a fuel additive be-
gan, until the end of 2011, when the VEETC was ended.
Nonetheless, the sudden end to the VEETC on December 31st, 2011, of-
fers a unique opportunity to observe the incremental consequences of a single
policy. In particular, at the time of its termination, was the ethanol subsidy
benefiting primarily ethanol producers or consumers? Was the value being
passed further up or down the supply chain? By comparing prices along the
1The VEETC accounted for $5 billion per year, or roughly one-quarter of all energy
related, non-stimulus subsidies in 2007 and 2011 (U.S. Energy Information Administration,
2011).
3