NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OVERCONFIDENT INVESTORS, PREDICTABLE RETURNS, AND EXCESSIVE
TRADING
Kent Daniel
David Hirshleifer
Working Paper 21945
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21945
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2016
This paper was prepared for the Journal of Economic Perspectives Symposium on Overconfidence.
We thank Gordon Hanson, Ulrike Malmendier, Enrico Moretti, Timothy Taylor, and Paul Tetlock
for helpful discussions and comments, and Chen Wang for excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21945.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Kent Daniel and David Hirshleifer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Overconfident Investors, Predictable Returns, and Excessive Trading
Kent Daniel and David Hirshleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 21945
January 2016
JEL No. G02,G11,G12,G14,G2,Z23,Z33
ABSTRACT
Individuals and asset managers trade aggressively, resulting in high volume in asset markets, even
when such trading results in high risk and low net returns. Asset prices display patterns of predictability
that are difficult to reconcile with rational expectations–based theories of price formation. This paper
discusses how investor overconfidence can explain these and other stylized facts. We review the evidence
from psychology and securities markets bearing upon overconfidence effects, and present a set of overconfidence
based models that are consistent with this evidence.
Kent Daniel
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 421
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
kd2371@columbia.edu
David Hirshleifer
Merage School of Business
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697
david.h@uci.edu

1 Introduction
The last several decades have seen a shift away from a fully rational paradigm of financial
markets towards one in which investor behavior is influenced by psychological biases. One
of the main factors contributing to this evolution is a body of evidence showing how psycho-
logical bias affects the behavior of economic actors. Another main factor is an accumulation
of evidence that is hard to reconcile with fully rational models of security market trading
volumes and returns. In particular, asset markets exhibit trading volumes that are high,
while individuals and asset managers trade aggressively, even when such trading results in
high risk and low net returns. Moreover, asset prices display patterns of predictability that
are difficult to reconcile with rational expectations based theories of price formation.
In this paper, we discuss the role of overconfidence as an explanation for these patterns.
Overconfidence means having mistaken valuations and believing in them too strongly. It
might seem that actors in liquid financial markets should not be very susceptible to overcon-
fidence, because return outcomes are measurable, providing extensive feedback. However,
overconfidence has been documented among experts and professionals, including those in the
finance profession. For example, overconfidence is observed among corporate financial offi-
cers (Ben-David, Graham and Harvey 2013) and among professional traders and investment
bankers (Glaser, Langer and Weber 2013). People tend to be overoptimistic about their life
prospects (Weinstein 1980), and this optimism directly affects their financial decisions (Puri
and Robinson 2007).
Wedonotmeantosuggestthatoverconfidenceistheonlyphenomenonworthconsidering
in behavioral finance, nor that it should serve as an all-purpose explanation for all financial
anomalies. But overconfidence seems likely to be a key factor in financial decision making.
Overconfidence is a widespread psychological phenomenon (as discussed by Malmendier and
Taylor in their overview for this symposium), and is associated with a cluster of related
effects. For example, it includes overplacement—overestimation of one’s rank in a population
on some positive dimension—and overprecision—overestimation of the accuracy of one’s
beliefs. An example is overestimation of one’s ability to predict the stock market’s future
returns. A cognitive process that helps support overconfident beliefs is self-attribution bias,
in which people give credit their own talents and abilities for past successes, while blaming
their failures on bad luck.
To evaluate the importance of overconfidence for financial markets, we proceed as follows.
We start by reviewing two of the primary financial market anomalies at odds with rational
1

agent asset pricing theories: the arguments that trading volumes are excessive and the
evidence that security returns are in some ways predictable. We then sketch a sequence of
models of investor trading and security prices that include various aspects of overconfidence,
with increasing complexity, and discuss the empirical implications of each of these models.
We hope that this presentation will clarify which aspects of the model are important in
delivering specific empirical implications. Finally, we offer some conclusions about how
overconfidence contributes to our understanding of financial markets.
2 Evidence on Trading Patterns and Return Predictabil-
ity
The notion of market efficiency, as explained in Fama (1970), is based on the idea that when
investors in frictionless asset markets compete with one another, securities will be correctly
priced to fully reflect all publicly available information. More generally, rationality on the
part of investors has some strong implications.
With surprisingly mild theoretical assumptions, one can show that rational individuals
should not agree to disagree. Intuitively, if we start with the same prior beliefs, yet now we
disagree, this suggests that at least one party has information that the other party should be
taking more fully into account (Aumann 1976). In a similar spirit, rational investors should
not place bets with each other; the fact that another investor is willing to take the opposite
side of my trade should suggest to me that this investor knows something I do not know
(Grossman 1976, Milgrom and Stokey 1982, Tirole 1982). For this reason, leading rational
frictionless models of asset pricing—at least in their most simple versions—imply that after
a single round of trading everyone should hold the market portfolio. Investors should not bet
against each other, each expecting to beat his counterparties. However, we clearly observe
high volumes of trade in financial markets.
Moreover, in an efficient market, a trading strategy based on existing information can-
not be used to earn abnormal profits. If such trading strategies do exist there is a return
anomaly: such opportunities suggest either that rational agents are not fully exploiting avail-
able profit opportunities, or that risk aversion or market frictions constrain their ability to
do so. However, it is now a well-accepted empirical finding—even by those who adhere
to a rational-actors explanation—that asset markets do display strong patterns of return
predictability. This finding poses a challenge to the hypothesis that investors are ratio-
2