NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RELATIVE PRICE DISPERSION:
EVIDENCE AND THEORY
Greg Kaplan
Guido Menzio
Leena Rudanko
Nicholas Trachter
Working Paper 21931
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21931
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2016
We are grateful to Bob Hall for comments on some of our previous work that inspired the current project.
We are grateful to Jim Albrecht, George Alessandria, Fernando Alvarez, Ken Burdett, Jeff Campbell,
Glenn Ellison, Sarah Ellison, Doireann Fitzgerald, Gaetano Gaballo, Matthew Gentzkow, Jose Moraga-Gonzales,
Erik Hurst, Nir Jaimovich, Boyan Jovanovic, Stephan Seiler, Rob Shimer, Randy Wright for useful
comments. We are grateful to our audiences at the NBER Summer Institute (IO and Price Dynamics
groups), Minnesota Macro Workshop, Canadian Macro Study Group, Philadelphia Search and Matching
Workshop, Econometric Society, Chicago FRB/St.Louis FRB Workshop on Money, Banking, Payments
and Finance, SED Annual Meeting, Bank of France Price Setting and Inflation Conference, EIEF Junior
Conference in Macroeconomics, University of Pennsylvania (Wharton), University of Wisconsin at
Madison, FRB Minneapolis, George Washington University, Universidad Torcuato di Tella, Universidad
San Andres, UVA/Richmond FRB Research Jamboree. We thank the Kilts Center for Marketing and
the Nielsen Company for sharing their data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond,
the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21931.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Greg Kaplan, Guido Menzio, Leena Rudanko, and Nicholas Trachter. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Relative Price Dispersion: Evidence and Theory
Greg Kaplan, Guido Menzio, Leena Rudanko, and Nicholas Trachter
NBER Working Paper No. 21931
January 2016
JEL No. D40,D83,E31,L11
ABSTRACT
We use a large dataset on retail pricing to document that a sizeable portion of the cross-sectional variation
in the price at which the same good trades in the same period and in the same market is due to the
fact that stores that are, on average, equally expensive set persistently different prices for the same
good. We refer to this phenomenon as relative price dispersion. We argue that relative price dispersion
stems from sellers' attempts to discriminate between high-valuation buyers who need to make all of
their purchases in the same store, and low-valuation buyers who are willing to purchase different items
from different stores. We calibrate our theory and show that it is not only consistent with the extent
and sources of dispersion in the price that different sellers charge for the same good, but also with
the extent and sources of dispersion in the prices that different households pay for the same basket
of goods, as well as with the relationship between prices paid and the number of stores visited by different
households.
Greg Kaplan Leena Rudanko
Department of Economics Research Department
Princeton University Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Fisher Hall Ten Independence Mall
Princeton, NJ 08544 Philadelphia, PA 19106
and NBER leena.rudanko@gmail.com
gkaplan@princeton.edu
Nicholas Trachter
Guido Menzio Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
Department of Economics 701 E Byrd Street
University of Pennsylvania Richmond, VA 23219
467 McNeil Building Nicholas.Trachter@rich.frb.org
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
gmenzio@econ.upenn.edu

1 Introduction
Using a large dataset on retail pricing, we document that a significant fraction of the cross-
sectional variation in the price at which the same good is sold in the same period of time and
in the same market is due to the fact that retailers that are, on average, equally expensive set
persistently different prices for that particular good. We refer to this phenomenon as relative
price dispersion. We propose a theory of relative price dispersion in an equilibrium model of
the retail market, where buyers and sellers, respectively, demand and supply multiple goods.
We argue that relative price dispersion stems from the sellers’ incentive to discriminate
between high-valuation buyers who need to make all of their purchases in the same store,
and low-valuation buyers who are willing to purchase different items from different stores.
We calibrate our theory of relative price dispersion and we show that it captures well the
differences between the extent and cause of variation in the price at which the same good
is sold by different sellers, and the extent and cause of variation in the prices that different
households pay for the same basket of goods.
In the first part of the paper, we measure the extent and sources of dispersion in the
price at which the same good is sold in the same week and in the same geographical area
by different retailers. We carry out the analysis using the Kilts-Nielsen Retail Scanner
Dataset (KNRS), which provides weekly price and quantity information for 1.5 million goods
(defined by their Unique Product Code) at around 40,000 stores in over 2,500 counties across
205 Designated Market Areas (which are geographical areas of roughly the same size as
Metropolitan Statistical Areas).
Using the KNRS, we compute the average price of a particular good in a given week
and in a given geographical area. We normalize the price of the good at each different
store by expressing it as a percentage deviation from the average price in the relevant week
and market. We break down the normalized price of the good at each different store into
a store component—defined as the average of the normalized price of all the goods sold
by the store in the week—and a store-good component—defined residually as the difference
between the price of the good at the store and the average price of the store. We then
compute the variance of the price of the good at different stores, and we break down this
variance into a store component and a store-good component. We find that, on average, the
standard deviation of prices for the same good in the same week and market is 15.3%, and
the variance is 2.34%. We also find that only 15% of the variance is due to the variance in
the store component—i.e. due to the fact that the same good is sold at stores that have
a different average price—while 85% is due to the variance of the store-good component—
2

i.e. due to the fact that the same good is sold at different prices at stores that are equally
expensive on average.
We then use the time dimension in KNRS to identify the persistent component and the
transitory component of the price of a particular good at a particular store. To this aim, we
follow an approach that is commonly used in the literature on labor economics to analyze
wage inequality (see, e.g, Gottschalk and Moffitt 1994 and Blundell and Preston 1998) but
that had never been applied before to study price dispersion. Specifically, we estimate a
statistical model for prices, in which both the store and the store-good component of prices
are given by the sum of a fixed effect, an AR process and an MA process. When estimated,
the statistical model fits the auto-covariances of prices very well. The estimated model
implies that almost all of the cross-sectional variance of the store component of prices stems
from persistent differences in average store prices. Also, the estimated model implies that
roughly 1/3 of the variance of the cross-sectional variance of the store-good component of
prices stems from persistent differences in the price of the good at equally expensive stores,
whileroughly2/3ofthevariancestemsfromtransitorydifferences. Overall, asizablefraction
of the variation in the price of the same good across different stores in the same week and in
the same market is due to the fact that, equally expensive stores, charge persistently different
prices for the same good. We refer to the persistent differences in the price of a particular
good relative to the average price of the store as relative price dispersion.
The literature offers compelling theories of short-term differences in the price of the same
good across equally expensive stores. For instance, according to the theory of intertemporal
price discrimination (see, e.g., Conlisk, Gerstner and Sobel 1984, Sobel 1984, Menzio and
Trachter 2015a), sellers find it optimal to occasionally lower the price of a particular good in
order to discriminate between low-valuation customers who are willing to do their shopping
at any time during the month, and high-valuation customers who need to make their pur-
chases on a specific day of the month. As different sellers implement these occasional price
reductions at different times, the equilibrium may feature short-term differences in the price
of the same good across equally expensive stores. According to the inventory management
theory (see, e.g., Aguirregabiria 1999), a seller finds it optimal to increases the price of a
good as the inventory of the good falls, and it finds it optimal to lower the price when the
inventory of the good is replenished. As different sellers have different inventory cycles, the
equilibrium may feature short-term differences in the price of the same good across equally
expensive stores. In contrast, the literature does not offer much theoretical guidance in the
way of understanding relative price dispersion, i.e. long-term differences in the price of the
same good across equally expensive stores.
3