NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STRONG STERLING POUND AND WEAK EUROPEAN CURRENCIES IN THE CRISES:
EVIDENCE FROM COVERED INTEREST PARITY OF SECURED RATES
Shin-ichi Fukuda
Working Paper 21938
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21938
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2016
An earlier version of this paper was presented at the 25th TRIO conference in Tokyo on December
16-17 in 2015, the 2013 Surrey-Fordham conference in Guildford on November 2-3 in 2013 and the
2nd FEBS Conference in London on 7-8 June in 2012. We would like to thank Natasha Burns, Rasmus
Fatum, Eiji Ogawa, and other participants for their useful comments. This work was supported by
JSPS KAKENHI Grant Numbers 26285044 and 15K13003. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Shin-ichi Fukuda. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Strong Sterling Pound and Weak European Currencies in the Crises: Evidence from Covered
Interest Parity of Secured Rates
Shin-ichi Fukuda
NBER Working Paper No. 21938
January 2016
JEL No. F36,G12,G15
ABSTRACT
In the post Lehman period, the interest rate of the US dollar became low on the forward contract because
of“flight to quality” to the international currency. However, in the Euro crisis, that of the Sterling pound
became equally low, while the other European currencies such as the Danish kroner increased its liquidity
premium. By using secured rates, the following analysis examines why the Sterling pound and the
Danish kroner showed asymmetric features in deviations from the covered interest parity (CIP) condition.
The regression results suggest that there was a structural break in the determinants of the deviations
across the European currencies in the two crises. Currency-specific money market risk was critical
in explaining the deviations in the global financial crisis (GFC), while EU banks’ credit risk and market
risk were useful in explaining the deviations in the Euro crisis. In particular, EU banks’ credit risk
and market risk had asymmetric effect on the deviations. The asymmetry explains different features
between the Sterling pound and the Danish kroner.
Shin-ichi Fukuda
Faculty of Economics
University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku
Tokyo 113-0033, JAPAN
sfukuda@e.u-tokyo.ac.jp

1. Introduction
The global financial crisis (GFC) and the following Euro crisis had enormous impacts on
international markets. In particular, covered interest parity (CIP) condition, which was solidly
anchored in riskless arbitrage during tranquil periods, was violated substantially during the crises.
Even using secured rates such as overnight index swap (OIS) rates, the violation was substantial in the
crises. In particular, when comparing interest rates across currencies, the CIP condition suggests that
the US dollar had lower interest rate than any other currency in the crisis.
Figure 1 depicts daily deviations from CIP condition between the US dollar and each of the
five non-US dollar currencies: Euro, Sterling pound, Danish krone, the Swiss franc, and Japanese yen.
For the sample period from January 1, 2007 to December 30, 2015, we calculated the deviations by
annualized value of (1+in) – (1+ius) (Fn /Sn), where in ≡ three-month currency n’s OIS rate, ius ≡
t t t+1 t t t
three-month US dollar OIS rate, Sn ≡ the spot exchange rate between the two currencies, and Fn ≡
t t+1
its three-month forward exchange rate. All of the data the unit of which is basis point are downloaded
from Datastream. For all combinations, deviations had been negligible until the beginning of August
2007. But significant upward deviations had occurred since mid-August 2007. In particular, there
were very large upward deviations after the Lehman shock on September 15 in 2008. The upward
deviations were temporarily stabilized in 2009. But reflecting the Euro crisis, we can still observe
significant upward deviations from 2010 to 2012 and in 2015. Money that provides with liquidity
has lower interest rate than any other safe asset. In the crises, the role of the US dollar as international
liquidity similarly made its interest rate lower than those of the other major currencies on the forward
market.
However, when comparing interest rates across the currencies, we can see that the Sterling
pound had smaller deviations than the other non-US dollar currencies after the early 2009. In
particular, since the second half of 2010, the Sterling pound came to have equally low interest rate as
the US dollar on the forward contract. In contrast, the other European currencies and the Japanese yen
had higher interest rates in the Euro crisis. Using the Euro as the benchmark currency, Figure 2
2

depicts daily CIP deviations of three European currencies and the Japanese yen from January 1, 2007
to December 30, 2015. For currency k (k = the Sterling pound, the Swiss franc, the Danish kroner, and
the Japanese yen), we calculated the deviations by annualized value of (1+ ik) – (1+ieuro)(fk /ek),
t t t+1 t
where ik ≡ three-month currency k’s OIS rate, ieuro ≡ three-month Euro OIS rate, ek ≡ the Euro spot
t t t
exchange rate against currency k, and fk ≡ its three-month forward exchange rate.1 Even when we
t+1
use the Euro as the benchmark currency, we can see significant positive deviations in the Danish
kroner, the Swiss franc, and the Japanese yen in the figure, although the Swiss franc showed
temporarily negative large deviations in September 2008. The upward deviations which became
largest after the Lehman shock persisted in the Euro crisis. In contrast, the Sterling pound showed
negative deviations throughout the period. In particular, the downward deviations were widened in the
second half of 2011 when the Euro crisis became more serious. The results imply that in the Euro
crisis, the Euro remained chosen as a regional liquidity among non-Euro members in Europe but that
the Sterling pound was preferred more than the Euro in the international money markets.
The results are essentially the same even if we calculated deviations from the CIP condition
by using interest rates with shorter term-to-maturities and with longer term-to-maturities. Using the
same data source and the same sample period, Figure 3 depicts daily CIP deviations of three European
currencies and the Japanese yen in one-month rates and in one-year rates when we use the Euro as the
benchmark currency. Except that we used a different term-to-maturity, we calculated the deviations by
using the same formula as in Figure 2. Compared with the three-month rates, the one-month rates
showed more temporary deviations, while the one-year rates had more persistent deviations. But even
the one-month rates showed a few large spikes in the deviations. More importantly, both in one-month
rates and in one-year rates, the Danish kroner, the Swiss franc, and the Japanese yen showed
significant positive deviations, while the Sterling pound showed negative deviations throughout the
period.
The purpose of this paper is to explore what made the CIP deviations so different between the
1 All of the data the unit of which is basis point are downloaded from Datastream.
3