NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW COLLATERAL LAWS SHAPE LENDING AND SECTORAL ACTIVITY
Charles W. Calomiris
Mauricio Larrain
José M. Liberti
Jason D. Sturgess
Working Paper 21911
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21911
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2016
We thank Emily Breza, Murillo Campello, Qianqian Du (discussant), Scott Frame (discussant), Todd
Gormley, Li Jin (discussant), Martin Oehmke, Arito Ono (discussant), Tomasz Piskorski, Jacopo Ponticelli
(discussant), Philip Strahan, Greg Udell, Paolo Volpin (discussant), Daniel Wolfenzon, Baozhong
Yang (discussant), Zacharias Sautner (discussant), Stefan Zeume (discussant), and seminar participants
at EBRD, Laboratoire d’Excellence ReFI, Columbia-NYU Junior Corporate Finance Meeting, Columbia
Business School, NBER Law and Economics Meeting, CEPR Workshop on Corporate Financing (Oxford),
Catolica Lisbon-Nova SBE (Lisbon), Junior Faculty Roundtable at UNC Chapel Hill, Symposium
on Emerging Financial Markets (Columbia), Federal Reserve Board, ITAM Finance Conference (Mexico
City), MoFiR Workshop on Banking (Kobe), University of New South Wales (Sydney), IMF, China
International Conference in Finance (Shenzhen), Catholic University of Chile, University of Chile,
University Adolfo Ibañez, University Los Andes, American Finance Association (San Francisco) and
European Finance Association Meeting (Vienna) for helpful comments. Jason Lee provided excellent
research assistance. We are grateful for funding from the Jerome A. Chazen Institute of International
Business at Columbia Business School. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Charles W. Calomiris, Mauricio Larrain, José M. Liberti, and Jason D. Sturgess. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Collateral Laws Shape Lending and Sectoral Activity
Charles W. Calomiris, Mauricio Larrain, José M. Liberti, and Jason D. Sturgess
NBER Working Paper No. 21911
January 2016
JEL No. G18,G21
ABSTRACT
We demonstrate the central importance of creditors’ ability to use “movable” assets as collateral (as
distinct from “immovable” real estate) when borrowing from banks. Using a unique cross-country
micro-level loan dataset containing loan-to-value ratios for different assets, we find that loan-to-values
of loans collateralized with movable assets are lower in countries with weak collateral laws, relative
to immovable assets, and that lending is biased towards the use of immovable assets. Using sector-level
data, we find that weak movable collateral laws create distortions in the allocation of resources that
favor immovable-based production. An analysis of Slovakia’s collateral law reform confirms our findings.
Charles W. Calomiris José M. Liberti
Graduate School of Business DePaul University
Columbia University 1 E. Jackson Blvd.
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall DePaul Center 6131
New York, NY 10027 Chicago
and NBER Illinois, 60604
cc374@columbia.edu jliberti@depaul.edu
Mauricio Larrain Jason D. Sturgess
Columbia University DePaul University
3022 Broadway, 813 Uris Hall Finance Group
New York, NY 10027 Suite 5500
mlarrain@columbia.edu 1 E Jackson Blvd
Chicago
IL 60604
jason.sturgess@gmail.com
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21911

I. Introduction
The ability of creditors to enforce their contracts with debtors is fundamental to the market for credit. A
debtor who cannot commit to repay her loan will find it difficult if not impossible to obtain one. Over the
past two decades, scores of academic articles have demonstrated the validity and importance of creditors’
rights for the supply of credit by showing how cross-country differences in the rights of creditors and
reforms within countries that improve creditors’ rights are associated with dramatic differences in the
supply of bank credit and economic growth.2 In this paper, we provide evidence on a new channel
through which legal systems affect debt contracting, and in turn, credit supply and real economic activity.
We demonstrate the central importance of creditors’ ability to use “movable” assets as collateral (as
distinct from “immovable” real estate) when borrowing from banks.
“Movable” assets consist of all non-real estate assets (such as machinery, accounts receivable,
and inventory). According to the World Bank, creditors in emerging markets are usually reluctant to
accept movable assets as collateral (Fleisig et al., 2006). That is a major problem for firms that rely on
bank credit because movable assets are central to the production processes of many firms in developed
and emerging market countries, and in the absence of legal system shortcomings, movable assets are the
most important class of collateral used in bank credit. For example, within the United States, 63 percent
of collateralized loans made to small and medium-sized enterprises are collateralized by movable assets.3
2 King and Levine (1993), Levine and Zervos (1998), La Porta et al. (1997, 1998), Taylor (1998), and Beck et al.
(2000) employed innovative statistical techniques to identify cross-country patterns. A later group of scholars—most
notably Rajan and Zingales (1998), Wurgler (2000), Cetorelli and Gamberra (2001), Fisman and Love (2004), and
Beck et al. (2008)—focused on the development of sectors as well as countries, and they reached the same
conclusion: finance leads growth. Research focusing on the growth of regions within countries by Jayaratne and
Strahan (1996), Black and Strahan (2002), Guiso et al. (2004), Cetorelli and Strahan (2006), Dehejia and Lleras-
Muney (2007), and Correa (2008) produced broadly similar results. There are also various articles focusing on how
creditors’ rights differences affect the structure of loans and the identity of lenders. See, for example, Demirguc-
Kunt and Maksimovic (1998), Qian and Strahan (2007), Bae and Goyal (2009), and Liberti and Mian (2010).
3 Specifically, 46% of collateralized loans are collateralized by machinery, and 17% collateralized by inventory and
accounts receivable. Data on collateralized lending for SMEs in the U.S. comes from the Federal Reserve Board’s
Survey of Small Business Finance (SSBF). The SSBF combines accounts receivable and inventory. Accounts
receivable and inventory are the two most fundamental forms of asset-based financing since they combine elements
of secured lending and short-term business loans. A firm would use the value of their accounts receivable and
inventory as collateral to secure financing to produce and sell their products and services. The financing is then
repaid by converting the inventory to cash, either directly or through the collection of accounts receivables (see
Udell, 2004). See Appendix Table A.2 for details.
1

In this paper, we argue that the root of the inability to make use of movables collateral in many emerging
markets reflects problems in legal regimes governing movables collateral use. Each country has a
collateral law for immovable assets and another law for movable assets. Although collateral laws for real
estate loans tend to be relatively well developed worldwide, creditors in many countries are reluctant to
lend against movable assets because their legal systems limit the usefulness of such assets as collateral. In
particular, legal systems for movables are weak in three dimensions: they limit the scope of movable
assets that can be used as collateral, they lack centralized registration systems to monitor the security
interests (to make sure no other lender has rights to the same collateral), and they allow enforcement in
the event of default only through courts.4
We explore how the sophistication of a country’s collateral laws for movable assets affects loan
supply, reflected in the loan-to-value (LTV) ratios for loans secured by movables assets compared to
loans against immovable assets. We employ a novel cross-country micro-level dataset containing small
and medium business secured loans issued by an anonymous global bank (which we label GlobalBank) in
12 emerging market countries. One advantage of the dataset is that it provides information regarding the
liquidation value of the asset being pledged as collateral.5 This allows us to construct comparable LTVs,
using meaningful measures of asset value, for loans collateralized by different types of assets – something
that the previous literature has been unable to do, due to the lack of data on asset liquidation values.
Another novel contribution of our study is our analysis of how different countries’ treatment of
movable assets as collateral shapes the allocation of resources across sectors. Because emerging market
finance is typically bank debt, and is often collateralized, constraints on LTV and debt capacity should
also constrain economic activity.6 Specifically, we analyze how collateral laws affect the sectoral
4 Article 9 of the Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) governs secured transactions for movable assets in the U.S.
According to the U.C.C., security interests over movables are well defined, easily registered, and can be seized
easily if default occurs without the necessity of a judicial procedure (see Section 9-607).
5 As per GlobalBank credit manuals, the asset value is the fair market value that a willing and informed buyer would
pay in less than 180 days under normal (non-fire sale) conditions.
6 According to the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys, which are performed in over 100 countries, collateral is
required for bank loans in 75% of loans worldwide. Moreover, the lack of collateral is one of the primary reasons for
2