NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCIAL FRICTIONS AND UNCONVENTIONAL MONETARY POLICY IN
EMERGING ECONOMIES
Roberto Chang
Andrés Velasco
Working Paper 21955
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21955
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2016
Prepared for the 2015 IMF Annual Research Conference. We are grateful for comments and suggestions
from Marcos Chamon and participants of seminars at CREI (Pompeu Fabra) and the Central Bank
of Austria. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Roberto Chang and Andrés Velasco. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Financial Frictions and Unconventional Monetary Policy in Emerging Economies
Roberto Chang and Andrés Velasco
NBER Working Paper No. 21955
February 2016
JEL No. E52,E58,F41
ABSTRACT
We analyze conventional and unconventional monetary policies in a dynamic small open-economy
model with financial frictions. In the model, financial intermediaries or banks borrow from the world
market and lend to domestic households. Banks can borrow abroad up to a multiple of their equity;
in turn, there is a limit to how much bank equity households can hold. An economy-wide credit constraint
and an endogenous interest rate spread emerge from this combination of external and domestic frictions.
The resulting financial imperfections amplify the domestic effects of exogenous shocks and make
those effects more persistent. In response to external balance shocks, fixed exchange rates are contractionary
and flexible exchange rates expansionary (although less so in the presence of currency mismatches);
the opposite is true in response to increases in the world interest rate. Unconventional policies, including
central bank direct credit, discount lending, and equity injections to banks, have real effects only if
financial constraints bind. Because of bank leverage, central bank discount lending and equity injections
are more effective than direct credit. Sterilized foreign exchange intervention is equivalent to lending
directly to domestic agents. Unconventional policies are feasible only to the extent that the central
bank holds a sufficient amount of international reserves.
Roberto Chang
Rutgers University
Department of Economics
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
chang@econ.rutgers.edu
Andrés Velasco
Columbia University
School of International and Public Affairs
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and Oxford University
and also NBER
avbranes@gmail.com

1 Introduction
In response to weakening commodity prices and higher interest rates in
the U.S., emerging economies have suffered capital outflows, raising concerns
about macro and financial vulnerabilities. This evolving scenario is also
fueling debate on how policy should respond to these and similar shocks
when they materialize. A central issue in the debate is whether and to what
extentcentralbanksinemergingcountriesshouldjointheiradvancedcountry
peers in implementing quantitative easing, credit easing, and other so-called
unconventional monetary policies.
But discussions of this issue have been hampered by our very imperfect
understanding of the rationale and implications of such unconventional poli-
cies. This is not surprising, given that dominant models of monetary policy
have assumed complete and perfectly functioning financial markets, which
imply that unconventional policies are redundant and irrelevant.1 This as-
sumption is unrealistic for advanced economies and even more so for emerg-
ing economies, which often have ill-functioning financial markets and sizable
stocks of dollar-denominated debt. In emerging economies, therefore, many
questions remain wide open: How do financial frictions amplify exogenous
shocks? Can the financial sector itself become a source of shocks? What
are the implications for monetary policies of both the “conventional“ and
“unconventional“ kinds? 2
To tackle these questions, in this paper we develop a simple model of
an emerging economy in which financial imperfections take center stage. We
then use the model to analyze the impact of various real and financial shocks
and the role of alternative monetary and exchange rate policies. While the
model is mostly standard, dynamic, and built from first principles, we derive
results analytically. To do so, we impose some special assumptions, so that
ourmodelmaynotbeasgeneralasothersintheliterature. Butwebelieveits
simplicityoffersacompensatingpayoffintermsofinsightandunderstanding,
especially on the mechanics of conventional and unconventional policy.
Domesticfinancial frictions, combinedwithexternalfinancialfrictions,
can translate into an economy-wide foreign debt limit, with significant impli-
cations for aggregate demand and monetary policy. In our model, domestic
1As for dominant models, see Woodford (2003). The irrelevance of unconventional
policies under perfect financial markets was originally shown in Wallace (1981).
2For further discussion of unconventional policies in advanced economies, see Gertler
and Kiyotaki (2010). For emerging economies, see C´espedes, Chang, and Velasco (2014).
3

residents cannot borrow abroad directly; instead, they borrow from domes-
tic financial intermediaries or banks which, in turn, borrow abroad. Foreign
credit to banks, however, has a limit that depends on the size of the banks’
equity capital. A crucial question, therefore, concerns the determination of
the financial sector equity base. We assume that intermediaries obtain equity
capital from households, but the typical household in turn faces an exoge-
nous upper limit to the amount of equity it can hold. This equity constraint
is quite consequential. Presumably it can be derived from more fundamental
domestic frictions, such as informational or enforcement imperfections, that
result in an incomplete transfer of equity from households to banks. 3 But
for our purposes, the exact source of the equity constraint is not as critical
as its implications.
One of these implications is that the binding domestic equity constraint
becomes a binding international borrowing constraint, so that an endogenous
spread between foreign and domestic interest rates emerges. Hence, in addi-
tion to standard transmission channels, our model features an interest rate
channel of the type emphasized by Bernanke and Blinder (1988), Woodford
(2010), and others. Movements in the spread reflect changes in the demand
and supply for funds in the domestic loan market. The spread increases when
the external debt constraint becomes tighter.
Another implication is that, when financial constraints are binding, the
economy’s external balance constraint determines how the economy responds
to several kinds of shocks. With binding borrowing constraints, domestic
agentscannotsmoothouttheeffectsoftheshocksbyrunningupdebt. Hence
thetradedeficithastoadjustonimpact,meaningthatdomesticconsumption
must fall or the real exchange rate has to depreciate, and by more than they
would in a world with perfectly functioning capital markets. In other words,
crucially, amplification of the shocks occurs.
Shocks that require such a drastic external adjustment, which we refer to
as external balance shocks, include standard real shocks –for instance, tem-
porary drops in foreign export demand. But external balance shockscan also
arise in the financial sector. This is the case, if the equity constraint tight-
ens, so that financial intermediaries suddenly have less capital, or if foreign
lenders are suddenly willing to lend less to domestic financial intermedi-
3HereourmodelisreminiscentoftheworkbyCaballeroandKrishnamurthy(2003,for
example). But their model is static and their analysis is concerned with a very different
set of questions.
4