NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TRADE POLICY UNCERTAINTY AND EXPORTS:
EVIDENCE FROM CHINA’S WTO ACCESSION
Ling Feng
Zhiyuan Li
Deborah L. Swenson
Working Paper 21985
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21985
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2016
We thank Robert Staiger, Robert Feenstra, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, Thibault Fally, Ben Faber, Jiandong
Ju, Peter Morrow, Linke Zhu, two anonymous referee, seminar participants at University of California,
Berkeley, University of California, Davis, Tsinghua University, University of Nottingham Ningbo
China and conference participants at 11th FREIT-LETC for helpful comments. Ling Feng and Zhiyuan
Li thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China for financial support through Grant No.
71403159 and No. 71203128, respectively. Zhiyuan Li thanks the Economics Department at the University
of California, Berkeley, where he was a Visiting Scholar during the writing of this paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Ling Feng, Zhiyuan Li, and Deborah L. Swenson. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Trade Policy Uncertainty and Exports: Evidence from China’s WTO Accession
Ling Feng, Zhiyuan Li, and Deborah L. Swenson
NBER Working Paper No. 21985
February 2016
JEL No. F13,F14,F23
ABSTRACT
This paper studies how reduction in trade policy uncertainty affects firm export decisions. Using a
firm-product level dataset on Chinese exports to the United States and the European Union in the years
surrounding China’s WTO accession, we provide strong evidence that reduction in trade policy uncertainty
simultaneously induced firm entries to and firm exits from export activity within fine product-level
markets. In addition, we uncover accompanying changes in export product prices and quality that coincided
with this reallocation: firms that provided higher quality products at lower prices entered the export
market, while firms that had higher prices and provided lower quality products prior to the changes,
exited. To explain the simultaneous export entries and exits, as well as the change in product export
prices and quality induced by trade policy uncertainty changes, we provide a model of heterogeneous
firms which incorporates trade policy uncertainty, tracing the effects of the changes in policy uncertainty
on firm-level payoffs and the resulting selection effects which apply to new entrants and incumbents.
Ling Feng Deborah L. Swenson
School of Finance Department of Economics
Shanghai University of Finance University of California, Davis
and Economics Davis, CA 95616
777 Guoding Road and NBER
Shanghai, China, 200433 deswenson@ucdavis.edu
feng.ling@mail.shufe.edu.cn
Zhiyuan Li
School of Economics
Shanghai University of Finance
& Economics
777 Guoding Road
Shanghai, P.R. China. 200433
zhyli97@gmail.com

1. Introduction
This paper studies how trade policy uncertainty affects firm export decisions. In
particular, we study the micro firm-level response margins which shaped firm export
changes following changes in trade policy uncertainty. To answer these questions, we
take advantage of the trade activities of Chinese firms that exported to the United States
at the time of China’s 2001 WTO entry. 1
Three factors make this setting especially suitable for addressing our question. First,
Chinese exports to the United States during this period were characterized by strong
dynamics. As Figure 1 shows, the exceptional acceleration of China’s export growth
coincided almost exactly with China's WTO entry. More important, as we show in detail
in section 2, there was remarkable reallocation of export activities across firms. Firms
who exited the export market between 2000 and 2006 were responsible for 76 percent of
China’s total export value just prior to China’s WTO accession. Indeed, while some of the
reallocation led to market share expansion by established exporters, new exporters who
started to export following China’s WTO entry were responsible for 67 percent of China’s
export activity in 2006.
Second, China's WTO entry provided exporters with a substantial reduction in trade
policy uncertainty in the U.S. market. Such uncertainty reduction stems from the small
bound duties in the U.S. that are negotiated under Most Favored Nation (MFN) treatment.
As MFN binds the applied duties by these bound rates, the MFN bound rates provide a
significant reduction in the gap between the applied rate and the bound rate. China’s
WTO accession thus removed the threat that the U.S. might at some future time revoke its
Most Favored Nation treatment of China's exports, reverting instead to the much higher
general tariff rates levied by the U.S. on non-MFN countries.
Third, the United States is one of the most important markets for Chinese exporters.
For firms that ever exported to the US during the 2000 to 2006 interval, 25% of their
export value was shipped to the United States, followed by 18% to the European Union
and 12% to Japan.
1 Prior to China's WTO entry each of its trade partners was free to decide whether to provide
China access to their MFN treatment. MFN status for China, which was suspended in 1951 by the
United States, was restored in 1980, though its continuation was subject to annual extensions.
Following 1989, the annual renewal of China’s MFN status became a source of considerable
debate in the U.S. Congress (Dumbaugh, 2001).
1

Analysis of China's exports to the U.S. reveals a number of robust links between
trade policy uncertainty reduction and firm exports. First, we find that trade volume
growth associated with new export entry was positively related to product-level
uncertainty reduction following from China's WTO accession. These product level
responses to uncertainty reduction were apparent by 2002 and grew in magnitude over
the longer horizon. More importantly, we also find a positive relationship between the
degree of trade policy uncertainty reduction and exits by some of the incumbent firms
that were engaged in U.S. export prior to the policy changes.
To understand why trade policy uncertainty reduction induced export entry by one
group of firms while it caused another group of firms to exit, we compare the export
characteristics of new exporters with the characteristics of exiters.2 We find strong
evidence that new exporters charged lower prices while they exported higher quality
goods than did exiting firms.3 Moreover, we find that the advantages of new exporters
relative to exiting exporters were larger for products that experienced larger reductions in
trade policy uncertainty.
Our discovery of simultaneous export entry and export exit at the product-level are
not initially intuitive. In particular, it is commonly assumed that lower tariff uncertainty,
which facilitates entry by new exporters, will also benefit, or at worst be harmless to
incumbents in the export market. Consequently heterogeneous firm models, such as
Melitz (2003) and Melitz and Ottaviano (2008), do not predict an increase in the exit
from export by some exporting incumbents following favorable trade policy
developments. In other words, while trade liberalization expands export opportunities and
induces export entry, these models do not predict that trade liberalization will also cause
some incumbents to exit the export market.
Nonetheless, recent work on the effects of trade liberalization, demonstrates the
value of modelling and evaluating effects stemming from the reallocation of activities
across firms and products. For example, Mayer, Melitz and Ottaviano (2014) consider
how changes in export competition lead to changes in product export composition, with
consequences for firm-level productivity, while Melitz and Redding (2013) demonstrate
how endogenous firm selection has the potential to influence aggregate productivity.
2 The term “new exporter” refers to a firm that was not involved in export in 2000, but exported in one of
the years following China’s WTO accession. The export “exiters” are defined as firms that exported to the
US in 2000 but ceased their US export following China’s WTO accession. Further details about the
definitions are provided in Section 2.
3 Product quality is measured following Khandelwal, Schott and Wei (2013).
2