NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LACK OF SELECTION AND LIMITS TO DELEGATION:
FIRM DYNAMICS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Ufuk Akcigit
Harun Alp
Michael Peters
Working Paper 21905
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21905
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2016, Revised April 2018
This is a heavily revised This is a heavily revised version of Akcigit, Alp, and Peters (2016). We thank the seminar
and conference participants at Harvard, MIT, University of Chicago, Stanford, Princeton,
Yale, USC, LSE, the Productivity, Development & Entrepreneurship, and Macroeconomics
Within and Across Borders Meetings at the NBER Summer Institute, the NBER
Development Program and EFG Meeting, Stanford CID/IGC Conference, AEA Meetings,
OECD/NBER Conference on Productivity and Innovation, Minnesota Macro, NYU, Penn
State, Einaudi, University of Houston, Barcelona GSE Summer Forum, Kauffman
Entrepreneurship Conference, London Macroeconomics Conference, CAED 2015 Conference,
Cologne Workshop on Macroeconomics, SKEMA Growth Conference, UPenn Growth Reading
Group, and UPenn Macro Lunch for helpful comments. In particular we would like to thank
our discussants Francesco Caselli, John Haltiwanger, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Rasmus Lentz, and
Yongs Shin. We furthermore received very valuable feedback from Abhijit Banerjee, Nick
Bloom, Matthew Cook, Jeremy Greenwood, Bill Kerr, Pete Klenow, Chad Jones, Sam
Kortum, Robert E. Lucas, Giuseppe Moscarini, Luis Serven, Andrei Shleifer, and Nancy Stokey.
Chang-Tai Hsieh and Pete Klenow have kindly shared some of their data with us. Jeremy Pearce
provided excellent research assistance. Akcigit gratefully acknowledges financial support
from the World Bank, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Ewing Marion Kauffman
Foundation, and the National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not
been peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that
accompanies official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Ufuk Akcigit, Harun Alp, and Michael Peters. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Lack of Selection and Limits to Delegation: Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries
Ufuk Akcigit, Harun Alp, and Michael Peters
NBER Working Paper No. 21905
January 2016, Revised April 2018
JEL No. O31,O38,O40
ABSTRACT
Managerial delegation is essential for firm growth. While firms in poor countries often shun
outside managers and instead recruit among family members, the pattern is quite the opposite for
firms in rich countries. In this paper, we ask whether these differences in managerial delegation
have important aggregate effects. We construct a model of firm growth where entrepreneurs have
fixed-time endowments to run their daily operations. As firms grow larger, the need to delegate
decision-making authority increases. Firms in poor countries might therefore decide to remain
small if delegating managerial tasks is difficult. We calibrate the model to firm-level data from
the U.S. and India. We show that the model is quantitatively consistent with the experimental
micro evidence on managerial efficiency and firm growth reported in Bloom et al. (2013). Our
quantitative analysis shows that the low efficiency of delegation in India can account for 5% of
productivity and 15% of income differences between the U.S. and India in steady state. We also
show that such inefficient delegation possibilities reduce the size of Indian firms, but would cause
substantially more harm for U.S. firms. This is because there are important complementarities
between the ease of delegation and other factors affecting firm growth.
Ufuk Akcigit Michael Peters
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of Chicago Yale University
1126 East 59th Street 28 Hillhouse Avenue
Saieh Hall, Office 403 New Haven, CT 06511
Chicago, IL 60637 and NBER
and NBER m.peters@yale.edu
uakcigit@uchicago.edu
Harun Alp
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
McNeil 160
Philadelphia, PA, 19104
aharun@sas.upenn.edu

1 Introduction
Managerial delegation is essential for firm growth. In the developed world, many family-owned
industrialgiants,suchasWalmart,TheLegoGroup,orFordMotorCo.,havemanagedtoexpandto
hundredsofthousandsofemployeesbyrelyingonnon-familymanagerstoruntheirkeyoperations.
In contrast, in developing economies there seem to be serious obstacles to managerial delegation,
which make firm owners often shun outside managers and recruit managers exclusively among
family members. This is arguably one of the reasons why the number of sons in the family is a
strong predictor of firm size in India (Bloom et al., 2013). These observations lead to the following
important questions: How do cross-country differences in the ease of managerial delegation affect
the process of firm growth and selection? What are the implications for the aggregate economy? In
this paper, we answer these questions both theoretically and quantitatively.
In this paper, our aim is to understand the link between the microeconomics of managerial del-
egation and firm growth and their macroeconomic implications. While we try to go from micro to
macro, we inform our theoretical setup using micro data on millions of establishments in India and
the U.S. More specifically, we introduce the need for managerial delegation into a Schumpeterian
growth model, which we then calibrate to the Indian and U.S. micro data. We show that our frame-
work is quantitatively consistent with various out-of-sample moments in the data and we compare
the implications of our model to the well-known experimental evidence on managerial efficiency
and firm growth by Bloom et al. (2013). Finally, once we establish enough confidence in the validity
ofourmodel,weconductvariouscounterfactualexercisestoquantifytheimportanceofmanagerial
delegation and firm selection for the aggregate economy and its transitional dynamics. In partic-
ular, our framework stresses the role of catch-up growth, whereby improvements in the process of
firm dynamics help a developing country converge to the frontier faster. This is arguably the most
relevant growth margin for a non-frontier country, such as India.
The central piece of our theory is that firms’ expansion incentives respond to the underlying
delegation environment (and other factors as described below). As the entrepreneur’s own man-
agerial time is a fixed factor, production features decreasing returns and marginal profits decrease
in firm size. This reduces the incentive to expand to a large firm. Entrepreneurs can overcome such
decliningmarginalreturnsbydelegatingdecisionpowertooutsidemanagersastheirfirmsexpand.
If the economy’s delegation efficiency is low (for instance due to imperfect contractual enforcement
oralackoftrust),entrepreneurshavelittleincentivetoadoptnewtechnologiesastheyanticipateto
notbeabletoefficientlydelegatedecision-makingpowerastheygrow. Improvementsindelegation
efficiency therefore raise the returns to growing large, induce more creative destruction, increase
the extent of catch-up growth, and reduce long-run productivity differences.
To analyze the quantitative importance of this delegation mechanism, we explicitly allow the
key structural parameters of our model to be country specific and calibrate them to micro data
from India and the U.S. independently. This calibration strategy is important because it prevents
us from loading all the differences between the U.S. and India onto our mechanism of interest –
differencesintheefficiencyofdelegation. Thekeyempiricalmomenttoinfersuchdifferencesinthe
delegation environment between the U.S. and India is the aggregate employment share of outside,
i.e. non-family,managers. Inourmodel,thisshareisofcourseanequilibriumoutcomeanddepends
1

explicitly on three components:
1. Delegation Efficiency: Firms’ demand for outside managers depends on the delegation effi-
ciency. If delegation is easier (e.g., due to a stronger rule of law or higher trust in non-family
managers),entrepreneursaremorelikelytodelegatemanagerialtasks. Quantifyingtheextent
to which differences in delegation efficiency can explain the observed differences in firm-
dynamics and aggregate economic performance, is the main focus of this paper.
2. FirmGrowthduetoNon-managerialFactors: Becausefirmsizeandmanagerialhiringarecomple-
ments,countrieswithlargerfirmswillhavemoremanagerialemploymentinequilibrium. Our
model, for example, explicitly recognizes the fact that firms differ in their growth potential,
i.e. that some entrepreneurs are transformative and have the necessary skills to expand, while
others are subsistence entrepreneurs, who may simply lack the ability to grow their firms be-
yondacertainsize(Schoar,2010;Deckeretal.,2014). Iftheshareofsubsistenceentrepreneurs
or the costs of expansion are lower in the U.S. (e.g. due to more efficient capital markets or
less distortionary regulation, lower payroll taxes or better infrastructure), firms would grow
more and demand more managers.
3. Managerial Human Capital: Naturally, the extent of managerial hiring depends directly on the
supply of managerial human capital. If managerial skills are relatively abundant in the U.S.,
everything else equal, the equilibrium share of managers in the workforce would be higher.
Empirically, outside managers account for only 1.7% of the labor force in India. In the U.S.,
this number amounts to 12.4%. To distinguish the relative importance of the above three channels
to explain such differences and to identify the direct effect of differences in delegation efficiency,
we rely on different sources of information. First, we use establishment-level information from
the manufacturing sector in India and the U.S. to measure establishments’ life-cycle growth, and
entry and exit patterns. These moments are informative about the initial importance of subsistence
entrepreneurs and other non-managerial determinants of firm growth (i.e., item #2 in the above
list). Second, we rely on data about managerial employment patterns and managerial wages from
the Indian and the U.S. Census, to distinguish the effects of delegation efficiency and managerial
humancapital. Inparticular,weexploitinformationonpre-andpost-migrationoutcomesofIndian
immigrants to the U.S., also taking into account the selection among immigrants from India.
In addition to the targeted moments, we show that our model is consistent with various non-
targeted moments. Among others, one such moment comes from the well-known field experiment
by Bloom et al. (2013). In that study, the authors provided a randomly selected group of Indian
textile companies with management consulting to introduce them to American-style frontier man-
agement practices and measured impact on subsequent output growth. Motivated by that study,
we replicate this experiment in our estimated model. In particular, we treat a subset of firms in our
estimated Indian economy with the U.S.-level delegation efficiency and follow that subset of firms
over a 100-week period. We show that this exercise can be mapped to our framework and that our
model implies output responses which are in the same ballpark as the experimental results. Hence,
our model generates the right microeconomic responses to the experimental "management" interven-
tion. Since our model is consistent with this "identified moment" (Nakamura and Steinsson, 2018),
2