NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANKRUPTCY AND INVESTMENT:
EVIDENCE FROM CHANGES IN MARITAL PROPERTY LAWS IN THE U.S. SOUTH, 1840-1850
Peter Koudijs
Laura Salisbury
Working Paper 21952
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21952
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2016
We thank seminar and conference participants at Berkeley, Gerzensee, NYU, Stanford, the University
of Minneapolis, Queen's, and the University of Zurich, and in particular Gillian Hamilton, Eric Hilt,
Ulf Lilienfeld-Toal (discussant), Hanno Lustig, Petra Moser, Joachim Voth, Lucy White, and Gavin
Wright for comments and suggestions. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Peter Koudijs and Laura Salisbury. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Bankruptcy and Investment: Evidence from Changes in Marital Property Laws in the U.S.
South, 1840-1850
Peter Koudijs and Laura Salisbury
NBER Working Paper No. 21952
February 2016
JEL No. G33,K11,K35,N21,N31
ABSTRACT
We study the impact of the introduction of a form of bankruptcy protection on household investment
in the U.S. South in the 1840s, which predated modern bankruptcy laws. During this period, certain
southern states passed laws that protected married women's property from seizure in the case of insolvency,
amending the common law default which vested a wife's property in her husband and thus allowed
it to be seized for the repayment of his debts. Importantly, these laws only applied to newlyweds. We
compare couples married after the passage of a law with couples from the same state who married
before the passage of a law. Since states passed laws at different points in time, we can exploit variation
in protection conditional on state and year of marriage. We find that the effect on household investment
was heterogeneous: if most household wealth came from the husband (wife), the law led to an increase
(decrease) in investment. This is consistent with a simple model where downside protection leads to
both an increase in the demand for credit and a reduction in supply. Demand effects will only dominate
if a modest fraction of total wealth is protected.
Peter Koudijs
Stanford Graduate School of Business
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
koudijs@stanford.edu
Laura Salisbury
Department of Economics
York University
Vari Hall 1092
4700 Keele Street
Toronto, ON M3J 1P3
Canada
and NBER
lsalisbu@yorku.ca

1 Introduction
Personal bankruptcy is an important economic institution. By allowing individuals to discharge
unsecured debt and preventing creditors from seizing future income, society allows people to make
a fresh start. Ex ante, this encourages people to take on risky projects that might benefit society
as a whole, but that a risk-averse individual person would never engage in without some sort of
downsideprotection. Thereisalsoadrawback: thepossibilityofbankruptcyreducestheamountof
collateralanindividualcanpledge, reducingaccesstooutsidefinance. Moreover, bankruptcymight
encourage people to take on too much risk or strategically default, further limiting the willingness
of financial intermediaries to provide credit.
Studying this trade-off empirically is not straightforward. Bankruptcy proceedings in the U.S.
are governed by federal law and are the same for all individuals. Gropp, Scholz and White (1997)
argue that there is one dimension in which bankruptcy protection does vary: different states have
different exemption levels, which determine the amount of an individual’s assets (mostly home
equity) is protected in case of bankruptcy. This has spurred a large empirical literature on the
link between state exemption levels and a host of economic outcomes. Nevertheless, this approach
has certain limitations. First of all, the effect of state-level exemptions is estimated for individu-
als who already enjoy significant downside protection under the (federal) U.S. Bankruptcy Code:
bankruptcy releases a borrower from unsecured debt and stays the garnishment of future income
by creditors. As such, these studies estimate the impact of a marginal increase in protection, and
not its overall effect. It is therefore not obvious to what extent differences in homestead exemp-
tions are informative about the general impact of bankruptcy protection. Second, the impact of
exemptions on investment differs across studies, and it is not fully understood what drives this het-
erogeneity. Third,ifcreditsupplyisnotinfinitelyelastic,state-leveldifferencesinexemptionscould
have important effects on the market supply of credit, leading to general equilibrium effects that
make it difficult to interpret empirical findings (Lilienfeld-Toal, Mookherjee, and Visaria [2012]).
Finally, differences in exemption levels across states might be correlated with other factors, making
it difficult to make causal inferences (Hynes, Malani and Posner [2004]).
Inthispaperwestudytheimpactofdownsideprotectioninaperiodandregionwhentherewas
virtuallynobankruptcyrelief: theU.S.Southduringthe1840s. Thoughhouseholdsweresometimes
protected through (limited) homestead exemptions, there was no bankruptcy procedure that could
lead to a discharge of current debts. After the Panic of 1837 led to a spike in insolvencies in the
2

South (McGrane [1924], Wallis [2001]), many state legislatures decided to remedy this situation.
Modern bankruptcy rules were considered but rejected as being detrimental to creditors (Coleman
[1974]). Instead, a number of states passed so-called Married Women Property Acts, whose main
purpose was to protect a wife’s assets (acquired through dowry or inheritance) from her husband’s
creditors. This way, a family would enjoy downside protection, while, at the same time, creditors
could seize fewer assets, potentially limiting access to credit. In the absence of bankruptcy relief,
these laws arguably had a first order impact on economic outcomes that is comparable with a
(hypothetical) introduction of a modern bankruptcy code.1
We study the impact of these laws on household investment decisions, in particular the size and
type of household investment measured by the possession of real estate and slaves. Crucially, the
Married Women Property Acts only applied to newlyweds: a retroactive application would have
been unconstitutional, as it would have violated the terms of existing contracts (Kelly [1882]). We
can therefore compare couples in the same state, in the same census year (1850), who were married
before and after the passing of the law. No other study has been able to exploit within state-year
variation in bankruptcy protection. Since states introduced laws at different points in time we can
alsocontrolfortheyearofmarriage, makingsurethatthetimesincemarriage, andageeffectsmore
generally,arenotdrivingourresults. Furthermore, sincethelawchangeonlyappliedtonewlyweds,
a relatively small group of people, general equilibrium effects are probably not first order in the
short term, allowing for a straightforward partial equilibrium interpretation of results.
The starting point for our analysis is a simple model of household borrowing and risky invest-
ment. Following the large literature on bankruptcy protection (see White [2011], Livshits [2014] for
overviews), downside protection has two opposing effects. First, less collateral is available and this
will shift the credit supply curve inward. Second, downside protection increases the demand for
credit. This goes back to the insights of Dubey, Geanakoplos and Shubik (2005) and Zame (1993)
that if (financial) markets are incomplete, theabilityto default on payments in certain states ofthe
world might actually serve to make markets more complete. This matters for risk averse borrowers
who are now better able to smooth consumption across states. As a result, the demand curve for
1ThemaritalpropertylawspassedintheU.S.Southduringthe1840sareparticularlycomparabletobankruptcy
protection because they did not grant married women autonomy over their separate property; they merely shielded
this property from seizure by creditors. This differentiates them from other Married Women’s Property Acts passed
outside the South starting in the late 1840s. This is important, because it means that our southern property laws
affectedthewayinwhichhouseholdsinteractedwiththecreditmarketwithoutaffectingotherfeaturesofhousehold
production. For instance, these laws should not have affected the quantity of effort married women expended in
household production, because they did not redistribute property rights to these women in any meaningful sense
(Geddes and Lueck [2002]; Hamilton [1999]). This also implies that the channel through which these laws changed
investment behavior is not systematic gender differences in preferences over investment strategies.
3