NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERMEDIARY ASSET PRICING:
NEW EVIDENCE FROM MANY ASSET CLASSES
Zhiguo He
Bryan Kelly
Asaf Manela
Working Paper 21920
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21920
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2016
We thank Markus Brunnermeier, Ian Dew-Becker, Valentin Haddad, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Alan
Moreira, Tyler Muir, Lasse Pedersen, Alexi Savov, Rob Vishny, seminar participants at Stanford University,
Penn State University, University of Iowa, Emory University, London School of Economics, London
Business School, University of Houston, University of Washington, University of Oklahoma, Washington
University, Gerzensee Summer School 2015, CITE 2015, NBER AP 2015, and Chicago Booth Asset
Pricing Conference 2015 for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Zhiguo He, Bryan Kelly, and Asaf Manela. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Intermediary Asset Pricing: New Evidence from Many Asset Classes
Zhiguo He, Bryan Kelly, and Asaf Manela
NBER Working Paper No. 21920
January 2016
JEL No. G01,G12,G21,G24
ABSTRACT
We find that shocks to the equity capital ratio of financial intermediaries—Primary Dealer counterparties
of the New York Federal Reserve—possess significant explanatory power for crosssectional variation
in expected returns. This is true not only for commonly studied equity and government bond market
portfolios, but also for other more sophisticated asset classes such as corporate and sovereign bonds,
derivatives, commodities, and currencies. Our intermediary capital risk factor is strongly pro-cyclical,
implying counter-cyclical intermediary leverage. The price of risk for intermediary capital shocks is
consistently positive and of similar magnitude when estimated separately for individual asset classes,
suggesting that financial intermediaries are marginal investors in many markets and hence key to
understanding asset prices.
Zhiguo He Asaf Manela
University of Chicago Washington University in St. Louis,
Booth School of Business Olin Business School,
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue Campus Box 1133
Chicago, IL 60637 One Brookings Drive
and NBER St. Louis, MO 63130
zhiguo.he@chicagobooth.edu amanela@wustl.edu
Bryan Kelly
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
bryan.kelly@chicagobooth.edu

1 Introduction
Intermediary asset pricing theories offer a new perspective for understanding risk premia. These
theories are predicated on the fact that financial intermediaries are in the advantageous position of
trading almost all asset classes, anytime and everywhere. For instance, Siriwardane (2015) shows
that in 2011 about 50% of total net Credit Derivative Swaps (CDS) protection in U.S. was sold
by the top five dealers.1 In the corporate bond market, more than 95% of bonds are traded in
over-the-counter markets, in which dealers are necessarily involved.2 It is likely that intermediaries
are marginal investors in many asset markets, and that their marginal value of wealth is a plausible
pricing kernel for a broad cross-section of securities.
This view stands in contrast to standard consumption-based models in which the focal pricing
kernel is that of the household (e.g., Campbell and Cochrane (1999); Bansal and Yaron (2004)).
Households’comparativelackofexpertiseintradingassets,especiallysophisticatedoneslikederiva-
tives or commodities, casts doubt on the viability of household marginal utility as a unified model
for jointly pricing the wide array of traded assets in the economy.3 Our hypothesis, inspired by
intermediary asset pricing theory, is that the classic risk-return asset pricing trade-off is more
likely to hold once we replace the first-order condition of unsophisticated households with that of
sophisticated intermediaries.
The central challenges facing this hypothesis are (i) how to identify a set of financial interme-
diaries that are marginal investors in many markets, and (ii) how to measure their marginal utility
of wealth in order to construct the pricing kernel. For the first choice, we focus on primary dealers
who serve as counterparties of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (“NY Fed” henceforth) in
its implementation of monetary policy. Primary dealers are large and sophisticated financial in-
stitutions that operate in virtually the entire universe of capital markets, and include the likes of
Goldman Sachs, JP Morgan, and Deutsche Bank.4
Our second choice is guided by the recent intermediary asset pricing models of He and Kr-
1Thesetofalldealersareresponsiblefor80%ofthenetCDSsalesin2011. Onthebuyside,alldealerscomprise
55% of net CDS purchases, and the top five dealers account for 25% of CDS purchases.
2These trades are reported in the Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine (TRACE) database. According to
Edwards et al. (2007), fewer than 5% of bonds are listed on the NYSE, and trades occuring via NYSE’s Automated
Bond System (ABS) are almost all from small retail investors. In contrast, only 2% of corporate bonds trades in
TRACE are from retail investors.
3Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) and Calvet et al. (2007) document limited stock market participation by households.
4Primary dealers as of 2014 are listed in Table 1, and the list of all primary dealers since 1960 is in Table A.1.
1

ishnamurthy (2012, 2013) and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014). In these models, which follow
the tradition of Bernanke and Gertler (1989) and Holmstrom and Tirole (1997), the intermediary
sector’s net worth (or, equivalently, its equity capital ratio) is the key determinant of its marginal
value of wealth. When the intermediary experiences a negative shock to its equity capital, say due
to an unexpected drop in the securitized mortgage market, its risk bearing capacity is impaired
and its utility from an extra dollar of equity capital rises.
Prompted by these theories, in Section 2 we propose a model for the intermediary pricing
kernel that is composed of two-factors: the excess return on aggregate wealth, and the shock to
intermediaries’(equity)capitalratio. ThereturnonaggregatewealthcapturestheusualTFP-style
persistent technology shock that drives general economic growth. Innovations to the intermediary
capital ratio capture financial shocks that affect the soundness of the financial intermediary sector,
arising for example from shocks to agency/contracting frictions, changes in regulation, or large
abnormal gains/losses in parts of an intermediary’s portfolio. We show how this pricing kernel
arises in the theoretical framework of He and Krishnamurthy (2012).
We construct the aggregate capital ratio for the intermediary sector by matching the New York
Fed’s primary dealer list with CRSP/Compustat and Datastream data on their publicly traded
holding companies (see Section 3). We define the intermediary capital ratio, denoted η , as the
t
aggregate value of market equity divided by aggregate market equity plus aggregate book debt of
primary dealers active in quarter t
P Market Equity
i i,t
η = .
t (cid:16) (cid:17)
P Market Equity +Book Debt
i i,t i,t
Our main empirical result is that assets’ exposure to intermediary capital ratio shocks (in-
novations in η ) possess a strong and consistent ability to explain cross-sectional differences in
t
average returns for assets in seven different markets, including equities, US government and corpo-
rate bonds, foreign sovereign bonds, options, credit default swaps (CDS), commodities, and foreign
exchange (FX).
We perform cross-sectional asset pricing tests both independently within each asset class, as
well as jointly using all asset classes. By comparing the risk price on intermediary capital shocks
estimated from different sets of test assets, we can evaluate the model assumptions that (i) inter-
2