NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHAT MAKES US GOVERNMENT BONDS SAFE ASSETS?
Zhiguo He
Arvind Krishnamurthy
Konstantin Milbradt
Working Paper 22017
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22017
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2016
We thank Manuel Amador and Jonathan Wallen for comments, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas for
his discussion of our work at the 2015 NBER Summer Institute. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22017.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Zhiguo He, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Konstantin Milbradt. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What Makes US Government Bonds Safe Assets?
Zhiguo He, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Konstantin Milbradt
NBER Working Paper No. 22017
February 2016
JEL No. E0,F0,F3,G0,G11
ABSTRACT
US government bonds are widely considered to be the world’s safe store of value. US government
bonds are a large fraction of safe asset portfolios, such as the porfolios of many central banks. The
world demand for safe assets leads to low yields on US Treasury bonds. During periods of economic
turmoil, such as the events of 2008, these yields fall even further. Moreover, despite the fact that US
government debt has risen substantially relative to US GDP over the last decade, US government bond
yields have not risen. What makes US government bonds “safe assets”? Our answer in short is that
safe asset investors have nowhere else to go but invest in US government bonds.
Zhiguo He Konstantin Milbradt
University of Chicago Kellogg School of Management
Booth School of Business Northwestern University
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue 2001 Sheridan Rd #401
Chicago, IL 60637 Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER and NBER
zhiguo.he@chicagobooth.edu milbradt@northwestern.edu
Arvind Krishnamurthy
Stanford Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
akris@stanford.edu

What makes US government bonds safe assets?∗
Zhiguo He†, Arvind Krishnamurthy‡and Konstantin Milbradt§
January 28, 2016
US government bonds are widely considered to be the world’s safe store of value. US
government bonds are a large fraction of safe asset portfolios, such as the porfolios of many
central banks. The world demand for safe assets leads to low yields on US Treasury bonds.
During periods of economic turmoil, such as the events of 2008, these yields fall even further.
Moreover, despite the fact that US government debt has risen substantially relative to US
GDP over the last decade, US government bond yields have not risen. What makes US
governmentbonds“safeassets”? Ouranswerinshortisthatsafeassetinvestorshavenowhere
else to go but invest in US government bonds.
Figure 1 provides some motivating evidence. The figure plots the interest rate on 3-
month Treasury Bills (3m-Tbill, in solid black), along with the Federal Funds target rate
(dashed line) and the rate on the 3-month Federal Funds Overnight Index Swap (3m-OIS in
grey line). The latter rate reflects the expected overnight Federal Funds rate over the next
3 months so that its maturity is comparable to the 3-month Treasury Bill rate. The figure
shows that the Treasury bill rate is below the other money market rates. Most striking is
that at times of worsening economic fundamentals – March 2008 with the demise of Bear
Stearns, and October 2008 with the demise of Lehman Brothers – the yield on Treasury bills
falls substantially relative to the other money market rates (Federal Funds in the figure, but
also relative to non-bank money market rates such as high grade non-financial commercial
paper which is not in the figure). In these episodes, US government debt should be expected
to rise substantially due to an impending recession and the possibility of large scale transfer
payments from the government. And yet, the yields on US government debt fall relative to
the yields of other debt. These observations beg the question of why US government debt
is a safe asset, especially given a high US debt-to-income ratio. More broadly, these obser-
vations are interesting in the context of the growing literature on safe assets (see Caballero
etal.[2008],CaballeroandKrishnamurthy[2009],andKrishnamurthyandVissing-Jorgensen
[2012]), and raise the question of what makes an asset a “safe asset.”
∗We thank Manuel Amador and Jonathan Wallen for comments, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas for his
discussion of our work at the 2015 NBER Summer Institute.
†University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, and NBER. Address: 5807 South Woodlawn Ave,
Chicago, IL 60637; Phone: 773-834-3769; Email: zhiguo.he@chicagobooth.edu.
‡Stanford University, Graduate School of Business, and NBER. Address: 655 Knight Way Stanford, CA
94305; Phone: 650-723-1985; Email: a-krishnamurthy@stanford.edu.
§Northwestern University, Kellogg School of Management, and NBER. Address: 2001 Sheridan Road,
Evanston, IL 60208; Phone: 847-491-8618; Email: milbradt@northwestern.edu.
1

6
3m(cid:3)OIS
5
3m(cid:3)Tbill
4
Fed(cid:3)Funds(cid:3)Target
3
2
1
0
Figure 1: Safe asset yields, August 2007 to June 2009
1 Model
There are two countries (i =A, B) that have sovereign debt outstanding at date t of bi .
t
This debt matures at date t and must be rolled over or defaulted on. Our model determines
conditions under which the time t debt of bi is safe debt. Each country can issue new debt
t
of
bi
to rollover the existing debt. We assume that the new debt has to pay with certainty
t+1
at date t+1. The maximum amount of such debt that a country can credibly issue is Bi ,
t+1
which is exogenous to our model. Without loss of generality we call country A the “large
country” (i.e. the US) and assume that
BA >BB
. Note that this is a statement that
t+1 t+1
the maximum amount (float) of country A debt is larger than that of country B debt. It is
not a statement regarding the countries’ debt/GDP ratios. In fact, to make our point most
Bi
clearly, let us suppose that the ratio of t+1 is the same across these countries so that
GDPi
t+1
fundamental repayment ability of the two countries are the same. We will show that it is
the larger absolute debt capacity of country A that makes its time t debt of bi to be the safe
t
asset, rather than the typical variables that affect debt sustainability.
There is a continuum of risk-neutral investors at date t. In total the investors have f
units of goods to invest. They must invest their funds in either the debt of country A or
B. Importantly, there is no other asset, or storage technology, in which to invest. We can
think of these investors as foreign central banks who collectively have f funds that they
must invest in the safe sovereign debts of other countries, and they face a portfolio choice of
buying country A and/or B debt.
Giventhepastdebtofbi thatisdueatdatet, country-ifacesarolloverproblem. Suppose
t
that country-i issues bi units of bonds at price pi that will be endogenously determined
t+1 t
in equilibrium. For simplicity, we assume that each country issues as much safe debt as it
can, so that bi = Bi . 1 Then country-i’s proceeds from the bond issue are piBi . The
t+1 t+1 t t+1
1This assumption can be justified based on the idea that the government of country-i chooses how much
debt to issue in order to maximize the chance of the country-i’s survival (therefore the rent enjoyed by
the incumbent government) in refinancing its existing debt. The maximum debt issuance becomes strictly
optimal if we introduce noise in the country’s fundamental repayment ability so that country-i survives
2