NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNIVERSITY INNOVATION AND THE PROFESSOR'S PRIVILEGE
Hans K. Hvide
Benjamin F. Jones
Working Paper 22057
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22057
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2016
We thank seminar participants at Bergen, Carlos III, Duke, Haugesund, Harvard, MIT, Oslo,
Stavanger, and Trondheim (NTNU), conference participants at ZEW, HEC, and NBER, Jin Li,
Michael Powell, and our discussants Andy Toole, Serguey Braguinsky, and Fiona Murray for
helpful comments. We are grateful to the Nordic Institute for Studies in Innovation, Research and
Education, to Bjarne Kvam and the Norwegian Patent Bureau, and Stefano Breschi for supplying
data. Tom Meling and Linyi Zhang provided excellent research assistance. This research has been
supported by the ESRC, grant no RES-000-22-2080. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Hans K. Hvide and Benjamin F. Jones. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

University Innovation and the Professor's Privilege
Hans K. Hvide and Benjamin F. Jones
NBER Working Paper No. 22057
March 2016
JEL No. L26,O31
ABSTRACT
National policies take varied approaches to encouraging university-based innovation. This paper
studies a natural experiment: the end of the “professor’s privilege” in Norway, where university
researchers previously enjoyed full rights to their innovations. Upon the reform, Norway moved
toward the typical U.S. model, where the university holds majority rights. Using comprehensive
data on Norwegian workers, firms, and patents, we find a 50% decline in both entrepreneurship
and patenting rates by university researchers after the reform. Quality measures for university
start-ups and patents also decline. Applications to literatures on university technology transfer,
innovation incentives, and taxes and entrepreneurship are considered.
Hans K. Hvide
Solvberget 12
5038 Bergen
Norway
hans.hvide@econ.uib.no
Benjamin F. Jones
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
Department of Management and Strategy
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
bjones@kellogg.northwestern.edu

I. Introduction
University researchers can create valuable commercial innovations. Standing at the frontier of
knowledge, university researchers may start successful high-technology companies (e.g.,
Genentech and Google) and create valuable intellectual property (e.g., the Hepatitis B vaccine
and the pain medication Lyrica).1 Given these roles, university patenting and entrepreneurship
have become subjects of substantial public interest and an expansive research literature, as
reviewed below.
This paper studies a large shock to university innovation policy. The setting is Norway, which in
2003 ended the “professor’s privilege,” by which university researchers had previously enjoyed
full rights to new business ventures and intellectual property they created. The new policy
transferred two-thirds of these rights to the universities themselves, creating a policy regime like
that which typically prevails in the United States and many other countries today. In addition to
the policy experiment, Norway also provides unusual data opportunities. Registry data allows us
to identify all start-ups in the economy, including those founded by university researchers. We
can also link university researchers to their patents. We are thus able to study the reform’s
effects on both new venture and patenting channels.
Inspired partly by a belief that U.S. universities are more successful at commercial innovation
(Mowery and Sampat 2005, Lissoni et al. 2008), many European countries have enacted laws in
the last 15 years that substantially altered the rights to university-based innovations. In
Germany, Austria, Denmark, Finland, and Norway, new laws ended the so-called “professor’s
privilege”. Recognizing potential complementarities between institution-level and researcher-
level investments, the new laws sought to enhance university incentives to support
commercialization activity, including through the establishment of technology transfer offices
(TTOs). However, while these reforms may have encouraged university-level investment, they
1 For example, University of California San Francisco Professor Herbert Boyer founded Genentech to bring genetic
engineering into the marketplace, and Stanford graduate students Sergey Brin and Larry Page founded Google and
revolutionized Internet search. In the patenting sphere, University of California researchers produced the Hepatitis
B vaccine, and Northwestern University Professor Richard Silverman created the compound for a pain medication,
Lyrica, which was Pfizer’s top-selling drug in 2014, with global sales of $5 billion. U.S. universities and research
institutions were granted over 6,000 patents and executed over 5,000 licenses in fiscal year 2012, according to a
recent survey (AUTM 2015).
2

also sharply increased the effective tax rate on university-based innovators, leaving the effect of
such reforms theoretically ambiguous. Broadly, these national systems moved from an
environment where university researchers had full property rights to a system that looks much
like the U.S. system today (since the 1980 U.S. Bayh-Dole Act), where the innovator typically
holds a minority of the rights (often one-third) and the university holds the remainder (Jensen
and Thursby 2001, Lach and Schankerman 2008).
To study the end of the professor’s privilege, we leverage several datasets that allow us to
examine new venture and patenting activity for all university researchers in Norway. Registry
datasets provide detailed information about all Norwegian workers and firms, while also linking
specific individuals to specific firms. We are thus able to identify all new firms in Norway and
all new firms started by university employees. The data further provides far-reaching
information about all Norwegian adults, including educational attainment, degree type, age,
income, wealth, and family status, allowing us to compare the behavior of those directly affected
by the policy shock (i.e., university employees) with various control samples (e.g., all Norwegian
individuals, and various subsets with increasingly similar demographic characteristics to the
university employees). We separately collect all patents issued in Norway and compare
patenting by university-based researchers with other Norwegian inventors. Finally, we
integrated all publications in the Web of Science by Norway-based researchers to examine
publication outcomes.
Our primary empirical finding is that the shift in rights from researcher to university led to an
approximate 50% drop in the rate of start-ups by university researchers. This drop appears (1) in
a simple pre-post analysis of university start-up rates, (2) when compared to background rates of
start-ups in Norway, and (3) when analyzed at the level of the individual Norwegian citizen,
controlling for fixed and time-varying individual-level characteristics. We further find that
university researchers substantially curtailed their patenting after the reform, with patent rates
falling by similar magnitudes as seen with start-ups. In addition to these effects on the quantity
of innovative output, we find evidence for decreased quality of both start-ups and patents, where
university start-ups exhibit less growth and university patents receive fewer citations after the
reform, compared to controls. Overall, the reform appeared to have the opposite effect as
intended.
3