NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MACROECONOMIC-DRIVEN PREPAYMENT RISK AND THE VALUATION OF
MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES
Mikhail Chernov
Brett R. Dunn
Francis A. Longstaff
Working Paper 22096
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22096
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2016
We are grateful for the comments and suggestions of Vineer Bhansali, Nina Boyarchenko,
Michael Brennan, Karen Chaltikian, Andrea Eisfeldt, Stuart Gabriel, James Gammill, David
Langor, David Lucca, Xiaoxian Luo, Carolina Marquez, Ravi Mattu, Emmanuel Vallod, Victor
Wong, and seminar participants at Blackrock, Boston College, Emory University, The Fink
Center for Finance and Investments, Georgetown University, Georgia Institute of Technology,
the University of British Columbia, the Spring 2015 Journal of Investment Management
Conference, and UCLA. All errors are our responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Mikhail Chernov, Brett R. Dunn, and Francis A. Longstaff. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Macroeconomic-Driven Prepayment Risk and the Valuation of Mortgage-Backed Securities
Mikhail Chernov, Brett R. Dunn, and Francis A. Longstaff
NBER Working Paper No. 22096
March 2016
JEL No. G12,G13
ABSTRACT
We introduce a reduced-form modeling framework for mortgage-backed securities in which we
solve for the implied prepayment function from the cross section of market prices. From the
implied prepayment function, we find that prepayment rates are driven not only by interest rates,
but also by two macroeconomic factors: turnover and rate response. Intuitively, turnover
represents prepayments for exogenous reasons like employment-related moves, household
income shocks, and foreclosures, while rate response reflects frictions faced by borrowers in
refinancing into a lower rate. We find that the empirical turnover and rate response measures are
both significantly related to macroeconomic measures, suggesting that these factors represent a
source of systematic risk. Consistent with this, we find that implied prepayments are substantially
higher than actual prepayments, providing direct evidence of significant prepayment risk premia
in mortgage-backed security prices. We analyze the properties of the prepayment risk premium
and find that it is almost entirely due to compensation for turnover risk. We also find evidence
that mortgage-backed security prices were significantly affected by Fannie Mae credit risk and
the Federal Reserve's Quantitative Easing Programs.
Mikhail Chernov Francis A. Longstaff
UCLA UCLA
Anderson School of Management Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C-417 110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095 Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
mikhail.chernov@anderson.ucla.edu and NBER
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu
Brett R. Dunn
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095
Brett.Dunn.1@anderson.ucla.edu

1. INTRODUCTION
A mortgage-backed security is a securitized claim to the principal and interest
payments generated by a pool of fixed-rate mortgages. Mortgage-backed securi-
ties havetraditionallybeen issuedeither by agenciessuchas FannieMae, Freddie
Mac, and Ginnie Mae, or by private issuers. Agency mortgage-backed securities
have the attractive feature that the timely payment of principal and interest is
backed by either an implicit or explicit government guarantee. As of June 2015,
the total notional amount of agency mortgage-backed securities outstanding was
$7.171 trillion, making this market one of the largest sectors of the global fixed
1
income markets.
Given the importance of the market, it is not surprisingthat much research
hasbeendevotedtotheissueofhowmortgage-backedsecuritiesshouldbevalued.
Thefirstgenerationofpricingmodelstreatedmortgageprepaymentsastheresult
ofaborrowerattemptingtomaximizethevalueofanimplicitinterestrateoption.
Key examples include Dunn and McConnell (1981a, 1981b) and Brennan and
Schwartz (1985). The second generation of pricing models is based on detailed
econometric models of historical prepayment behavior. In these models, interest
rate paths are simulated (under the risk-neutral measure) and the econometric
prepayment model (estimated under the actual measure) is used to specify the
cash flows along each interest rate path. Key examples include Schwartz and
Torous (1989, 1992, 1993) and Richard and Roll (1989).
Thesetypes ofmodels,however,haveanumberof importantdrawbacks. For
example, prepayments are driven exclusively by interest rate changes in these
models. Thus, by ruling out other possible sources of prepayments, the only
risk premium allowed in these models is an interest rate risk premium—there is
no scope for a separate prepayment risk premium. Furthermore, these models
tend to produce prices that often diverge significantly from market prices, and
can only be reconciled by introducing ad hoc “option-adjusted spreads” into the
framework.
Thispaperpresentsareduced-formframeworkforthevaluationofmortgage-
backed securities. This framework differs fundamentally from previous work
in that we solve for the implied prepayment function rather than imposing an
externalprepaymentmodel. A keyadvantageofthisapproachisthat bystudying
the implied prepayment function, we can identify factors that the market views
as important drivers of prepayment risk as well as the risk premia associated
with those factors. The implied prepayment function is easily identified using
1
See www.sifma.org/research/statistics.aspx.
1

the information in the cross section of mortgage-backed securities with different
couponrates(the couponstack). Ourapproachalsoallowsforthepossibilitythat
mortgagecashflowsmaybe discountedathigherratesthan Treasuriesbecauseof
either the perceived credit risk of the agency guaranteeing the mortgage-backed
security, or the illiquidity of mortgage-backed securities themselves. We apply
the framework to study the valuation of Fannie Mae mortgage-backed securities
over the 1998–2014 period. A number of important results emerge from this
analysis.
First, we find that implied prepayments are driven by interest rates as well
as two additional macroeconomic risk factors: turnover and rate response. The
turnover rate reflects prepayments occurring for exogenous reasons unrelated to
interest rates, but possibly correlated with macroeconomic fluctuations. Exam-
ples include adverse income shocks or unemployment resulting in a move or a
foreclosure, negative shocks to housing values resulting in underwater borrowers
strategically defaulting on non-recourse loans, or homeowners with appreciated
property taking cash-out mortgages to extract home equity. We find that the
variationin the empiricalturnoverrate isstronglyrelated to macroeconomicfun-
damentalssuchasconsumptiongrowth,changesinunemployment,andmortgage
delinquencies. This suggests that turnover risk may be systematic in nature and
carry a large risk premium. This is supported by evidence that the implied
turnover rate is more closely related to returns in financial market than is the
empiricalturnoverrate. The rate responsefactor representsthe time variationin
the sensitivity of refinancing activity to mortgage rate incentives. For example,
borrowers may be less able to refinance into a lower mortgage rate after declines
in housingprices, duringrecessionsin whichthe borrowers’income or credit may
have been impaired, or during periods in which mortgage lending standards are
tightened. The results also provide evidence that this factor may be systematic
in nature.
Second, we find that the implied prepayments on agency-guaranteed mort-
gages behave very differently than actual prepayments. For most mortgage-
backed securities, implied prepayment rates are significantly higher than actual
prepayment rates. This result provides some of the first direct evidence that the
market incorporates significant prepayment-relatedrisk premia into the prices of
mortgage-backed securities, and may also explain why previous models based on
empirical prepayment functions face challenges in their attempts to match the
market prices of mortgage-backed securities.
Third, we study the determinants of the prepayment risk premium by map-
pingitintotheriskpremiaassociatedwiththeturnoverandrateresponsefactors.
We find that the turnoverfactor carries a large positive premiumthroughout the
entire sample period, consistent with the systematic nature of turnover risk. In
2