NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY DOES FAST LOAN GROWTH PREDICT POOR PERFORMANCE FOR BANKS?
Rüdiger Fahlenbrach
Robert Prilmeier
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 22089
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22089
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2016
Fahlenbrach is Associate Professor at the Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), and
affiliated with the Swiss Finance Institute, Prilmeier is Assistant Professor at Tulane University, and
Stulz is the Everett D. Reese Chair of Banking and Monetary Economics, Fisher College of Business,
Ohio State University, and affiliated with NBER and ECGI. Fahlenbrach gratefully acknowledges
financial support from the Swiss Finance Institute. We are grateful for discussions with Ron Masulis.
We thank Greg Duffee and seminar participants at the University of Bristol for helpful comments.
Address correspondence to René M. Stulz, Fisher College of Business, The Ohio State University,
806 Fisher Hall, Columbus, OH 43210, stulz@cob.osu.edu. René Stulz serves on the board of a bank
and consults and provides expert testimony for financial institutions. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22089.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Rüdiger Fahlenbrach, Robert Prilmeier, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Why Does Fast Loan Growth Predict Poor Performance for Banks?
Rüdiger Fahlenbrach, Robert Prilmeier, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 22089
March 2016
JEL No. G01,G12,G21
ABSTRACT
From 1973 to 2014, the common stock of U.S. banks with loan growth in the top quartile of banks
over a three-year period significantly underperforms the common stock of banks with loan growth
in the bottom quartile over the next three years. The benchmark-adjusted cumulative difference in
performance over three years exceeds twelve percentage points. The high growth banks also have
significantly higher crash risk over the three-year period. This poor performance is explained by fast
loan growth as asset growth separate from loan growth is not followed by poor performance. These
banks reserve less for loan losses when their loans grow quickly than other banks. Subsequently, they
have a lower return on assets and increase their loan loss reserves. The poorer performance of the fast
growing banks is not explained by merger activity and loan growth through mergers is not accompanied
by the same poor loan performance. The evidence is consistent with fast-growing banks, analysts,
and investors failing to properly appreciate the extent to which the fast loan growth results from making
riskier loans and failing to charge for these risks correctly.
Rüdiger Fahlenbrach René M. Stulz
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) The Ohio State University
Quartier UNIL-Dorigny Bâtiment Extranef, # 211 Fisher College of Business
1015 Lausanne 806A Fisher Hall
Switzerland Columbus, OH 43210-1144
ruediger.fahlenbrach@epfl.ch and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu
Robert Prilmeier
Tulane University
A.B. Freeman School of Business
7 McAlister Drive
New Orleans, LA 70118
rprilmei@tulane.edu

1. Introduction
Many recent papers show that credit booms generally end poorly and are followed by poor economic
performance (e.g., Baron and Xiong (2015), Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2013), Reinhart and Rogoff
(2009), or Schularick and Taylor (2012)). Such a result could be explained by macroeconomic
phenomena. With this view, banks would rationally be making more loans because of good lending
opportunities without taking more risk, but the economy would unexpectedly experience a shock which
would end the credit boom and cause poor performance.1 Hence, a credit boom would be followed by
slow growth. The recent evidence by Krishnamurthy and Muir (2015) that credit spreads are low before
crises is consistent with this possibility if markets are efficient, as it indicates that investors’ expectations
of credit losses are low immediately before crises.
Alternatively, however, it could be that the end of the credit boom is the result of poor performance of
weak loans made during the credit boom. With this view, bank lending increases because banks fail to
fully realize the risks of new loans and make loans that are riskier than they think. As the risks of these
loans materialize, poorly performing loans weaken the banks, reduce the credit supply, and lead to poor
economic performance.2 Country-level analyses such as Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) or Schularick and
Taylor (2012) do not make it possible to discriminate between the two explanations for why credit booms
end poorly.
In this paper, we undertake a bank-level analysis that allows us to assess whether banks that
experience fast loan growth make poorer loans. We find that banks that grow quickly make loans that
perform worse than the loans of other banks, that investors and equity analysts do not anticipate this
1 Mian and Sufi (2010) argue that such a view is consistent with the real business cycle literature which associates
credit expansions with positive productivity or technology shocks (e.g., Bernanke and Gertler (1989) or Kiyotaki
and Moore (1997)). When asset values fall, firms have lower net worth and less collateral, restricting their
borrowing and leading to lower credit growth and lower economic activity. Mian and Sufi (2009) show that this
view was also prevalent at least at the onset of the recent crisis. They refer to testimony of Alan Greenspan and Ben
Bernanke during the credit expansion, in which Greenspan and Bernanke attributed the growth in mortgage credit
and housing prices to fundamental economic improvements such as productivity and income gains. Kahle and Stulz
(2013) find evidence that a demand shock can explain both a decrease in corporate investment and the end of the
corporate credit boom during the recent crisis.
2 Brunnermeier (2009) provides an overview of different mechanisms that led to the financial crisis, including the
lending supply channel mechanism. Gorton (2010) argues that it was not only a bank lending supply channel but
more generally a credit supply channel that contributed to the crisis. Shleifer and Vishny (2010) and Gennaioli,
Shleifer, and Vishny (2012) develop models in which financial innovation and investor sentiment lead to a fragile
banking sector.
1

poorer performance, and that these banks fail to set aside enough reserves for these loans, which is
consistent with the hypothesis that they underappreciate the risk of these loans.
A bank can grow quickly by underpricing its loans. As a result, it will face a large loan demand and
its lending will increase if it has enough capital to support more loans. In the short-run, investors will
generally not be able to assess whether the bank’s lending is increasing because it is underpricing loans.
Eventually however, riskier loans will have a higher default rate and it will become apparent that a bank
grew by making riskier loans. Such a bank will experience increases in loan loss provisions relative to
other banks. A bank that underprices loans may be doing so because it is overoptimistic about borrowers’
future performance, in which case its concurrent loan provisions will be smaller and will not reflect that it
is making riskier loans. If a bank chooses to grow its loan portfolio by making riskier loans and properly
reserves for the greater risk, its loan loss provisions should be higher and should reflect the greater risk of
the new loans.
We analyze a panel of U.S. publicly listed banks between 1972 and 2014. We first examine whether
high bank asset growth predicts poor future bank stock returns, following the methodology of Baron and
Xiong’s (2015) country level analysis. If banks grow quickly because they make risky loans, they will
experience higher loan losses following a period of high growth. If the banks and their investors properly
understood that the high growth was the result of riskier loans, the stock price should correctly reflect the
expectation of higher loan losses, so that high loan growth should not predict lower performance. By
analyzing a panel of banks, we focus on variation in growth across banks and eliminate the effects of
economic conditions because they are common across banks. We first examine the relation between past
loan growth measured over one and three years and future returns measured over one, two, and three
years in pooled time-series cross-sectional regressions with year-fixed effects. Dividing banks in quartiles
of loan growth, we find that banks in the top quartile of three-year loan growth have significantly lower
returns than banks in the bottom quartile for one, two, and three-year returns. We find some evidence of
underperformance when we use one-year loan growth, but it is weaker. Unlike loan growth, non-loan
asset growth does not predict future returns. Our evidence is robust to alternative econometric approaches.
The evidence is slightly stronger when we use bank fixed effects. The same results hold for returns
2