NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ECONOMIC POLICY UNCERTAINTY AND THE CREDIT CHANNEL:
AGGREGATE AND BANK LEVEL U.S. EVIDENCE OVER SEVERAL DECADES
Michael D. Bordo
John V. Duca
Christoffer Koch
Working Paper 22021
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22021
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2016
We thank William D. Dupor, Leonardo Gambacorta, Joseph G. Haubrich, Michael Weiss, and seminar
participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, the 2015 Federal Reserve System Committee Meeting
on Financial Structure and Regulation in Charlotte, NC, and the 2015 25th Annual Rome International
Conference on Money, Banking, and Finance for suggestions. We also thank Tyler Atkinson, James
B. Cooke, and Camden Cornwell for providing excellent research assistance. The views expressed
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas,
the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Any remaining errors
are those of the authors.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22021.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Michael D. Bordo, John V. Duca, and Christoffer Koch. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Economic Policy Uncertainty and the Credit Channel: Aggregate and Bank Level U.S. Evidence
over Several Decades
Michael D. Bordo, John V. Duca, and Christoffer Koch
NBER Working Paper No. 22021
February 2016
JEL No. E40,E50,G21
ABSTRACT
Economic policy uncertainty affects decisions of households, businesses, policy makers and Financial
intermediaries. We first examine the impact of economic policy uncertainty on aggregate bank credit
growth. Then we analyze commercial bank entity level data to gauge the effects of policy uncertainty
on Financial intermediaries' lending. We exploit the cross-sectional heterogeneity to back out indirect
evidence of its effects on businesses and households. We ask (i) whether, conditional on standard macroeconomic
controls, economic policy uncertainty affected bank level credit growth, and (ii) whether there is variation
in the impact related to banks' balance sheet conditions; that is, whether the effects are attributable
to loan demand or, if impact varies with bank level financial constraints, loan supply. We find that
policy uncertainty has a significant negative effect on bank credit growth. Since this impact varies
meaningfully with some bank characteristics – particularly the overall capital-to-assets ratio and bank
asset liquidity–loan supply factors at least partially (and significantly) help determine the influence
of policy uncertainty. Because other studies have found important macroeconomic effects of bank
lending growth on the macroeconomy, our findings are consistent with the possibility that high economic
policy uncertainty may have slowed the U.S. economic recovery from the Great Recession by restraining
overall credit growth through the bank lending channel.
Michael D. Bordo Christoffer Koch
Department of Economics Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas
Rutgers University 2200 North Pearl Street
New Jersey Hall Dallas, TX 75201
75 Hamilton Street Christoffer.Koch@dal.frb.org
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu
John V. Duca
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas
2200 North Pearl Street
Dallas, TX 75201
John.V.Duca@dal.frb.org

1 Introduction
Recent literature emphasizes how uncertainty matters for economic decision-making. For example,
Stokey (2008) devotes an entire book to theoretically analyzing “[T]he Economics of Inaction.”
Bloom(2009)developsatractablemodelinwhichuncertaintyresultsinacentralregionofinaction
for hiring and investment, with this zone of inaction expanding when uncertainty is higher because
nonconvex adjustment costs increase. Recently, new methodologies have enabled researchers to
better measure macroeconomic (Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng, 2015) and economic policy uncer-
tainty (Baker, Bloom, and Davis, 2015). And at the macro-level, Karnizova and Li (2014) find
that economic policy uncertainty helps predict recessions in the presence of now-standard finan-
cial variables. Less well explored are the more specific channels through which economic policy
uncertainty may affect the macro economy.
ThisisparticularlythecasewiththerecentweakrecoveryofU.S.banklending, asevidencedby
a lower path of real total bank loans following the Great Recession than in earlier recessions since
1969-70 (Figure 1). Following the Great Recession, bankers complained that delays implementing
financialreformundertheDodd-FrankActcreatedregulatorypolicyuncertainty(Koch,2012)that
restrained lending, which, in turn, slowed the economic recovery. Indeed, three years after Dodd-
Frank became law, rule-writing regulatory agencies set only about one-half of the new regulations
and reporting requirements have continued to increase (Figure 2). At the same time, the index
of economic policy uncertainty (EPU) based on newspaper wording (“EPU index”, Baker, Bloom,
and Davis, 2015) had been at elevated levels during the Great Recession and the early part of the
economic recovery, generally exceeding the cyclical averages seen in the first four years following
the onset of the five prior recessions (Figures 3 and 4).1
These developments naturally raise the questions: Did economic policy uncertainty restrain
U.S. bank lending during the prolonged recovery from the Great Recession and what role has it
played in other periods? To address these issues, we analyze data for the banking industry in its
entirety and individual banks separately to empirically assess whether the EPU index contains
1The index measures the number of articles that include the words (1) ‘uncertain’ or ‘uncertainty’, and (2)
‘economics’, ‘economy’, ‘business’, ‘commerce’, ‘industry’, or ‘industrial’, and (3) ‘Congress’, ‘legislation’, ‘White
House’,‘regulation’,‘FederalReserve’,or‘deficit’. Source: http://www.policyuncertainty.com/us_historical.
html.
2

marginal information about the growth of bank lending, controlling for variables ranging from
interest rates and GDP growth to controls for early regulations that affected the bank lending
decisions such as Regulation Q (Aron, Duca, Muellbauer, Murata, and Murphy, 2012; Koch, 2015)
and the credit controls of 1980. We exploit the cross-sectional heterogeneity to back out indirect
evidence of EPU’s effects on bank lending. We ask (i) whether, conditional on standard macroe-
conomic controls along with ones for regulation, did economic policy uncertainty affect bank level
credit growth, and (ii) whether there is variation in the impact related to banks’ balance sheet
conditions, i.e., whether the effects are attributable to loan demand or, if the impact varies with
bank level financial constraints, reflect individual bank loan supply effects.
We find that policy uncertainty significantly slows U.S. bank credit growth, consistent with it
having an effect on broad loan supply and demand. We find that lagged changes in the EPU index
are negatively and significantly linked to the growth rate of bank lending both at the aggregate
and cross-sectional levels. For the latter, we construct a bank level data set from call reports that
has commonly been used in bank level studies of the credit channel of monetary transmission, see,
for instance, Kashyap and Stein (2000), Kishan and Opiela (2000), Ashcraft (2006) or Bluedorn,
Bowdler, and Koch (2014).
Using aggregated data, economic policy uncertainty is highly significant in quarterly models of
real per capita bank loan growth spanning 1961 to 2014. This result is robust to the inclusion or
exclusion of macroeconomic controls (lags of GDP growth and changes in the real fed funds rate),
direct regulatory controls (a measure of the effects of deposit regulations and an episode when the
Federal Reserve implemented credit controls in 1980), lags of the forward-looking (expectations)
index of consumer sentiment from the University of Michigan, and other macro variables which
may be correlated with economic policy uncertainty. We also find that innovations to EPU also
have significant effects on GDP and bank loans in VARs, consistent with the battery of VARs of
Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2015) who do not focus on bank lending.
A robust impact of EPU on loan growth also arises when individual bank data are analyzed
in models that use a general specification better suited to cross-sectional data. The cross-section
enables us to more convincingly identify a role for loan supply factors by examining how individual
3