NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
NETWORK CONTAGION AND INTERBANK AMPLIFICATION DURING THE
GREAT DEPRESSION
Kris James Mitchener
Gary Richardson
Working Paper 22074
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22074
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2016
We thank seminar and conference participants at Banca d’Italia, Stanford University, the
University of Colorado – Boulder, Southern Denmark University, Lund University, the London
School of Economics, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, CEPR-Bank of Italy, the
Cleveland Federal Reserve Bank, the Atlanta Federal Reserve Bank, Dartmouth, the San
Francisco Federal Reserve Bank, Solvay Brussels School of Economics and Management, and
the NBER summer institute for helpful comments and suggestions. Joseph Johnson, Joseph
Henry, and Arjola Cuko provided invaluable research assistance. Gary Richardson serves as the
Federal Reserve's official Historian. The views in this paper are the authors’ and not necessarily
those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Kris James Mitchener and Gary Richardson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Network Contagion and Interbank Amplification during the Great Depression
Kris James Mitchener and Gary Richardson
NBER Working Paper No. 22074
March 2016
JEL No. E44,G01,G21,L14,N22
ABSTRACT
Interbank networks amplified the contraction in lending during the Great Depression. Banking
panics induced banks in the hinterland to withdraw interbank deposits from Federal Reserve
member banks located in reserve and central reserve cities. These correspondent banks responded
by curtailing lending to businesses. Between the peak in the summer of 1929 and the banking
holiday in the winter of 1933, interbank amplification reduced aggregate lending in the U.S.
economy by an estimated 15 percent.
Kris James Mitchener
Department of Economics
Leavey School of Business
Santa Clara University
Santa Clara, CA 95053
and NBER
kmitchener@scu.edu
Gary Richardson
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3155 Social Sciences Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
garyr@uci.edu

1. Introduction
Understanding how financial networks propagate shocks, increase systemic risk, and
potentially magnify economic downturns are questions of long-standing interest to
policymakers and scholars. Economic theory suggests many channels through which
networks may transmit shocks (e.g., Allen and Gale, 2000; Allen, Babus, and Carletti, 2010;
Feixas, Parigi, and Rochet, 2000; Lagunoff and Schreft, 2001; Dasgupta, 2004; Cabellero and
Simesek, 2013). Empirical research has provided some evidence of contagious failures
flowing through interbank markets, particularly for the recent financial crisis in the United
States and Europe (Cohen-Cole, Patacchini, and Zenou, 2011; Puhr, Seliger, and Sigmund,
2012; Fricke and Lux, 2012).1 Yet, empirical analysis of how interbank connections
amplified downturns is a surprisingly lightly studied aspect of past crises, even for well-
researched episodes such as the Great Depression.
In this paper, we document how the interbank network transmitted deposit
withdrawals through the nation’s banking system and amplified the contraction in real
economic activity during the Great Depression. Interbank balances exposed correspondent
banks to shocks afflicting banks in the hinterland. Interbank deposits were a liquid source of
funds that could be employed to meet sudden demands by depositors to convert claims to
cash, and the removal of these deposits from correspondent banks peaked during periods that
contemporary commentators described as, and that our analysis confirms were, banking
panics. During these panics, withdrawals of interbank deposits forced correspondent banks to
reduce lending to businesses. We estimate that these interbank outflows led to a substantial
decline in aggregate lending, equal to approximately 15 percent of the total decline in
commercial bank lending from the peak in 1929 to the trough in 1933.
1 See Allen and Babus (2009) for a survey of the theoretical and empirical literature on bank networks.
1

Our paper contributes to the growing literature on financial networks and the real
economy, illuminating both a mechanism for transmission (interbank deposits) as well as a
source of amplification (balance-sheet effects). It also introduces an additional channel
through which banking distress deepened the Great Depression and complements existing
research on how bank distress during the Great Depression influenced the real economy.
Friedman and Schwartz (1963) focused on how distress reduced money multipliers and
monetary aggregates, triggering deflations, altering real interest rates, distorting consumers’
and firms’ choices, and fueling debt deflation (Fisher 1933). The key mechanism transmitting
bank shocks to the aggregate economy was changes in the aggregate price level. In
examining what they called “a contagion of fear,” which altered the behavior of bank
depositors and managers, they excluded interbank deposits from their analysis since at the
aggregate level these net to zero (i.e., one bank’s asset was another bank’s liability). We
show that interbank networks transfered shocks from one banks’ balance sheet to their
interbank partners, often in cities far away. These transmission chains could change the
quantity and composition of credit, even if they did not change the money supply, the price
level, or other aggregate variables at the heart of Friedman and Schwartz’s analysis.
Bernanke (1983) focused on the liquidation of banks themselves, which raised the
costs of acquiring credit and reduced the supply of loans from banks. The key mechanism
transmitting this shock to the aggregate economy was the destruction of relationships and
information that facilitated financial intermediation when banks failed. We find that the
destruction of banks not only reduced credit available to their own customers, but also to
customers of their correspondents, who had to alter the composition of their balance sheets to
accommodate increased and increasingly volatile interbank outflows. We also find that bank
failures were not necessary for banking panics and central-bank policies to have a substantial
impact on aggregate lending. Runs on banks (i.e., periods when individuals and banks
2