NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHAT DRIVES RACIAL AND ETHNIC DIFFERENCES IN HIGH COST MORTGAGES?
THE ROLE OF HIGH RISK LENDERS
Patrick Bayer
Fernando Ferreira
Stephen L. Ross
Working Paper 22004
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22004
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2016
The analysis presented in this NBER Working Paper substantially extends that reported in our earlier
NBER WP #20762, “Race, Ethnicity and High-Cost Mortgage Lending,” which should be considered
superseded by this paper. Gordon MacDonald, Kyle Mangum, Yuan Wang and Ailing Zhang provided
outstanding research assistance. The analyses presented in this paper uses information provided by
a major credit repository. However, the substantive content of the paper is the responsibility of the
authors and does not reflects the specific views of any credit reporting agencies. This work was supported
by Ford Foundation, Research Sponsors Program of the Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center at Wharton,
and the Center for Real Estate and Urban Economic Studies at the University of Connecticut for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22004.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Patrick Bayer, Fernando Ferreira, and Stephen L. Ross. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What Drives Racial and Ethnic Differences in High Cost Mortgages? The Role of High Risk
Lenders
Patrick Bayer, Fernando Ferreira, and Stephen L. Ross
NBER Working Paper No. 22004
February 2016
JEL No. G21,I28,J15,J71,R21
ABSTRACT
This paper examines racial and ethnic differences in high cost mortgage lending in seven diverse metropolitan
areas from 2004-2007. Even after controlling for credit score and other key risk factors, African-American
and Hispanic home buyers are 105 and 78 percent more likely to have high cost mortgages for home
purchases. The increased incidence of high cost mortgages is attributable to both sorting across lenders
(60-65 percent) and differential treatment of equally qualified borrowers by lenders (35-40 percent).
The vast majority of the racial and ethnic differences across lender can be explained by a single measure
of the lender’s foreclosure risk and most of the within-lender differences are concentrated at high-risk
lenders. Thus, differential exposure to high-risk lenders combined with the differential treatment by
these lenders explains almost all of the racial and ethnic differences in high cost mortgage borrowing.
Patrick Bayer Stephen L. Ross
Department of Economics University of Connecticut
Duke University Department of Economics
213 Social Sciences 341 Mansfield Road, Unit 1063
Durham, NC 27708 Storrs, CT 06269-1063
and NBER stephen.l.ross@uconn.edu
patrick.bayer@duke.edu
Fernando Ferreira
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
1461 Steinberg - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
fferreir@wharton.upenn.edu

1. Introduction
Whether African-American and Hispanic mortgage borrowers face a higher cost of credit
than comparable white borrowers has been a long-standing question in academic and policy
debates about inequities in financial markets. Interest in this question is motivated by several
related issues. First, a large literature has studied racial discrimination in mortgage lending.
While historically focused on discrimination in mortgage underwriting and redlining against
minority neighborhoods, attention has increasingly turned to differences in the price of mortgage
credit, which has also been the focus of several high profile U.S. Department of Justice cases in
the wake of the recent financial crisis.1 Second, higher credit costs create an obvious barrier to
African-American and Hispanic homeownership, which has historically lagged that of white
households by large margins.2 Finally, the last housing cycle was characterized by a growing
subprime sector (Mian and Sufi 2009). African-American and Hispanic borrowers were more
likely to receive subprime loans at higher costs, possibly contributing to especially high
foreclosure rates for these borrowers.3
In this study, we examine racial and ethnic differences in the incidence of high cost
mortgage loans in a market-wide sample covering several large U.S. metropolitan areas or
regions. While some previous studies ask the question of whether similar borrowers receive
different prices from the same lender (e.g., disparate treatment discrimination),4 our use of
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
!!Munnell, Tootell, Browne and McEneaney (1996) and Ross and Yinger (2002) examine mortgage underwriting,
Holmes and Horvath (1994) and Tootell (1996) examine redlining, and Ross (2005) and Chan, Haughwout and
Tracy (In Press) study racial price differences. Recent cases have been filed or settled against National City Bank,
Wells Fargo, GFI Mortgage Bankers and Bank of America based on the past actions of Countrywide Mortgage.!
"!See Quercia, McCarthy and Wachter (2003), Belsky, Retsinas and Duda (2005), and Herbert, Haurin, Rosenthal
and Duda (2005) for a detailed discussion of racial and ethnic differences in homeownership.!
#!See Gerardi and Willen (2009), Reid and Laderman (2009) and Edminston (2009).!
4 For example, see Courchane and Nickerson (1997), Black, Boehm and DeGennaro (2003), Nelson (2005), and
Courchane (2007). These studies have found very small, if any, within-lender differences between white and
minority borrowers in the incidence of high cost mortgage credit.
!"
"

market-wide data shifts the question to whether unexplained racial and ethnic differences exist in
market outcomes, a phenomenon that Heckman (1998) described as market discrimination.5
Significant market level differences in the price of credit may have important consequences for
the dynamics of racial and ethnic inequality in homeownership, wealth, and credit worthiness,
even if only small differences exist at the lender level.
To build the database for our analysis, we first linked the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act
(HMDA) data on home purchases and refinance mortgages from 2004 and 2007 to public records
data on housing transactions and liens in seven distinct metropolitan housing markets.6 The
public records data contain information on all liens, as well as the name and address of the
individual purchasing the housing unit or refinancing their mortgage and in many cases the name
of the individual’s spouse. HMDA contains a rate spread variable that allows us to create an
indicator for the loan, which is equal to one when the Annual Percentage Rate (APR) exceeds the
interest rate on treasury securities of comparable maturity by at least 3 percentage points. Loans
that exceed this threshold are often described as rate spread loans, and this threshold is typically
used to identify high cost loans.7 We drew a sample of matched mortgages that were originated
between May and August of each year and provided the names and addresses from this sample to
one of the major credit reporting agencies. The credit reporting agency used the name and
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
$!Other studies documenting market wide differences in the prevalence of high cost loans include Bhutta and Ringo
(2013) using HMDA and credit repository data and Courchane (2007), Haughwout, Mayer and Tracy (2009) and
Ghent, Hernandez-Murillo and Owyang (In Press) using proprietary loan data. Studies using proprietary data have
typically been restricted to samples that represent a subset of the market, usually emphasizing loans that are
securitized privately or lenders that operate primarily in the subprime sector.
6 The data also includes a sample of 2008 originations, which we do not include in our analysis in order to focus on
lending prior to the financial crisis that began to accelerate with the failure of Bear-Stearns during the fall of 2007
and winter of 2008. See Harding and Ross (2010) for a discussion of the timing of the on-set of the broad financial
crisis. All results are robust to including 2008 originations.
%!The Annual Percentage Rate (APR) estimates cost of credit including interest rate and closing costs. These high
cost or rate spread loans are sometimes referred to as subprime loans, but other authors study the subprime market
based on a list of top subprime lenders, e.g. Ferreira and Gyourko (2015), based on borrowers who have a low credit
score, e.g. Mian and Sufi (2009), or private label securitized loans, e.g. Ghent, Hernandez-Murillo and Owyang (In
Press).
#"
"