NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK QUALITY, JUDICIAL EFFICIENCY AND BORROWER RUNS:
LOAN REPAYMENT DELAYS IN ITALY
Fabio Schiantarelli
Massimiliano Stacchini
Philip E. Strahan
Working Paper 22034
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22034
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2016
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors alone and do not necessarily represent
those of the institutions with which they are affiliated, nor of the National Bureau of Economic
Research. We are grateful to Massimiliano Affinito, Giorgio Albareto, Alberto Alesina,
Francesco Columba, Riccardo De Bonis, Emilia Bonaccorsi di Patti, Francesco Giavazzi,
Francesco Manaresi, Alfonso Rosolia and seminar participants at the Bank of Italy, Bocconi
University, Boston College, University of Chicago, Georgia Tech, the University of Illinois at
Champaign-Urbana, Notre Dame, Nova School of Business, the Bank of Portugal, SAIF,
Tsinghua University and the University of Western Ontario for helpful comments. We also thank
Ana Lariau Bolentini and Danilo Liberati for the helpful research assistance.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Fabio Schiantarelli, Massimiliano Stacchini, and Philip E. Strahan. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bank Quality, Judicial Efficiency and Borrower Runs: Loan Repayment Delays in Italy
Fabio Schiantarelli, Massimiliano Stacchini, and Philip E. Strahan
NBER Working Paper No. 22034
February 2016, Revised August 2016
JEL No. G02
ABSTRACT
Exposure to liquidity risk makes banks vulnerable to runs from both depositors and from
wholesale, short-term investors. This paper shows empirically that banks are also vulnerable to
run-like behavior from borrowers who delay their loan repayments (default). Firms in Italy
defaulted more against banks with high levels of past losses. We control for borrower
fundamentals with firm-quarter fixed effects; thus, identification comes from a firm's choice to
default against one bank versus another, depending upon their health. This `selective' default
increases where legal enforcement is weak. Poor enforcement thus can create a systematic loan
risk by encouraging borrowers to default en masse once the continuation value of their bank
relationships comes into doubt.
Fabio Schiantarelli Philip E. Strahan
Department of Economics Carroll School of Management
Boston College 324B Fulton Hall
140 Commonwealth Avenue Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467 Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and IZA and NBER
schianta@bc.edu philip.strahan@bc.edu
Massimiliano Stacchini
Bank of Italy
via Nazionale 91, 00184
Roma, Italy
massimiliano.stacchini@bancaditalia.it

Bank Quality, Judicial E(cid:30)ciency and Borrower Runs:
Loan Repayment Delays in Italy
Fabio Schiantarelli∗, Massimiliano Stacchini†, Philip E. Strahan‡
August 2016
Abstract
Exposure to liquidity risk makes banks vulnerable to runs from both depositors
and from wholesale, short-term investors. This paper shows empirically that banks are
also vulnerable to run-like behavior from borrowers who delay their loan repayments
(default). FirmsinItalydefaultedmoreagainstbankswithhighlevelsofpastlosses. We
control for borrower fundamentals with (cid:28)rm-quarter (cid:28)xed e(cid:27)ects; thus, identi(cid:28)cation
comes from a (cid:28)rm’s choice to default against one bank versus another, depending upon
their health. This ‘selective’ default increases where legal enforcement is weak. Poor
enforcement thus can create a systematic loan risk by encouraging borrowers to default
en masse once the continuation value of their bank relationships comes into doubt.
1 Introduction1
Under the traditional view of Diamond and Dybvig [1983], provision of liquidity insurance to
households and (cid:28)rms exposes banks to the risk of a destructive run: depositors may demand
∗Boston College and IZA
†Bank of Italy
‡Boston College & NBER
1
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors alone and do not necessarily represent those
oftheinstitutionswithwhichtheyarea(cid:30)liated. WearegratefultoMassimilianoA(cid:30)nito,GiorgioAlbareto,
Alberto Alesina, Francesco Columba, Riccardo De Bonis, Emilia Bonaccorsi di Patti, Francesco Giavazzi,
Francesco Manaresi, Alfonso Rosolia and seminar participants at the Bank of Italy, Bocconi University,
BostonCollege, UniversityofChicago, GeorgiaTech, theUniversityofIllinoisatChampaign-Urbana, Notre
Dame, Nova School of Business, the Bank of Portugal, SAIF, Tsinghua University and the University of
Western Ontario for helpful comments. We also thank Ana Lariau Bolentini and Danilo Liberati for the
helpful research assistance.
1

cash solely because they expect others to do the same. In the aftermath of the (cid:28)nancial and
sovereign debt crises, these old-style depositor runs have been the exception rather than the
rule.2 But even in these modern crises, we have seen panic-motivated instances of drying up
of wholesale, short-term debt markets, and increases in collateral demands in asset-backed
commercial paper and repo markets.3 These episodes, often called ‘runs on the shadow
banking system in the US’, create similar pressures on banks as traditional depositor runs,
making it hard for them to fund new loans and raising the likelihood that (cid:28)re sales of old
ones can cause insolvency. Similar liquidity pressures from the asset-side of banking emerged
following the collapse of Lehman, as (cid:28)rms drew down credit lines at banks perceived to be
more likely to restrict access to future liquidity.4
Both the traditional literature as well as recent studies of (cid:28)nancial crises emphasize
liquidity as the key risk that makes banks uniquely vulnerable. This framework rationalizes
a host of government interventions such as deposit insurance schemes and lenders of last
resort, as well as necessary but potentially distortive regulations on bank risk taking, capital
structure and liquidity exposure (e.g. Basel I, II and III).
In this paper, we show that banks face a second source of vulnerability, one stemming
from borrowers rather than from demanders of liquidity. Using data from Italy leading up
to and following the Euro crisis, we provide evidence that bank instability can stem from
credit risk. The link between credit risk and bank stability is well known: history tells us
that waves of bank failures are often traceable to borrower losses and declines in the value
of loans.5 However, we highlight a new channel through which credit risk enhances bank
fragility. We show that borrowers selectively default against banks already weakened by past
bad loans; borrowers thus seem to default because they observe other borrowers doing so.
2
Exceptions include the withdrawals of deposits from Northern Rock at the beginning of the (cid:28)nancial
crisis, and the more recent withdrawals of deposits from Greek banks during the negotiations with their
creditors.
3
See Freixas, Laeven, and Peydro [2015] and Gorton and Metrick [2012].
4
See Ivashina and Scharfstein [2010], Cornett et al. [2011], and Ippolito et al. [2015].
5
The principles for appropriate management of credit risk are also a long-lasting topic of debate for
regulators (e.g Basel I, II, III).
2