NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FISCAL AND FINANCIAL CRISES
Michael D. Bordo
Christopher M. Meissner
Working Paper 22059
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22059
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2016
Working version of our chapter for the forthcoming Handbook of Macroeconomics vol. II. We
thank Sarah Quincy for invaluable research assistance. We thank conference and seminar
participants at the BIS, Bonn, Bank of France, Copenhagen Business School, Hoover Institute,
Kyoto World Economic History Conference, Lund, and Rutgers. Chris Cumming, Lars Jonung,
Oscar Jordà, Yannick Kalantzis, John Landon-Lane, Ashoka Mody, Moritz Schularick, Anders
Ögren, John B. Taylor, Harald Uhlig, and Eugene White provided very helpful comments. We
remain responsible for any errors. Data and other related files are available at: https://
sites.google.com/site/chrismmeissner/data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22059.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Michael D. Bordo and Christopher M. Meissner. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Fiscal and Financial Crises
Michael D. Bordo and Christopher M. Meissner
NBER Working Paper No. 22059
March 2016
JEL No. E62,G01,N1
ABSTRACT
Interconnections between banking crises and fiscal crises have a long history. We document the
long-run evolution from classic banking panics towards modern banking crises where financial
guarantees are associated with crisis resolution. Recent crises feature a feedback loop between
bank guarantees and bank holdings of local sovereign debt thereby linking financial to fiscal
crises. Earlier examples include the crises in Chile (early 1980s), Japan (1990), Sweden and
Finland (1991), and the Asian crisis (1997). We discuss the evolution in economic theorizing on
crises since the 1950s, and then provide an overview of the long-run evolution of connections
between different types of crises. Next we explore the empirics of financial crises. We discuss the
methodological issue of crisis measurement encompassing the definition, dating, and incidence of
financial crises. Leading data sets differ markedly in terms of their historical frequency of crises
leading to classification uncertainty. There is a range of estimates of output losses from financial
crises in the literature, and these are also dependent upon definitions. We find economically
significant output losses from various types of crises using a consistent methodology across time
and data sets. Predicting crises also remains a challenge. We survey the Early Warnings
Indicators literature finding that a broad range of variables are potential predictors. Credit booms
have been emphasized recently, but other factors still matter. Finally, we identify a new policy
trilemma. Countries can have two of the following three choices: a large financial sector, fiscal
bailouts devoted to financial crises, and discretionary fiscal policy aimed at raising demand
during the recessions induced by financial crises.
Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu
Christopher M. Meissner
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
cmmeissner@ucdavis.edu

1. Introduction
The recent financial crisis in the Eurozone involved both sovereign debt and the
banking system. The circumstances of this crisis were unique as were the country
experiences, but the combined incidence of fiscal and financial crises is actually not new. In
fact, these connections have changed progressively over the long-run. Recurrent and
systemic financial crises emerged as a side effect of the modern process of financial
development, globalization, and economic growth which got underway in the early
nineteenth century. Over time, economic theory, economic data and changes in the
objectives of policy makers have shaped the reactions to crises and their subsequent
contours. Interconnections between types of financial crises indeed have a long history.
From the mid-19th century, financial crises in the banking sector moved from being
the responsibility of markets alone to receiving aid from central banks in a lender of last
resort capacity. In the post-World War II period, especially since the 1970s, banking,
currency, and debt crises became linked because governments became more willing to
guarantee significant fractions of the liabilities of the banking system. The seminal paper by
Diaz-Alejandro (1985) generated an enormous literature to explain the Latin American crises
of the early 1980s. The Nordic crisis of 1991-1992 and the Japanese Banking Crisis of 1990
involved many of these elements. The Asian crisis of 1997-98 led to new theories which
explained “triple crises” based on guarantees and foreign currency denominated debt. Finally
the recent Eurozone crisis has led to new work which emphasizes the feedback loop
between bank guarantees and banks’ holding of member states’ sovereign debt which links
financial to debt crises.
In this paper, we examine the interconnections between financial and fiscal crises
based on history, theory, and empirics. Section 2 presents a brief historical overview of
financial crises. Banking crises can be traced back hundreds of years. Before the advent of
deposit insurance and effective use of the lender of last resort, banking crises were banking
panics. In the Depression of the 1930s, governments instituted numerous interventions and
guarantees effectively laying a strong precedent for subsequent fiscal resolutions. Since the
breakdown of the Bretton Woods system in the 1970s and the advent of liberalized domestic
2

and international financial markets, banking panics have increasingly evolved into fiscally
resolved banking crises. Banking crises have often been global or regional events as countries
have been linked together by fixed exchange rates, capital flows, and other sources of
contagion. Debt crises—sovereign debt defaults--have also been around for centuries,
associated with over-borrowing and have been triggered by international and domestic
shocks. Today they occur primarily in emerging countries, but again, several advanced
countries in the Eurozone faced a tough test after 2008 (with a sovereign default in Greece).
Currency crises—speculative attacks on pegged exchange rates – often accompanied banking
crises and sometimes debt crises because of linkages between monetary policy and crisis
resolution.
Section 3 surveys theoretical perspectives on financial crises. Banking crises
traditionally were analyzed using three approaches: the monetarist approach, the financial
fragility approach, and the business cycle approach. Modern perspectives build upon these
earlier theories. The key approach is based on the Diamond and Dybvig (1983) notion of the
inherent instability of banking because of a maturity mismatch. Also seminal are theories
based on asymmetric information. In the recent decade, the financial frictions studied in
partial equilibrium models have successfully been added to dynamic general equilibrium
models. The pioneering modern work to explain why countries issue sovereign debt and try
to avoid debt crises traces back to Eaton and Gersovitz (1981) who emphasize reputation.
By contrast Bulow and Rogoff (1989a) focus on the deterrence effect of sanctions. Reinhart
and Rogoff (2009) emphasize serial defaults, debt intolerance, and the distinction between
domestic and foreign debt. New research in dynamic general equilibrium models also
incorporates connections between the fiscal and financial side of the economy.
Section 4 provides empirical perspectives on financial crises. We discuss the
methodological issue of crisis measurement which encompasses the definition, dating, and
incidence of financial crises. Different approaches to definition and dating which are taken
in the literature lead to very different patterns of recorded incidence and hence very different
interpretations of the historical record. These classification problems must be acknowledged
before any definitive general statements can be made. We also discuss the many and varied
causes or determinants of financial crises, including bank credit driven asset booms which
have resonance for the recent crisis. A number of approaches have been taken to identify
the key determinants of crises and to assess the predictive power of empirical models. This
3