NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW MANAGEMENT RISK AFFECTS CORPORATE DEBT
Yihui Pan
Tracy Yue Wang
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 22091
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22091
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2016
We would like to thank Shan Ge, Tyler Jensen, Abby Kim, Dongxu Li, Xingzhou Li, Keeseon
Nam, Xi Wu and Julian Zhang for excellent research assistance. Participants in presentations at
Arizona, Beijing University, CKGSB, Fullerton, George Washington, London Business School,
University of Minnesota, Ohio State University, University of Oregon, Southern Methodist
University, University of Southern California, University of Texas-Dallas, University of Utah,
Villanova University, 2015 Western Finance Association Meeting, 2015 Annual Conference on
Financial Economics and Accounting, and 2015 FMA Asia Annual Meeting, as well as Benjamin
Bennett, Jeff Coles, Michael Cooper, Naveen Daniel, Harry DeAngelo, Isil Erel, Steve Karolyi,
Sigitas Karpavicius, John Matsusaka, Stanislava Nikolova, Oded Palmon, Miriam Schwartz-Ziv,
Berk Sensoy, Henri Servaes, Anil Shivdasani, Léa Stern, Luke Taylor, Jun Yang, Xiaoyun Yu,
Lu Zhang, and an anonymous referee provided very helpful suggestions. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Yihui Pan, Tracy Yue Wang, and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Management Risk Affects Corporate Debt
Yihui Pan, Tracy Yue Wang, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 22091
March 2016
JEL No. G32,G34,M12,M51
ABSTRACT
Management risk occurs when uncertainty about future managerial decisions increases a firm’s
overall risk. This paper argues that management risk is an important yet unexplored determinant
of a firm’s default risk and the pricing of its debt. CDS spreads, loan spreads and bond yield
spreads all increase at the time of CEO turnover, when management risk is highest, and decline
over the first three years of CEO tenure, regardless of the reason for the turnover. A similar
pattern but of smaller magnitude occurs around CFO turnovers. The increase in the CDS spread
at the time of the CEO departure announcement, the change in the spread when the incoming
CEO takes office, as well as the sensitivity of the spread to the new CEO’s tenure, all depend on
the amount of prior uncertainty about the new management.
Yihui Pan Michael S. Weisbach
Department of Finance Department of Finance
1655 Campus Center Drive Fisher College of Business
University of Utah Ohio State University
Salt Lake City, UT 84112-9303 2100 Neil Ave.
Yihui.Pan@business.utah.edu Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
Tracy Yue Wang weisbach.2@osu.edu
Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
wangx684@umn.edu

1. Introduction
A firm’s default risk reflects not only the likelihood that it will have bad luck, but also the risk that
the firm’s managerial decisions will lead the firm to default. Management risk occurs when the impact of
management on firm value is uncertain, and, in principle, could meaningfully affect the firm’s overall risk.
Practitioners have long understood the importance of management risk, and regularly characterize it as an
important factor affecting a firm’s risk.1 However, the academic literature on corporate default risk and the
pricing of corporate debt has largely ignored management risk. This paper evaluates the extent to which
uncertainty about management is a factor that affects a firm’s default risk and the pricing of its debt.
We identify the effect of management risk using the idea that uncertainty about future managerial
decisions rises around executive turnovers, particularly CEO turnovers, and decreases over time as the
manager’s actions are observed. When a senior manager departs, there is an immediate increase in the
uncertainty about who his replacement will be, and also about the impact the new manager will have on firm
value. Part of this uncertainty is resolved when the incoming manager’s identity is revealed, but substantial
uncertainty remains about his ability and the quality of match between him and the firm. If the ex ante
expectation of a manager’s quality is on average correct, then there should be no systematic change in the
market’s estimate of an average manager’s ability over his tenure in office. What will decline unambiguously,
however, is the noise in this estimate, since more observations of his actions will allow the market to learn
more about the manager. Therefore, management risk, which arises because of the uncertainty of the
manager’s value added, should decline with a manager’s tenure. If management risk increases the market’s
assessment of a firm’s default probability, then the default risk embedded in the pricing of firms’ debt should
also increase around the time of executive turnover and subsequently decline over the executive’s tenure.
1 For example, a special document Moody’s circulated about corporate governance claims: “[T]here is inherent
transition risk in any CEO change and we therefore look to evaluate any changes to strategic initiatives or financial
policies that differ from previous expectations, and whether credit metrics or liquidity deteriorates as a result.” See:
Plath (2008).
1

Using a sample of primarily S&P 1500 firms between 1987 and 2012, we characterize the way that
the risk of a firm’s corporate debt varies with the uncertainty the market likely has about its management.
The basic pattern is depicted in Figure 1, which illustrates the way CDS spreads change around the time of a
CEO change. The announcement of a CEO’s departure is associated with an increase in the firm’s CDS
spread, reflecting an increased market assessment of the firm’s default risk. The CDS spread declines at the
announcement of the successor, and further declines during the new CEO’s time in office, approximately
back to the pre-turnover level after about three years. Holding other factors constant, the 5-year CDS spread
is about 35 basis points (22% relative to the sample mean) higher when a new CEO takes office than three
years into his tenure. Spreads on shorter-term CDS contracts exhibit an even larger sensitivity to CEO
turnover and tenure. Spreads on loans and bond yield spreads also decline following CEO turnovers. These
patterns occur regardless of the reason for the turnover; changes in spreads following turnovers that occur
because of the death or illness of the outgoing CEO are not economically or statistically significantly
different from changes in spreads in the entire sample.
The CEO, however, is not the only member of the management team that is relevant for decision-
making in the firm. We examine the effect of Chief Financial Officers’ (CFOs’) turnovers as well. Our
estimates indicate that, similar to CEOs, spreads on a firm’s CDS and new debt decline over the first three
years of its CFO’s tenure, but the magnitude of the decline is smaller than that following CEO turnovers,
especially if the CFO turnover is not accompanied by a CEO turnover.
The observed decline in default risk over tenure potentially reflects the resolution of uncertainty
about management and hence a decline in management risk. To evaluate whether this interpretation is the
appropriate one, we examine cross-sectional variation in the way that ex ante uncertainty gets resolved across
CEOs and firms. In particular, Bayesian learning models imply that if the changes in spreads around CEO
turnover occur because of changes in management risk, then when ex ante uncertainty about management is
higher, spreads should increase more around management turnover and decline faster subsequently.
2