NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIQUIDITY REQUIREMENTS, LIQUIDITY CHOICE AND FINANCIAL STABILITY
Douglas W. Diamond
Anil K Kashyap
Working Paper 22053
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22053
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2016
We thank Franklin Allen, Gary Gorton, Guido Lorenzoni, Annette Vissing-Jorgenson, Nancy
Stokey, Nao Sudo, John Taylor, Harald Uhlig and seminar participants at the Asian Development
Bank Institute, East Asian Economic Seminar, Imperial College, Melbourne Institute
Macroeconomic Policy Meetings, National Bureau of Economic Research Monetary Economics
meeting, the Bank of England, European Central Bank, Centre for Economic Policy Research and
Centre for Macroeconomics Conference on Credit Dynamics and the Macroeconomy, Riksbank,
and the University of Chicago for helpful comments and Adam Jorring for expert research
assistance. We thank the Initiative on Global Markets at Chicago Booth, the Fama Miller Center
at Chicago Booth and the National Science Foundation for grants administered through the
NBER for research support. Diamond has an ongoing visiting scholar relationship with the
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and Chicago. Kashyap has an ongoing visiting scholar
relationship with the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and is an advisor to the Riksbank, see his
web page for a complete list of his non-teaching compensated activities. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Douglas W. Diamond and Anil K Kashyap. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Liquidity Requirements, Liquidity Choice and Financial Stability
Douglas W. Diamond and Anil K Kashyap
NBER Working Paper No. 22053
March 2016
JEL No. E44,G01,G18,G21
ABSTRACT
We study a modification of the Diamond and Dybvig (1983) model in which the bank may hold a
liquid asset, some depositors see sunspots that could lead them to run, and all depositors have
incomplete information about the bank’s ability to survive a run. The incomplete information
means that the bank is not automatically incentivized to always hold enough liquid assets to
survive runs. Regulation similar to the liquidity coverage ratio and the net stable funding ratio
(that are soon be implemented) can change the bank’s incentives so that runs are less likely.
Optimal regulation would not mimic these rules.
Douglas W. Diamond
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
douglas.diamond@chicagobooth.edu
Anil K Kashyap
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
anil.kashyap@chicagobooth.edu

Introduction
In September 2009 the leaders of 20 major economies created the Financial Stability Board
(FSB) whose purpose is to “coordinate at the international level the work of national financial
authorities and international standard setting bodies (SSBs) in order to develop and promote the
implementation of effective regulatory, supervisory and other financial sector policies.” Since
that time the financial system has undergone a regulatory overhaul.
The term “macroprudential” regulation has become synonymous with much of this effort. As we
explain in the next section, what that means in practice remains somewhat elusive. But, there are
two tangible changes that are on track to occur over the remainder of this decade. One widely
studied set of reforms pertain to the rules regarding capital requirements for banks. Less well-
understood is that, through their cooperation via the Basel Committee on Bank Supervision, the
major economies have also agreed also to implement by 2019 new rules governing banks’ debt
structures and requirements to hold certain types of liquid assets.
To date there is a remarkable asymmetry in the economic analysis of the capital and liquidity
regulations. The pioneering work of Modigliani and Miller (1958) provides a solid theoretical
framework for analyzing capital regulation. Any student taking a first course in corporate
finance will encounter this theory and there is a massive empirical literature that explores the
theory’s predictions. Capital regulations for banks at the international level go back to 1988 and
there many empirical examinations of the impact of these regulations.
In contrast, there is no benchmark theory regarding liquidity provision by intermediaries.
Indeed, financial economists even have competing concepts that they have in mind when
discussing liquidity, so that there is no generally accepted empirical measure of liquidity
economists study. Allen (2014), in his survey of the nascent literature on liquidity regulation,
concludes by writing “much more research is required in this area. With capital regulation there
is a huge literature but little agreement on the optimal level of requirements. With liquidity
regulation, we do not even know what to argue about.”
Nonetheless, the global regulatory community has agreed on certain liquidity requirements
(Basel Committee on Bank Supervision (2013a, 2014)). Two new concepts, the liquidity
coverage ratio and the net stable funding ratio, have been proposed and banks by 2019 will be
compelled to meet requirements for these ratios. Thus, it seems fair to say we are in a situation
where practice is ahead of both theory and measurement.
In this paper we survey the existing work on liquidity regulation and develop a framework for
discussing the regulation. The theory that we propose suggests, in certain parameterizations,
regulations bearing some resemblance to the liquidity coverage ratio and net stable funding ratio
can emerge as ones which will improve outcomes relative to an unregulated benchmark.
However, the regulations that arise in our model would naturally differ across banks, depending
1

on certain bank characteristics, so they do not mimic exactly the ones that are on track to be
implemented.
The critical ingredients in our model are the following. First, we consider banks which are
spatially separated and hence do not compete aggressively for deposits. Treating the bank as
monopolist simplifies the analysis by allowing us to side-step some complications that arise from
having to model the deposit market equilibrium. The model can also be interpreted as a
description of the aggregate banking system, which for many financial stability and regulatory
discussions is the object of primary concern and under this interpretation ignoring the deposit
competition is perhaps more natural.
Second, we assume that intermediaries provide liquidity insurance for customers who have
uncertain withdrawal needs (or consumption desires). We build on the Diamond and Dybvig
(1983), henceforth DD, model of banking in which banks provide this insurance by relying on
the law of large numbers to eliminate idiosyncratic customer liquidity needs.
For those familiar with DD, we make two modifications. The first is allowing the bank to invest
in a liquid asset that has a rate of return exceeding the return from liquidating illiquid assets and
thus is the efficient way to arrange to pay customers that need liquidity. This introduces a
tradeoff between lending and holding liquidity as in Bhattacharya and Gale (1987) and several
papers of Allen and Gale (1997 and others).
The other modification to DD is the form of run risk that the banks face. Banks are assumed to
have a good assessment of the aggregate needs of their customers for fundamental reasons. But,
they also know that some customers will receive a signal about the bank which could lead to a
run. The sunspots that we consider are a metaphor for people being concerned with the health of
the bank, but not having a fully formed set of beliefs about the bank’s solvency status. In
making their decisions we assume that customers are unable to fully evaluate the ability of the
bank to honor deposits. Given the complexity of modern banks it seems realistic to presume that
most customers cannot precisely determine their bank’s maturity mismatch and hence its
vulnerability to a run. The imperfect information creates a challenge for the banks because their
customers will not necessarily know if the bank is prudently holding liquidity or not, which
reduces the incentive to hold liquidity.
In the event that a run does occur, we depart from DD and Ennis and Keister (2006) to allow for
the possibility that not all customers seek to withdraw their funds. We believe it is useful to
analyze partial runs for two separate reasons. One is that in practice there do seem to be some
sticky deposits that do not flee even in times of considerable banking stress. In addition, even
before troubles occur it is usually clear which types of deposits are prone to running. So this
allows us to talk about policies for different types of withdrawal risk.
Within this environment we can assess the vulnerability of the financial system to runs under
different regulatory arrangements. In the baseline case, we assume that banks simply maximize
2