NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INDUSTRY FAMILIARITY AND TRADING:
EVIDENCE FROM THE PERSONAL PORTFOLIOS OF INDUSTRY INSIDERS
Itzhak Ben-David
Justin Birru
Andrea Rossi
Working Paper 22115
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22115
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2016
Previously circulated as "Trading Skill: Evidence from Trades of Corporate Insiders in Their
Personal Portfolios." We benefited from the comments of René Stulz and Michael Weisbach. We
thank Terrance Odean for providing the data. The authors appreciate comments received from
participants in seminars at Case Western Reserve University, Drexel University, Georgetown
University, Ohio University, The Ohio State University, the University of Cincinnati, the
University of Illinois, and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Ben-David and Birru’s
research was supported by the Dice Center at the Fisher College of Business. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Itzhak Ben-David, Justin Birru, and Andrea Rossi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Industry Familiarity and Trading: Evidence from the Personal Portfolios of Industry Insiders
Itzhak Ben-David, Justin Birru, and Andrea Rossi
NBER Working Paper No. 22115
March 2016, Revised December 2016
JEL No. G11,G14
ABSTRACT
We study whether industry familiarity is an advantage in stock trading by exploring the trading
patterns of industry insiders in their own personal portfolios. To do so, we identify accounts of
industry insiders in a large dataset provided by a retail discount broker. We find that insiders
trade firms from their own industry more frequently. Furthermore, they earn abnormal returns
exclusively when trading own-industry stocks, especially obscure stocks (small, low analyst
coverage, high volatility). In a battery of tests, we find no evidence of the use of private
information. The results are most consistent with the interpretation that industry familiarity is an
advantage in stock trading.
Itzhak Ben-David Andrea Rossi
Department of Finance Department of Finance
Fisher College of Business Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue 2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210 Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER andrearossi832@msn.com
bendavid@fisher.osu.edu
Justin Birru
Department of Finance
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
birru.2@fisher.osu.edu
A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22115

1 Introduction
A vast literature examines the ability of individuals to trade profitably.1 Although most
analyses find that individuals lose on average from trading (e.g., Barber and Odean, 2000), a few
studies show that some individuals consistently outperform the benchmarks (e.g., Seru, Shumway,
and Stoffman, 2010). One potential source of trading advantage for some individuals is familiarity
with the stocks and industries they trade, i.e., having better tools to decipher public information.
Several studies attempt to examine this source, yet the results are mixed. In the context of retail
traders, Døskeland and Hvide (2011) document that individuals overweight stocks of companies
in the industry in which they are employed, but they find that they earn negative returns. The
authors attribute this result to overconfidence. In the context of mutual fund managers, Pool,
Stoffman, and Yonker (2012) find that managers overweight stocks from their home states but do
not exhibit superior performance. Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2005) show that mutual fund
managers who have concentrated positions in a few industries achieve positive abnormal returns.
Kempf, Manconi, and Spalt (2014) report that mutual fund managers outperform in industries in
which they have more investing experience. Finally, Cici, Gehde-Trapp, Göricke, and Kempf
(2014) find that mutual fund managers do not overweight industries in which they previously
worked. However, stocks that they pick from these industries outperform stocks in the rest of their
portfolio. Given the mixed results, it is important to understand whether familiarity with an
industry is related to skill.
In this paper, we provide evidence on the ability of investors to capitalize on industry
familiarity from a novel source. Specifically, we examine trades made by industry insiders in their
own personal portfolios. In this setting, top corporate executives serve as retail traders. Compared
with average employees who engage in stock trading (such as those studied in Døskeland and
Hvide, 2011), the executives in our study are likely to have a better understanding of their industry.
Our tests contrast executives’ trading patterns and performance in stocks of firms within their
industry with those outside the industry. After documenting that insiders outperform when trading
stocks in their own industry, we attempt to identify the type of information on which insiders are
trading. To do so, we focus on the specific sources of trading profits that have been documented
in prior research, such as trading ahead of earnings announcements or merger and acquisition
1 See Barber and Odean (2011) for a comprehensive review of the findings of the literature on individual investors.
1

(M&A) announcements, or trading in conjunction with the trades of firm insiders. Our findings,
however, do not reveal any evidence that insider profits in industry stocks originate from any of
the commonly identified sources. Instead, our analysis suggests that industry familiarity is the
trading advantage that best explains our results.
Our study also contributes to the understanding of trading and portfolio holdings of
corporate executives. Past research has shown that insiders can profitably trade their own firm
stocks: Seyhun (1998), Lakonishok and Lee (2001), Cohen, Malloy, and Pomorski (2012), and
Ben-David and Roulstone (2012) report that prices drift for up to a year following insider
purchases. This performance is often ascribed to private information that insiders hold (e.g.,
Seyhun, 1998). However, little is known about the composition of insiders’ full portfolios or the
trades they make outside their own firm. Because our data cover all stocks that insiders trade with
the retail broker, we can provide the first insight into the portfolio composition and diversification
choices of insiders.
Our data come from matching a transaction-level retail trading database (used in Barber
and Odean, 2000) with insider transactions reported in U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC) records. Matching these databases allows us to identify insiders in the retail database and
track their other, non-own-firm, trades.
We start by examining the trade composition of insiders. We first look at whether insiders
hedge their human capital by avoiding stocks in their industry of profession. In contrast, our results
show that insiders actually trade disproportionally more in own-industry stocks relative to non-
own-industry stocks. We estimate that 8.4% of their trades are in own-industry stocks, even though
own-industry firms comprise only 4.1% of the total market capitalization, on average.
Next, we test whether insiders exhibit skill with respect to their stock buy-and-sell
decisions. Also, we explore whether this outperformance is reflected in all stock picks or confined
to trades in which insiders have professional expertise. We find evidence that insiders exhibit skill
only in their own-industry trades. Given that own-industry stock returns are likely to be correlated
with returns on insider human capital, insiders should avoid own-industry stocks unless they
possess some advantage in trading these stocks. Indeed, we find evidence that insiders make large
abnormal returns on their own-industry trades, both purchases and sales, but exhibit no
outperformance in non-own-industry trades. These results are robust to various methods of
2