NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE DEPOSITS CHANNEL OF MONETARY POLICY
Itamar Drechsler
Alexi Savov
Philipp Schnabl
Working Paper 22152
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22152
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2016
We thank Siddharth Vij for excellent research assistance. We thank Robert Adams, Juliane
Begenau, Markus Brunnermeier, Douglas Diamond, Eugene Fama, Erik Gilje, Simon Gilchrist,
Gary Gorton, Anil Kashyap, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Sam Hanson, Daniel Paravisini, David
Scharfstein, Philip Strahan, Amit Seru, Adi Sunderam, Amir Sufi, Jeremy Stein, and seminar
participants at the AEA Meetings, Berkeley, Boston College, Chicago Booth, Chicago Federal
Reserve, Cornell University, Harvard University, IMF/Worldbank Joint Seminar, London School
of Economics, London Business School, NBER Asset Pricing, NBER Corporate Finance, NYU-
Columbia Junior Meeting, SFS Finance Cavalcade, Stanford University, UCLA, University of
Maryland, University of Montreal, and Temple University for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Itamar Drechsler, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Deposits Channel of Monetary Policy
Itamar Drechsler, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl
NBER Working Paper No. 22152
April 2016, Revised January 2017
JEL No. E52,E58,G12,G21
ABSTRACT
We present a new channel for the transmission of monetary policy, the deposits channel. We
show that when the Fed funds rate rises, banks widen the spreads they charge on deposits, and
deposits flow out of the banking system. We present a model where this is due to market power in
deposit markets. Consistent with the market power mechanism, deposit spreads increase more
and deposits flow out more in concentrated markets. This is true even when we control for
lending opportunities by only comparing different branches of the same bank. Since deposits are
the main source of liquid assets for households, the deposits channel can explain the observed
strong relationship between the liquidity premium and the Fed funds rate. Since deposits are also
a uniquely stable funding source for banks, the deposits channel impacts bank lending. When the
Fed funds rate rises, banks that raise deposits in concentrated markets contract their lending by
more than other banks. Our estimates imply that the deposits channel can account for the entire
transmission of monetary policy through bank balance sheets.
Itamar Drechsler Philipp Schnabl
Stern School of Business Stern School of Business
New York University New York University
44 West Fourth Street, 9-120 44 West Fourth Street
New York, NY 10012 New York, NY 10012
and NBER and NBER
itamar.drechsler@stern.nyu.edu schnabl@stern.nyu.edu
Alexi Savov
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-85
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
asavov@stern.nyu.edu

I Introduction
We propose and test a new channel for the transmission of monetary policy, the deposits
channel. We show that when the Fed funds rate rises, banks widen the interest spreads they
charge on deposits, and deposits flow out of the banking system. Since banks rely heavily on
deposits for their funding, these outflows induce a contraction in lending. The relationships
we document are strong and their aggregate effects are large. We argue, both theoretically
and empirically, that they are due to banks’ market power over deposits.
Our results are important for two reasons. First, the deposits channel provides an expla-
nation for how monetary policy impacts banks’ funding and the supply of bank lending in
the economy. Unlike existing theories of the bank lending channel (e.g. Bernanke and Blin-
der 1988), the deposits channel does not work through required reserves. This is important
because the required reserves mechanism has come to be viewed as implausible, throwing
the idea of a bank lending channel into question (Romer and Romer 1990, Bernanke and
Gertler 1995, Woodford 2010).
Second, the deposits channel provides an explanation for how monetary policy affects
the supply of safe and liquid assets in the economy. Deposits are the main source of such
assets for households, and hence a major component of their aggregate supply. Another
major component are U.S. Treasuries (Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen 2012). When
thesupplyofdepositscontracts, theliquiditypremiumonallsafeandliquidassets, including
Treasuries, is predicted to rise. The deposits channel can thus explain the observed strong
relationship between the Fed funds rate and the liquidity premium (Nagel 2014).
We provide a model of the deposits channel. In the model, households have a preference
for liquidity, which they obtain from cash and deposits. Cash is highly liquid but pays no
interest, while deposits are partially liquid and pay some interest, the deposit rate. The
deposit rate is set by banks that have market power over their local deposit markets. House-
holds can also invest in bonds, which provide no special liquidity and pay a competitive
open-market rate set by the central bank, the Fed funds rate. The Fed funds rate thus
equals the cost of holding cash, and the difference between the Fed funds rate and the de-
posit rate—the deposit spread—equals the cost of holding deposits. When the central bank
1

raises the Fed funds rate, cash becomes more expensive to hold, and this allows banks to
raise deposit spreads without losing deposits to cash. Households respond by reducing their
deposit holdings, and deposits flow out of the banking system and into bonds.
We test the predictions of the deposits channel in aggregate, bank-level, and branch-level
data for the U.S. At the aggregate level, deposit spreads increase strongly with the Fed funds
rate, suggesting substantial market power. Consistent with our model, the rise in spreads
is associated with large deposit outflows. Also consistent with our model, the effects are
stronger for the most liquid types of deposits (checking and savings). The fact that deposit
prices (spreads) and quantities (flows) move in opposite directions indicates that monetary
policy shifts banks’ deposit supply curve rather than households’ demand curve.
The aggregate time series is subject to a common identification challenge: deposit supply
may be responding to contemporaneous changes in banks’ lending opportunities rather than
directly to monetary policy. For instance, if banks’ lending opportunities decline as the
Fed raises rates, then we would see banks make fewer loans and consequently take in fewer
deposits even absent a deposits channel.
We address this identification challenge by exploiting geographic variation in an observ-
able determinant of market power, the concentration of local deposit markets. The deposits
channel predicts that when the Fed funds rate rises, banks in more concentrated areas should
increase deposit spreads by more and experience greater deposit outflows. Yet we cannot
simply compare deposits across banks because different banks may have different lending op-
portunities. To control for bank-specific lending opportunities, we compare deposit spreads
and flows across branches of the same bank located in areas with different concentration.
The identifying assumption for this within-bank estimation is that banks can raise deposits
at one branch and lend them at another.
The results support the predictions of the deposits channel. Following a 100 bps increase
in the Fed funds rate, a bank’s branches in high-concentration areas increase their spreads
on savings and time deposits by 14 bps and 7 bps, respectively, relative to its branches in
low-concentration areas. The corresponding deposit outflows are 66 bps larger at the high-
concentration branches. These results are robust to a variety of specifications and also hold
when we compare branches of different banks.
2