NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE REAL EFFECTS OF LIQUIDITY DURING THE FINANCIAL CRISIS:
EVIDENCE FROM AUTOMOBILES
Efraim Benmelech
Ralf R. Meisenzahl
Rodney Ramcharan
Working Paper 22148
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22148
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2016
We thank Bo Becker, Gadi Barlevi, Gabriel Chowdorow-Reich, Dan Covitz, Diana Hancock,
Arvind Krishnamurthy, Gregor Matvos, Jonathan Parker, Wayne Passmore, Karen Pence, Phillip
Schnabl, Andrei Shleifer (the editor), Jeremy Stein, Philip Strahan, Amir Sufi, three anonymous
referees, and seminar participants at the 2015 AEA Meetings, Basel Research Task Force,
Berkeley (Haas), CSEF-IGIER Symposium in Economics and Institutions (Capri), Cornell, Dutch
National Bank, Emory University, Entrepreneurship and Finance Conference in memory of Ola
Bengtsson (Lund University), Federal Reserve Board, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Federal
Reserve Day Ahead Conference, Georgetown University, Georgia State University, Hong Kong
University, Indiana University (Kelley School of Business), NBER Summer Institute, NBER
Corporate Finance Meeting, NBER Monetary Economics Meeting, Northwestern University
(Kellogg), Pennsylvania State University (Smeal), Singapore Management University, Stanford
University, Tsinghua University, Tulane University, University of Munich, and University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign for very helpful comments. Della Cummings, Sam Houskeeper,
Jeremy Oldfather, and Jeremy Trubnick provided excellent research assistance. Benmelech is
grateful for financial support from the National Science Foundation under CAREER award
SES-0847392. The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the Board of Governors, the staff of the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Efraim Benmelech, Ralf R. Meisenzahl, and Rodney Ramcharan. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Real Effects of Liquidity During the Financial Crisis: Evidence from Automobiles
Efraim Benmelech, Ralf R. Meisenzahl, and Rodney Ramcharan
NBER Working Paper No. 22148
April 2016
JEL No. G01,G23,L62
ABSTRACT
Illiquidity in short-term credit markets during the financial crisis might have severely curtailed
the supply of non-bank consumer credit. Using a new data set linking every car sold in the United
States to the credit supplier involved in each transaction, we find that the collapse of the asset-
backed commercial paper market reduced the financing capacity of such non-bank lenders as
captive leasing companies in the automobile industry. As a result, car sales in counties that
traditionally depended on non-bank lenders declined sharply. Although other lenders increased
their supply of credit, the net aggregate effect of illiquidity on car sales is large and negative. We
conclude that the decline in auto sales during the financial crisis was caused in part by a credit
supply shock driven by the illiquidity of the most important providers of consumer finance in the
auto loan market. These results also imply that interventions aimed at arresting illiquidity in
short-term credit markets might have helped to contain the real effects of the crisis.
Efraim Benmelech Rodney Ramcharan
Kellogg School of Management University of Southern California
Northwestern University Rodney.ramcharan@gmail.com
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
e-benmelech@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Ralf R. Meisenzahl
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
20th Street and Constitution Ave NW - MS 145
Washington, DC 20551
Ralf.R.Meisenzahl@frb.gov

I. INTRODUCTION
Financial crises can have large adverse effects on real economic activity. Illiquidity in
one corner of the financial system and large realized balance-sheet losses in the financial sector
can lessen the aggregate credit supply and spur economic decline.1 Consistent with these
theoretical predictions, there is growing evidence from the 2007–2009 financial crisis that the
balance-sheet losses incurred by traditional financial institutions—banks and credit unions—
might have led to a fundamental post-crisis disruption in credit intermediation, contributing to
the recession and the subsequent slow economic recovery (Chodorow-Reich 2014; Ramcharan
van den Heuvel and Verani forthcoming).2
However, non-bank financial institutions—such as finance and leasing companies—are
historically important sources of credit, especially for purchases of such consumer durable goods
as automobiles and appliances (Ludvigson 1998). Before the crisis, for example, non-bank
lenders financed more than half of all new cars bought in the United States (Table A.I). Unlike
most traditional banks, non-bank financial institutions have connections to the shadow banking
system, relying for funding primarily on short-term markets, such as the asset-backed
commercial paper (ABCP) market.
We investigate how runs in the ABCP market and the loss of financing capacity at non-
bank institutions, such as the captive leasing arms of car manufacturers, might have curtailed the
supply of auto credit, led to the collapse in car sales, and exacerbated the financial difficulties of
companies such as General Motors (GM) and Chrysler that were already verging on bankruptcy.
Between 2007 and 2008, short-term funding markets in the United States dried up as money
market funds (MMFs) and other traditional buyers of short-term debt fled these markets (Covitz,
Liang, and Suarez 2013). Although the initial decline in 2007 was driven mainly by ABCP
backed by mortgage-backed securities, the decline following the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy
affected all ABCP issuers.
By early 2009, growing illiquidity in the ABCP market—a key source of short-term
credit in the United States—made it difficult for many non-bank intermediaries to roll over debt
or secure new funding (Campbell et al. 2011). This illiquidity coincided with the collapse of
1 See, e.g., Allen and Gale 2000; Diamond and Rajan 2005, 2011; and Shleifer and Vishny 2010.
2 The crisis may have also disrupted intermediation even at such nontraditional lenders as Internet banks
(Ramcharan and Crowe 2012).
2

several large non-bank lenders, chief among them the General Motors Acceptance Corporation
(GMAC), the financing arm of GM and one of the world’s largest providers of auto financing. At
the same time, automobile sales fell dramatically in 2008 and 2009, and GM and Chrysler
eventually filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
To uncover the economic consequences of these disruptions in short-term funding
markets, we use a proprietary micro-level data set from R. L. Polk & Company (Polk) of all new
car sales in the United States. Our data set matches every new car sale to its financing source (for
example, auto loan or lease) and identifies the financial institution involved in the sale. The data,
reported quarterly starting in 2002, also identify each vehicle’s make and model, along with
county of registration. This micro-level detailed information and its spatial nature enable us to
develop an empirical identification strategy to identify how the loss of financing capacity in the
shadow banking system might have affected U.S. car sales.
Our identification strategy hinges on the notion that by the end of 2008, liquidity runs in
the ABCP market and dislocations in other short-term funding markets might have curtailed the
financing capacity of non-bank institutions, notably the captive financing arms of automakers.
We show cross-sectionally that in counties in which buyers are historically more dependent on
non-bank lenders for auto credit, sales of cars fell even more sharply in 2009. In particular, a one
standard deviation increase in non-bank dependence is associated with a 1 percentage point or
0.08 standard deviation decline in the growth in new car transactions over the 2008–2009 period.
This point estimate implies that even with the unprecedented interventions aimed at unfreezing
short-term funding markets in 2008 and 2009, as well as the bailout of the U.S. automakers and
their financing arms, the liquidity shock to non-bank financing capacity might explain about 31
percent of the drop in car sales in 2009 relative to 2008.
Non-bank lenders tend to serve lower-credit-quality borrowers—the very borrowers
identified as most affected by the Great Recession. There is compelling evidence, for example,
that these borrowers suffered significantly from the collapse in house prices, reducing their
demand for automobiles and other durable goods (Mian and Sufi 2014). These borrowers are
also more likely to have faced a reduction in their credit card limits. And rather than reflecting
the effects of diminished captive financing caused by illiquidity in short-term funding markets,
the results reported here could reflect a more general contraction in credit to riskier borrowers.
3