NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CORPORATE RESILIENCE TO BANKING CRISES:
THE ROLES OF TRUST AND TRADE CREDIT
Ross Levine
Chen Lin
Wensi Xie
Working Paper 22153
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22153
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2016
We thank Thorsten Beck, Craig Doidge, Andrew Ellul, Itay Goldstein, Gary Gorton, Jun-Koo
Kang, Yoonha Kim, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Michelle Lowry, and Luigi Zingales and the
seminar participants at the Wharton School, for their helpful comments and suggestions. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22153.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Wensi Xie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Corporate Resilience to Banking Crises: The Roles of Trust and Trade Credit
Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Wensi Xie
NBER Working Paper No. 22153
April 2016
JEL No. D22,G01,G21,G32,Z13
ABSTRACT
Are firms more resilient to systemic banking crises in economies with higher levels of social
trust? Using firm-level data in 34 countries from 1990 through 2011, we find that
liquidity-dependent firms in high-trust countries obtain more trade credit and suffer smaller drops
in profits and employment during banking crises than similar firms in low-trust economies. The
results are consistent with the view that when banking crises block the normal banking-
lending channel, greater social trust facilitates access to informal finance, cushioning the effects
of these crises on corporate profits and employment.
Ross Levine Wensi Xie
Haas School of Business Department of Finance
University of California at Berkeley Chinese University of Hong Kong
545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685) Hong Kong
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900 wensixie@baf.cuhk.edu.hk
and NBER
Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu
Chen Lin
Faculty of Business and Economics
The University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong
chenlin1@hku.hk

1. Introduction
Systemic banking crises are costly, common, and heavily researched. Boyd, Kwak, and
Smith (2005), Kroszner, Laeven, and Klingebiel (2007), Claessens, Tong, and Wei (2012), and
others show that banking crises shrink output and employment. Reinhardt and Rogoff (2009)
document the ubiquitousness of financial crises throughout history, and Laeven and Valencia
(2012) find that most countries experienced a systemic banking crisis between 1970 and 2011.
Unsurprisingly, therefore, an enormous literature examines the causes of banking crises (e.g., see,
recent reviews by Allen and Gale, 2009 and Laeven, 2011).
What has received less attention is the resilience of firms—and hence economies—to
systemic banking crises. While many countries experience crises, not all experience similar
reductions in output and employment. Levine, Lin, and Xie (2016) show that well-developed
stock markets mitigate the adverse effects of banking crises by providing an alternative source of
financing when crises curtail the flow of bank credit to firms. But, other factors might also shape
the ability of firms to obtain financing during systemic banking crises.
In this paper, we examine whether social trust affects (a) the ability of firms to obtain
financing through informal channels when crises reduce the flow of bank loans to firms and (b)
the resilience of corporate profits and employment to systemic banking crises. As defined by
Fukuyama (1995, p. 27) and Putnam (2000, p. 19), social trust means the expectations within a
community that people will behave in honest and cooperative ways and the extent to which
human interactions are governed by the norms of reciprocity and trustworthiness. By informal
finance, we mean credit provision that occurs beyond the scope of a country’s formal financial
and regulatory institutions. For example, firms often receive trade credit that does not involve
collateral or promissory notes subject to formal judicial enforcement mechanisms (Ayyagari,
Demirgüç-Kunt, and Maksimovic, 2010). Trade credit represents a large proportion of debt
financing, accounting for 25% of the average firm’s total debt liabilities in our sample of over
3500 firms across 34 countries from 1990 to 2011.
1

Existing research suggests how social trust could enhance corporate resilience to
systemic banking crises. First, when a systemic banking crisis impedes the normal bank-lending
channel, access to trade credit could partially offset the reduction in bank loans and ameliorate
the impact of the crisis on corporate profits and employment. Indeed, Garcia-Appendini and
Montoriol-Garriga (2013) show that the 2007-2008 banking crisis triggered a surge in between-
firm liquidity provision. Second, social trust could facilitate access to trade credit during a
banking crisis. Karlan (2005) shows that people who view their communities as more
trustworthy are more likely to lend money and payback loans even when there are no formal
enforcement mechanisms in place. While firms might prefer bank loans (Ayyagari, Demirgüç-
Kunt, and Maksimovic, 2010), high social trust can increase firms’ access to trade credit when
bank loans are unavailable (Allen, Qian, and Qian, 2005).
Using a difference-in-differences methodology, we first assess the relation between social
trust and firms’ use of trade credit, profitability, and employment during systemic banking crises.
We use a sample of about 3,600 manufacturing firms across 34 countries over the years from
1990 through 2011. Data on trade credit received, profitability, employment, and other firm-level
information come from Worldscope. Our key explanatory variable is the interaction term
between a measure of social trust (Trust) and a crisis dummy that equals one in the start-year of a
systemic banking crisis and remains one for the three years after the crisis (Crisis). To date
systemic banking crises, we rely on Laeven and Valencia (2012). To measure social trust, we
follow previous studies (e.g., La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1997a; Guiso,
Sapienza and Zingales, 2008) and compute the percentage of survey respondents who answer
“most people can be trusted” in response to the question in World Values Survey (WVS),
“Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted, or that you can’t be too
careful in dealing with people?”. We measure Trust three years before the start of a country’s
systemic banking crisis. We interpret greater values of the trust measure as suggesting that
suppliers of trade credit are more confident about the trustworthiness of the demanders of such
credit. If the key interaction term—Trust*Crisis—enters positively, this suggests that, on average,
2