NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ORGANIZATIONAL COMPLEXITY AND BALANCE SHEET MANAGEMENT
IN GLOBAL BANKS
Nicola Cetorelli
Linda S. Goldberg
Working Paper 22169
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22169
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2016
The views expressed in this paper are those of the individual authors and do not necessarily
reflect the position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Address correspondences to Nicola Cetorelli or Linda S.
Goldberg, Federal Reserve Bank of NY, Research Department, 33 Liberty St, New York, N.Y.
10045, U.S.A. email: Linda.Goldberg@ny.frb.org or Nicola.Cetorelli@ny.frb.org. We gratefully
acknowledge the excellent data work of Rose Wang and Sam Stern. Our work benefited from the
insights of seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago, the Bank for International Settlements, Columbia Business School,
Hitotsubashi University, MOFIR Conference in Kobe Japan, the University of North Carolina,
the International Banking Research Network, Banca d’Italia, Bank of Canada, and Bank of Japan.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Nicola Cetorelli and Linda S. Goldberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Organizational Complexity and Balance Sheet Management in Global Banks
Nicola Cetorelli and Linda S. Goldberg
NBER Working Paper No. 22169
April 2016
JEL No. F3,G15,G21
ABSTRACT
Banks have progressively evolved from being standalone institutions to being subsidiaries of
increasingly complex financial conglomerates. We conjecture and provide evidence that the
organizational complexity of the family of a bank is a fundamental driver of the business model
of the bank itself, as reflected in the management of the bank’s own balance sheet. Using micro-
data on global banks with branch operations in the United States, we show that branches of
conglomerates in more complex families have a markedly lower lending sensitivity to funding
shocks. The balance sheet management strategies of banks are very much determined by the
structure of the organizations the banks belong to. The complexity of the conglomerate can
change the scale of the lending channel for a large global bank by more than 30 percent.
Nicola Cetorelli
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
nicola.cetorelli@ny.frb.org
Linda S. Goldberg
Federal Reserve Bank-New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER
linda.goldberg@ny.frb.org

1. Introduction
In a traditional setting, banks are entities whose business model is predominantly defined
by their deposit taking and loan making operations. The balance sheet of such entities
largely defines what a bank is and what a bank does, and understanding banks’ overall
balance sheet management – from funding and liquidity strategies to sensitivity to
investment opportunities – has been the focus of analysis of a vast and well-established
literature.
While extremely broad and diverse in scope, a fairly distinctive feature of this
literature is the focus on banks’ own characteristics (e.g., balance sheet size, asset
composition, liability structure, its own governance, etc.) to explain observed patterns in
balance sheet management and choice of business model. This approach has been perfectly
legitimate, at least with historic applications to U.S. data, since across time the typical
banking firm has been either a standalone entity or a commercial bank subsidiary in simple,
bank-focused bank holding companies (BHCs). But while there is certainly still a large
number of banks fitting the mold of simple organizations, there has also been the
progressive emergence and growth of complex financial conglomerates, where a bank may
be just one of many – at times thousands – related affiliates (Cetorelli and Goldberg, 2014;
Cetorelli, McAndrews and Traina, 2014). In this paper we conjecture that the organizational
complexity of the family a bank is part of is a fundamental driver of the business model of
the bank itself, as reflected in the management of its own balance sheet.
Why should the organizational structure of the corporate family matter for the
business model of its bank subsidiaries? One possibility is that it doesn’t. Perhaps
conglomeration is merely a manifestation of scale. As an entity grows in size it may just
expand its organizational footprint, but the separate “parts” are just run independently of
one another. Or it may be that the driver behind conglomeration is to achieve
diversification, whereby subsidiaries are on their own while, by virtue of aggregation, the
whole organization achieves reduced return variability. If that were the case, then we would
expect banks, irrespective of the organizational structure of their families, to operate
according to the canonical model mentioned above: the bank is a profit center, engaged
predominantly in exploiting investment (e.g., lending) opportunities, and it manages its own
1

balance sheet accordingly.
Conversely, one could speculate that firms organize themselves as complex
conglomerates because there may be synergies and complementarities across the different
subsidiaries that extend beyond diversification. Because of these complementarities, the
individual subsidiaries are not run independently of one another but instead take family-
wide considerations into account while managing their own activities. This conjecture is
rooted in the literature on the theory of the firm: Organizational form should emerge
endogenously depending on the intensity of informational and other agency frictions that
may exist within the organization on the one hand, and the relative importance of cross-
benefits to linking together separate lines of business activity on the other. These tradeoffs
have been explicitly laid out, for instance, in Stein (2002) and Rajan and Zingales (2000,
2001a, 2001b). The main takeaway of these contributions is that if we observe a firm with
a complex organizational structure, such as one that ties together a large count of different
subsidiaries, then it must be the case that internal complementarities and mutual
what is needed are links that cause the person or unit to be better off
dependencies are sufficiently large to justify the costs associated with the associated
voluntarily following the firm’s commands rather than going their own way
agency frictions (“...
...”, Rajan and
1
Zingales, 2000, p. 19). If that is the case, the complexity of a conglomerate should impose a
constraint on its subsidiaries’ business choices. The implication is that, all else equal, their
own balance sheet should exhibit relatively lower sensitivity to changes in market
conditions. While we are not aware of contributions that have looked explicitly at the role
of organizational complexity on the business conduct of banks, the literature on
organizational form and efficiency does provide evidence consistent with this conjecture.
For example, Ozbas and Scharfstein (2010) show that subsidiaries that are part of
conglomerates respond less to investment opportunities than otherwise similar,
s t a n d a l o n e e n t i t i e s .
1
This point delineating the issue of establishing the allocation of control within a hierarchy, and its possible
delegation, is made broadly in other related contributions. For instance, Hart and Moore’s (2005) model of hierarchy
suggests how chains of command and centralization of decision within an organization is likely to emerge naturally.
But even in settings where it may be optimal for authority to be delegated, the decision making process may
necessarily present some degree of mediation among the different parts of the organization (e.g., Aghion and Tirole,
1997). This impact on conduct is also found in models describing the effort by subordinates to influence the
decision making process internal to the organization (e.g., Milgrom, 1988, Milgrom and Roberts, 1988).
2