NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNINFORMATIVE FEEDBACK AND RISK TAKING:
EVIDENCE FROM RETAIL FOREX TRADING
Itzhak Ben-David
Justin Birru
Viktor Prokopenya
Working Paper 22146
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22146
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2016
We benefited from the comments of David Hirshleifer. We thank exp(capital) for providing the
data for the project. The authors appreciate comments received from participants in seminars at
Notre Dame University, The Ohio State University, and the University of Washington, as well as
participants at the Behavioral Finance Conference at Erasmus University (Rotterdam). Ben-David
and Birru’s research was supported by the Dice Center at the Fisher College of Business. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Itzhak Ben-David, Justin Birru, and Viktor Prokopenya. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Uninformative Feedback and Risk Taking: Evidence from Retail Forex Trading
Itzhak Ben-David, Justin Birru, and Viktor Prokopenya
NBER Working Paper No. 22146
April 2016
JEL No. G02,G11,G32
ABSTRACT
We document evidence consistent with retail day traders in the Forex market attributing random
success to their own skill and, as a consequence, increasing risk taking. Although past
performance does not predict future success for these traders, traders increase trade sizes, trade
size variability, and number of trades with gains, and less with losses. There is a large
discontinuity in all of these trading variables around zero past week returns: e.g., traders increase
their trade size dramatically following winning weeks, relative to losing weeks. The effects are
stronger for novice traders, consistent with more intense “learning” in early trading periods.
Itzhak Ben-David Viktor Prokopenya
Fisher College of Business SBS Swiss Business School and exp(Capital)
The Ohio State University Internatsyyanal’naya Vulitsa 36
2100 Neil Avenue Minsk 220030
Columbus, OH 43210 Belarus
and NBER v@expcapital.com
bendavid@fisher.osu.edu
Justin Birru
Department of Finance
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
birru.2@fisher.osu.edu

1 Introduction
Feedback is a key input in decision making. Information about outcomes from past actions
can help improve future decision making (e.g., Seidenfeld 1985). Also, feedback is considered one
of the main remedies for overconfidence: the more instances that one can observe and learn from,
the better future predictions become (e.g., Arkes, Christensen, Lai, and Blumer 1987, Thaler 2000).
In certain settings, however, feedback may be uninformative, yet individuals use it to
calibrate their future decisions. In particular, individuals tend to accredit observed successes to
their own ingenuity and blame failures on bad luck. Langer and Roth (1975), for example, show
that subjects attribute to themselves the skill of predicting the outcomes of coin tosses after a few
correct guesses. The information in the feedback, therefore, can be misinterpreted and mistakenly
enhance one’s perception of skill, even if the outcome is impossible or hard to predict. In such
cases, self-attribution of successes can lead individuals to take greater risks, based on the false
conclusion of having forecasting skill. The idea that feedback may distort decision making due to
self-attribution is a key component in several theoretical models. In Daniel, Hirshleifer, and
Subrahmanyam (1998) and Gervais and Odean (2001), traders attribute successful investment
outcomes to their skill and failures to bad luck. Over time, with some random successes, traders
overestimate their ability to trade. This effect is expected to be stronger early in a traders’ life. In
the words of Gervais and Odean (2001), traders learn to become overconfident. Despite the
compelling evidence from the lab and the theory suggesting that traders “learn” to be
overconfident, there is little empirical evidence documenting this process.
In this study, we test how past trading performance is interpreted and used by individuals.
The usefulness of feedback for learning and risk taking is ultimately an empirical issue that boils
down to the true ability of individuals to predict outcomes and the degree of self-attribution that
2

they exhibit. With this in mind, we focus on a population of day traders in the Forex (foreign
exchange) market: they trade intensively (median trade lasts 16 minutes) in an environment that is
very noisy and leaves very little room for skill. At the same time, traders receive immediate
feedback about outcomes following their actions. Our trading dataset allows us to measure risk
taking (measured as the average trade size) and perceived skill (measured as trade size variability
and the number of trades) as a function of traders’ past performance. If overconfidence arises
through the self-attribution mechanism, as proposed by Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam
(1998) and Gervais and Odean (2001),1 we should be able to detect it. Our results show that past
performance plays an important role in the behavior of traders, supporting the “learning to be
overconfident” mechanism.
We use a dataset of individual retail accounts in the Forex futures market provided by a
large international broker based in Poland. The broker caters to retail traders and specializes in
foreign exchange futures. Traders use an electronic platform (dedicated software) to submit their
orders and monitor their accounts. The broker lets traders leverage their equity up to 500 times,
allowing ample room for risk taking. All of the traders in our dataset use a software package to
submit their orders, and most are day traders who hold their positions open for only a short time.
Retail trading in this market has seen large growth in recent years, perhaps because of its lottery-
like nature (i.e., high leverage, short holding horizons, and quick feedback).
A key empirical challenge is to identify the effects of self-attribution (caused by
overconfidence), which is the mechanism that ties current trader behavior (e.g., risk taking) to past
performance. Our identification strategy is based on two non-linearities predicted by the theory
1 In the words of Gervais and Odean (2001), “A trader who receives frequent, immediate, and clear feedback will, on
average, peak in overconfidence early” (p. 13). Barber and Odean (2002) attribute the underperformance of online
traders (as opposed to phone traders) to overconfidence, self-attribution, and the illusion of control.
3