NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COORDINATED NOISE TRADING:
EVIDENCE FROM PENSION FUND REALLOCATIONS
Zhi Da
Borja Larrain
Clemens Sialm
José Tessada
Working Paper 22161
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22161
We thank Patricio Ayala, Tomás Balmaceda, Keith Brown, Yong Chen (Gutmann Symposium
discussant), Nicolás Desormeaux, David Hirshleifer, Paul Hsu, Jennifer Huang, Gabriele
LaSpada, Dong Lou (EFA discussant), Katya Malinova (University of Toronto discussant),
Gonzalo Maturana, Pamela Searle, René Selpúlveda, Tao Shu (ABFER discussant), Rick Sias
(AFA discussant), David Solomon (FinanceUC discussant), Laura Starks, Zheng Sun, Sheridan
Titman, Chuck Trzcinka (UC Davis discussant), Jay Wang (CICF discussant), Yan Xu and
seminar participants at the Cheung Kong Graduate School of Business, the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, Georgia State University, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
Peking University, Tsinghua University, the University of California at Irvine, the University of
Hong Kong, the University of Missouri, the University of Notre Dame, the University of Texas at
Austin, York University, the 9th International FinanceUC Conference in Chile, the 2015
Conference on Liquidity Risk in Asset Management at the University of Toronto, the 2015
Conference of the Asian Bureau of Finance and Economic Research, the 2015 China
International Conference in Finance, the 2015 Meetings of the European Finance Association, the
2015 WU Gutmann Center Symposium, the 2015 University of California at Davis Finance
Symposium, and the 2016 Meetings of the American Finance Association for comments and
suggestions. We thank Daniel Muñoz and Cristián Rojas for excellent research assistance. Da
acknowledges the generous support from the Andrónico Luksic Grants program at the University
of Notre Dame. Larrain acknowledges funding from Proyecto Fondecyt Regular #1141161.
Tessada acknowledges financial support from Conicyt Proyecto Inserción a la Academia
#79100017. Larraín is an academic advisor to Larrain Vial Wealth Management. Sialm is an
independent contractor with AQR Capital Management. All errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22161.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Zhi Da, Borja Larrain, Clemens Sialm, and José Tessada. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Coordinated Noise Trading: Evidence from Pension Fund Reallocations
Zhi Da, Borja Larrain, Clemens Sialm, and José Tessada
NBER Working Paper No. 22161
April 2016
JEL No. F32,G02,G11,G12,G14,G15,G18,G23,G28,H31,H55
ABSTRACT
We document a novel channel through which coordinated noise trading exerts externalities on
financial markets dominated by institutional investors. We exploit a unique set of events where
Chilean pension fund investors followed an influential financial advisory firm that recommended
frequent switches between equity and bond funds. The recommendations, which mostly followed
short-term trends, generated large and coordinated fund flows. These flows resulted in substantial
price pressure and increased volatility in financial markets. Pension funds increased cash holdings
as a response. Our findings suggest that giving retirement savers unconstrained reallocation
opportunities may exert negative externalities on financial markets.
Zhi Da Clemens Sialm
University of Notre Dame University of Texas at Austin
239 Mendoza College of Business McCombs School of Business
Notre Dame, Indiana 46556-5646 2110 Speedway; B6600
zda@nd.edu Austin, TX 78712-1276
and NBER
Borja Larrain clemens.sialm@mccombs.utexas.edu
Escuela de Administracion
Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile José Tessada
Avda Vicuna Mackenna 4860 Escuela de Administracion
Macul, Santiago Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile
Chile Avda Vicuna Mackenna 4860
borja_larrain@yahoo.com Macul, Santiago
Chile
jtessada@gmail.com

1 Introduction
The impact of noise traders on asset prices is central to the debate over market efficiency.
Black (1986) points out in his AFA presidential address that noise might cause market
inefficiencies. DeLong, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990a) formalize the role of noise
traders in financial markets. They show that noise traders can create mispricing and excess
volatility if the trading horizon of risk-averse arbitrageurs is short. Taking advantage of
several unique features of the Chilean pension system, we document a novel channel through
which coordinated noise trading can exert large price pressure in financial markets, even
when asset ownership is dominated by institutional investors.
The Chilean pension system is a fully-funded defined-contribution (DC) pension system
with personal retirement accounts.1 Investors can freely allocate their balances across funds
with different risk levels. A financial advisory firm called “Felices y Forrados” (FyF, trans-
lated as “Happy and Loaded”) started in 2011 to cater to the demand of individual investors
to time the market. For a fee of around US$20 per year, FyF sends investors their switching
recommendations by e-mail or private website login. FyF gained popularity among Chilean
pension investors through an aggressive marketing campaign on social media. As a result,
recommendations from FyF act as a coordination device among noise traders. This is ev-
ident from Figure 1, which shows the number of voluntary daily fund switches since 2011.
The spikes in the number of account switches closely coincide with FyF recommendations.
These account switches involve large fund flows, amounting from US$1 to US$5 billion and
corresponding to between 10% and 20% of funds’ assets.
We document a large aggregate price impact immediately after the reallocation recom-
mendations become public. The price pressure in the equity market amounts to around 1%
during the first day after the FyF recommendation and reverts after a couple of weeks. The
1The Chilean pension system has obtained substantial attention in economics and finance research over
the last decades due to its early adoption of personal retirement accounts. See, for example, Diamond and
Vald´es-Prieto (1994), Diamond (1996), Mitchell and Barreto (1997), Edwards (1998), Benartzi and Thaler
(2001), Mitchell, Todd, and Bravo (2009), and Opazo, Raddatz, and Schmukler (2014) for a discussion of
the Chilean experience.
1

price pressure is accompanied by abnormal turnover induced by the switches. The price
pressure pattern that we document is remarkably consistent with the prediction of DeLong,
Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990b). The first day effect implies an elasticity of
demand for stocks of −0.45, which means that demand is more inelastic than the one esti-
mated in the case of index additions by Shleifer (1986) and Wurgler and Zhuravskaya (2002).
Placebo tests and additional robustness tests confirm that the price pressure is more likely
driven by recommendation-based fund reallocations rather than from fundamental factors
that may trigger the recommendations in the first place.
Besides the aggregate price effects we also find significant cross-sectional differences in
the impact of the recommendations. The price pressure in the equity market is driven by
relatively large stocks that dominate the portfolios of pension funds. Smaller stocks, on the
other hand, are not traded as frequently as they are more illiquid and amount to a smaller
fraction of funds’ holdings. More generally, consistent with the findings in Greenwood and
Thesmar(2011), thepredictioninthecross-sectionisthatstocksthatreceivehigherportfolio
weights (relative to their market capitalization) at the time of the recommendations will
experience greater price pressure and excess volatility. We show that this is the case using
monthly panel regressions after controlling for other stock characteristics.
Stambaugh (2014) documents that there has been a substantial decline in direct indi-
vidual equity ownership in the U.S. Thus, it has been suggested that noise trading, which
is driven primarily by individual investors, might become less pronounced as individuals
reduce their direct stock ownership. However, the evidence in our paper suggests that noise
traders can affect asset prices even when these assets are held primarily by large financial
institutions. As Frazzini and Lamont (2008) argue, “it is hard for a fund manager to be
smarter than his clients. Mutual fund holdings and performance are driven by both manage-
rial choices in picking stocks and retail investor choices in picking managers.” Such fund
choices could be affected by “noise.” For example, Da, Engelberg, and Gao (2015) show
that an investor sentiment measure based on internet search results can predict daily mutual
2