NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCIAL DAMPENING
Johannes F. Wieland
Mu-Jeung Yang
Working Paper 22141
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22141
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2016
We are grateful to Yuriy Gorodnichenko, John Cochrane, James Hamilton, Valerie Ramey, the
editor, John Leahy, three anonymous referees and seminar participants at the Bank of England,
Barcelona Summer Forum, the European Central Bank, NBER Summer Institute (ME), UCSD,
SED and USC for helpful comments. Shihan Xie provided excellent research assistance. All
errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Johannes F. Wieland and Mu-Jeung Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Dampening
Johannes F. Wieland and Mu-Jeung Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 22141
March 2016
JEL No. E5,E50,E51,E52,G20,G21
ABSTRACT
We propose a novel mechanism, “financial dampening,” whereby loan retrenchment by banks
attenuates the effectiveness of monetary policy. The theory unifies an endogenous supply of
illiquid local loans and risk-sharing among subsidiaries of bank holding companies (BHCs). We
derive an IV-strategy that separates supply-driven loan retrenchment from local loan demand, by
exploiting linkages through BHC-internal capital markets across spatially-separate BHC
member-banks. We estimate that retrenching banks increase loan supply substantially less in
response to exogenous monetary policy rate reductions. This relative decline has persistent effects
on local employment and thus provides a rationale for slow recoveries from financial distress.
Johannes F. Wieland
Department of Economics
University of California at San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
jfwieland@ucsd.edu
Mu-Jeung Yang
Department of Economics, University of Washington
Savery Hall, 327
Seattle, WA 98195-3330
mjyang@uw.edu

1 Introduction
Monetary policy responded aggressively to the fallout caused by the 2008 financial crisis
by cutting the Federal Funds rate all the way to zero, issuing forward guidance and conduct-
ing large-scale asset purchases. Yet despite these large, and unprecedented policy actions,
the recovery from the Great Recession has been slow. This seemed to support the hypoth-
esis that in the aftermath of financial crises, recoveries are typically sluggish. The basis of
this “financial crises recoveries are different” hypothesis is typically cross-country empirical
evidence as in Reinhart and Rogoff (2008) and Cerra and Saxena (2008). Yet, we currently
lack a clear conceptual or empirical understanding of the mechanisms that might render
recoveries after financial distress different from other recoveries.
We propose a novel mechanism that dampens the potency of monetary policy, particu-
larly after financial crises. We focus on the phenomenon of loan retrenchment, commonly
associated with financial distress, whereby banks seek to systematically reduce their expo-
sure to non-tradable loan risks. We build on the framework of Froot and Stein (1998),
which provides a unified perspective on risk management and capital structure in financial
institutions. In our micro-founded model, loan retrenchment combined with loan liquidation
costs reduces the pass-through from monetary policy rate changes to loan supply (the “Bank
Lending Channel”), which attenuates the effectiveness of monetary policy.
To build intuition, consider the case were bank loans are completely illiquid, so retrench-
ing banks cannot actively reduce their loan portfolio. Thus, their target loan exposure is
less than their actual loan exposure. A reduction in the monetary policy rate does increase
the target loan exposure of these banks, but so long as it is below the actual loan exposure
no new loans will be forthcoming. By contrast, a bank that does not retrench will increase
loan supply since its target loan exposure increased. The same logic also applies to mone-
tary policy rate increases: a retrenching bank cannot reduce its loan exposure due to loan
illiquidity, dampening the impact of monetary policy on loan supply, whereas an expanding
1

bank can reduce new loan issuance. Thus, the degree of loan retrenchment is an important
state variable influencing the effectiveness of monetary policy rate reductions, a mechanism
we call “financial dampening.”
We empirically investigate how financial dampening mitigates the transmission of mon-
etary policy shocks on local lending. Like much of the empirical literature on financial
frictions, we face an identification challenge since local loan volumes could be driven by local
loan demand shocks, rather than changes in loan supply. To understand how to overcome
this identification problem, we incorporate it into our model: a low sensitivity of loan quan-
tities to monetary policy shocks can occur either because of supply-driven loan retrenchment
or constrained local loan demand. Simple OLS estimates therefore do not correctly uncover
financial dampening.
To show how our spatial IV-strategy can overcome this identification problem, our model
also incorporates two previously documented features of U.S. banking. First, U.S. banking
is very local as emphasized by Becker (2007). We independently document this local nature
by showing that more than 50% of commercial banks essentially operate only in one county,
65% only in one metropolitan area, and over 95% only in one state. Second, commercial
banks are typically part of larger financial conglomerates or bank holding companies (BHC).
Furthermore, BHCsdonotonlyowncommercialbanksfromseveraldistinctareas, butBHC-
member banks share a single internal capital market (Houston, James, and Marcus, 1997;
Campello, 2002). In the model, local banks use this internal capital market to insure against
non-tradable risks from illiquid local loans.
These features imply that an increase in the BHC’s internal capital cost imparts a com-
mon force for supply-driven loan retrenchment across all BHC-member banks, since now in-
suranceagainstnon-tradablerisksbecomesmoreexpensive. Further,geographically-separate
BHC-member banks are not subject to the same local demand constraints. Thus, average
loan retrenchment at spatially-separate BHC-member banks can be used as an instrument
for local loan retrenchment. We then show that if banks are small and demand shocks
2