NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE THEORY OF UNCONVENTIONAL MONETARY POLICY
Roger Farmer
Pawel Zabczyk
Working Paper 22135
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22135
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2016
An earlier incarnation of this paper with the title “Qualitative Easing: How it Works and Why it
Matters” (Farmer, 2012d) appeared as an NBER and a CEPR working paper. The current version
was written after extensive discussions with Pawel Zabczyk during, and following, Farmer's visit,
as Senior Houblon-Norman Fellow at the Bank of England in 2013. In contrast to the earlier
paper, here we introduce money. Farmer thanks the Center for Central Bank Studies at the Bank
of England for their hospitality. We thank participants of seminars at the National Institute for
Economic and Social Research, Warwick University, The Swiss National Bank and the Bank of
Italy. Bernard Winkler, Francesco Lippi and Christian Hepenstrick have all contributed
thoughtful dicussions of our work and we thank them for their comments. We have also benefited
from discussions with Andy Haldane, Minouche Shafik and Martin Weale. The views expressed
in this paper are those of the authors, and not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Roger Farmer and Pawel Zabczyk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Theory of Unconventional Monetary Policy
Roger Farmer and Pawel Zabczyk
NBER Working Paper No. 22135
March 2016, Revised December2016
JEL No. E02,E6,G11,G21
ABSTRACT
This paper is about the effectiveness of qualitative easing, a form of unconventional monetary
policy that changes the risk composition of the central bank balance sheet with the goal of
stabilizing economic activity. We construct a general equilibrium model where agents have
rational expectations and there is a complete set of financial securities, but where some agents are
unable to participate in financial markets. We show that a change in the risk composition of the
central bank's balance sheet will change equilibrium asset prices and we prove that, in our model,
a policy in which the central bank stabilizes non-fundamental fluctuations in the stock market is
Pareto improving and self-financing.
Roger Farmer
UCLA
Department of Economics
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
rfarmer@econ.ucla.edu
Pawel Zabczyk
Center for Central Bank Studies HO7-BD
Bank of England
Threadneedle Street EC2R 8AH,
London, UK
pawel.zabczyk@bankofengland.co.uk

THE THEORY OF UNCONVENTIONAL MONETARY POLICY
ROGER E.A. FARMER
University of California Los Angeles
PAWEL ZABCZYK
CCBS, Bank of England and Centre for Macroeconomics
Abstract. Thispaperisabouttheeffectivenessofqualitativeeasing,aformofunconventional
monetary policy that changes the risk composition of the central bank balance sheet with
the goal of stabilizing economic activity. We construct a general equilibrium model where
agents have rational expectations and there is a complete set of financial securities, but where
some agents are unable to participate in financial markets. We show that a change in the
risk composition of the central bank’s balance sheet will change equilibrium asset prices and
we prove that, in our model, a policy in which the central bank stabilizes non-fundamental
fluctuations in the stock market is Pareto improving and self-financing.
Central banks throughout the world have recently engaged in two kinds of unconventional
monetary policies: quantitative easing (QE), which is “an increase in the size of the balance
sheet of the central bank through an increase in its monetary liabilities”, and qualitative easing
(QualE) which is “a shift in the composition of the assets of the central bank towards less liquid
and riskier assets, holding constant the size of the balance sheet.”1
Because qualitative easing is conducted by the central bank, it is often classified as a
monetary policy. But because it adds risk to the public balance sheet that is ultimately borne
by the taxpayer, QualE is better thought of as a fiscal or quasi-fiscal policy (Buiter, 2010).
This distinction is important because, in order to be effective, QualE necessarily redistributes
resources from one group of agents to another.
In theoretical papers that study the effectiveness of QualE, researchers often assume that
financial markets are complete and that there is complete participation in these markets. When
Date: December 4, 2016.
An earlier incarnation of this paper with the title “Qualitative Easing: How it Works and Why it Matters”
(Farmer, 2012d) appeared as an NBER and a CEPR working paper. The current version was written after
extensivediscussionswithPawelZabczykduring,andfollowing,Farmer’svisit,asSeniorHoublon-NormanFellow
at the Bank of England in 2013. In contrast to the earlier paper, here we introduce money. Farmer thanks the
CenterforCentralBankStudiesattheBankofEnglandfortheirhospitality. Wethankparticipantsofseminars
at the National Institute for Economic and Social Research, Warwick University, The Swiss National Bank and
the Bank of Italy. Bernard Winkler, Francesco Lippi and Christian Hepenstrick have all contributed thoughtful
dicussions of our work and we thank them for their comments. We have also benefited from discussions with
Andy Haldane, Minouche Shafik and Martin Weale. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors,
and not necessarily those of the Bank of England.
1The quote is from Willem Buiter (2008) who proposed this very useful taxonomy in a piece on his ‘Maverecon’
Financial Times blog. Farmer (2013) used this distinction to argue that the Bank should actively stabilize the
assetmarkets. ThispaperprovidesthetheorythatexplainswhyQualitativeEasingiseffective. Earlierworking
papersthatexplainwhyfinancialmarketsmaybeParetoInefficientincludeFarmer(2002b,a,2012c,2014,2015)
and Farmer et al. (2012).
1

these two conditions hold, a change in the risk composition of the central bank’s balance sheet
has no effect on asset prices.
For example, in an influential paper that was presented at the 2012 Jackson Hole Confer-
ence, MichaelWoodford(2012)madetheclaimthatQualEisunlikelytobeeffectiveand, tothe
extent that it does stimulate economic activity, that stimulus must come through the impact
of QualE on the expectations of financial market participants of future Fed policy actions.2 In
contrast, Joseph Gagnon (2012) has argued that qualitative easing works through the portfolio
balance effect, a term attributed to James Tobin (1963; 1969) who assumed that private agents’
asset demands are functions of relative asset prices, much as the demands for commodities
depend on relative goods prices.3
QualE is ineffective when participation in assets markets is complete because market par-
ticipants are able to undo the effects of a portfolio shift by the central bank through private
trades in securities. As a consequence, QualE has no effect on the distribution of resources,
either between borrowers and lenders in the current financial markets, or between current mar-
ket participants and those yet to be born. We will argue here, that the assumption of complete
participation is not a good characterization of real world financial markets and that QualE is
effective because it redistributes resources across states of nature for people who are unable to
participate in financial markets that open before they are born.
Wemakethecasefortheeffectivenessofqualitativeeasingbyconstructingasimplegeneral
equilibrium model where agents are rational and have rational expectations and where the
financial markets are complete. Our model has two important features. First, the people in
our model use money as a medium of exchange. This feature ensures that, in the absence of
uncertainty, the model possesses multiple equilibria. Second, some people in our model are not
present in the financial markets. That property is a feature of all real world economies where
it follows from the fact that people have finite lives.
In this environment, we show that 1) a central bank that takes risk onto its balance sheet
can increase welfare and 2) the optimal intervention restores efficiency and is self-financing.
When all uncertainty is non-fundamental, the optimal policy is for the central bank to stabilize
the stock market so that the return to the stock market is equal in every state to the return
on a one-period real government bond. In the presence of fundamental shocks, the government
intervention eliminates non-fundamental volatility.
1. How our Model is Related to Previous Literature
Our model is related to the work of Cass and Shell (1983). These authors construct a
two-period, purely real, pure-exchange general-equilibrium model. In the first period, of their
model, households trade financial assets. In the second period they trade goods. In the Cass-
Shell example there are multiple equilibria in the second period. They show that, if some
2Citing papers by Krugman (1998) and Eggertsson and Woodford (2002) where the case is made explicitly,
Woodford(2012)arguesthatthisso-calledportfoliobalanceviewisinvalid, and, ifcentralbankassetpurchases
aretobeeffective,theireffectivenessmustrelyontheirabilitytoalterthepublic’sexpectationsoffuturecentral
bank policies.
3Examples of recent empirical papers that find a significant effect of Fed asset purchases on asset prices include
VissingJorgensenandKrishnamurthy(2011);Gagnonetal.(2011);D’AmicoandKing(2010);Neely(2010);Li
and Wei (2012), and Hamilton and Wu (2012).
2