NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COMPETITION AND BANK LIQUIDITY CREATION
Liangliang Jiang
Ross Levine
Chen Lin
Working Paper 22195
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22195
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2016
We thank the seminar participants at University of Melbourne for many helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Liangliang Jiang, Ross Levine, and Chen Lin. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Competition and Bank Liquidity Creation
Liangliang Jiang, Ross Levine, and Chen Lin
NBER Working Paper No. 22195
April 2016
JEL No. G21,G28,G32,G38
ABSTRACT
Does an intensification of competition among banks increase or decrease liquidity creation? By
integrating the dynamic process of interstate bank deregulation that lowered barriers to
competition across U.S. states over the 1980s and 1990s with the gravity model of the geographic
expansion of banks, we construct time-varying measures of the competitive pressures facing each
individual bank. We find that regulatory-induced competition reduced liquidity creation.
Consistent with some theories, we also find that the liquidity-destroying effects of competition
are mitigated among more profitable banks and heightened among smaller banks.
Liangliang Jiang Chen Lin
Lingnan University Faculty of Business and Economics
Hong Kong The University of Hong Kong
liangliangjiang@ln.edu.hk Hong Kong
chenlin1@hku.hk
Ross Levine
Haas School of Business
University of California at Berkeley
545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685)
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu

1
1. INTRODUCTION
Liquidity creation is a vital service that banks provide to the economy. They create
liquidity by using relatively liquid liabilities, such as demand deposits, to fund relatively
illiquid assets, such as business loans. This simultaneously satisfies the demand for liquidity
by savers and the demand for longer-term financing commitments by firms (Bryant, 1980;
Diamond and Dybvig, 1983; Gatev and Strahan, 2006). Banks also create liquidity off the
balance sheet by providing loan commitments and standby letters of credit that allow firms to
develop and modify long-run investment strategies efficiently (Boot, Greenbaum, and Thakor
1993; Holmstrom and Tirole, 1998; Kashyap, Rajan, and Stein, 2002). By creating liquidity,
theory suggests that banks improve the allocation of capital and accelerate economic growth
(Bencivenga and Smith, 1991; Levine, 1991). Empirically, Berger and Sedunov (2016) find
that the positive impact of liquidity creation on economic growth is larger than the growth
effects of other services provided by banks.
Given the importance of liquidity creation, there is surprisingly little empirical work on
the factors shaping liquidity creation. Indeed, it is only recently that Berger and Bouwman
(2009) created the first comprehensive measures of liquidity creation, which include data on
all asset-side, liability-side, and off-balance sheet activities for U.S. banks over the period
from 1993 to 2003. With these data, they examine the connection between capital regulations
and liquidity creation. Cornett, et al (2011), Berger, Makaew, and Turk-Ariss (2015), and
Peydro, Polo, and Sette (2016) examine how liquidity creation changes when banks are under
financial duress.
In this paper, we evaluate whether U.S. bank regulatory reforms that intensified
competition among banks increased, decreased, or had no effect on liquidity creation. While
researchers have actively studied the impact of regulatory-induced competition on bank
risk-taking, efficiency, and valuations (e.g., Jayaratne and Strahan, 1998; Hellmann et al.,
2000; Boyd and De Nicolo, 2005; Goetz, Laeven, and Levine, 2013, 2016; and Houston et al.,
2010), we are unaware of any previous research on how competition shapes liquidity creation.
Theory offers differing perspectives on the impact of competition on bank liquidity
creation. One strand of research suggests that competition reduces liquidity creation by

2
lowering the risk absorption capacity of banks. There are two building blocks to this view.
First, by squeezing profit margins and depleting buffers against losses (Jayaratne and Strahan,
1998), competition can induce banks to reduce risk-taking (Boyd and De Nicolo, 2005;
Peydro, Polo, and Sette 2016). Second, liquidity creation is risky, i.e., banks tend to suffer
losses if they must quickly dispose of illiquid assets to meet the demands of those holding
liquid liabilities (Allen and Santomero 1998; Allen and Gale 2004). Thus, competition can
induce banks to lower their risks by reducing liquidity creation. A second strand of research
suggests that competition will reduce liquidity creation by impeding relationship lending. This
view begins by noting that competition can make it easier for firms to change banks, making
it harder for banks to recoup the costs of building long-run relationships with firms (Petersen
and Rajan, 1995; Black and Strahan, 2002; Cetorelli and Strahan, 2006). Furthermore,
research finds that long-run bank-firms relationships can facilitate banks’ acquisition of “soft”
information about firms, including the liquidation value of firm assets (Berger et al., 2005;
Berger and Udell, 1995; Diamond and Rajan, 2001). As a result, “relationship lenders” are in
a position to create liquidity more effectively than other lenders. Under these conditions,
competition can impede effective liquidity creation by reducing relationship lending.
Theory also suggests mechanisms through which competition can boost liquidity
creation. First, competition tends to spur financial innovation and improve efficiency (Boot
and Thakor, 2000; Black and Strahan, 2002; Laeven, Levine, and Michalopoulos, 2015). One
dimension along which the bank might innovate is liquidity creation. Second, competition
tends to make banks more transparent (Jiang, Levine and Lin, 2016), which can spur bank
managers to devote more effort to screening potential borrowers and monitoring firms. In turn,
improvements in credit allocation can encourage more bank lending and more liquidity
creation. Thus theory provides differing views on the effect of competition on liquidity
creation.
To assess the impact of competition on liquidity creation, we follow a two-step method
for constructing time-varying measures of the competitive pressures facing each bank. First,
as in Goetz, Laeven, and Levine (2013), we exploit the process of interstate bank deregulation
that lowered barriers to competition between banks in different states. From the late-1970s