NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHO SOLD DURING THE CRASH OF 2008-9? EVIDENCE FROM TAX-RETURN
DATA ON DAILY SALES OF STOCK
Jeffrey Hoopes
Patrick Langetieg
Stefan Nagel
Daniel Reck
Joel Slemrod
Bryan Stuart
Working Paper 22209
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22209
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2016
We thank John Friedman, Clemens Sialm, Andrei Shleifer, Chris Williams, Stefan Zeume, and
participants at the University of Michigan Public Finance seminar, the 2015 National Tax
Association meetings, the NBER Behavioral Finance Meeting, the US Treasury Office of Tax
Analysis, and the University of North Carolina Annual Tax Symposium for helpful discussion
and comments. We also thank John Guyton of the Research, Analysis, and Statistics Division of
the Internal Revenue Service for help with using the IRS administrative data. The views
expressed here are those of the authors alone, and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Internal Revenue Service or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22209.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Jeffrey Hoopes, Patrick Langetieg, Stefan Nagel, Daniel Reck, Joel Slemrod, and
Bryan Stuart. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Who Sold During the Crash of 2008-9? Evidence from Tax-Return Data on Daily Sales of
Stock
Jeffrey Hoopes, Patrick Langetieg, Stefan Nagel, Daniel Reck, Joel Slemrod, and Bryan Stuart
NBER Working Paper No. 22209
April 2016
JEL No. G01,G11,G12
ABSTRACT
We examine individual stock sales from 2008 to 2009 using population tax return data. The share
of sales by the top 0.1 percent of income recipients and other top income groups rose sharply
following the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy and remained elevated throughout the financial crisis.
Sales by top income and older age groups were relatively more responsive to increased stock
market volatility. Volatility-driven sales were not concentrated in any one sector, but mutual fund
sales responded more strongly to increased volatility than stock sales. Additional analysis
suggests that gross sales in tax return data are informative about unobserved net sales.
Jeffrey Hoopes Daniel Reck
Ohio State University University of Michigan
448 Fisher Hall Economics Department
2100 Neil Avenue 238 Lorch Hall, 611 Tappan Street
Columbus, OH 43210 Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
hoopes@fisher.osu.edu dreck@umich.edu
Patrick Langetieg Joel Slemrod
Internal Revenue Service University of Michigan Business School
Patrick.T.Langetieg@irs.gov 701 Tappan Street
Room R5396
Stefan Nagel Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
Ross School of Business and and NBER
Department of Economics jslemrod@umich.edu
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street Bryan Stuart
Ann Arbor, MI 48109 Department of Economics
and NBER University of Michigan
stenagel@umich.edu 611 Tappan St.
Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
bastuart@umich.edu

Introduction
Periods of turmoil in stock markets—such as September 2008 in the wake of the Lehman
Brothers bankruptcy—are associated with large declines in prices, abnormally high intra-day
price volatility, and high trading volume. Market commentary often characterizes these periods
as "sell-offs." As always, there is a buyer for every seller, so investors as a group cannot all be
sellers. What may be happening instead during these instances is that some investors sell out,
leaving the remaining investors to bear the risk of stock ownership. Such a reallocation of asset
ownership among heterogeneous investors is consistent with the high level of trading activity
observed during such periods. Little is known, however, about the characteristics of the investors
that are prone to sell in the midst of market turmoil. This paper uses administrative data from the
Internal Revenue Service, consisting of billions of third-party reports on all sales of stock in
United States taxable individual accounts, to understand which individuals sold stock during the
tumultuous market events of 2008 and 2009. Our main finding is that investors at the very top of
the income distribution—both the top 1 percent and even the top 0.1 percent—are, along with
older investors, much more likely to sell stock during times of market tumult than other
investors.
A number of factors can cause certain investors to be relatively sensitive to market
tumult. Some investors may be forced to sell due to constraints on their risk-bearing capacity
(e.g., leverage constraints, liquidity shocks), some may be less tolerant of short-run risk than the
average investor (e.g., close to retirement), some may perceive themselves to be better informed
than others and anticipate a further price decline, and some investors may lose trust in the stock
market altogether and perceive it as a rigged game. While some of these reasons for selling could
1

apply equally to both institutional and individual investors, others are primarily relevant for
individual investors (and the flows they direct in and out of institutional investment products).
Understanding heterogeneity in investors' propensity to sell sheds light on several key
questions in finance and macroeconomics, including the mechanisms that give rise to elevated
premia for bearing risk (Bollerslev and Todorov 2011; Martin 2015) and for providing liquidity
(Nagel 2012) following market tumult episodes. If part of the investor population has a tendency
to sell during times of market turmoil, this leaves a smaller set of investors holding aggregate
stock market risk. They must be enticed to do so by a higher risk premium and by greater
compensation for absorbing the liquidity demand of those who want to sell. Empirical evidence
on such episodic shifts in stock ownership has so far remained largely elusive due to lack of data.
In this paper, we study this set of questions with a unique new data set that allows us to
track, at a daily frequency, sales of stocks and mutual fund shares in the population of U.S.
taxable individual investors. The data are extracted from the universe of (anonymized) tax
returns filed with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), and allow us to match asset sales reported
for capital gains taxation purposes with some demographic information on each taxpayer. While
we do not observe asset purchases in these tax records, we present indirect evidence from
dividend receipts and a supplementary brokerage account data set suggesting that individuals
with high levels of gross sales are also, to a substantial extent, net sellers of stocks.
We focus our analysis on 2008 and 2009, and further zoom in on the period immediately
following the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers in September 2008. We find that, starting in
September 2008, the share of sales volume attributed to the top 0.1 percent of income recipients
rises sharply until the beginning of 2009. More generally, we find that high-income taxpayers
have a greater propensity to sell during periods of market tumult. In regression analysis, we
2