NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GLOBAL PRODUCTION WITH EXPORT PLATFORMS
Felix Tintelnot
Working Paper 22236
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22236
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2016
I am grateful to my advisors Jonathan Eaton and Stephen Yeaple for their guidance,
encouragement, and support. I am also grateful to Andrés Rodríguez-Clare and Paul Grieco for
encouragement and various discussions on the topic. I wish to thank the editor, Elhanan Helpman,
and three anonymous referees for their comments and suggestions. I thank Pol Antras, Costas
Arkolakis, Kerem Cosar, Anca Cristea, Teresa Fort, Anna Gumpert, Christian Gourieroux, Oleg
Itskhoki, David Jinkins, Corinne Jones, Sung Jae Jun, Konstantin Kucheryavyy, Matthias Lux,
Kalina Manova, Eduardo Morales, Andreas Moxnes, Joris Pinkse, Natalia Ramondo and seminar
participants at Arizona State University, Boston University, University of Chicago, University of
British Columbia, MIT, University of Michigan, NBER Summer Institute, Pennsylvania State
University, Stanford University, University of Wisconsin, and Yale University for helpful
comments and suggestions. I thank the German Bundesbank for the hospitality and access to its
Microdatabase Direct investment (MiDi). This paper is part of my PhD dissertation at Penn State.
I continued working on this project while visiting the International Economics Section at
Princeton University, whom I thank for their hospitality. Meru Bhanot, Ken Kikkawa, and Zhida
Gui provided outstanding research assistance. This work was completed in part with resources
provided by the University of Chicago Research Computing Center. I gratefully acknowledge the
support of the National Science Foundation (under grant SES-1459950) and the Andrew and
Betsy Rosenfield Program in Economics, Public Policy, and Law at the Becker Friedman
Institute. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Felix Tintelnot. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Global Production with Export Platforms
Felix Tintelnot
NBER Working Paper No. 22236
May 2016
JEL No. F12,F23,L23
ABSTRACT
Most international commerce is carried out by multinational firms, which use their foreign
affiliates both to serve the market of the host country and to export to other markets outside the
host country. In this paper, I examine the determinants of multinational firms' location and
production decisions and the welfare implications of multinational production. The few existing
quantitative general equilibrium models that incorporate multinational firms achieve tractability
by assuming away export platforms – i.e. they do not allow foreign affiliates of multinationals to
export – or by ignoring fixed costs associated with foreign investment. I develop a quantifiable
multi-country general equilibrium model, which tractably handles multinational firms that engage
in export platform sales and that face fixed costs of foreign investment. I first estimate the model
using German firm-level data to uncover the size and nature of costs of multinational enterprise
and show that the fixed costs of foreign investment are large. Second, I calibrate the model to
data on trade and multinational production for twelve European and North American countries.
Counterfactual analysis reveals that multinationals play an important role in transmitting
technological improvements to foreign countries and that the pending Canada-EU trade and
investment agreement could divert a sizable fraction of the production of EU multinationals from
the US to Canada.
Felix Tintelnot
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
5757 South University Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
tintelnot@uchicago.edu

1 Introduction
Multinational firms account for a large share of global output and employment.1 In structuring their global
operations, these firms confront various costs of multinational production and trade. For instance, whether a
firm should pursue a strategy of maintaining many plants to avoid shipping costs or a strategy of consolidating
production in a few locations turns on the size of the fixed costs of establishing foreign plants relative to the
costs of shipping goods. Further, given a set of production locations, the choice of which product to produce
where depends on the interaction of comparative advantage and the cost of shipping goods. In the data, firms
tend to concentrate their production in only a few locations, which is intuitive under increasing returns at
the plant level, and to use export platform sales in order to serve markets outside the host country. For US
multinationals’ affiliates in Europe, Figure 1 documents the proportion of output exported to other countries
from the host country. Across all countries (including countries outside Europe), export platform sales account
for an average of 43 percent of multinationals’ foreign output, a share that is systematically higher for smaller
countries.
In this paper, I develop a framework that is designed to answer several key questions. First, what are
the costs associated with multinational production? How important are the fixed costs of establishing foreign
operations relative to possible efficiency losses due to remote management? Second, how does the process of
globalization, measured as a fall in these costs, affect the structure of global production? Will globalization
result in firms’ consolidating production in a few favored locations, or will firms expand their global production
networks? Third,howdoesallowingformultinationalproductionaffectourunderstandingofthewelfareeffects
in a general equilibrium trade model?
Export platform sales, together with the presence of fixed cost of establishing foreign plants, imply a
hard permutation problem for deciding on how to structure a firm’s global operations. A firm simultaneously
needs to decide the set of countries in which to establish a production plant, which markets to serve from each
plant, and how much to sell to each market. Perhaps for this reason, the literature on multinational firms in
multi-country settings has made extreme assumptions. Existing work either does not allow for export platform
sales or ignores the fixed costs of establishing foreign plants. The key idea for tractability in the framework
presented in this paper is to consider a firm as consisting of a continuum of products and to treat a firm’s
product-location-specific productivities as random variables, similarly to how Eaton and Kortum (2002) treat
a country’s productivities. By allowing each firm to produce a continuum of products, I smooth out the firm’s
1A multinational firm is a company with enterprises in more than one country. I define its home country as the country in
which the parent company of the enterprises is registered. Usually, this coincides with the country of the multinational firm’s
headquarters. According to Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2009), in the year 2000 multinational firms accounted for nearly 80
percent of US imports and exports, and employed 18 percent of the entire US civilian workforce. Publicly available BEA data
showsthat, inthemanufacturingsector, thesalesbyUSMNEs’majority-ownedforeignaffiliatesaremorethantwiceaslargeas
aggregateUSexports.
2

Figure 1: Export platform shares for US multinationals in Europe
Notes: This figure displays the share of output that is exported to countries outside the host country by US
multinationals’majority-ownedforeignaffiliatesinthemanufacturingsector. FortheEuropeancountriesdisplayed
inthefigure,typicallyonlyabout5percentoftheoutputissoldbacktotheUS.AnexceptionisIreland,forwhich
17 percent of the output is sold to the US. Across all countries (including countries outside Europe), US-owned
foreignaffiliatesinthemanufacturingsectorsell43percentoftheiroutputtocountriesoutsidethehostcountry–
13percentoftheoutputissoldtotheUSand30percenttootherforeigncountries. Thestatisticsarefortheyear
2004. Source: BEA.
responsetochangesinaggregatevariablesandobtainintuitive,closed-formexpressionsfortheoutputateachof
the firm’s plants. A firm’s output is a function of the locations of its plants, the productivity of each plant, the
input costs in the plants’ host countries, and the market potential of the plants’ host countries. Furthermore,
the model delivers a probability with which a firm chooses a set of plants, as the fixed cost to establish a plant
in a foreign country is stochastic and firm-country-specific.
Withthisframework,Iconductatwo-tieredempiricalanalysis. UsingGermanfirm-leveldataonoutput
attheparentandaffiliatelevels,Iestimateboththevariableproductioncostsinforeigncountriesaswellasthe
distribution of fixed costs to establish a foreign plant. I find that German multinational firms face between 5
percent(Austria)and35percent(UnitedStates)largervariableproductioncostsabroadthanathomeandface
substantialfixedcostsofestablishingforeignaffiliates. Ialsodocumentthatmultinationalfirmstendtoproduce
3