NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEPOSIT INSURANCE:
THEORIES AND FACTS
Charles W. Calomiris
Matthew Jaremski
Working Paper 22223
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22223
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2016
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Charles W. Calomiris and Matthew Jaremski. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Deposit Insurance: Theories and Facts
Charles W. Calomiris and Matthew Jaremski
NBER Working Paper No. 22223
May 2016
JEL No. E44,G21,G28
ABSTRACT
Economic theories posit that bank liability insurance is designed as serving the public interest by
mitigating systemic risk in the banking system through liquidity risk reduction. Political theories
see liability insurance as serving the private interests of banks, bank borrowers, and depositors,
potentially at the expense of the public interest. Empirical evidence – both historical and
contemporary – supports the private-interest approach as liability insurance generally has been
associated with increases, rather than decreases, in systemic risk. Exceptions to this rule are rare,
and reflect design features that prevent moral hazard and adverse selection. Prudential regulation
of insured banks has generally not been a very effective tool in limiting the systemic risk
increases associated with liability insurance. This likely reflects purposeful failures in regulation;
if liability insurance is motivated by private interests, then there would be little point to removing
the subsidies it creates through strict regulation. That same logic explains why more effective
policies for addressing systemic risk are not employed in place of liability insurance. The politics
of liability insurance also should not be construed narrowly to encompass only the vested
interests of bankers. Indeed, in many countries, it has been installed as a pass-through subsidy
targeted to particular classes of bank borrowers.
Charles W. Calomiris
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu
Matthew Jaremski
Colgate University
Department of Economics
13 Oak Drive
Hamilton, NY 13346
and NBER
mjaremski@colgate.edu

I. Introduction
The insurance of bank liabilities began as an American experiment in six U.S. states in the early-
to-mid 19th century. All six of those state liability insurance experiments had disappeared by the
1860s. A second wave of eight U.S. state experiments with deposit insurance occurred in the
early 20th century, and again, all of those had disappeared by around 1930.1 In 1933, after fifty
years of failed attempts by advocates of deposit insurance to pass federal legislation and in the
wake of the collapses of the eight state deposit insurance systems, U.S. federal deposit insurance
was enacted. Although it was initially established as a temporary measure covering only small
deposits, it soon became a permanent feature of the U.S. banking regulation that covers (either
explicitly or implicitly) virtually all deposits today. Bank liability insurance remained an
exceptional and controversial policy experience of the United States until the latter half of the
20th century. However, today it stands as a nearly ubiquitous feature of banking regulation that
is endorsed by influential cross-border institutions such as the International Monetary Fund, the
World Bank, and the European Union. As it spread to new nations, the extent of deposit
insurance coverage within countries has also expanded.
This paper reviews the worldwide experience with bank liability insurance – including an
analysis of the factors that led to its passage and expansion, as well as analyses of its
performance, and connects the history of liability insurance to competing theoretical arguments
that seek to explain it. Broadly speaking, there are two theoretical approaches to explaining the
creation and expansion of deposit insurance: an economic approach grounded in potential
1 After 1863, only national banks issued bank notes, owing to the prohibitive federal taxation of state bank issuance
of notes. National bank notes suffered no risk of default because they were fully backed by government bonds
deposited at the U.S. Treasury (Calomiris 1988). This explains why pre-1863 state insurance systems included the
insurance of notes, while 20th century state insurance systems insured only deposits.
1

efficiency gains (i.e., public interest motivation), and a political approach grounded in the rising
power of special interest groups that favored it (i.e., private interest motivation).
The economic approach posits that liability insurance may improve the efficient
management of the banking system by reducing systemic liquidity risk. Despite that potential
advantage, economic theories recognize the costs of enacting liability insurance. These include
moral-hazard and adverse-selection costs, which increase fundamental insolvency risk, either as
a consequence of greater conscious risk taking by bankers (moral hazard) or through an increase
in the proportion of bankers who are incompetent managers. Whether bank liability insurance, on
balance, reduces or increases risk in the banking system is an empirical question.
Alternatively, political theory provides a separate theoretical basis for explaining the
presence of bank liability insurance. Political models identify circumstances under which the
interests of particular groups within society (beneficiaries of passing liability insurance) may
succeed in securing its passage, even though liability insurance is inefficient. Political models
seek to explain why liability insurance may occur to favor certain groups in society at the
expense of other groups and at the cost of higher systemic risk of banks.
After reviewing the economic and political theories of liability insurance in Section II,
Section III reviews empirical evidence about factors that have been instrumental in creating or
expanding deposit insurance, and the economic consequences of doing so. We conclude Section
III by considering what these two types of evidence tell us about which of the two theoretical
paradigms reviewed in Section II – the economic theory or the political theory– is more
consistent with the facts. We show that the empirical literature on bank liability insurance
2