NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE GRANULAR NATURE OF LARGE INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS
Itzhak Ben-David
Francesco Franzoni
Rabih Moussawi
John Sedunov
Working Paper 22247
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22247
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2016, Revised July 2020
Special acknowledgments go to Robin Greenwood and David Thesmar for thoughtful and
extensive comments. We also thank Sergey Chernenko, Kent Daniel (NBER discussant), Itamar
Drechsler, Thierry Foucault, Xavier Gabaix, Denis Gromb, Andrew Karolyi, Alberto Plazzi,
Tarun Ramadorai (AFA discussant), Martin Schmalz, René Stulz, and Fabio Trojani as well as
participants at the NBER Summer Institute (Risk of Financial Institutions) and seminars at
Cornell University, the Interdisciplinary Center Herzliya, University of Texas at Austin, Georgia
State University, Tilburg University, Maastricht University, HEC Paris, USI Lugano, Villanova
University, The Ohio State University, the Bank for International Settlements, NBER Risk of
Financial Institutions Summer Institute, and American Finance Association for helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Itzhak Ben-David, Francesco Franzoni, Rabih Moussawi, and John Sedunov. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Granular Nature of Large Institutional Investors
Itzhak Ben-David, Francesco Franzoni, Rabih Moussawi, and John Sedunov
NBER Working Paper No. 22247
May 2016, Revised July 2020
JEL No. G01,G12,G23
ABSTRACT
Large institutional investors own an increasing share of the equity markets in the U.S. The
implications of this development for financial markets are still unclear. The paper presents novel
empirical evidence that ownership by large institutions predicts higher volatility and greater noise
in stock prices as well as greater fragility in times of crisis. When studying the channel, we find
that large institutional investors exhibit traits of granularity, i.e., subunits within a firm display
correlated behavior, which reduces diversification of idiosyncratic shocks. Thus, large institutions
trade larger volumes and induce greater price impact.
Itzhak Ben-David Rabih Moussawi
The Ohio State University Villanova University
Fisher College of Business 800 Lancaster Ave
606A Fisher Hall Bartley 2051
Columbus, OH 43210-1144 Villanova, PA 19085
and NBER Rabih.Moussawi@villanova.edu
ben-david.1@osu.edu
John Sedunov
Francesco Franzoni Villanova University
Swiss Finance Institute 2042 Bartley Hall
Via G. Buffi 13 800 Lancaster Avenue
6904, Lugano - Switzerland Villanova, PA 19085
and University of Lugano john.sedunov@villanova.edu
francesco.franzoni@usi.ch

1 Introduction
Recent decades have witnessed the rise of large institutional players in financial markets. Since
1980, the top 10 institutional investors have quadrupled their holdings in U.S. stocks. As of
December 2016, the largest institutional investor oversaw 6.3% of the total equity assets, and the
top 10 investors managed 26.5% of these assets. Observing these trends, regulators have expressed
concerns about systemic risks that could result from the high concentration of assets under a few
large actors. The main threat is that institutional investors, when experiencing redemptions,
liquidate their portfolios and destabilize asset prices, propagating the effect to other investors’
balance sheets.1 Any potential implications of large institutional investors on the prices of the
securities they hold remain unclear and unexplored.
Theoretical arguments suggest that large institutions should impact stock prices more than
small institutions. Gabaix (2011) posits that large market players are “granular,” i.e., shocks to
these agents are not easily diversified when aggregating across units and are reflected in aggregate
market outcomes. In particular, aggregate fluctuations can result from firm-level shocks if the
distribution of firms is fat-tailed. Applying this notion to financial markets, Gabaix, Gopikrishnan,
Plerou, and Stanley (2006) suggest that the trades of large investors can explain excess volatility.
Drawing inspiration from this theory, our empirical contribution is twofold. First, we show
that ownership by large institutions is associated with larger volatility in the underlying securities
and that this increase reflects an increase in the noise embedded in stock prices. Moreover, we
show that during times of market turmoil, stocks with higher ownership by large institutions
display significantly larger price drops. This finding is relevant for regulators who are concerned
about financial stability.
Second, when studying the channels behind these effects, we find empirical evidence
supporting the view that large institutions are granular, i.e., behavior within the subunits of a large
firm displays some correlation that limits internal diversification and exacerbates market impact.
Specifically, capital flows and trading strategies are more correlated across different entities within
1 The Office of Financial Research (2013) identifies redemption risk as a major vulnerability of asset managers and
points to the fire sale channel as a source of systemic risk. Relatedly, a recent Financial Stability Board publication
(2015) remarks that, although research studying market contagion is abundant, a gap exists in the study of the potential
effect of large individual organizations.
1

the same institution than across independent managers. We interpret this evidence as the outcome
of centralized functions, such as marketing, research, and risk management, as well as of a unique
corporate identity that guides managers’ decisions and investors’ responses. These results can
explain why large institutions have a bigger impact on asset prices than a collection of smaller
independent entities. Consistent with this conclusion, we find that the trading activity of large
institutions explains their effect on volatility. Top institutions trade in larger volumes and have a
greater impact on prices.
Our study has three parts. In the first part, we start from the hypothesis that large investors’
trading activity leads to more intense price pressure, which in turn translates into higher stock price
volatility. We confirm this prediction by showing a significant relation between ownership by top
institutions and stock-level volatility. The economic magnitude of this effect grows over time,
coinciding with the rise in the importance of large institutions in financial markets. Toward the
end of the sample, the effect is economically large: A one-standard-deviation increase in the largest
10 institutions’ ownership is associated with 16% of a standard deviation increase in volatility.
While our main tests focus on daily volatility, the effect is also present at lower frequencies
(weekly, monthly, quarterly), making it relevant for long-term investors as well.
One might speculate that the increase in volatility that we identify is a desirable outcome
of institutional ownership. For example, large institutions could encourage information production
and faster price discovery. To shed light on this issue, we investigate whether large institutions are
associated with more efficient prices. In fact, focusing on daily return autocorrelation, we find that
stocks with higher ownership by top institutions display more negatively autocorrelated returns.
This evidence is consistent with the idea that large institutions impound liquidity shocks into
prices, which then revert, and lead to noisier prices.
Next, we directly address regulatory concerns and study the effect of large institutional
investors on stock prices during periods of market turmoil. Given our conjecture that large
investors influence asset prices through a more intense demand for liquidity, we expect the prices
of the stocks that they own to be more fragile when aggregate liquidity is low. Accordingly, we
find that in turmoil periods, stocks with higher ownership by large institutions experience
significantly lower returns, while no effect on the level of returns is present in normal times.
2