NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE ECONOMICS OF BANK SUPERVISION
Thomas M. Eisenbach
David O. Lucca
Robert M. Townsend
Working Paper 22201
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22201
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2016
For valuable comments, we thank Doug Diamond and Mark Flannery, as well as audience
members at the New York Fed Conference on Supervising Large & Complex Financial
Institutions. Emily Eisner provided excellent research assistance. Any errors are our own. The
views expressed in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be
interpreted as reflecting the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, anyone else
associated with the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Thomas M. Eisenbach, David O. Lucca, and Robert M. Townsend. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Economics of Bank Supervision
Thomas M. Eisenbach, David O. Lucca, and Robert M. Townsend
NBER Working Paper No. 22201
April 2016
JEL No. D82,G21,G28
ABSTRACT
We study bank supervision by combining a theoretical model distinguishing supervision from
regulation and a novel dataset on work hours of Federal Reserve supervisors. We highlight the
trade-offs between the benefits and costs of supervision and use the model to interpret the relation
between supervisory efforts and bank characteristics observed in the data. More supervisory
resources are spent on larger, more complex, and riskier banks. However, hours increase less than
proportionally with bank size, suggesting the presence of technological scale economies in
supervision. The data also show reallocation of supervisory hours at times of stress and in the
post-2008 enhanced supervisory framework for large banks, providing evidence of constraints on
supervisory resources. Finally, we show theoretically limits to assessing supervisory success
based on ex-post outcomes, as well as benefits of ex-ante commitment policies.
Thomas M. Eisenbach Robert M. Townsend
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Department of Economics, E52-538
33 Liberty St MIT
New York, NY 10045 77 Massachusetts Avenue
thomas.eisenbach@ny.frb.org Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
David O. Lucca rtownsen@mit.edu
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
david.lucca@ny.frb.org

1 Introduction
Muchpolicydebateinrecentyearshasfocusedonbanksupervisionandregulation.In
order“[t]opromotethefinancialstabilityoftheUnitedStates,”the2010DoddFrankAct
(DFA) introduced a number of provisions aimed in particular at the largest and most
complexbankingorganizations.1 Whiletheacademicliteraturehaspaidincreasingat-
tentiontobankregulation,workonbanksupervisionremainslimited,partlyreflecting
theopacityofsupervisoryactivitiesthatstemsfromsupervisors’relianceonconfiden-
tialinformation.Inthispaper,wefirstdevelopanabstractframeworkcharacterizedby
incentive problems and asymmetric information between banks and banking authori-
ties. Observability and verifiability of bank information and actions distinguish regu-
latory from supervisory activities. Second, we use information from a unique dataset
of hours spent by Federal Reserve bank examiners overseeing U.S. bank holding com-
panies matched to banks’ characteristics. We use the data to illustrate details of the
supervisoryprocessandinterpretkeyempiricalrelationsusingthetheoreticalmodel.
Prudentialsupervisioniscloselyrelatedto,butdistinctfrom,regulationofbanking
organizations.Regulationinvolvesthedevelopmentandpromulgationoftherulesun-
der which banking organizations operate as well as their enforcement in the court of
law.Thedistinguishingfeaturesofbanksupervisionare:(i)theassessmentofthesafety
and soundness of banks through monitoring and exams, and (ii) the use of this infor-
mationtorequestcorrectiveactionsfrombanksshouldtheirconditionsorpracticesbe
deemedunsafeorunsound.
Inourtheoreticalframework,theincentiveproblembetweenauthoritiesandbanks,
which creates the need for regulation and supervision, is rooted in the bank’s limited
liability.Banksonlyvaluepayoffsconditionalonbeingsolventwhilebankingauthori-
ties value asset payoffs in all states of the world (micro-prudential objectives) and take
intoaccountspillovers(macro-prudential,orfinancialstability,objectives).
In differentiating between regulation and supervision, we assume that regulation
is “coarse” and can only be contingent on verifiable information while supervision is
“discretionary” and can be contingent on non-verifiable information. Regulation can
therefore restrict banks’ activities ex-ante (for example, a ban on the trading of phys-
1TheDFAcontainsalargenumberofregulatorychangesbothinthecontextoffinancialstabilityand
consumerprotection.Intermsoffinancialstability,theDFAestablishedtheFinancialStabilityOversight
Committee (FSOC) with the authority to designate systemically important institutions. The DFA also
mandated the Federal Reserve Board and other federal banking regulatory authorities to issue tighter
regulationsforthelargestinstitutionsrelatedtothelevelofregulatorycapital,proprietarytradingand
stresstesting,amongothers.
1

ical commodities) and respond to asset payoffs ex-post (for example, the imposition
of penalties after a breach of a capital requirement). Supervision can respond to in-
terim signals about bank actions and influence asset payoffs before they are realized.
Inpractice,agrayareacanexistbetweensupervisionandregulation,asexemplifiedby
stresstestingandthefactthatsomesupervisoryactivitiesinvolvecompliancewithreg-
ulations (see, for example Goldsmith-Pinkham, Hirtle, and Lucca, 2016). In its purest
form,regulationiswrittenintolawandenforcedthroughcourts,andthereforerequires
verifiability(Maskin,Laffont,andHildenbrand,1982).
In our setting,a bank’s balance sheetand returns are verifiable.Regulation can im-
pose capital requirements that increase loss absorption and provide skin in the game
ex-ante as well as provide discipline in risk management by imposing costs ex-post
should the requirements be breached. In contrast to regulation, supervision can col-
lectinformationaboutbank’sactionsthroughcostlymonitoring,leadingtoaninterim
signal,whichinthedataweproxywiththebank’ssupervisoryrating.Theinterimsig-
nal is informative to banking authorities and allows improved outcomes compared to
whenonlyregulationispresent.However,weassumethatthesignalsarenoisyandcan
prove to be incorrect. After accounting for the informativeness of the signal, supervi-
sion can respond to its realization and influence asset payoffs before they are realized.
Inpracticethesesupervisoryinterventionsaretakenbycommunicatingtobanks“mat-
tersrequiringattention”(MRAs)and“mattersrequiringimmediateattention”(MRIAs)
as discussed in Eisenbach et al. (2015). Although the supervisory signal is informative
on average, it can point to the wrong interim action on occasions, in which case the
supervisoryinterventionwouldalsoproveincorrect.
We assume that both supervisory monitoring and intervention are costly for the
bankingauthority.Theoptimallychosensupervisorystrategythereforehastotradeoff
benefitsandcostsofsupervision.Eventhoughmoresupervisionmayalwaysbebetter
when only considering its benefits, optimal supervision will be limited overall with
higher intensity warranted only if it results in higher marginal benefits than marginal
costs.
Given these trade-offs, our model predicts that intervention efforts are higher for
riskier banks, which are those with a worse observed signal. Consistent with this pre-
dictions, we find empirically that Fed supervisors’ efforts increase between 70 and 140
percent for banking organizations where the confidential supervisory rating indicates
moderatetoextremelevelsofconcerns(ratingof3,4or5).
In light of the large size heterogeneity of U.S. banking organizations, we study in
2