NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW CREDIT CONSTRAINTS IMPACT JOB FINDING RATES, SORTING & AGGREGATE
OUTPUT
Kyle Herkenhoff
Gordon Phillips
Ethan Cohen-Cole
Working Paper 22274
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22274
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2016
We are grateful for comments from Mark Aguiar, Naoki Aizawa, Sofia Bauducco, Lukasz Drozd,
Fatih Guvenen, Marcus Hagedorn, Jonathan Heathcote, Henry Hyatt, Miles Kimball, Marianna
Kudlyak, Jeremy Lise, Carlos Madeira, Iourii Manovskii, Ellen McGrattan, Kurt Mitman, Lee
Ohanian, Fausto Pena, Fabrizio Perri, Victor Rios-Rull, Jean-Marc Robin, Thomas Sargent, Sam
Schulhofer-Wohl, Rob Shimer, Jim Spletzer, Randy Wright, Ming Xu, and Moto Yogo as well as
seminar participants at Bonn, Central Bank of Chile, Census, CESifo, Columbia, ES-Bocconi,
FGV, Iowa, Michigan, Miami, Minneapolis Fed, NBER SI-Macro Perspectives, Northwestern,
Notre Dame, Philadelphia Fed, Queens, Richmond Fed, Rochester, SAM, SED, SOLE/MEA,
USC, and Virginia. We thank Brian Littenberg and the Census for their hospitality and ongoing
support. We thank Ming Xu for excellent research assistance. Herkenhoff and Phillips thank the
Washington Center for Equitable Growth for generous funding. Cohen-Cole and Phillips thank the
NSF (Grant No. 0965328) for funding and TransUnion for providing credit data. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Kyle Herkenhoff, Gordon Phillips, and Ethan Cohen-Cole. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Credit Constraints Impact Job Finding Rates, Sorting & Aggregate Output
Kyle Herkenhoff, Gordon Phillips, and Ethan Cohen-Cole
NBER Working Paper No. 22274
May 2016
JEL No. E13,E2,E24,E32,J01,J21,J24,J31,J6,J63,J64,J65
ABSTRACT
We empirically and theoretically examine how consumer credit access affects displaced workers.
Empirically, we link administrative employment histories to credit reports. We show that an
increase in credit limits worth 10% of prior annual earnings allows individuals to take .15 to 3
weeks longer to find a job. Conditional on finding a job, they earn more and work at more
productive firms. We develop a labor sorting model with credit to provide structural estimates of
the impact of credit on employment outcomes, which we find are similar to our empirical
estimates. We use the model to understand the impact of consumer credit on the macroeconomy.
We find that if credit limits tighten during a downturn, employment recovers quicker, but output
and productivity remain depressed. This is because when limits tighten, low-asset, low-
productivity job losers cannot self-insure. Therefore, they search less thoroughly and take more
accessible jobs at less productive firms.
Kyle Herkenhoff Ethan Cohen-Cole
Department of Economics Econ-One
University of Minnesota ecohencole@gmail.com
kfh@umn.edu
Gordon Phillips
Tuck School of Business
Dartmouth College
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
gordon.m.phillips@gmail.com
A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22274

Recent research by Kaplan and Violante [2014] has shown that many households, even
those with large amounts of wealth, have very little liquid assets. At the same time, many
of those households have significant amounts of credit access (Herkenhoff [2013]). This gen-
erates a potentially important consumption smoothing role for consumer credit if ‘hand-to-
mouth’ households lose their jobs. While much is known about the impact of unemployment
benefits on employment outcomes (inter alia Katz and Meyer [1990], Ljungqvist and Sar-
gent [1998], Acemoglu and Shimer [1998], Chetty [2008], Mitman and Rabinovich [2012], and
Hagedorn et al. [2013]), little is known about the role consumer credit plays in the search
decisions of unemployed households, and even less is known about how this interaction af-
fects the macroeconomy.1 How does consumer credit affect job finding rates, replacement
earnings, or the types of jobs workers take? How does access to consumer credit affect the
allocation of workers to firms, and what does this imply for labor productivity, output, and
employment dynamics?
We examine these questions empirically and theoretically. Empirically, we link individual
credit reports with administrative employment records. We use this dataset to measure the
impactofconsumercreditaccessonjobfindingratesandre-employmentearningsofdisplaced
workers. We find that being able to replace 10% more of prior annual labor earnings with
personal revolving credit allows medium-tenure displaced mortgagors to take .15 to 3 weeks
longer to find a job, and, among those who find a job, they obtain a 0 to 1.7% greater annual
earnings replacement rate. Moreover, individuals with greater access to credit find jobs at
larger firms and more productive firms.
Our results are consistent with individuals using personal credit to fund longer unem-
ployment spells so that they can search and find better job matches. These results show that
independent of realized borrowing, the potential to borrow affects search decisions regardless
if credit lines are actually drawn down. To our knowledge, we are the first to measure the
elasticity of non-employment durations and the elasticity of earnings replacement rates with
respect to consumer credit access.
Theoretically, wedevelopageneralequilibriumlaborsortingmodelwithconsumercredit.
We use the model to structurally estimate the impact of credit limits on job search behavior
and to assess the impact of consumer credit on the aggregate economy. In our model,
1Thenascentbutgrowingliteratureonthetopichasfocusedontwomechanisms,theself-insuranceroleof
credit (e.g. Athreya and Simpson [2006], Herkenhoff [2013], Athreya et al. [2014]) and labor demand effects
of credit (e.g. Bethune et al. [2013], Donaldson et al. [2014]). The equally sparse empirical literature on
unemployment and borrowing is limited due to data constraints (Hurst and Stafford [2004], Sullivan [2008]
amongothers)butrecentinroadsarebeingmadewithnewaccountdata(BakerandYannelis[2015],Gelman
et al. [2015], Ganong and Noel [2015], Kolsrud et al. [2015] among others).
2

heterogeneous credit-constrained workers accumulate human capital while working. When
unemployed, they direct their search, as in Menzio and Shi [2010, 2011], for jobs among
heterogeneous firms.2 Firms differ with respect to capital and produce output by combining
the human capital of workers with their own physical capital (for simplicity we refer to
firm capital as physical capital, but this may also be thought of as intellectual capital).
We assume supermodularity, meaning that firms with greater amounts of physical capital
produce more with workers who have greater amounts of human capital. We therefore
measuresorting in themodel astherawcorrelationcoefficient between workerhumancapital
and firm physical capital.3 Which worker matches with which firm determines both output
and labor productivity in this economy, and therefore the ability of unemployed households
to self-insure, either through saving or borrowing, and search for higher physical capital jobs
has the potential to change the path of a recovery.
Using this new theoretical framework, we make two quantitative contributions. First,
we estimate the model using public data in order to provide a set of independent structural
estimates of the elasticity of the duration of unemployment and the earnings replacement
rate with respect to consumer credit access. We find an elasticity of duration with respect
to unused credit of .61 (implying about a .7 week longer non-employment duration with a
credit line worth 10% of prior income). This estimate falls in the middle of our reduced form
estimates. We also estimate an elasticity of earnings with respect to unused credit, among
those who find a job, of approximately 1.8%.
Second, given that the model produces earnings and duration elasticities that are consis-
tent with the data, we use the model as a laboratory to examine the impact of credit on labor
sorting, productivity, and the ensuing employment recovery during a recession. The main
experiment we conduct using the model is to tighten borrowing limits during the 2007-2009
recession and then study the subsequent recovery. In particular, we simulate the 2007-2009
recession by feeding actual total factor productivity residuals into the model. During the
recession, we permanently tighten borrowing limits, delivering roughly a 3 percentage point
2Related theoretical work includes sorting models with frictions (inter alia Bagger and Lentz [2008],
EeckhoutandKircher[2011],Hagedornetal.[2012],Bonhommeetal.[2014]),frictionlessassignmentmodels
withborrowingconstraints(FernandezandGali[1999],LegrosandNewman[2002],andStrauss[2013]),and
occupational choice under credit constraints (inter alia Neumuller [2014], and Dinlersoz et al. [2015]).
Our work is also related to Lentz [2009], Krusell et al. [2010] and Nakajima [2012a] who have studied the
impact of savings on search decisions, and Guerrieri and Lorenzoni [2011] among others have looked at the
role household borrowing constraints play in models with frictionless labor markets.
3This measure is highly correlated with the Spearman Rank correlation coefficient. We also report the
Spearman Rank correlation coefficient for completeness.
3