NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEMOCRACY FOR POLARIZED COMMITTEES
THE TALE OF BLOTTO'S LIEUTENANTS
Alessandra Casella
Jean Francois Laslier
Antonin Macé
Working Paper 22231
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22231
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2016
We thank participants to seminars and conferences in Berkeley, Caltech, Marseilles, St.
Petersburg, UC Santa Barbara, and Tokyo, and in particular Yann Bramoullé, Matias Nunez and
Rafael Treibich, for useful suggestions and comments. We thank Manuel Puente and Liu
Yongfeng for their research assistance, and the National Science Foundation for financial support
(grant SES-0617934). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Alessandra Casella, Jean Francois Laslier, and Antonin Macé. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Democracy for Polarized Committees
The Tale of Blotto's Lieutenants
Alessandra Casella, Jean Francois Laslier, and Antonin Macé
NBER Working Paper No. 22231
May 2016
JEL No. C72,C92,D71
ABSTRACT
In polarized committees, majority voting disenfranchises the minority. Allowing voters to spend
freely a fixed budget of votes over multiple issues restores some minority power. However, it also
creates a complex strategic scenario: a hide-and-seek game between majority and minority voters
that corresponds to a decentralized version of the Colonel Blotto game. We offer theoretical
results and bring the game to the laboratory. The minority wins as frequently as theory predicts,
despite subjects deviating from equilibrium strategies. Because subjects understand the logic of
the game — minority voters must concentrate votes unpredictably — the exact choices are of
secondary importance, a result that vouches for the robustness of the voting rule to strategic
mistakes.
Alessandra Casella Antonin Macé
Department of Economics GREQAM,
Columbia University Centre de la Vieille Charité
420 West 118 Street 2 rue de la Charité
New York, NY 10027 13002 Marseille, France
and NBER antonin.mace@gmail.com
ac186@columbia.edu
Jean Francois Laslier
Paris School of Economics
48 boulevard Jourdan
75014 Paris
France
jean-francois.laslier@ens.fr
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22231

1 Introduction
How should political power be shared? Majoritarian democracy is desir-
able under many criteria (Condorcet, 1785; May, 1952; Rae, 1969), but in
polarized societies, where the same group is on the losing side on all es-
sential issues, it effectively disenfranchises the minority.1 Polarization can
exist in rich as well as poor countries, in old as well as new democracies,
and can predate the democratic institutions or be generated by the insti-
tutions themselves. For instance, polarization can rest on the exogenous
separation of the population into two main religions. But it can also result
from electoral competition in a winner-take-all system, in otherwise very
different countries.2 Emerson (1998, 1999), referring to Northern Ireland,
the Balkans, and other places plagued by civil wars, claims that majority
rule is the problem, not a solution, and that more consensual rules must be
implemented.
In modern democracies, the main tool for power-sharing is representa-
tion. The complexity of the political agenda, which unfolds over time and
allows changing coalitions, logrolling, and compromises makes representa-
tion in Parliament valuable even to a minority. When group barriers are
permeable, the minority can occasionally belong to the winning side. But
when preferences are fully polarized and the power of a cohesive majority
bloc is secure — a scenario we refer to as a systematic minority — the mi-
nority remains disenfranchised. In some instances, therefore, power-sharing
is imposed directly, and the constitution grants executive positions to spe-
cific groups, typically on the basis of their ethnic or religious identity.3 The
problem is that constitutional provisions of this type are difficult to enforce
and heavy-handed, unsuited to changing realities. We argue that power-
sharing in polarized societies could be achieved in a more subtle and more
1Political philosophy has long recognized that the tyranny of the majority poses a
fundamental challenge to the legitimacy of majority voting (Dahl, 1991).
2See Jacobson (2008); Fiorina et al. (2005) for the US case, or Reynal-Querol (2002);
Eifert et al. (2010); Kabre et al. (2013) for African cases.
3For example, in Lebanon (Picard, 1994; Winslow, 2012), in Mauritus (Bunwaree and
Kasenally, 2005), and occasionally elsewhere (Lijphart, 2004).
2

flexible manner via the design of appropriate voting rules.4
The Storable Votes mechanism (henceforth SV) does just that: it allows
the minority to prevail occasionally and yet is anonymous and treats every-
one identically (Casella, 2005). In a setting with a finite number of binary
issues, the SV mechanism grants a fixed number of total votes to each voter
withthefreedomtodividethemas wishedoverthedifferentissues, knowing
that each issue will be decided by simple majority. SV can apply to direct
democracy in large electorates, or to smaller groups, possibly legislatures or
committees formed by voters’ representatives, as in the model we study in
this paper.
Although easy to describe, SV poses a challenging strategic problem:
how should the votes best be divided? We study the SV mechanism in a
committee divided in two groups: a systematic minority and the remaining
majority. The model highlights a central ingredient of the strategic environ-
ment: the hide-and-seek nature of the game between majority and minority
voters. If the majority spreads its votes evenly, then the minority can win
some issues by concentrating its votes on them, but if the majority knows
in advance which issues the minority is targeting, then the majority can win
those too.
Such strategic interaction is studied in the literature under the name of
Colonel Blotto game: in the original version of the game (Borel and Ville,
1938; Gross and Wagner, 1950), two opposite military leaders with given
army sizes must choose how many soldiers to deploy on each of several
battlefields. Each battlefield is won by the army with the larger number
of soldiers. Each colonel could win if he knew the opponent’s plan. At
equilibrium, choices must be random.
The SV’s model can be phrased as the classical Colonel Blotto scenario,
with“issues”and“votes”insteadof“battlefields”and“soldiers”. Thegame
is asymmetric — the majority has more votes — and thus recalls Colonel
4Notethatneithervetoesorsupermajorityrequirements,norlog-rollingcanovercome
the problem posed by a systematic minority. If on each issue there is a fixed majority
of,say,60percent,versusafixedminorityof40percent,thenvetoesandsupermajorities
stall all voting, and logrolling has no role because the majority is always winning.
3