NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOUSEHOLD RISK MANAGEMENT
Adriano A. Rampini
S. Viswanathan
Working Paper 22293
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22293
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2016, Revised May 2017
We thank Ing-Haw Cheng (WFA discussant), João Cocco (NBER discussant), Mariacristina De
Nardi (NBER discussant), Emmanuel Farhi, Nobu Kiyotaki, David Laibson, David Martinez-
Miera (CEPR discussant), Alex Michaelides, Martin Oehmke (AFA discussant), Tomek Piskorski
(AEA discussant), Alp Simsek (Wash U discussant), Jeremy Stein, Roberto Steri (FIRS
discussant), George Zanjani, and seminar participants at the AEA Annual Meeting, Duke, the
NBER-Oxford Sa d-CFS-EIEF Conference on Household Finance, the HBS Finance Unit
Research Retreat, the Asian Meeting of the Econometric Society, MIT, UC Berkeley, Harvard,
USC, the WFA Annual Conference, the SED Annual Meeting, the Bank of Canada and Queen's
University Workshop on Real-Financial Linkages, Cheung Kong GSB, Cornell, DePaul,
Princeton, BYU, Carnegie Mellon, Indiana, Wharton, Chicago, Amsterdam, UCL, Imperial
College, Warwick, the CEPR European Summer Symposium in Financial Markets, the
Washington University Conference on Corporate Finance, the AFA Annual Meeting, Houston,
Minnesota, Illinois, Virginia, the Conference in Honor of Robert M. Townsend, the FIRS
Conference, and the NBER SI on Capital Markets and the Economy for helpful comments. Part
of this paper was written while the first author was visiting the finance area at the Stanford
Graduate School of Business and the economics department at Harvard University and their
hospitality is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Adriano A. Rampini and S. Viswanathan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Household Risk Management
Adriano A. Rampini and S. Viswanathan
NBER Working Paper No. 22293
May 2016, Revised May 2017
JEL No. D14,D91,E21,G22,I13
ABSTRACT
Households' insurance against shocks to income and asset values (that is, household risk
management) is limited, especially for poor households. We argue that a trade-off between
intertemporal financing needs and insurance across states explains this basic insurance pattern. In
a model with limited enforcement, we show that household risk management is increasing in
household net worth and income, incomplete, and precautionary. These results hold in economies
with income risk, durable goods and collateral constraints, and durable goods price risk, under
quite general conditions and, remarkably, risk aversion is sufficient and prudence is not required.
In equilibrium, collateral scarcity lowers the interest rate, reduces insurance, and increases
inequality.
Adriano A. Rampini
Duke University
Fuqua School of Business
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
rampini@duke.edu
S. Viswanathan
Duke University
Fuqua School of Business
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
viswanat@duke.edu

1 Introduction
In economics, insurance is typically thought of as trade across states. With limited
enforcement, however, tradeacrossstatesislinkedtointertemporaltrade. Indeed, insuch
an environment insurance may be better viewed as state-contingent savings as insurance
premia need to be paid in advance. Since insurance is state-contingent saving, savings
and insurance are intimately connected. Households with limited funds may not want
to save and hence may choose to insure less or not at all. We argue that this trade-off
between insurance and financing is a key factor explaining the absence of household risk
management for poor households and the basic relation between insurance and household
income or net worth.
We provide a standard neoclassical model in which households’ ability to promise to
pay is subject to limited enforcement. In our benchmark model there is no collateral
and limited enforcement implies that households have access to complete markets for
state-contingent claims subject to short-sale constraints. We first show that optimal
household risk management of risk averse households whose income (net of expenditures
for health and other non-discretionary spending needs) follows a stationary Markov chain
withpositivepersistenceisincreasinginhouseholdnetworthandincome, andincomplete,
even in the long run, that is, under the stationary distribution of household net worth.
Thus, the limited ability to pledge restricts and links financing and risk management.
Given this link, households limit their risk management and may completely abstain
from insurance when their current funds are sufficiently low.
We extend these results to an economy with durable goods that the households can
borrowagainst, andshowthattheincreasingriskmanagementresultgeneralizes. Inprac-
tice, beyond consumption needs, households’ primary financing needs are two: purchases
of durable goods and the accumulation of human capital. First, households consume the
services of durable goods, most importantly housing, and the purchase of such goods
needs to be financed. Second, investment in education requires financing, and education
and learning-by-doing imply an age-income profile which is upward sloping on average.
The bulk of financing actually extended to households is for purchases of durable goods.
Indeed, more than 90% of household liabilities are attributable to durable goods pur-
chases, mainly real estate (around 80%) and vehicles (around 6%), and less than 4% of
household liabilities are attributable to education purposes.1 In our model all household
1DatafromtheU.S. Flow of Funds Accounts forthefirstquarterof2009showsthathomemortgages
are 78% of household liabilities and consumer credit is about 19% and, according to the Federal Reserve
Statistical Release G.19, 12% is non-revolving consumer credit (including automobile loans and non-
revolving loans for mobile homes, boats, trailers, education, or vacations). Data from the 2007 Survey
1

borrowing needs to be collateralized by households’ stocks of durable goods. Since most
household financing is comprised of such loans, our model is plausible empirically. While
households are able to borrow for education only to a limited extent, consistent with our
model, education and learning-by-doing are nevertheless important as they result in age-
income profiles that are upward sloping on average which means that households have an
incentive to borrow against the future using other means, namely, by financing durable
goods.
Furthermore, we consider durable goods price risk, in addition to income risk, and
provide conditions for increasing risk management. Under some assumptions, households
partially hedge income risk but do not hedge durable goods price risk at all. When
householdscanchoosetorentdurablesaswellasbuythem, weshowthathouseholdswith
low net worth rent and that renters may hedge high durable goods prices. Shiller (1993)
has argued that markets that allow households to manage their risks would significantly
improvewelfareandthattheabsenceofsuchmarketshencepresentsanimportantpuzzle.
For example, Shiller (2008) writes that “[t]he near absence of derivatives markets for real
estate ... is a striking anomaly that cries out for explanation and for actions to change the
situation.” We provide a rationale why households may not use such markets even if they
exist. And given this lack of demand from households, the absence of such markets may
not be so puzzling after all. The explanation we provide is simple: households’ primary
concernisfinancing, thatis, shiftingfundsfromthefuturetotoday, notriskmanagement,
that is, not transferring funds across states in the future. Risk management would require
households to make promises to pay in high income states in the future, but this would
reducehouseholds’abilitytopromisetopayinhighincomestatestofinancedurablegoods
purchases today, because households’ total promises are limited by collateral constraints.
Ourdynamicmodelofcompletemarketssubjecttocollateralconstraintsallowsanexplicit
analysis of the connection between financing and risk management, and shows that the
cost of risk management may be too high.
Our economy with income risk only is similar to the classic model of buffer stock
savings of Bewley (1977) and Aiyagari (1994), among others. The main difference is that
this class of models typically assumes that households have access only to risk-free assets
subject to short-sale (or borrowing) constraints, whereas households in our model have
access to state-contingent claims, albeit subject to similar short-sale constraints. The
behavior of state-contingent savings in our model differs from the savings behavior in the
of Consumer Finances on the purpose of debt shows that in 2007, 83% of household debt is due to the
purchase or improvement of a primary residence or other residential property, 6% to vehicle purchases,
less than 4% to education, and 6% to purchases of goods or services not further broken out.
2