NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CURBING SHOCKS TO CORPORATE LIQUIDITY:
THE ROLE OF TRADE CREDIT
Niklas Amberg
Tor Jacobson
Erik von Schedvin
Robert Townsend
Working Paper 22286
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22286
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2016
Discussions with and suggestions from Vicente Cuñat and Tore Ellingsen, as well as seminar and
conference participants at Sveriges Riksbank, Lund University, and the 2015 Norges Bank
Conference on Banking and Financial Intermediation have been very helpful in improving upon
earlier drafts. We are also grateful for the generous data support provided by
Upplysningscentralen AB. Special thanks to Lars-Henric Andersson at Lindahl law firm in
Stockholm, appointed trustee of the Panaxia bankruptcy estate, for sharing his deep insights about
this complex event. Amberg gratefully acknowledges research support from Jan Wallanders och
Tom Hedelius Stiftelse. Townsend gratefully acknowledges research support from Eunice
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD and
Private Enterprise Development in Low-Income Countries (PEDL). We assume full responsibility
for any and all errors in the paper. The views expressed in this paper are solely the responsibility
of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Executive Board of
Sveriges Riksbank or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Niklas Amberg, Tor Jacobson, Erik von Schedvin, and Robert Townsend. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Curbing Shocks to Corporate Liquidity: The Role of Trade Credit
Niklas Amberg, Tor Jacobson, Erik von Schedvin, and Robert Townsend
NBER Working Paper No. 22286
May 2016
JEL No. D22,G30
ABSTRACT
Using data on exogenous liquidity losses generated by the fraud and failure of a cash-in-transit
firm, we demonstrate a causal impact on firms’ trade credit usage. We find that firms manage
liquidity shortfalls by increasing the amount of drawn credit from suppliers and decreasing the
amount issued to customers. The compounded trade credit adjustments are at least as great, if not
greater than corresponding adjustments in cash holdings, suggesting that trade credit positions are
economically important sources of reserve liquidity. The underlying mechanism in trade credit
adjustments is in part due to shifts in credit durations—both upstream and downstream.
Niklas Amberg Erik von Schedvin
Stockholm School of Economics Sveriges Riksbank
Box 6501 10337 Stockholm
SE-113 83 Stockholm Sweden
Sweden erik.vonschedvin@riksbank.se
niklas.amberg@hhs.se
Robert Townsend
Tor Jacobson Department of Economics, E52-538
Sveriges Riksbank MIT
10337 Stockholm 77 Massachusetts Avenue
Sweden Cambridge, MA 02139
tor.jacobson@riksbank.se and NBER
rtownsen@mit.edu

1 Introduction
Do firms use their trade credit positions to handle shortfalls in liquidity? Theoretical and em-
piricalresearchhasshownthatcorporatecashholdingsplayaprominentroleinfirms’liquidity
management by ensuring funding of future investments, see, e.g., Almeida, Campello, and
Weisbach (2004), and as a buffer against shortfalls in liquidity, see Acharya, Davydenko, and
Strebulaev (2012). It is intuitive that firms’ choices of buffer liquidity levels hinge on a range
of capital structure attributes; bankruptcy risk and cash flow volatility to mention two prime
candidates, and obviously also to what extent firms can access outside funding, be it market or
bank financing, cf. Sufi (2007). Less recognized is that firms’ trade credit positions give rise to
sizablefinancialassetsandliabilitiesontheirbalancesheets,andtherebyprovideopportunities
for firms to extract liquidity from their suppliers and customers by adjusting these positions;
forinstance,bypostponingpaymentsontheirtradecreditobligations(accountspayable),orby
promotingpromptpaymentsontheirtradecreditclaims(accountsreceivable).
It is thus conceivable that adjustment capacity at the trade credit margins—next to cash
holdings—canpotentiallyfunctionasanimportantsourceofreserveliquidity. Thisperspective
has in part been put forward by Wilner (2000) and Cuñat (2007), who propose that trade credit
networkscanfunctionasaliquidityinsurancemechanismbyallocatingliquidityfromsuppliers
toconstrainedcounterpartiesfurtherdownthesupplychain;thatis,firms’abilitytoexploittheir
accounts payable to accrue liquidity.1 Cuñat (2007) argues that suppliers, incentivized by the
rentsfrommaintaininglong-termrelationships,maychoosetosupportdownstreamcounterpar-
ties that experience temporary liquidity shocks. The idea is that firms experiencing a liquidity
shock can offset the impact by postponing payments on the trade credit claims held by its sup-
pliers, a temporary default if you will; or, alternatively, by increasing the maturity of future
trade credit contracts; both measures will generate liquidity, without necessarily affecting the
volume of input purchases. Here we go one step further to envision an insurance mechanism,
in which upstream and downstream firms are connected to each other as if in an implicit risk
sharing arrangement. We suggest that such a liquidity insurance mechanism may operate sym-
metrically, by also allocating liquidity from unconstrained customers to otherwise constrained
1 Closelyrelated,BoissayandGropp(2013)empiricallyshowthatfirmsexperiencinglatecustomerpayments
aremorelikelytopostponetheirownpaymentstosuppliers, illustratingthattradecreditchainsmayfunctionas
aninsurancemechanismagainstliquidityshocks.
1

counterparties further up the supply chain; that is, firms can manage their accounts receivable
to generate liquidity. We should, from the downstream perspective, expect that firms can seek
togenerateadditionalliquiditybyreducingtheamountofissuedtradecredittotheircustomers
by reversing the measures that apply upstream; i.e., either reducing net days on issued trade
credit contracts, or by proactive monitoring and management of outstanding contracts to avoid
overduecustomerpayments.
More generally one can envision that firms in a risk sharing network are subject to idiosyn-
cratic,firm-specificshocksandtosectoralormacroaggregateshocks. Iftherewerenoobstacles
tosuchrisksharing,idiosyncraticshockswouldbepooledaway,internally,withinthenetwork,
leavingmanagementofaggregateshockstogrouplevelcashmanagementortoexternalformal
bank relationships. No doubt in practice there are obstacles to and hence more limited risk
sharing; obstacles such as limited information and limited commitment. In particular, firms
may threaten non-cooperation, e.g., to pull out of the network if they are unwilling to provide
the requisite liquidity of the implicit sharing rules. But such a threat might be mitigated by
potentiallossofestablishedrelationshipswithinthecurrentsupplychain,givenpre-established
specificity in inputs, tailored monitoring technologies, and so on. Risk sharing is better, the
more specific these relationships are. Nevertheless, threats may not be sufficient, and on some
paths of shock realizations firms will file legal claims for recovery or be forced themselves to
consider bankruptcy. In sum, we are allowing both an ex ante risk sharing perspective and an
ex post contagion perspective, simultaneously. This then is the overall framework we have in
mind. Which of these various forces we can plausibly identify in data is the empirical quest of
thispaper.
Themainchallengeistodemonstratethatadjustmentsattradecreditmarginscanbecaused
by firms’ increased liquidity needs, while ruling out potentially confounding factors, such as
changesindemandandsupplyconditionsinthesupply-chain. Weconducttheempiricalanaly-
ses on two primary data sets. On the one hand, we use a population-wide data set on Swedish
corporatefirms. Forourpurpose,thisdatasethastwodistinctadvantages. Firstly,fora(small)
sub-sample of the firms, we can evaluate the impact of exogenous liquidity shocks imposed by
the fraud and failure of a large cash-in-transit firm. Secondly, the data set covers the universe
of Swedish firms, which enables an evaluation covering the full spectrum of firms, from very
2