NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MONETARY VERSUS MACROPRUDENTIAL POLICIES:
CAUSAL IMPACTS OF INTEREST RATES AND CREDIT CONTROLS
IN THE ERA OF THE UK RADCLIFFE REPORT
David Aikman
Oliver Bush
Alan M. Taylor
Working Paper 22380
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22380
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2016, revised August 2024
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Bank
of England or the National Bureau of Economic Research. The authors wish to thank – without
implicating – Thilo Albers, Saleem Bahaj, Michael Bordo, Forrest Capie, Matthieu Chavaz,
James Cloyne, Angus Foulis, Julia Giese, Charles Goodhart, Robert Hetzel, Ethan Ilzetzki, Òscar
Jordà, George Kapetanios, Norbert Metiu, Paul Mizen, Duncan Needham, Edward Nelson, José-
Luis Peydró, Jonathan Pinder, Ricardo Reis, Gary Richardson, Albrecht Ritschl, Joan Rosés,
Peter Scott, Lord Skidelsky, Peter Sinclair, Ryland Thomas, Matthew Waldron, Eugene White,
and Garry Young for helpful conversations, and Jiayi Cheng, Jiawei Fan, Casey Murphy,
Consgor Osvay, Henrik Pedersen, Jenny Spyridi, and Yizhong Zhang for their excellent research
assistance, and the archivists at the Bank of England, Barclays Bank, HSBC, the Royal Bank of
Scotland and the National Archives. We have benefited from comments of participants at
presentations at UC Davis, UC Berkeley, the NBER Summer Institute, the Cliometric Society
Annual Conference, the American Economic Association Annual Meetings, the European
Economic Association Annual Congress, the Royal Economic Society Annual Conference, the
Federal Reserve conference on economic and financial history, the Oxford-Indiana
Macroeconomic Policy Conference, the 6th EurHiStock Workshop, the CEPR Financial Markets
Symposium, the MNB-CEPR-ESRB Macroeconomic Policy Research Workshop, the Central
Bank of Ireland Economic History Workshop, the INET Young Scholars’ Initiative economic
history conference, the London School of Economics, the University of Cambridge, the
University of Oxford, the University of Bonn, the University of Reading, Rutgers University,
Warwick University, the Bank for International Settlements and the Bank of England.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22380
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by David Aikman, Oliver Bush, and Alan M. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Monetary Versus Macroprudential Policies: Causal Impacts of Interest Rates and Credit Controls
in the Era of the UK Radcliffe Report
David Aikman, Oliver Bush, and Alan M. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 22380
June 2016, revised August 2024
JEL No. E50,G18,N14
ABSTRACT
We have a world of conjoined monetary and macroprudential policies. But can they function
smoothly and with what effects? The evidence is quite limited, especially for advanced
economies. We adopt a historical laboratory. From the 1950s to the 1980s, the UK used credit
policy tools alongside conventional interest rate policy. These tools are similar to today’s
macroprudential policies. We document these tools and craft a new dataset to estimate their
effects using modern high-frequency identification with a novel empirical strategy, Factor-
Augmented Local Projection. Monetary policy acted mainly on inflation but credit policy acted
primarily to modulate bank lending.
David Aikman Alan M. Taylor
King's College London Columbia University
david.aikman@kcl.ac.uk 1313 International Affairs
420 West 118th Street
Oliver Bush New York, NY 10027
oliver.bush@bankofengland.co.uk and CEPR
and also NBER
amt2314@columbia.edu

Changes in the complex of interest rates ...should not be precluded, ...and should, as a rule, be
regarded as secondary to the technique of rationing the volume ...of credit ....
1
— John Maynard Keynes
But, when all has been said on the possibility of monetary action and of its likely efficacy, our
conclusion is that monetary measures cannot alone be relied upon to keep in nice balance an
economy subject to major strains from both without and within. Monetary measures can help,
but that is all.
2
— The Radcliffe Report
1 ntroduction acropru in the ear iew irror
. I : M R -V M
The Global Financial Crisis and its disappointing aftermath were widely viewed as a case of
macroeconomic policy failure from which lessons must be learned. Yet, more than a decade
on, agreement on the precise failures and, thus, the necessary lessons, has been elusive in
many areas, especially regarding financial regulation and central banking. According to
2009 2011
some prominent commentators (Bernanke ; Tucker ) the lack of a clear mandate
for macroprudential policy was a key shortcoming and many of the regulatory reforms
since have aimed to address this. Encouragingly, there has a substantial increase in the
use of macroprudential policy tools over the past decade in both advanced economies and
2019
emerging market economies alike (see, e.g., Alam et al. ).
Despite this, the role of macroprudential policy remains fraught, with doubts about
whether these tools should exist, if they work, and how they should be designed and
used. For example, there remains no real consensus on whether credit booms are best
3
addressed via tighter monetary policy or via macroprudential policies. And while most
advancedeconomiesnowhavespecificinstitutionalarrangementstocoordinateordischarge
4
macroprudential policies, and one prominent committee – the UK’s Financial Policy
Committee – is now a little over ten years old, some large countries including the United
States, Australia and Japan have yet to deploy these tools at all.
1 Keynes(1978),page397.
2 CommitteeontheWorkingoftheMonetarySystem(1959),page183.
3
Facingaheatingupoftheirhousingmarketslastdecade,SwedenandNorwaytookquitedifferentpolicy
actions. Sweden’s Riksbank tried to battle this development using monetary policy tools only, raising the
policyrate,andtippingtheeconomyintodeflation,ashadbeenpredictedbythedissidentDeputyGovernor
LarsSvensson,whosubsequentlyresigned. Acrosstheborder,theNorgesBankimplementedsomecyclical
macroprudential policies to crimp credit expansion and moderate mortgage and house price booms and
managedtoavoidanout-turnlikethatinSweden.
4 EdgeandLiang(2019)findthat47countrieshavesetupsuchFinancialStabilityCommittees.
1

It seems likely to us that the lack of reliable empirical evidence on the impact of macro-
prudential policies is hindering their take-up. While the greater use of macroprudential
5
tools over the past decade has spawned a large body of empirical research, there remains
a lack of longer-run empirical evidence, especially in advanced economies.
New evidence and methods This paper seeks a new analytical approach by bringing a
novel and unique array of empirical evidence to the table based on past UK experience
over a relatively long period. To that end, we turn to the last great era of central bank
experimentation with instruments similar to those now being used for macroprudential
1950 1980
policy: the postwar decades from the s to the early s when many types of new
credit controls were put in play.
1950 1960
In these years – particularly the s and s – economic discourse and policymaking
in the UK were dominated by Keynes’ legacy. The Radcliffe Report is the most famous
example of Keynes’ followers’ scepticism of using policy rates for macroeconomic control
and it endorsed other instruments, notably credit controls, instead. In our examination
of this period, which we dub the “Radcliffe era”, we construct by hand new quantitative
indicators over many decades on the application of such policies in the UK, including credit
ceilings, hire-purchase controls, special deposits, and the so-called “Corset”. We follow
1973 1973
Hodgman ( ) and Miller ( ) in referring to instruments such as these as “credit
controls” and use the term “credit policy” to describe these policies taken as a whole.
To evaluate the impacts of these policies, and to compare them with the impacts of the
standard monetary policy tool of Bank Rate, we develop a new empirical approach, one
that we refer to as Factor-Augmented Local Projection (FALP). Our approach uses the local
2005
projection (LP) method (Jorda` ) with shocks identified using high-frequency financial
2015
marketsurprisestostudymacroresponsesinthespiritofGertlerandKaradi( ). Wejoin
this with the factor augmentation approach that has been employed in the VAR literature
2005
(Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz ) as a means to control for other information correlated
with future macroeconomic developments, for more robust estimation in small samples. For
robustness we also estimate LPs using an alternative and weaker identification assumption
via the now widely-used heteroskedasticity-based estimation which takes into account the
difference in signal and noise on (treatment) days with a policy action and (control) days
2003 2004 2018
without (Rigobon ; Rigobon and Sack ; Nakamura and Steinsson ; Ka¨nzig
2021
). We also subject our results to a range of robustness tests, most of which give us little
reason to doubt our main results.
5 Araujoetal.(2020)summariselessonsfromtheliterature,usingameta-analysisof58distinctempirical
studies. Lookingacrossthesestudies, theyfindthatmacroprudentialpolicieshavestatisticallysignificant
effects on credit, albeit with considerable heterogeneity across instruments, and weaker effects on house
prices. Moreover,theyfindtheseeffectsarestrongerinemergingmarketeconomies.
2