NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIQUIDITY TRANSFORMATION IN ASSET MANAGEMENT:
EVIDENCE FROM THE CASH HOLDINGS OF MUTUAL FUNDS
Sergey Chernenko
Adi Sunderam
Working Paper 22391
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22391
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2016
We thank Jules van Binsbergen, Jaewon Choi, Lauren Cohen, Robin Greenwood, Johan Hombert,
Marcin Kacperczyk, Xuewen Liu, Alexi Savov, Jeremy Stein, René Stulz, Robert Turley, Jeff
Wang, Zhi Wang, Michael Weisbach, Yao Zeng, and seminar participants at the 3rd Annual
Conference on Financial Market Regulation, Adam Smith Conference, Duke/UNC Asset Pricing
Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, NBER New Developments in Long-Term Asset
Management Conference, Ohio State University, Risk Management Conference Mont Tremblant,
Texas A&M, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, and University of Massachusetts at
Amherst for helpful comments and suggestions. Yuan He and Mike Dong provided excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Sergey Chernenko and Adi Sunderam. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Liquidity Transformation in Asset Management: Evidence from the Cash Holdings of Mutual
Funds
Sergey Chernenko and Adi Sunderam
NBER Working Paper No. 22391
July 2016
JEL No. G20,G23
ABSTRACT
We study liquidity transformation in mutual funds using a novel data set on their cash holdings.
To provide investors with claims that are more liquid than the underlying assets, funds engage in
substantial liquidity management. Specifically, they hold substantial amounts of cash, which they
use to accommodate inflows and outflows rather than transacting in the underlying portfolio
assets. This is particularly true for funds with illiquid assets and at times of low market liquidity.
We provide evidence suggesting that mutual funds’ cash holdings are not large enough to fully
mitigate price impact externalities created by the liquidity transformation they engage in.
Sergey Chernenko
The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
818 Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210
sergey.chernenko@fisher.osu.edu
Adi Sunderam
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 359
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
asunderam@hbs.edu

I. Introduction
Liquidity transformation – the creation of liquid claims that are backed by illiquid assets
– is a key function of many financial intermediaries. A long literature, starting with Diamond and
Dybvig (1983) and Gorton and Pennacchi (1990), argues, for example, that the purpose of banks
is to provide investors with highly liquid demand deposits while financing illiquid, information
intensive loans. Liquidity transformation is also an important function of the system of market-
based intermediaries known as the shadow banking system, as argued by Gorton and Metrick
(2010), Kacperczyk and Schnabl (2010), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgenson (2015), Moreira
and Savov (2016), and Nagel (2016).
Through open-ending – allowing investors to withdraw capital at short notice –
traditional asset managers provide liquidity services that are similar to banks and shadow banks.
For example, though they may invest in illiquid assets such as corporate bonds, bank loans, and
emerging market stocks, open-end mutual funds have liquid liabilities. Specifically, mutual funds
allow investors to redeem any number of shares at the fund’s end-of-day net asset value (NAV),
effectively pooling liquidation costs across investors. In contrast, investors who directly hold the
underlying investments bear their own liquidation costs when selling those assets.
Can liquidity transformation by asset managers cause financial stability problems? This
question has been the subject of a vigorous debate among academics, practitioners, and
regulators (e.g., Goldstein et al, 2015; International Monetary Fund, 2015; Financial Stability
Oversight Council, 2014; Feroli et al, 2014; Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang, 2010). A key concern on
one side of the debate is that liquidity transformation increases the scope for fire sales.
Redemptions from an open-ended fund can force sales of illiquid assets, depressing asset prices
and thereby stimulating further redemptions and fire sales. Motivated by such concerns, the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) has recently proposed new rules to promote more
effective liquidity risk management by mutual funds (SEC, 2015).
On the opposite side of the debate are two main arguments. First, many contend that asset
managers are essentially a veil, simply transacting in the underlying equities and bonds on behalf
of investors without performing much liquidity transformation (Investment Company Institute,
2015). Second, others argue that asset managers are well aware of the risks of fire sales and take
1

steps to manage their liquidity needs (Independent Directors Council, 2016; Investment
Company Institute, 2016).
A key empirical challenge in this debate is that it is difficult to measure liquidity
transformation for asset managers. For banks and shadow banks, maturity mismatch – the
difference in maturity between assets and liabilities – provides a reasonable measure of liquidity
transformation. While investors can withdraw unlimited quantities of deposits without any price
impact, bank loans cannot be traded before maturity without creating substantial price impact.
For asset managers, however, there is no comparable measure. Their assets are typically
tradeable securities, though with varying levels of liquidity. Furthermore, some price impact can
be passed on to investors because they own claims whose value is not fixed. Nevertheless, asset
managers perform some amount of liquidity transformation because their ability to pool trades
and space transactions over time flattens the price-quantity schedule faced by their investors.
In this paper, we use the cash holdings of mutual funds that invest in equities and long-
term corporate bonds as a window into the liquidity transformation activities of asset managers.1
Our key insight is that the way mutual funds manage their own liquidity to provide the benefits
of open-ending to investors is a measure of how much liquidity transformation funds are
performing. A fund acting as a pure pass-through, simply buying and selling the underlying
assets on behalf of its investors, has little need for cash holdings to manage its liquidity. In
contrast, a fund performing substantial liquidity transformation will seek to use cash holdings to
mitigate the costs associated with providing investors with claims that are more liquid than the
underlying assets. This revealed preference argument thus suggests that funds’ cash management
practices can be used to measure their liquidity transformation.
Two features of the mutual fund industry make it a good laboratory for studying liquidity
transformation by asset managers. First, mutual funds account for a large fraction of the overall
asset management industry. As of 2015Q1, mutual funds had aggregate assets of $12.9 trillion
and held 20.5% of corporate equities and 20.6% of corporate and foreign bonds.2 Second, while
1 Because we focus on the mismatch in liquidity between fund assets and liabilities, we exclude money market
mutual funds, closed end funds, index funds, ETFs, and short-term bond mutual funds from our analysis.
2 Federal Reserve Flow of Funds. These numbers do not include the assets of money market mutual funds.
2