NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE VALUE OF TRADING RELATIONSHIPS IN TURBULENT TIMES
Marco Di Maggio
Amir Kermani
Zhaogang Song
Working Paper 22332
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22332
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2016
We thank Daron Acemoglu, Viral Acharya, John Campbell, Nicolae Gârleanu, Larry Glosten,
Jeff Harris, Terry Hendershott, Dwight Jaffee, Charles Jones, Christian Julliard, Pete Kyle, Ben
Lester, Christopher Palmer, Chester Spatt, Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, Hongjun Yan, and Kathy
Yuan, as well as seminar participants at the 2015 NYU/NYFRB Financial Intermediation
Conference, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the 2015 LSE conference on Economic
Networks and Finance, and the Third Annual Conference on Financial Market Regulation for
helpful comments. We also thank Calvin Zhang, Jeff Jacobs, Katrina Evtimova and especially
Jason Lee for outstanding research assistance. All remaining errors are ours. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Marco Di Maggio, Amir Kermani, and Zhaogang Song. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Value of Trading Relationships in Turbulent Times
Marco Di Maggio, Amir Kermani, and Zhaogang Song
NBER Working Paper No. 22332
June 2016
JEL No. G01,G12,G14,G2
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the ways in which the network of relationships between dealers shapes
their trading behavior in the corporate bond market. They charge lower spreads to dealers with
whom they have the strongest ties, and this effect is all the more pronounced at times of market
turmoil. Moreover, highly connected and systemically important dealers exploit their connections
at the expense of peripheral dealers as well as clients, charging higher markups than to other core
dealers, especially during periods of uncertainty. We show that following the collapse of a
flagship dealer in 2008, trading chains lengthened by almost 20 percent and that the increase was
even greater for the institutions that had the closest ties with the defaulted dealer. Finally, we find
evidence that dealers drastically reduced their inventory during the financial crisis. These results
can help inform the debate on the risks posed by the interconnectedness of the financial system,
showing how this could be a source of market fragility and illiquidity.
Marco Di Maggio Zhaogang Song
Graduate School of Business The Johns Hopkins Carey
Columbia University Business School
3022 Broadway, uris Hall 819 100 International Drive
New York, NY 10027 Baltimore, MD 21202
and NBER zsong8@jhu.edu
mdimaggio@columbia.edu
Amir Kermani
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Building #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
kermani@berkeley.edu
A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22332

1 Introduction
The global …nancial crisis of 2008 highlighted the key role of the intertwined nature of …nancial
markets in shaping the transmission of risk and the buildup of fragility throughout the system.
At the same time, the growing importance of o¤-exchange trading, with many securities traded in
opaque OTCmarkets (corporatebonds, mortgage-backed securities, credit defaultswaps, etc.), has
been blamed for the persistent illiquidity of these markets. Even the new regulatory frameworks
adopted in the aftermath of the crisis, from the proposal that clearing houses serve as central
counterparties to the de…nition of systemically important …nancial institutions, have incorporated
these views. Yet exactly what role is played by …nancial system interconnectedness and the ways
in which large …nancial institutions may a¤ect OTC market liquidity remain at best imperfectly
understood.
This paper investigates dealers’trading behavior and pricing strategy in the corporate bond
market to shed new light on the role of the network of existing relationships among dealers in
shaping the transmission of risk and in‡uencing market liquidity. The corporate bond market is
one of the world’s largest and most important sources of capital for …rms, with outstanding debt
now of about $8 trillion.1 Daily trading volume in the U.S. averages $20 billion, virtually all
between broker-dealers and large institutions in a decentralized OTC market.2 Hence, this market
is ideal for studying how the network of dealer relationships shapes trading behavior and liquidity
provision, and investigating how dealers responded during the crisis.3
We start by showing that the inter-dealer corporate bond market has a de…nite, persistent core-
periphery network structure. In other words, there are only a few highly interconnected dealers,
the core dealers, which intermediate most of the transactions with other dealers and with clients
1Based on data from SIFMA. See http://sifma.org/research/statistics.aspx.
2In the last few years, investors have been attracted to …xed income securities, and bond issuers have taken
advantage of the low interest rate environment. For instance, FINRA reports that in 2012 issuers borrowed a record
$1.54 trillion,up 29% from 2011,owing chie‡y to ashiftin retailportfolio composition from equitiesto …xed-income
instruments.
3Aswemakeclearinthenextsection,ourempirical…ndingsareinformedandguidedbytheburgeoningtheoretical
literatureonnetworksando¤-exchangemarkets. FollowingtheseminalarticlesofAllenandGale(2000)andFreixas
etal. (2000),agrowingbodyofworkhasconsidered…nancialnetworksasapossiblemechanismforshockpropagation
andampli…cation. Forinstance,Acemogluetal. (2015)characterizetheextentofcontagionwhen…nancialinstitutions
are linked via unsecured debt contracts, and Elliott et al. (2015) study cascading failures in a model of equity cross-
holdings. Inasimilarvein,Stantonetal. (2014)developsanetworkmodelinwhichheterogeneous…nancialnormsand
systemicvulnerabilitiesareendogenousandtestsitsimplicationswithdataon…nancialintermediaries’securitization
network.
1

(retail investors, insurance companies, mutual and hedge funds, etc.) and many sparsely connected
ones transacting less frequently, i.e. the peripheral dealers.4 Given this structure, we analyze
how dealers’markups and trading behavior di¤er according to their counterparties’position in the
network, and how their previous relationships with counterparties a¤ect trading outcomes.5 The
…rst result is that when dealers trade with clients rather than other dealers, they pro…t signi…cantly
more. Onaverage,similarbondsinthesameindustrytradedbythesamedealergoatasigni…cantly
higherpricetonon-dealerclients,anextramarkupofabout50basispoints. Wealsoshowthatmore
centraldealerspaylowerspreadswhilechargingsigni…cantlyhigherspreadstotheircounterparties.6
Importantly, we also …nd signi…cantly lower spreads between dealers with stronger prior rela-
tionships, asproxiedbythefractionofbondsexchangedbetweentwocounterpartiesintheprevious
quarter. Here the results do not depend on di¤erences in the type, volume or quality of the trans-
actions of more or less connected dealers, because these characteristics are controlled for. The
magnitude of the e¤ects, moreover, is economically signi…cant: the di¤erence in the terms of trade
between the bottom and the top decile of relationship strength comes to about 20 basis points.
And the results hold even in the most conservative speci…cation, where we control for seller- and
buyer-month …xed e¤ects, to o¤set time-varying shocks at dealer level that could a¤ect trading
behavior. Overall, our …ndings constitute evidence that existing trading relationships, which most
of the theoretical literature abstracts from, are crucial in determining trading behavior, at least on
a par with network centrality.
Now we can answer the main questions we want to pose. Does the importance of these prior
relationships vary over time? And do dealers tend to provide liquidity to their counterparties
in times of market turmoil? We capture periods of …nancial market stress in two ways. One
is a simple volatility index (VIX or MOVE). The second splits the full sample into three sub-
periods, January 2005-December 2006, January 2007-August 2008, and September 2008-July 2009.
4Thisnetwork structure hasbeen thesubjectofrecenttheoreticalstudieson theriskscreated by highly intercon-
nected institutions (see for instance Babus (2016), Farboodi (2014) and Atkeson et al. (2015)).
5Our main dependent variable is the di¤erence between the price at which a dealer sells a bond and his previous
buying price. We call this the spread, pro…t margin or markup. We provide results for two di¤erent measures. The
more conservative approach considers only trades in which the dealer buys a bond and then sells it within an hour.
However,wealsoprovideconsistentevidenceinwhichthebenchmarkbuypriceistheaverageatwhichotherdealers
buy the same bond during the same week.
6Giventheseresults,ourpaperisrelatedtoempiricalstudiesonOTCmarkettransactioncostsandpricediscovery,
such as Bessembinder et al. (2006), Schultz (2001) Edwards et al. (2007), Green et al. (2007b), and Green et al.
(2010). In other related works, Biais (1993) and ?) consider the comparative advantages of bilateral and electronic
trading. Our own focus is on how relationships shape dealers’liquidity provision during periods of uncertainty.
2