NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES OF THE ZERO LOWER BOUND POLICY
Marco Di Maggio
Marcin Kacperczyk
Working Paper 22351
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22351
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2016
We acknowledge financial support from Inquire Europe. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Marco Di Maggio and Marcin Kacperczyk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Unintended Consequences of the Zero Lower Bound Policy
Marco Di Maggio and Marcin Kacperczyk
NBER Working Paper No. 22351
June 2016
JEL No. E52,G23,G28
ABSTRACT
We study the impact of the zero lower bound interest rate policy on the industrial organization of
the U.S. money fund industry. We find that in response to policies that maintain low interest
rates, money funds: change their product offerings by investing in riskier asset classes; are more
likely to exit the market; and reduce the fees they charge their investors. The consequence of fund
closures resulting from interest rate policy is the relocation of resources in affected fund families
and in the asset management industry in general, as well as decline in capital of issuers borrowing
from money funds.
Marco Di Maggio
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, uris Hall 819
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
mdimaggio@columbia.edu
Marcin Kacperczyk
Imperial College Business School
Tanaka Building
South Kensington Campus
London SW7 2AZ
United Kingdom
m.kacperczyk@imperial.ac.uk
An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22351

1. Introduction
In the aftermath of the financial crisis of 2007-2008, the Federal Reserve took an unprecedented
decision to lower short-term nominal interest rates to zero, a policy commonly known as zero lower
bound policy. This initial action was followed by a sequence of announcements providing guidance
that the short-term rate would stay near zero for a longer period. While several economists have
argued that the Fed’s policy exerted a positive impact on the U.S. economy by stimulating a sluggish
economic growth and boosting employment, some critics pointed out that the policy might have
also produced undesired consequences, for example, inflation in asset prices, or ill-suited incentives
to chase higher yields. In this paper, we show that the policy created a shock to an important part of
the shadow banking system, money funds, which resulted in significant dislocations in terms of their
market participation and product offerings.
By regulation, money market funds (henceforth MMFs) are obliged to invest in safe short-
term assets with rates of return that are typically close to the Fed funds rate. The monetary policy
shock has thus driven the funds’ gross profit margins nearly to zero and has seen many fund
investors face investment opportunities with negative (net of fees) expected returns. The
deteriorating investment environment, in turn, has triggered significant responses of MMFs and
broader asset management industry in terms of their product offerings, pricing policy, and
organizational structure. We study empirically these adjustments using detailed micro-level data.
Traditionally, MMFs used to offer relatively low returns for the provision of safety. While
this idea has been somewhat shattered with the collapse of the Reserve Primary Fund and the run on
MMFs in September 2008 [e.g., Kacperczyk and Schnabl (2013), Chernenko and Sunderam (2014),
Strahan and Tanyeri (2015)], until then, MMFs provided investors positive returns, even after paying
fees. The consequence of the unprecedented change in interest rates to levels close to zero has been
1

that returns on traditional money market instruments, such as Treasuries, repos, or deposits declined
to similarly low levels. Therefore, any fund investing in these assets was likely to produce negative
net-of-fees nominal returns to their investors. It has thus become obvious that such business model
cannot be sustained for too long, as money would flow out of funds with negative returns.1
Such a dire situation has posed a dilemma for money funds. On the one hand, they could
accept the situation and keep their risk profiles unchanged. This, however, would force them to first
reduce or even waive their fees, and in the end, if the low rates persisted, to exit the market. On the
other hand, funds could change their product offerings by shifting their risk into securities with
higher interest rates, thus accepting higher risk in their portfolios, an idea coined as reaching for
yield. Increasing fund risk would boost returns and investor flows [e.g., Christoffersen (2001)], and
would likely prevent funds from exiting the market. The cost of increasing risk would be a higher
chance of being run on in the event of distress in the money market industry. The consequence of
such runs would be distress of individual funds themselves, which could generate high costs either in
terms of the necessity to bail out the fund or through a significant loss of reputation for the fund
organization and other related business of a fund sponsor.
In this paper, we assess empirically the equilibrium response of MMFs to the low interest
rate environment using weekly data on the universe of U.S. prime funds. We exploit both a time-
series and cross-sectional variation in the data to identify the causal effect of the unconventional
monetary policy on MMFs' strategies. Our main empirical identification comes from an event study
analysis of five FOMC announcements, which signaled that interest rates would be kept near zero
into the future. These decisions were plausibly exogenous with respect to the funds’ behavior; hence,
1A standard portfolio theory suggests that investors should look at fund spread, returns net of Treasury bill, rather than
fund returns as a way of assessing their decisions. But in times of zero interest rates both returns and spreads are
virtually the same. In addition, our regression estimates account for any business-cycle variation in the data.
2