NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BOND FINANCE, BANK CREDIT, AND AGGREGATE FLUCTUATIONS IN AN
OPEN ECONOMY
Roberto Chang
Andrés Fernández
Adam Gulan
Working Paper 22377
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22377
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2016
Prepared for the Spring 2016 Carnegie Rochester NYU Conference on Public Policy. We thank
Mark Aguiar, Andrea Ferrero, Leonor Modesto, Maria Pía Olivero and Damiano Sandri for
useful discussions. We have also benefited from conversations with Julian Caballero, Luis Catão,
Fiorella De Fiore, Pablo D'Erasmo, Markus Haavio, Bengt Holmström, Esa Jokivuolle, Joachim
Jungherr, Enrique Mendoza, Guillermo Ordoñez, Vincenzo Quadrini, Antti Ripatti, Ctirad Slavík,
Christian Upper, Jaume Ventura, Mirko Wiederholt, and participants of several seminars and
conferences. The opinions in this paper are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the opinion of the Inter-American Development Bank or its board of directors, nor the
countries that they represent, nor of the Bank of Finland, nor of the European System of Central
Banks. Chang acknowledges the hospitality of CREI. Santiago Téllez provided excellent research
assistance. Further comments will be most appreciated. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Roberto Chang, Andrés Fernández, and Adam Gulan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bond Finance, Bank Credit, and Aggregate Fluctuations in an Open Economy
Roberto Chang, Andrés Fernández, and Adam Gulan
NBER Working Paper No. 22377
June 2016
JEL No. F3,F4
ABSTRACT
Corporate sectors in emerging markets have noticeably increased their reliance on foreign
financing, presumably reflecting low global interest rates. The evidence also shows a rebalancing
from bank loans towards bonds. To study these developments, we develop a dynamic open
economy model where these modes of finance are determined endogenously. The model
replicates the stylized facts following a drop in world interest rates; in particular, rebalancing
towards bonds occurs because bank credit becomes relatively more expensive, reflecting the
scarcity of bank equity. More generally, the model is suitable for studying interactions between
modes of finance and the macroeconomy.
Roberto Chang Adam Gulan
Rutgers University Monetary Policy and Research Department
Department of Economics Bank of Finland
75 Hamilton Street Snellmaninaukio
New Brunswick, NJ 08901 Helsinki, FI00101
and NBER Finland
chang@econ.rutgers.edu adam.gulan@bof.fi
Andrés Fernández
Research Department
Inter-American Development Bank
1300 New York Avenue NW
Washington DC 20577
andresf@iadb.org

1 Introduction
In recent years, the corporate sector in emerging market economies has increased its reliance
on foreign (cid:28)nancing considerably. This trend became more marked during the period of
low global interest rates following the global (cid:28)nancial crisis, and has generated a lively
debate regarding its interpretation and policy implications. An optimistic view is that the
increase in corporate liabilities is a natural response to favorable interest rates and relatively
favorable investment prospects in emerging countries. A less sanguine view is that larger
foreign liabilities are dangerous and place emerging economies in a precarious position.
Understanding this phenomenon has been complicated by the observation that it has
largely re(cid:29)ected increased bond issuance by emerging economies’ (cid:28)rms, in contrast to the
1 2
bank loans which dominated capital (cid:29)ows in the past. To illustrate, Figure 1 reproduces a
chart from Powell (2014), describing the evolution of foreign corporate liabilities in Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru, as well as an average (LAC-5). The (cid:28)gure shows a clear
acceleration in the amount of both bonds and loans owed by Latin American (cid:28)rms. It also
shows that the relative importance of bonds has increased since the start of the century
and, more emphatically, since the global crisis. For an average country in the (cid:28)gure, the
share of bonds in the stock of international corporate debt increased from 22% in 2000 to
43% in 2013. This process has taken place while, simultaneously, debt-to-output ratios have
increased in emerging economies. In 2005 debt-to-quarterly GDP for LAC-5 was about 30%,
3
while by the end of 2013 it had almost doubled, just below 60%.
Figure 2 shows that the surge of external borrowing has been accompanied by a drop in
theinterestratesfacedbyemergingeconomies. Thisdropwaspartlyrelatedtothelowglobal
1Note also that these developments have been dominated by corporate debt rather than sovereign debt,
which was prevalent in earlier periods. As shown in Caballero, FernÆndez and Park (2016), corporate
bond issuance has also increased domestically, but not as much as the one issued in international markets.
Sovereigns, on the other hand, have displayed a tendency of substituting international bond issuance with
domestic bond issuance.
2Figures and tables are gathered at the end of the paper.
3Wemeasuredebtonaresidencebasis. Stylizedfactsholdaswellwhendebtismeasuredonanationality
basis. The Online Appendix reproduces Figure 1 by scaling the amount of debt by GDP.
2

interest rates since the onset of the crisis, here measured by real U.S. bond rates. However,
since the early 2000s it was also accompanied by the low spreads that these countries are
4
charged on top of the riskless rate. Low spreads continued despite the short-lasting jump
following the panic of 2008.
Thispapershedslightontheinterpretationandimplicationsoftheseeventsbydeveloping
a stochastic dynamic equilibrium model of an open economy in which the quantities of
direct versus intermediated (cid:28)nance are determined endogenously. Our calibrated model
embeds the static, partial equilibrium model of Holmstr(cid:246)m and Tirole (1997, henceforth
HT) into an otherwise standard dynamic setting. As in HT, the production of capital goods
requires (cid:28)nance from outside investors. As we are interested in foreign borrowing by the
emerging economies, we assume in the model that this outside lending comes from abroad.
Due to moral hazard problems, only a fraction of this production can be (cid:28)nanced directly
from the outsiders, while another portion can be (cid:28)nanced only with the participation of
5
monitors or "banks". In each period, therefore, the amounts of bank loans and direct
(cid:28)nance are endogenous and depend on variables such as the price of capital goods and the
equity of capital producing (cid:28)rms and banks. The latter are determined in a dynamic general
equilibrium, incontrasttoHT.Henceourmodelallowsforastudyoftheinteractionbetween
modes of (cid:28)nance and the macroeconomy, and is of independent interest.
As a main (cid:28)nding, the model yields an intuitive economic explanation of the joint dynam-
ics of bonds, bank loans, and interest rates summarized by Figures 1 and 2. In the model, an
exogenous drop in world interest rates leads to an increase in the demand for capital goods
and a corresponding increase in their relative price. The latter raises the pro(cid:28)tability of
capital goods production; given existing corporate equity, this raises pledgeable income and
4These favorable borrowing conditions have been enjoyed not only by sovereign borrowers, as depicted
by the EMBIG spread in Figure 2 but also by non-(cid:28)nancial corporations, as measured by the CEMBI which
has also followed the dynamics of EMBIG.
5We abstract from equity issuance as a source of funding. In practice this is not far from reality, par-
ticularly for emerging market economies. Gozzi, Levine and Schmukler (2010) examine (cid:28)rm-level patterns
in international (cid:28)nancing decisions over the period 1991-2005 (cid:28)nding that debt issues in public markets are
much more important as a source of (cid:28)nance for (cid:28)rms than equity issues, with debt accounting for 80% of
the total funds raised through public markets.
3