NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE SPILLOVERS, INTERACTIONS, AND (UN)INTENDED CONSEQUENCES
OF MONETARY AND REGULATORY POLICIES
Kristin Forbes
Dennis Reinhardt
Tomasz Wieladek
Working Paper 22307
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22307
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2016
We would like to thank James Benford, Enrica Detragiache, Marco Lo Duca, Jas Ellis, Phil
Evans, Linda Goldberg, Glenn Hoggarth, Sujit Kapadia, Luc Laeven, Lyndon Nelson, Roland
Straub, and participants at the Carnegie-Rochester-NYU Conference on Public Policy, CBRT-
IMF-BIS conference on ‘Macroprudential Policy: Effectiveness and Implementation Challenges’,
at the EMG-ECB Workshop on Global Liquidity and its International Implications, the ECB
workshop on non-standard monetary policy measures, the IMF’s 16th Jacques-Polak Annual
Research Conference, the Bank of England Research Steering committee and Research Awayday
for useful comments. We thank John Lowes for excellent assistance and advice with regard to the
data. This paper was initially released as Bank of England External MPC Unit Discussion Paper
No. 44. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed in this paper are those of the
authors, and not any institutions with which they are affiliated. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22307.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Kristin Forbes, Dennis Reinhardt, and Tomasz Wieladek. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Spillovers, Interactions, and (Un)Intended Consequences of Monetary and Regulatory
Policies
Kristin Forbes, Dennis Reinhardt, and Tomasz Wieladek
NBER Working Paper No. 22307
June 2016
JEL No. G21,G28
ABSTRACT
Have bank regulatory policies and unconventional monetary policies—and any possible
interactions—been a factor behind the recent “deglobalisation” in cross-border bank lending? To
test this hypothesis, we use bank-level data from the UK—a country at the heart of the global
financial system. Our results suggest that increases in microprudential capital requirements tend
to reduce international bank lending and some forms of unconventional monetary policy can
amplify this effect. Specifically, the UK’s Funding for Lending Scheme (FLS) significantly
amplified the effects of increased capital requirements on cross-border lending. Quantitative
easing did not appear to have a similar effect. We find that this interaction between
microprudential regulations and the FLS can explain roughly 30% of the contraction in aggregate
UK cross-border bank lending between mid-2012 and end-2013, corresponding to around 10% of
the global contraction in cross-border lending. This suggests that unconventional monetary policy
designed to support domestic lending can have the unintended consequence of reducing foreign
lending.
Kristin Forbes Tomasz Wieladek
MIT Sloan School of Management 5 The North Colonnade
100 Main Street, E62-416 Canary Wharf
Cambridge, MA 02142 London E14 4BB
and NBER United Kingdom
kjforbes@mit.edu tomaszwieladek@gmail.com
Dennis Reinhardt
Bank of England,
Threadneedle Street,
London EC2R 8AH
dennis.reinhardt@bankofengland.co.uk

1. Introduction
Global financial intermediation has changed significantly since 2008. Cross-border
capital flows have contracted sharply (Figure 1), mainly due to a reduction in
international bank lending. In contrast, FDI and international portfolio exposures have
not declined by nearly as much and have bounced back since the 2008 crisis (Figure 2).
This evolution in cross-border bank lending has been described as “financial
deglobalisation” (Forbes, 2014) and “the great cross-border bank deleveraging” (Cerutti
and Claessens, 2014). It can be divided into two stages: the sharp initial contraction that
occurred during the crisis, and a more recent decline that began in 2012—what we refer
to as the “second phase of banking deglobalisation”. This most recent decline in
international lending stands in sharp contrast to the relative stability in domestic bank
lending over the same period, in both the UK and the world (Figure 3). Proposed
explanations for the initial phase of banking deglobalisation include government
intervention in the banking system (Rose and Wieladek, 2014), increased home bias
(Giannetti and Laeven, 2012), reduced demand for loans, and reduced availability of
wholesale funding for banks.1 Although a substantial literature has analysed various
effects of regulatory and unconventional monetary policy, no previous work has
examined whether these policies could be an important factor behind this contraction in
global banking.2 Also, no other work has studied the second phase of banking
deglobalisation. This paper aims to fill these gaps.
Many countries have significantly tightened bank regulations over the past few
years (such as shown in Figure 4a for UK capital requirements) in order to strengthen the
resilience of their financial systems. At the same time, many of the world’s major central
banks pursued unconventional monetary policies, such as quantitative easing (shown in
Figure 4b for the UK), and credit easing aimed at stimulating aggregate demand. While
these policies are obvious candidate explanations for the contraction in cross-border bank
1 See Cerutti and Claessens (2014) and Forbes (2014) for more detailed discussion of various potential causes.
2 Most papers examining the impact of unconventional monetary policy focus on the effects on domestic and international
financial market prices. Fratzscher, Lo Duca, and Straub (2013), Ahmed and Zlate (2013), and Koepke (2014) are some of the
few examples of papers which instead assess the impact on global capital flows, especially to emerging markets.
1

lending, there are several reasons why no other work has evaluated their effects
empirically. First, distinguishing between cross-border loan supply and demand is
difficult. Second, the temporal clustering of these different policies, in direct response to
the financial crisis in most countries, makes disentangling their individual effects
challenging using only time-series data. Finally, it is difficult (if not impossible) to obtain
the necessary data on all the relevant policies in most countries.
This paper is able to address these challenges with a unique UK dataset combined
with the policy responses of the UK over this period. The dataset includes external bank
lending by country, which we have merged with detailed regulatory data3 on
microprudential capital requirements, as well as with information on bank balance sheets
and different forms of unconventional monetary policy. The resulting bank-country-time
panel allows us to separate country-specific loan demand from supply via country-time
effects (as in Aiyar et al., 2014). The UK also actively used different regulatory and
unconventional monetary policies after the peak of the financial crisis: UK quantitative
easing was conducted from 2009-2013; micro-prudential regulatory requirements were
adjusted throughout; and the Funding for Lending Scheme (FLS), a policy designed to
stimulate domestic lending, was introduced in July 2012. Finally, the UK is an ideal case
study because UK-resident banks are at the heart of the global financial system and have
played a major role in the deglobalisation of bank flows.4 Consequently, this dataset and
the interplay of various UK policies over this time period allow us to identify and tackle
the important question of what has caused the recent contraction in international bank
lending.
Our results suggest that increases in capital requirements, and their interactions
with certain types of unconventional monetary policies, have led to a significant
reduction in international bank lending. We find that an increase in a bank’s capital
requirement of 100 basis points leads to a contraction in its external lending growth of
3 To construct a continuous series of microprudential capital requirements, it was necessary to merge data across three different
regulatory forms, as reporting requirements changed substantially over this time period.
4 UK banks provide more international loans (bank-to-bank assets) than any other country in the world, with 15% of
international interbank activity booked in the UK and the average UK bank lending to 53 countries. Cross-border UK bank
assets and liabilities both contracted by over 2% of global GDP from 2008Q4 through 2013Q4—the largest contraction in
global interbank activity corresponding to an individual country over this period.
2