NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BIAS IN OFFICIAL FISCAL FORECASTS:
CAN PRIVATE FORECASTS HELP?
Jeffrey A. Frankel
Jesse Schreger
Working Paper 22349
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22349
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2016
The authors wish to acknowledge capable research assistance from Marco Martinez del Angel;
helpful conversations with Philip Hubbard, publisher of Consensus Economics; detailed
comments from Mikkel Plagborg-Møller; and support from the Smith Richardson Foundation and
the Weatherhead Center for International Affairs. Views and findings are ours alone. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22349.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Jeffrey A. Frankel and Jesse Schreger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Bias in Official Fiscal Forecasts: Can Private Forecasts Help?
Jeffrey A. Frankel and Jesse Schreger
NBER Working Paper No. 22349
June 2016
JEL No. E62,H68
ABSTRACT
Government forecasts of GDP growth and budget balances are generally more over-optimistic
than private sector forecasts. When official forecasts are especially optimistic relative to private
forecasts ex ante, they are more likely also to be over-optimistic relative to realizations ex post.
For example, euro area governments during the period 1999-2007 assiduously and inaccurately
avoided forecasting deficit levels that would exceed the 3% Stability and Growth Pact threshold;
meanwhile private sector forecasters were not subject to this crude bias. As a result, using private
sector forecasts as an input into the government budgeting-making process would probably
reduce official forecast errors for budget deficits.
Jeffrey A. Frankel
Harvard Kennedy School
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeffrey_frankel@harvard.edu
Jesse Schreger
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jschreger@hbs.edu

Figure 1: Greek Budget Balance (Left) and Real GDP (Right)
5
0
5−
01−
51−
2000 2003 2006 2009 2012
Year
Three years ahead Two years ahead
One year ahead Actual
Notes: The left panel plots official one, two, and three year ahead budget balance forecasts, as well
as the realizations. The right panel plots official one and two year ahead official and private sector
consensus forecasts of real GDP growth, as well as the realization.
1 Introduction
Excessivepublicdebtsanddeficitsareamongthemostwidelydiscussedofmacroeconomicproblems.
Why do countries find it so hard to get their deficits under control? There are many theories, most
having to do with short horizons on the part of politicians1 and dispersion of political power.2 But
webelievethatsystematicpatternsintheerrorsthatofficialbudgetagenciesmakeintheirforecasts
alsoplayanimportantrole,particularlyforecastsofGDPgrowth,taxreceipts,andbudgetbalances.
Totakeanegregiousexample, theofficialGreekforecastin2000saidthatthefiscaldeficitwould
fall below 2% of GDP one year in the future, fall below 1% of GDP two years into the future, and
convert to a surplus three years into the future. (Figure 1). The subsequent budget deficit actually
fell into the range of 4-5%, well above the 3% of GDP ceiling required by the Maastricht criterion
and the Stability and Growth Pact. Did the Greek government then adjust its overall fiscal policies
in response to missing the targets? No, it adjusted its forecasts, predicting steady progress toward
budget balance in the future. This pattern also describes the forecasts reported by the government
in 2001, and every year for the next ten years: always overly optimistic, and the more so the longer
the horizon.
1For example, Alesina and Tabellini (1990a,b), Grilli et al. (1991), Roubini and Sachs (1989b,a), Caballero and
Yared (2010), Battaglini and Coate (2008), Song et al. (2012).
2Lane (2003). Other explanations for budget deficits abound as well. Surveys include Alesina et al. (1998) and
Persson and Tabellini (2002).
1

The same pattern extends qualitatively to most other industrialized countries. Having a fiscal
rule like the Stability and Growth Pact does not seem to help. In fact it worsens the bias toward
overoptimistic forecasting. Most euro countries, even when they ran deficits that exceeded 3% of
GDP, continued to forecast future budget deficits that would fall under that threshold, every year
until the crisis of 2010 hit, and in some cases even then.
Ourpreviousresearchstudiesforecastsofrealgrowthratesandbudgetbalancesmadebyofficial
government agencies among 24 countries.3 In general, the forecasts are found: (i) to have a positive
average bias, (ii) to be more biased in booms, (iii) to be even more biased at the 3-year horizon
than at shorter horizons. This over-optimism in official forecasts can help explain excessive budget
deficits: if rapid growth is expected, retrenchment is treated as unnecessary. Many believe that
better fiscal policy can be obtained by means of rules such as ceilings for the deficit or, better yet,
the structural deficit. But we also find: (iv) countries subject to a budget rule, in the form of
euroland’s Stability and Growth Path, make official forecasts of growth and budget deficits that are
even more biased then others.
Thequestionbecomeshowtoovercomegovernments’tendencytosatisfyfiscaltargetsbywishful
thinking rather than by action. One possibility is a rule whereby the government must use in its
fiscal planning process forecasts coming from the private sector or some other independent body
that is insulated from political pressures and the temptations of wishful thinking. (Chile instituted
suchasystemin2000. Thispresumablyexplainswhyitsbudgetforecastswerenotoverlyoptimistic
after that, even in booms.4)
When governments are overly optimistic, subsequent realized budget deficits turn out to be
larger than projected and realized surpluses are smaller. If no one used the forecasts for anything,
then these mistakes, even though systematic, would not matter much. But the forecasts of the
budget or economic agency within each government are used as the basis for fiscal planning. If
the forecast is for a strong budget, tax parameters and spending policies are likely to be eased
accordingly. Thus the excessive optimism in forecasts can help explain excessive deficits in practice.
(Returning to the case of Chile, its avoidance of overly optimistic forecasts may explain why it was
3Frankel (2011) and Frankel and Schreger (2013).
4Canadatoohasavoidedoptimismbias(andinfacthasbeentoopessimisticonaverage),perhapsbecauseittoo
usesindependentforecasts. Withtheyears2010and2011addedtothesample,severalcountriesaswellarenolonger
over-optimistic on average at the one-year horizon, though they still are at the two-year horizon
2