NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BUNCHING AT THE KINK:
IMPLICATIONS FOR SPENDING RESPONSES TO HEALTH INSURANCE CONTRACTS
Liran Einav
Amy Finkelstein
Paul Schrimpf
Working Paper 22369
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22369
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2016
Einav and Finkelstein gratefully acknowledge support from the NIA (R01 AG032449). We thank
John Friedman, Henrik Kleven, and Wojciech Kopczuk for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22369.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Paul Schrimpf. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bunching at The Kink: Implications for Spending Responses to Health Insurance Contracts
Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Paul Schrimpf
NBER Working Paper No. 22369
June 2016
JEL No. D12,G22
ABSTRACT
A large literature in empirical public finance relies on “bunching” to identify a behavioral
response to non-linear incentives and to translate this response into an economic object to be used
counterfactually. We conduct this type of analysis in the context of prescription drug insurance
for the elderly in Medicare Part D, where a kink in the individual’s budget set generates
substantial bunching in annual drug expenditure around the famous “donut hole.” We show that
different alternative economic models can match the basic bunching pattern, but have very
different quantitative implications for the counterfactual spending response to alternative
insurance contracts. These findings illustrate the importance of modeling choices in mapping a
compelling reduced form pattern into an economic object of interest.
Liran Einav Paul Schrimpf
Stanford University Vancouver School of Economics
Department of Economics University of British Columbia
579 Serra Mall 997 - 1873 East Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072 Vancouver, BC V6T1Z1
and NBER schrimpf@mail.ubc.ca
leinav@stanford.edu
Amy Finkelstein
Department of Economics, E52-442
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
afink@mit.edu

1 Introduction
Over the last decade, there has been an increased reliance in public economics on evidence that
is based on observed “bunching”around kink points in budget sets; Kleven (2016) provides an
overview of this growing literature. The key underlying idea is simple and tractable: if rational
individuals face a non-linear budget set with considerable kinks, they should bunch around the
kinks, andtheextentofbunchingshouldbeinformativeaboutrelevantelasticities(orlackthereof).
The existence of bunching or excess mass around kink points of a budget set can thus provide
compelling, visual evidence against the null hypothesis of no behavioral response of individual to
the incentives; likewise, the lack of such bunching suggests the opposite.
Many of the applications of this idea have been in the context of the behavioral response to
non-linear income tax schedules (Saez 2010; Chetty et al. 2011; Chetty, Friedman, and Saez 2013a;
Kleven and Waseem 2013; Bastani and Selin 2014; Kleven et al. 2014). But similar ideas have been
widely applied in other settings that generate non-linear budget sets, including pensions (Manoli
and Weber, forthcoming), electricity (Ito 2014), fuel economy policy (Sallee and Slemrod 2012),
mortgages (Best et al. 2015), cell phones (Grubb 2015; Grubb and Osborne 2015), broadband
(Nevo, Turner, and Williams 2016), taxes on home sales (Kopczuk and Monroe 2015; Best and
Kleven 2016), healthcare procurement (Bajari et al. 2013), and –the subject of this current paper
–health insurance contracts (Abaluck, Gruber, and Swanson 2015; Dalton, Gowrisankaran, and
Town 2015; Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf 2015).
A likely key factor behind this recent popularity of bunching estimates is the seminal contri-
bution of Saez (2010), which illustrates how one may convert an observed bunching pattern to an
economic object of interest: a “structural”behavioral elasticity parameter. Using data on individ-
uals’annual earning, which bunch around concave kinks in the income tax schedule, Saez used a
stylized, static, frictionless model of labor supply to provide a simple, transparent, and easy-to-
implement mapping from the observed bunching to an estimate of the elasticity of labor supply
(or earning) with respect to the marginal tax rate. This allows one to take the compelling visual
evidence of bunching and move beyond merely rejecting the null of non-behavioral response to esti-
mating a quantitative economic object of interest that can be used to predict behavioral responses
to counterfactual scenarios. Not surprisingly, this compelling and tractable idea has been quite
in‡uential, and has been frequently used to translate various bunching estimates into “structural”
elasticities (Chetty et al. 2011; Kleven et al. 2011; Kleven and Waseem 2013; Bastani and Selin
2014).
TheSaez(2010)approachisveryappealing. Itistransparentandeasytoimplement. Ofcourse,
the simplicity comes at the cost of potentially abstracting from a host of real-world features that
may be important in a particular context. An alternative to this approach would be to develop a
more complete model of a given context, which includes dynamics, uncertainty, and other relevant
frictions. Manoli and Weber (forthcoming) provide such a model in the context of labor supply,
and our earlier work (Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf 2015) provides another example in the
context of demand for prescription drugs. As the Saez approach is so much simpler and easier to
1

implement, it seems useful to ask how well of an approximation to the main object of interest, a
simpler, Saez-style approach can provide. Naturally, the reasonableness of the approximation will
depend on the speci…c context.
This is precisely the goal of the current paper, where we explore this question in the context of
demand for prescription drugs under Medicare Part D, the public prescription drug insurance pro-
gram for elderly and disabled individuals in the United States. Our substantive question concerns
the spending (or “moral hazard”) e¤ects of alternative insurance contracts. This is a topic that has
attracted considerable attention both for health insurance contracts in general, and more recently
in our speci…c Part D context.
We begin in Section 2 by describing the setting and the data. An important feature of Medicare
PartDcoverageisthedonutholeinthebasicbene…tdesign, whichgeneratesalarge, discontinuous
increase in the marginal price. Consequently, individuals’annual drug expenditures bunch around
this kink, making it a natural context to explore the implication of di¤erent bunching estimates.
In Section 3 we present and estimate two di¤erent models of prescription drug purchasing
behavior. The …rst is our adaptation of the static, frictionless Saez (2010) model to the Medicare
Part D context; we refer to it hereafter as a Saez-style model and the resultant elasticities as
Saez-based elasticities. The second is the dynamic model we developed in our earlier work (Einav,
Finkelstein, and Schrimpf 2015); we refer to it hereafter as the dynamic model and the resultant
elasticities as the dynamics-based elasticities. Both models match the basic bunching pattern;
however, the implied elasticity from the dynamic model is an order of magnitude greater than the
Saez-based elasticity estimate. This is the key result of the paper.
There are multiple di¤erences between the two, non-nested settings. The Saez-style framework
assumes continuous spending decisions (i.e. no lumpiness in drug purchases), perfect foresight
of future health shocks (i.e. no uncertainty), and no discounting of the future. None of these
assumptions are made in the dynamic model. It is interesting to explore which features of the
model are most important for the di¤erences in implied elasticities, which is the focus of Section 4.
There we develop two modi…cations of the dynamic model, which bring it closer to the Saez-style
framework. Wethenre-estimateeachoftheseversionsofthemodelusingthesamedata. Ourmain
…ndingisthatastatic, perfectforesightversionofthefulldynamicmodel–whichcomesquiteclose
totheSaez-stylemodelexceptthatitallowsforlumpinessinspendingdecisions–resultsinimplied
elasticities that are about half way between the Saez-based estimates and the dynamics-based ones.
Interestingly, once we allow for lumpiness, allowing for uncertainty essentially allows us to recover
the magnitude of the elasticity implied by the full dynamic model; as it turns out, allowing for
discounting is not quantitatively important.
We emphasize that the results we present in this paper should be viewed as illustrative. They
are speci…c to our particular (Medicare Part D) context, as well as to the modeling choices we
have made. Nonetheless, they highlight what we believe to be an important and broader point:
in-sample bunching patterns may be rationalized by a host of modeling assumptions, and these
assumptions can, at least in some contexts, have very di¤erent quantitative implications for the
out-of-sample objects of interest. Kleven (2016) emphasizes a similar point in his review article;
2