NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHO'S THE BOSS? THE EFFECT OF STRONG LEADERSHIP ON EMPLOYEE
TURNOVER
Susan Payne Carter
Whitney Dudley
David S. Lyle
John Z. Smith
Working Paper 22383
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22383
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2016, Revised March 2017
Previously circulated as “The Effects of Mentor Quality, Exposure, and Type on Junior Officer
Retention in the United States Army.” We thank Dean Dudley, William Skimmyhorn, and
seminar participants at the Western Economics Association, the Association for Public Policy
Analysis and Management, the Office of Economic and Manpower Analysis, and the U.S.
Military Academy. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not reflect the
position of the United States Military Academy, the Department of the Army, the Department of
Defense, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Susan Payne Carter, Whitney Dudley, David S. Lyle, and John Z. Smith. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Who's the Boss? The Effect of Strong Leadership on Employee Turnover
Susan Payne Carter, Whitney Dudley, David S. Lyle, and John Z. Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 22383
July 2016, Revised March 2017
JEL No. J01,J08,J24,J53,J63
ABSTRACT
Despite the importance placed on supervision in the workplace, little is known about the effects
of a boss’ leadership quality on labor market outcomes such as employee job retention. Using
plausibly exogenous assignment of junior officers to bosses in the U.S. Army, we find positive
retention effects for those assigned to immediate and senior bosses who are good leaders. These
effects are strongest for officers with high SAT scores. Junior officers who share the same home
geographic region, high SAT, and undergraduate institution as their bosses who also have strong
leadership qualities retain at the highest rates.
Susan Payne Carter David S. Lyle
United States Military Academy Department of Social Sciences
Department of Social Sciences United States Military Academy
607 Cullum Road West Point, NY 10996
West Point, NY 10996 and NBER
susan.carter@usma.edu david.lyle@usma.edu
Whitney Dudley John Z. Smith
United States Army, SOCOM Department of Social Sciences
Ft. Bragg, NC 607 Cullum Road
whitney.dudley.ctr@socom.mil United States Military Academy
West Point, NY 10996
John.Smith2@usma.edu

1.Introduction
Employee turnover costs are a significant challenge for many firms.1
Studies show that employee turnover can cost between twenty and seventy-five
percent of salary in terms of recruiting, training, and lost productivity.2 In
response to these high costs, firms often design compensation structures to
encourage longer employee tenure. Firms also make investments in the work
environment and offer nonpecuniary benefits, such as free lunches or access to
fitness rooms, to enhance employee work experience. While firms continue to
experiment with innovative ways to improve employee retention, perhaps one of
the most enduring aspects of a job that impacts worker satisfaction is the
relationship that workers have with their boss. What often differentiates a good
boss from a bad one is leadership ability. From motivating and rewarding effort,
organizing capital and labor, establishing the work pace, serving as a role model
for employees, and setting the overall tone of an organization’s work
environment, a boss’ leadership ability is apt to impact how employees view their
job.
Using rich administrative data from the U.S. Army, we explore how the
leadership ability of a boss – both immediate and more senior – impacts junior
officer retention. The U.S. Army is an ideal setting to study the impact of
leadership ability because of the exogenous nature of officer assignments in the
Army, the emphasis and clear distinction of who the Army considers to have the
1 One study found that turnover costs represented 12%-40% of pre-tax income
(Driving the Bottom Line, 2006).
2 Boushey and Glynn (2012) estimate that the cost of replacing an employee
whose annual salary is less than $75,000 is roughly 20 percent of annual pay. The
Society of Human Resource Managers offers a higher replacement cost heuristic
for salaried employees: 50 to 75 percent of annual pay (Merhar, 2016).
https://www.zanebenefits.com/blog/bid/312123/employee-retention-the-real-cost-
of-losing-an-employee.
3

highest leadership ability, and the fact that wages are set in the Army by rank and
tenure as opposed to ability.3 The granularity of our data allows us to further
investigate the impact of leadership effects when employees and bosses share the
same race, SAT, home of record, or attendance at the same undergraduate
institution.
In part, our paper contributes to the managerial skills literature. While
most papers have focused on the effects of managers on firm productivity (see for
examples Bloom et al., 2013, Bertrand and Schoar, 2003, and Bloom and Van
Reenen, 2007),4 a few focus on the effects of manager quality on employees.
Bender et al. (2016) find that better managed firms (using an index that measures
advanced management practices in place) in Germany attract higher quality
employees, which are the type of employees that are less likely to be fired or laid
off. Hoffman and Tadelis (2016) use data from a technology and service firm and
find that manager quality is significantly correlated with reductions in employee
turnover, employee promotions, and employee salary increases for both low and
high skilled employees.
3 We define a good leader as one who received an early promotion to the rank of
major. For both the junior and senior leaders in our study, this early promotion
occurred outside of the time frame of the employee-employer relationships we
study. Early promotion to major is highly selective; typically less than 10 percent
of an officer cohort is promoted early.
4 Bloom et al. (2013) perform a randomized control trial at Indian Textile firms
where they give five months of management consulting to the treatment firms and
only once moth of training to the control firms, and they find increases in
productivity of 17%. Bertrand and Schoar (2003) follow the top five paid
employees in large publically traded firms in the U.S. across time and different
companies. They find that manager fixed effects have important explanatory
power on firm decisions. Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) collect information on
management practices in firms in the United States, the United Kingdom, France,
and Germany using a new survey instrument. Their instrument is strongly
correlated with multiple measures of firm success, including profitability,
productivity, etc.
4