NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SOVEREIGN RISK AND BANK LENDING:
EVIDENCE FROM 1999 TURKISH EARTHQUAKE
Yusuf Soner Baskaya
Bryan Hardy
Ṣebnem Kalemli-Özcan
Vivian Yue
Working Paper 22335
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22335
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2016, Revised March 2023
This paper previously circulated under the title, "Are Government Bonds Bad for Banks?
Evidence from a Rare Fiscal Shock". We thank Daron Acemoglu, Mark Aguiar, Koray Alper,
Cristina Arellano, Erdem Basci, Javier Bianchi, V.V. Chari, Stijn Claessens, Giancarlo Corsetti,
Raquel Fernandez, Jose Louis De-Peydro, Linda Goldberg, Anne Krueger, Alberto Martin, Atif
Mian, Pablo Ottonello, Radek Paluszynski, Richard Portes, Ken Rogoff, Larry Wall, and the
participants at various conferences for their comments. The views expressed in this paper do not
necessarily represent those of the institutions that the authors are affiliated with, nor of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Yusuf Soner Baskaya, Bryan Hardy, Ṣebnem Kalemli-Özcan, and Vivian Yue. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Sovereign Risk and Bank Lending: Evidence from 1999 Turkish Earthquake
Yusuf Soner Baskaya, Bryan Hardy, Ṣebnem Kalemli-Özcan, and Vivian Yue
NBER Working Paper No. 22335
June 2016, Revised March 2023
JEL No. E0,F0,G0,G01,G21
ABSTRACT
We use an exogenous fiscal shock to identify the transmission of government risk to bank lending
due to banks holding government bonds. We illustrate with a theoretical model that for banks
with higher exposure to government bonds, a higher sovereign default risk implies lower bank net
worth and less lending. Our empirical estimates confirm the model’s predictions. The exogenous
change in sovereign default risk of Turkish government debt as a result of the 1999 earthquake
impacts banks whose balance sheets were exposed more to government bonds. The resulting
lower bank net worth translates into lower credit supply. We rule out alternative explanations.
Our estimates suggest this channel can explain half of the decline in bank lending following the
earthquake. This underlines the importance of the bank balance-sheet channel in transmitting a
higher sovereign default risk to reduced real economic activity.
Yusuf Soner Baskaya Ṣebnem Kalemli-Özcan
University of Glasgow Department of Economics
soner.baskaya@gmail.com University of Maryland
Tydings Hall 4118D
Bryan Hardy College Park, MD 20742-7211
Bank for International Settlements and CEPR
Centralbahnplatz 2 and also NBER
4051 Basel kalemli@econ.umd.edu
Switzerland
bryan.hardy@bis.org Vivian Yue
Economics Department Emory
University
602 Fishburne Drive
Atlanta, GA 30322
and NBER
vivianyue1@gmail.com

I Introduction
Financial institutions play a pivotal role in supplying credit both to real sector and sovereign
governments. Lending to their own sovereigns increases the exposure of domestic financial
institutions tosovereign risk.1 An increasein sovereignrisk constitutes a directbalance sheet
shock to the banks that hold sovereign debt (Gennaioli, Martin, and Rossi (2014), Bocola
(2016), Arellano, Bai, and Bocola (2020), Morelli, Ottonello, and Perez (2022)). The decline
in asset value reduces bank net worth, which can then constrain bank borrowing and lending.
Higher sovereign risk can also affect banks’ financial performance by reducing the collateral
value of the sovereign bonds and thereby banks’ ability to secure funding. These concerns
played out most notably in the 2012 Eurozone crisis. However, the surge in government
borrowing across both advanced and emerging markets, spurred by the Covid-19 crisis, has
brought them back to the fore (Hardy and Zhu (2023)).
Nevertheless, quantifying the effect of sovereign risk on bank balance sheets and credit
provision is a challenging task. In particular, it is difficult to identify a causal relationship
between sovereign risk and banking sector distress from bank-sovereign doom loop episodes,
underlined by the well-known facts of the coincidence of sovereign crises and banking crises
(Reinhart and Rogoff (2009)). First, sovereign risk can increase endogenously due to weak
banks. In the presence of financial crises, banks under financial stress face insolvency risk,
which can result in the need for a government bailout. As governments recapitalize banks to
backstopthefinancialsystem,functioningasalenderoflastresort, thebailoutsincreasetheir
fiscal burden and so can increase sovereign risk (Acharya, Drechsler, and Schnabl (2014)).
Second, bank balance sheet shocks are mostly anticipated and unfold simultaneously with
the sovereign debt crisis. For example, banks can actively manage their balance sheets by
buying/selling government bonds in response to changes in sovereign risk. Furthermore, the
value of the existing government bonds may not change on the bank balance sheet even
when sovereign ratings go down, if banks are recording all assets at book value (e.g. held-
1Sovereign governments mostly borrow from domestic residents (Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), Tomz and
Wright (2013), Aguiar and Amador (2014), and Fang, Hardy, and Lewis (2022)).
2

to-maturity securities in the banking book). In this case, the shock to bank balance sheets
may not be observed in the data. A bank will change its behavior in terms of private sector
lending given the lower market value of bonds, but the change in the value of the bonds may
not be observed on the balance sheet. In this case, one can erroneously attribute the change
in bank lending to other factors and/or conclude that there is no effect of increased sovereign
risk on lending through bank balance sheets. Third, if distress in the banking sector and/or
increased sovereign risk lead to a recession and increased uncertainty, the demand for credit
by non-financial private sector will go down. Therefore, in the absence of an exogenous
shift in credit supply conditions while keeping demand constant, the variations in the credit
provision can simply reflect the recessionary environment potentially affecting loan demand
rather than a deterioration in bank balance sheets affecting credit supply. Last but not
least, lack of appropriate micro data and therefore reliance on macro data can complicate
disentangling factors affecting loan demand from loan supply.
We solve this identification problem by focusing on a unique natural experiment and
detailed bank-level data. We first provide an analytical framework to identify the bank
balance sheet channel. In particular, based on Morelli et al. (2022), we provide a simple
model where banks face different changes in their funding constraint based on their differ-
ent holdings of government bonds: as the economy experiences an unexpected increase in
sovereign risk, the net worth of banks holding government debt is impacted, constraining
their lending. We specify the alternative competing channels through which the spillover
of an exogenous shock may impact the bank lending (e.g. demand, risky firms, financial
repression). The model thus guides the subsequent empirical analysis to disentangle these
channels. Second, we utilize the 1999 Marmara Earthquake as an unanticipated exogenous
fiscal shock that elevated Turkey’s sovereign risk. The unanticipated nature of the shock
makes it impossible for banks to accumulate or run down government debt in expectation of
sovereign risk. Hence, this helps us to rule out moral hazard and/or risk shifting scenarios
due to sovereign default expectations. Third, we use an administrative portfolio data for the
universe of banks in Turkey between 1997–2002 to analyse how banks’ exposure to sovereign
3