NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INFORMATION SPILLOVERS IN SOVEREIGN DEBT MARKETS
Harold Cole
Daniel Neuhann
Guillermo Ordoñez
Working Paper 22330
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22330
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2016, Revised March 2021
This paper previously circulated under the title ”Debt Crises: For Whom the Bell Tolls.” We
thank Vladimir Asriyan, Marco Bassetto, Anmol Bhandari, Patrick Kehoe, Monika Piazzesi, Alex
Vardoulakis, Laura Veldkamp, Venky Venkateswaran and seminar participants at Arizona State,
Banco Central de Chile, Cambridge, Carlson School at Minnesota, Cornell, Harvard, Johns
Hopkins, McGill, NYU, Penn State, Richmond Fed, Stanford, UCL, Wharton, Yale, the 2015
NBER Conference on “MacroeconomicsWithin and Across Borders”, the 2015 Barcelona GSE
Summer Forum, the 2015 Conference for Junior Macroeconomists at the EIEF in Rome, the 2015
QED Frontier of Macroeconomics Conference, and the 2019 UVA Symposium on Financial
Economics for useful comments. Cole and˛Ordonez received support fromt he NSF through grant
1851707. The usual waiver of liability applies. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Harold Cole, Daniel Neuhann, and Guillermo Ordoñez. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Information Spillovers in Sovereign Debt Markets
Harold Cole, Daniel Neuhann, and Guillermo Ordoñez
NBER Working Paper No. 22330
June 2016, Revised March 2021
JEL No. F34,F42,G15,H63
ABSTRACT
We develop a theory of information spillovers in primary sovereign bond markets where
governments raise funds from a common pool of competitive investors who may acquire
information about default risk and later trade in secondary markets. Strategic complementarities
in information acquisition lead to the co-existence of an informed regime with high yields and
high volatility, and a Pareto-dominant uninformed regime with low yields and low volatility.
Small shocks to default risk in a single country may trigger information acquisition, retrenchment
of capital flows, and sharp yield increases within and across countries. Competitive secondary
markets strengthen information acquisition incentives, raise primary market yields, and amplify
spillovers.
Harold Cole Guillermo Ordoñez
Economics Department University of Pennsylvania
University of Pennsylvania Department of Economics
3718 Locust Walk PCPSE - Room 505
160 McNeil Building 133 South 36th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104 Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER and NBER
colehl@sas.upenn.edu ordonez@econ.upenn.edu
Daniel Neuhann
Department of Finance CBA 6.278
McCombs School of Business
2110 Speedway, Stop B6600
Austin, TX 78712
daniel.neuhann@mccombs.utexas.edu

1 Introduction
Two empirical regularities in sovereign bond markets have received widespread at-
tention. The first is that increases in sovereign yields (particularly during sovereign
debtcrises)oftenspillovertootherseeminglyunrelatedcountries. Examplesinclude
theRussiancrisisof 1998,theMexicancrisisof1994, theLatinAmericancrisesofthe
1980s, and the recent Eurozone crisis. The second is that these movements typically
lead to a retrenchment of capital flows and increased market segmentation that fur-
ther raises yields by reducing cross-country diversification (see, for example, Milesi-
Ferretti et al. (2011) and Lane (2012)). We develop a new heterogeneous information
modelofsovereigndebtmarketsthatisconsistentwiththisevidence.
We differ from the existing macroeconomic literature in three ways. First, since
government revenues are determined when selling new bonds, we focus on primary
ratherthansecondarymarketprices.1 Second,westudytheroleofasymmetricinfor-
mation in determining bond yields and yield volatility. This allows us to establish a
new information-based channel of yield shocks and spillovers that leads to the exis-
tenceofmultipleequilibriawithinacountry,butisunrelatedtorollovercrises. Third,
weshowhowtheinteractionbetweenprimaryandsecondarymarketsreinforcesthe
link between information and bond yields. Perhaps contrary to conventional wis-
dom,secondarymarketsraisethevalueofacquiringinformationinprimarymarkets,
increasingyieldsandyieldvolatility.
We study a model in which two countries run simultaneous auctions in primary
marketstoraiseagivenamountofrevenuebysellingbondstoex-anteidenticalrisk-
averse investors, who may participate in both countries’ auctions and later trade in
secondary markets.2 The only other asset available to investors is a risk-free invest-
ment with zero net return. To focus on demand determinants of bond yields, we
modeldefaultsasmechanicallydeterminedbyanexogenousrealizationofacountry-
specific state. The state can be good (low default probability) or bad (high default
probability). There are no fundamental links between countries; default risk is inde-
1Manymodelslinkcountryfundamentalstosecondarymarketspreads. SeeforexampleReinhart,
Rogoff, and Savastano (2003), Tomz and Wright (2007), Broner, Martin, and Ventura (2010), Tomz
andWright(2013)andAguiarandAmador(2014)). Foraquantitativeliteraturethataccountsforthe
effectofdefaultonsovereignspreadsseeAguiarandGopinath(2006),Arellano(2008),Chatterjeeand
Eyigungor(2012),HatchondoandMartinez(2009). Aguiaretal.(2016)surveysthisliterature.
2Lizarazo(2013)andBroner,Lorenzoni,andSchmukler(2013)discusstheimportanceofriskaver-
sionforexplainingthebehaviorofsovereignspreads.
1

pendentlydistributedacrosscountries.
Priortoparticipatinginprimarymarkets,investorscanexertcostlyefforttolearn
about the state of the world in one or both countries. This decision determines an in-
vestor’s type as either informed or uninformed about the probability of default, such
that informed investors can adjust their bid upon learning this information. While
informationacquisitioncouldpertaintolearningaboutmacroeconomicperformance
or financial indicators, we view it primarily as relating to soft information such as
internal negotiations about government policy, the formation of political coalitions,
debt renegotiation strategies with large external creditors or the outcomes of perti-
nent court cases.3 Given this interpretation, our analysis applies primarily to volatile
emergingmarketeconomiesandtheEurozoneperiphery.4
We model primary markets as multi-unit discriminatory-price auctions, the pre-
dominant protocol used by these economies to sell bonds.5 Under this format, in-
vestors submit multiple sealed bids consisting of a price and a commitment to buy
a certain number of bonds at that price. The government orders bids in descend-
ing order of prices and executes bids at the bid price until it raises the required rev-
enue. This leads to a lowest-accepted marginal price, with all bids at prices above the
marginal price also accepted. Since there are many bidders, we assume individual
investorstakethesetofmarginalpricesasgiven. Thisprice-takingassumptionleads
to a tractable setting for studying endogenous information acquisition in primary
sovereigndebtmarkets.
Foranypossiblemarginalprice,informedinvestorsbidmoreaggressivelyupon
goodnewsandmoreconservativelyafterbadnews. Hencethepresenceofinformed
investors leads to price dispersion that creates a form of the winner’s curse for the
remaining uninformed investors: any bid at the high price associated with the good
state is also accepted when the state is bad. This leads to a tradeoff for the unin-
formed between capturing infra-marginal rents in the good state and overpaying in
thebadstate. Thevalueofinformation,measuredasthedifferenceinexpectedutility
3ThecomplexdebtrestructuringprocessofArgentina’sdefaultedbondsin2001,whichincludeda
2005restructuring,repaymentofobligationstotheIMF,aseconddebtswapin2010,a2014“selective
default”withholdouts,etc.,provideavividillustrationoftheintricaciesofinformationwemodeland
theimplicationsfornewdebtissuance.
4InCole,Neuhann,andOrdon˜ez(2020)weprovideevidenceontherelevanceofinformationfric-
tionsandthenatureofinformationusingMexicanCetesauctions.
5Brenner, Galai, and Sade (2009) find that the majority of their sample of 83 countries, including
83%ofOECDcountriesandmanycountriesthathaveexperiencedsovereigndefaultepisodesinthe
past,sellbondsusingdiscriminatoryprice(payyourbid)auctions.
2