NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ANALYST PROMOTIONS WITHIN CREDIT RATING AGENCIES:
ACCURACY OR BIAS?
Darren J. Kisgen
Matthew Osborn
Jonathan Reuter
Working Paper 22477
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22477
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016, Revised August 2017
We thank Ramin Baghai (discussant), Nicole Boyson, Thomas Chemmanur, Jesse Cornaggia
(discussant), Matti Keloharju, Jeffrey Pontiff, Vikram Nanda (discussant), Philip Strahan, brown
bag participants at Boston College and Harvard, seminar participants at Rice University,
University of Kansas, and University of Virginia, and conference participants at The Economics
of Credit Rating Agencies, Credit Ratings and Information Intermediaries Conference (2015),
Colorado Finance Summit (2015), Northeastern University Finance Conference (2016), and
University of Connecticut Risk Management Conference (2016) for helpful questions and
comments. Before collecting data on analyst career paths from LinkedIn.com, we submitted a
proposal to Boston College's Institutional Review Board (IRB). We were granted an exemption
from Boston College IRB review in accordance with 45 CFR 46.101 (b) 4. Our IRB Protocol
Number is 16.192.01e. The views expressed in this article are solely those of the authors, who are
responsible for the content, and do not necessarily represent the views of our employers. Any
remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Darren J. Kisgen, Matthew Osborn, and Jonathan Reuter. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Analyst Promotions within Credit Rating Agencies: Accuracy or Bias?
Darren J. Kisgen, Matthew Osborn, and Jonathan Reuter
NBER Working Paper No. 22477
August 2016, Revised August 2017
JEL No. G14,G24,G28
ABSTRACT
We examine whether credit rating agencies reward accurate or biased analysts. Using data
collected from Moody’s corporate debt credit reports, we find that Moody’s is more likely to
promote analysts who are accurate, but less likely to promote analysts who downgrade frequently.
Combined, analysts who are accurate but not overly negative are approximately twice as likely to
get promoted. Further, analysts whose rating changes are more informative to the market are
more likely to get promoted, unless their ratings changes cause large negative market reactions.
Moody’s balances a desire for accuracy with a desire to cater to its corporate clients.
Darren J. Kisgen Jonathan Reuter
Boston College Carroll School of Management
Fulton Hall, Finance Department Boston College
140 Commonwealth Av. 224B Fulton Hall
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467 140 Commonwealth Avenue
Kisgen@bc.edu Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
Matthew Osborn reuterj@bc.edu
3409 Wilson Blvd, Unit 611
Arlington, VA 22201
m.g.osborn@gmail.com

I. Introduction
While credit ratings play an important role in bond markets and institutional investing,
their objectivity has been under scrutiny for years.1 Corporate bond ratings provide a summary
assessment of a firm’s credit quality that can be used by investors and regulators to assess risk.
However, the structure of the industry provides the potential for conflicts of interest, not least
because issuers of bonds typically pay rating agencies for the ratings on their bonds. While much
research has focused on the quality of corporate and mortgage backed security ratings (e.g., Ash-
craft, Goldsmith-Pinkham, and Vickery (2010); Becker and Milbourn (2011); Griffin and Tang
(2012)), as yet little research has focused on the employees of credit rating agencies.2 In this pa-
per, we infer Moody’s preference for accurate versus biased ratings from the internal labor mar-
ket outcomes of its analysts. Specifically, we combine data on analyst promotions and departures
between 2002 and 2011 with analyst-level measures of ratings accuracy and bias and then ex-
plore how our measures correlate with subsequent career outcomes. Doing so allows us to shed
new light on the objective function of a major credit rating agency.
We collect data on Moody’s analysts names and ranks from over 40,000 “announcement”
and “ratings action” reports on corporate debt. We focus on analysts who rate corporate bonds
for two reasons. First, with over $8.5 trillion in outstanding U.S. corporate debt, this market
segment is important to investors and regulators.3 Second, and most importantly, corporate bond
ratings are the setting in which we might expect to find the strongest preference for accuracy
from credit ratings agencies, because the incentive to reward accurate ratings are arguably
1 See, for example, Cornaggia, Cornaggia, and Xia (2016) and Behr, Kisgen, and Taillard (2016).
2 One notable exception is Fracassi, Petry and Tate (2016). In their paper, they identify credit rating ana-
lyst fixed effects and find that these effects are important for bond yields and corporate policy. We focus
instead on linking rating characteristics to analyst promotions and departures.
3 At the end of 2016, SIFMA valued outstanding corporate debt at $8.5 trillion, outstanding mortgage re-
lated debt at $8.9 trillion, and outstanding treasury debt at $13.9 trillion.
2

stronger for corporate bonds than for mortgage backed securities (e.g., Frenkel (2015)). Our final
sample includes 177 Moody’s analysts covering 1,843 firms. The lowest of the five analyst ranks
is Analyst and the highest is Managing Director. We observe 102 promotions (increases in ana-
lyst rank between years t-1 and t) across 786 analyst years. Because we recognize that not all de-
partures reflect forced exits, we collect data from LinkedIn.com on the career paths of the 75 an-
alysts who stop authoring corporate credit reports during our sample period. We find 14 rotations
into other divisions of Moody’s and 16 employer changes that plausibly reflect external promo-
tions, leaving us with 45 departures that plausibly reflect an unfavorable assessment of the ana-
lyst’s ratings by Moody’s.
To determine the role that accuracy plays in the 102 promotions and 45 departures, we
construct three distinct measures of accurate ratings, each with its own advantages and disad-
vantages. Using three measures increases the likelihood of detecting any underlying preference
of Moody’s for accurate ratings. To increase precision and reduce measurement error, our pre-
ferred specifications combine the (binary) accuracy measures into an “Accuracy Index.”
Our first measure of accuracy, “Stock Accurate,” is based on the idea that more informa-
tive rating initiations and revisions should generate larger stock price reactions. We find that ana-
lysts whose rating initiations and revisions are associated with above-median stock price reac-
tions in year t-1 (relative to those of other Moody’s analysts, excluding earnings announcements,
and adjusting for stock-level idiosyncratic volatility) are significantly more likely to be promoted
and significantly less likely to depart in year t. While this finding is consistent with Moody’s
valuing accuracy, we recognize that Stock Accurate may also proxy for an analyst’s external
reputation, which may not perfectly correlate with accuracy. Our second measure of accuracy is
based on whether the Moody’s analyst is a ratings “leader” relative to his counterpart at S&P.
3