NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE FED AND LEHMAN BROTHERS:
INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY
Laurence Ball
Working Paper 22410
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22410
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2016
I am grateful for comments and suggestions from Markham Ball, Jacob Goldfield, Joanne Im,
David Romer, Lawrence Summers, and Johns Hopkins colleagues, and for excellent research
assistance from Edmund Crawley. All opinions are strictly my own. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Laurence Ball. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Fed and Lehman Brothers: Introduction and Summary
Laurence Ball
NBER Working Paper No. 22410
July 2016
JEL No. E52,E58,E65
ABSTRACT
Why did the Federal Reserve let Lehman Brothers fail? Fed officials say they lacked the legal
authority to rescue the firm, because it did not have adequate collateral to borrow the cash it
needed. This paper summarizes a monograph that disputes officials’ claims (Ball, 2016). These
claims are incorrect in two senses: a perceived lack of legal authority was not why the Fed did not
rescue Lehman; and the Fed did in fact have the authority for a rescue.
Laurence Ball
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
lball@jhu.edu
A supplemental file is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22410

1. INTRODUCTION
On Monday, September 15, 2008, at 1:45 AM, Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. filed a
bankruptcy petition in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York.
This action was the most dramatic event of the financial crisis of 2007-2009, and many economists
believe it greatly worsened the crisis and the Great Recession that followed.
Why did Lehman Brothers fail? At one level, the answer is clear. Lehman suffered large losses
on real estate investments in 2007-2008, which threatened its solvency. Other financial institutions
lost confidence in Lehman, precipitating a liquidity crisis: the firm could not roll over short-term
funding that supported illiquid assets. Lehman declared bankruptcy in the early hours of September
15 because it did not have enough cash to open for business that morning.
Yet one part of the story is less clear. Lehman was the only large financial institution to file for
bankruptcy during the financial crisis. Others, such as Bear Stearns and AIG, also experienced
liquidity crises and surely would have gone bankrupt if not for emergency loans from the Federal
Reserve. Why didn’t the Fed make another loan to rescue Lehman?
This question is controversial among students of the financial crisis. Some say that Fed officials
bowed to political opposition to a “bailout” of Lehman. Others say that policymakers were
concerned about moral hazard: they feared that rescuing Lehman would encourage excessive risk-
taking by other firms. Yet another factor, according to many, is that policymakers underestimated
the damage that Lehman’s bankruptcy would do to the financial system and economy.
Yet Fed officials insist that none of these views is correct. The people in charge in 2008, from
Ben Bernanke on down, have said repeatedly that they wanted to save Lehman, but could not do so
because they lacked the legal authority. When the Fed lends to a financial institution, the Federal
Reserve Act requires “satisfactory” collateral to protect the Fed if the borrower defaults. In
1

Lehman’s case, according to Bernanke (Jackson Hole, 2009):
[T]he company’s available collateral fell well short of the amount needed to secure a Federal
Reserve loan of sufficient size to meet its funding needs. As the Federal Reserve cannot make an
unsecured loan... the firm’s failure was, unfortunately, unavoidable.
According to Bernanke (FCIC testimony, 2010):
[T]he only way we could have saved Lehman would have been by breaking the law, and I’m not
sure I’m willing to accept those consequences for the Federal Reserve and for our systems of laws.
I just don’t think that would be appropriate.
In his 2015 memoirs (p. 288), Bernanke reiterates that Lehman did not have “sufficient collateral
to back a loan of the size needed to prevent its collapse.”
This paper seeks to set the record straight on why the Fed did not rescue Lehman Brothers. I
conclude that the explanation offered by Fed officials is incorrect, in two senses: a perceived lack
of legal authority was not the reason for the Fed’s inaction; and the Fed did in fact have the authority
to rescue Lehman. I base these broad conclusions on the following findings:
C There is a substantial record of policymakers’ deliberations before the bankruptcy, and it
contains no evidence that they examined the adequacy of Lehman’s collateral, or that legal barriers
deterred them from assisting the firm.
C Arguments about legal authority made by policymakers since the bankruptcy are unpersuasive.
These arguments involve flawed interpretations of economic and legal concepts, and factual claims
that do not appear to be accurate.
C From a de novo examination of Lehman’s finances, it is clear that the firm had ample
collateral for a loan to meet its liquidity needs. Such a loan could have prevented a disorderly
bankruptcy, with negligible risk to the Fed.
C More specifically, Lehman probably could have survived by borrowing from the Fed’s
Primary Dealer Credit Facility on the terms offered to other investment banks. Fed officials
2