NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY DOES IDIOSYNCRATIC RISK INCREASE WITH MARKET RISK?
Söhnke M. Bartram
Gregory Brown
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 22492
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22492
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016
We thank Laura Veldkamp for providing uncertainty index data. The paper has been improved by
thoughtful comments from Francesco Franzoni, Andrei Gonçalves, Luigi Guiso, Camelia
Kuhnen, Jacob Sagi, Andrei Salem, Sheridan Titman and workshop participants at ANU, Bank of
Italy, EIEF, Frankfurt School of Finance and Management, IWH, Lancaster University, Queens
University Belfast, University of Basel, University of North Carolina, University of Reading and
University of Surrey. The authors acknowledge financial support from the British Academy/
Leverhulme Trust, Center for Financial Studies and Inquire Europe. Bartram gratefully
acknowledges the warm hospitality of the UCLA Anderson School of Management, London
Business School, CFS House of Finance, and EIEF during visits to these institutions. William
Waller provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22492.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Söhnke M. Bartram, Gregory Brown, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Why Does Idiosyncratic Risk Increase with Market Risk?
Söhnke M. Bartram, Gregory Brown, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 22492
August 2016
JEL No. G10,G11,G12
ABSTRACT
From 1963 through 2015, idiosyncratic risk (IR) is high when market risk (MR) is high. We show
that the positive relation between IR and MR is highly stable through time and is robust across
exchanges, firm size, liquidity, and market-to-book groupings. Though stock liquidity affects the
strength of the relation, the relation is strong for the most liquid stocks. The relation has roots in
fundamentals as higher market risk predicts greater idiosyncratic earnings volatility and as firm
characteristics related to the ability of firms to adjust to higher uncertainty help explain the
strength of the relation. Consistent with the view that growth options provide a hedge against
macroeconomic uncertainty, we find evidence that the relation is weaker for firms with more
growth options.
Söhnke M. Bartram René M. Stulz
Warwick University The Ohio State University
Warwick Buisiness School Fisher College of Business
Department of Finance 806A Fisher Hall
Coventry Columbus, OH 43210-1144
CV4 7AL and NBER
United Kingdom stulz@cob.osu.edu
s.m.bartram@wbs.ac.uk
Gregory Brown
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Kenan-Flagler Business School
gregwbrown@unc.edu

In this paper, we investigate how a firm’s idiosyncratic risk (IR) is related to its market risk (MR) and to
aggregate uncertainty. Using the market model, we find that firm market risk averages 9.2% when the
within-month volatility of the CRSP value-weighted index, a proxy for macroeconomic or aggregate un-
certainty (Bloom, 2009), is below the median and 17.7% when it is above the median. The comparable
figures for idiosyncratic risk are 30.1% when uncertainty is low and 38.2% when it is high. Consequently,
average market risk is higher by 8.5 percentage points when aggregate uncertainty is high, and average
idiosyncratic risk is higher by 8.1 percentage points. Similar results hold for other proxies for macroeco-
nomic or aggregate uncertainty. After showing that there is a very robust and economically significant
positive relation between MR and IR, we investigate possible explanations for that relation and find that
liquidity and firm fundamentals help explain it. Specifically, we find that the relation is weaker for more
liquid stocks and for growth stocks. Further, an increase in a firm’s market risk is associated with an in-
crease in its idiosyncratic earnings volatility.
Since a stock’s idiosyncratic return is, by definition, uncorrelated with the return of the market, one
might be tempted to conclude that MR and IR should be unrelated as well. Alternatively, it would seem
plausible that when the market is highly volatile, market movements would drive stock returns, so that IR
would be low. Both of these hypotheses are strongly rejected in the data. While some previous research has
noted that there is a positive relation between IR and MR, no analysis to date has shown that this relation
persists since 1963, holds across a variety of subsamples, or attempted to explain it.1 In this paper, we
demonstrate that the relation is extremely persistent across a variety of subsamples. We examine several
possible explanations for this relation and show that it arises partly because shocks to aggregate uncertainty
are magnified at the firm level and that the extent to which these shocks are magnified depends on firm
characteristics.
1 A positive correlation between idiosyncratic and market risk was first noted by Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel and Xu
(2001). More recently, Duarte, Kamara, Siegel, and Sun (2012) identify common components in measures of idiosyn-
cratic volatility and show that these are related to business cycles and a variety of pricing anomalies including the
IVOL anomaly of Ang, Hodrick, Xing and Zhang (2006). In a recent paper, Kalay, Nallareddy and Sadka (2016) find
that the effects of firm-level and aggregate-level uncertainty are exacerbated in the presence of the other.
1

The relation between MR and IR is important for many issues in finance and macroeconomics. There
is a growing recent literature that relates investment to idiosyncratic uncertainty. For instance, Gilchrist,
Sim and Zakrajsek (2014) show that firm-level investment is negatively related to the firm’s idiosyncratic
uncertainty which they measure with idiosyncratic risk from a market model regression. A positive relation
between MR and IR has implications for business-cycle theories, as it implies that aggregate uncertainty
may be magnified at the firm level through changes in firm-level uncertainty. Shocks to idiosyncratic risk
adversely affect a firm’s distance to default in a structural debt pricing model such as Merton (1973). In a
recent paper, Atkeson, Eisfeldt, and Weill (2014) show that changes in idiosyncratic risk are a more im-
portant factor in explaining changes in the financial soundness of firms than changes in stock price. Hence,
understanding why idiosyncratic risk changes is important to assess both firm-level financial soundness as
well as the financial soundness of the corporate sector as a whole. In corporate finance, it is frequently
noted that insiders cannot diversify their stake in their firm, so that they have to bear large amounts of
idiosyncratic risk. Idiosyncratic risk shocks mean that these insiders have to bear more risk, which can
affect the policies of their firms. For instance, Dou (2016) shows that idiosyncratic shocks can lead insiders
to invest less when they find it difficult to share firm-specific risks. A positive relation between MR and IR
also has important implications for the benefits of portfolio diversification since it predicts that the costs of
under-diversification are highest when the market is most volatile. In theories of asset pricing, if IR is high
when MR is high, the value of firm-specific growth options is higher in times of higher market volatility,
everything else equal, so that growth firms would be affected differently by increases in MR than value
firms.
The first possible explanation for the positive correlation between IR and MR is what we call the il-
liquidity hypothesis. The literature has shown that illiquidity and IR are positively related (see, for instance,
Spiegel and Wang (2005)). For less liquid stocks, information from market changes should be incorporated
in prices less quickly than for the most liquid stocks. Consequently, for less liquid stocks, the lagged incor-
poration of market information could be misconstrued as idiosyncratic risk, since market information would
be incorporated with a lag and hence unrelated to contemporaneous market shocks. This hypothesis predicts
2