NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TAKING ORDERS AND TAKING NOTES:
DEALER INFORMATION SHARING IN TREASURY MARKETS
Nina Boyarchenko
David O. Lucca
Laura Veldkamp
Working Paper 22461
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22461
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2016
The views expressed here are the authors' and are not representative of the views of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York or of the Federal Reserve System. We thank Bruno Biais, Giovanni
Cespa, John Cochrane (through his blog), Darrell Duffie, Ken Garbade, Luis Gonzalez, Robin
Greenwood, Zhiguo He, Pablo Kurlat, Richard Tang, Hongjun Yan, Haoxiang Zhu and
participants at the NBER AP meetings, Chicago Booth Asset Pricing Conference, Duke, Miami,
U.S. Treasury Roundtable on Treasury Markets, NYU, the Spring 2015 Macro Finance Society
Meetings, SED 2015, Gerzensee Summer Institute 2015, EFA 2015, EEA 2015, FIRS 2016, Bank
of Canada and SFI Lausanne for comments. Nic Kozeniauskas, Karen Shen, Arnav Sood and
Peifan Wu provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22461.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Nina Boyarchenko, David O. Lucca, and Laura Veldkamp. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Taking Orders and Taking Notes: Dealer Information Sharing in Treasury Markets
Nina Boyarchenko, David O. Lucca, and Laura Veldkamp
NBER Working Paper No. 22461
July 2016
JEL No. D44,G1,G14
ABSTRACT
The use of order flow information by financial firms has come to the forefront of the regulatory
debate. A central question is: Should a dealer who acquires information by taking client orders be
allowed to use or share that information? We explore how information sharing affects dealers,
clients and issuer revenues in U.S. Treasury auctions. Because one cannot observe alternative
information regimes, we build a model, calibrate it to auction results data, and use it to quantify
counter-factuals. We estimate that yearly auction revenues with full-information sharing (with
clients and between dealers) would be $5 billion higher than in a "Chinese Wall" regime in which
no information is shared. When information sharing enables collusion, the collusion costs
revenue, but prohibiting information sharing costs more. For investors, the welfare effects of
information sharing depend on how information is shared. Surprisingly, investors benefit when
dealers share information with each other, not when they share more with clients. For the market,
when investors can bid directly, information sharing creates a new financial accelerator: Only
investors with bad news bid through intermediaries, who then share that information with others.
Thus, sharing amplifies the effect of negative news. Tests of two model predictions support its
key features.
Nina Boyarchenko Laura Veldkamp
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Stern School of Business
33 Liberty Street New York University
New York, NY 10045 44 W Fourth Street,Suite 7-77
Nina.boyarchenko@ny.frb.org New York, NY 10012
and NBER
David O. Lucca lveldkam@stern.nyu.edu
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
david.lucca@ny.frb.org

“[B]efore the Treasury holds an auction, salespeople at 22 primary dealers field billions of dollars in bids
for government debt. Traders working at some of these financial institutions have the opportunity to learn
specificsofthosebidshoursaheadoftheauctions[and]alsohavetalkedwithcounterpartsatotherbanksvia
onlinechatrooms[...]. Suchconversations,bothinsidebanksandamongthem,couldgivetradersinformation
useful for making bets on one of the most powerful drivers of global markets [...].” — Bloomberg (2015),
“As U.S. Probes $12.7 Trillion Treasury Market, Trader Talk Is a Good Place to Start.”
Recent financial market misconduct, involving misuse of information about clients’ orders,
cost the firms involved record fines and lost reputation. It also prompted investigations
and calls for curbing dissemination of order flow information, between and within dealers.
Recent investigations reportedly involve U.S. Treasury auctions (Bloomberg, 2015 above).
But the use of order flow information has been central to our understanding of Treasury
auctions (Horta¸csu and Kastl, 2012), to market making theory generally (Kyle, 1985) and
to market practice for decades. In describing Treasury market pre-auction activities in the
1950s, Robert Roosa (1956) noted that “Dealers sometime talk to each other; and they all
talk to their banks and customers; the banks talk to each other.” Furthermore, sharing
order-flow information–or, colloquially, “market color”–with issuers is even mandatory for
primary dealers both in the U.S. and abroad. Of course, if information sharing leads to
collusion, that has well-known welfare costs. But if collusion could be prevented with
separate remedies, is information sharing by itself problematic? The strong conflicting
views on a seemingly long-established practice raise the question of who gains or loses
when order-flow information is shared.1
Measuring the revenue and welfare effects of information sharing directly would require
data with and without sharing. In the absence of such data, we use a calibrated model.
Our setting is an institutionally-detailed model of U.S. Treasury auctions, which we select
because of the available data, the absence of other dealer functions,2 and their enormous
economic importance. In the model, dealers observe client orders and may use that in-
1Thus far actions for misconduct have been successfully brought against participants in the interbank
lending (Libor) and foreign exchange markets. Regulations on information sharing in sovereign auctions
vary and are evolving. As of 2011, the UK Debt Management Office sanctioned that UK primary dealers,
or Gilt-edged Market Makers, “whilst not permitted to charge a fee for this service, may use the infor-
mation content of that bid to its own benefit” (GEMM Guidebook, 2011). The 2015 GEMM Guidebook,
instead, states that “information about trading interests, bids/offers or transactions may be subject to
confidentialityobligationsorotherlegalrestrictionsondisclosure(includingpursuanttocompetitionlaw).
ImproperdisclosureorcollusivebehaviourwillfallbelowthestandardsexpectedofGEMMs,andevidence
or allegations of such behaviour will be escalated to the appropriate authority(ies).” We are not aware
of analogous rules in the context of U.S. Treasury auctions. In practice, a financial intermediary’s use of
clientinformation,includingsharingsuchinformationwithotherclientsorusingtheinformationforother
benefit to such intermediary, may violate legal requirements, be they statutory, regulatory or contractual,
market best practices or standards. This paper does not take a view as to whether the described use of
client information with respect to Treasury auction activity is legal or proper. The objective of the paper
is to study the economic effects of alternative information sharing arrangements.
2Dealers in Treasury auctions do not diversify or transform risks, do not locate trading counterparties
and cannot monitor issuers because they cannot influence fiscal policy.
1

formation to inform their own strategy, share some of the information with clients, or
exchange information with other dealers. Then all agents submit menu bids to a uniform-
price, common-value auction. To quantify the effects of order flow information sharing and
sign welfare results, we calibrate the model to auction results and allotment data as well as
market pricing information and on-the-run premia. Then we compare the model’s revenue
and utility predictions with varying degrees and types of information sharing. Finally,
we derive two testable predictions from our model and show that both are supported by
auction data.
The model teaches us that the primary beneficiary of information sharing is the U.S. Trea-
sury,whobenefitsfromthehigherbidsofbetter-informedbuyers. Weestimatethatmoving
from full information sharing benchmark to a “Chinese wall” policy of no information-
sharing between or within dealers would lower Treasury auction revenues by $4.8 billion
annually. While the idea that better-informed investors bid more is not a new finding, the
issue is rarely raised in policy debates, presumably because the magnitude of the effect is
not known.
Our second finding is that dealer information sharing with other dealers and sharing with
clients have opposite effects on investor utility. When all dealers share information with
their clients, it typically makes the clients worse off. This is a form of the well-known
Hirshleifer (1971) effect, which arises here because better-informed clients have more het-
erogeneous beliefs and therefore share risk less efficiently. But surprisingly, when dealers
share information with each other and then transmit the same amount of information to
their clients, investor welfare improves. Our model shows how inter-dealer information
sharing makes beliefs more common, and thereby improves risk-sharing and welfare. In
essence, information sharing with clients is similar to providing more private information,
while inter-dealer sharing functions effectively makes information more public.
Third, since information sharing has been associated with coordinated trades in foreign-
exchange misconduct (for example, to manipulate benchmark rates), we consider a setting
in which dealers who share information also collude. In a collusive equilibrium, dealers
who share information also bid as a group, or coalition, that considers price impact of
the coalition as a whole. We find that dealer information sharing and collusion jointly
suppress auction prices and reduce Treasury revenue. However, if the dealers share enough
information with clients, the revenue costs may disappear.
Fourth, we uncover a new financial accelerator: Only investors with bad news employ
intermediaries, who then share that information with others. Thus the combination of
information sharing and intermediation choice can amplify the effect of negative news and
raise the probability of auction failure.
2