NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BUYOUT ACTIVITY:
THE IMPACT OF AGGREGATE DISCOUNT RATES
Valentin Haddad
Erik Loualiche
Matthew Plosser
Working Paper 22414
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22414
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2016
Valentin Haddad is with Princeton University and NBER, Erik Loualiche is with MIT Sloan
School of Management, and Matthew Plosser is with Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The
views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. For helpful comments,
the authors thank Bruno Biais (the editor), Olivier Darmouni, Douglas Diamond, Steven Kaplan,
Anil Kashyap, Ralph Koijen, Adair Morse, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Jonathan Parker, Pietro
Veronesi, anonymous referees, and seminar participants at the Chicago Booth Junior Finance
Symposium, SITE, the European Summer Symposium in Financial Markets, the Northwestern
Finance Conference, the Chicago Booth Finance Brownbag, the Economic Dynamics Working
Group at the University of Chicago, the Student Seminar and Macro Lunch at Northwestern
University, the Transatlantic Doctoral Conference, London Business School, and the Cambridge-
Princeton Finance Conference. They also appreciate research assistance from Tara Sullivan and
Meru Bhanot. The authors do not have any potential conflicts of interest. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Valentin Haddad, Erik Loualiche, and Matthew Plosser. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Buyout Activity: The Impact of Aggregate Discount Rates
Valentin Haddad, Erik Loualiche, and Matthew Plosser
NBER Working Paper No. 22414
July 2016
JEL No. G11,G23,G34
ABSTRACT
Buyout booms form in response to declines in the aggregate risk premium. We document that the
equity risk premium is the primary determinant of buyout activity rather than credit-specific
conditions. We articulate a simple explanation for this phenomenon: a low risk premium
increases the present value of performance gains and decreases the cost of holding an illiquid
investment. A panel of U.S. buyouts confirms this view. The risk premium shapes changes in
buyout characteristics over the cycle, including their riskiness, leverage, and performance. Our
results underscore the importance of the risk premium in corporate finance decisions.
Valentin Haddad Matthew Plosser
Bendheim Center for Finance Financial Intermediation Function
Princeton University Federal Reserve Bank of New York
26 Prospect Avenue 33 Liberty Street
Princeton, NJ 08540 New York, NY 10045
and NBER matthew.plosser@ny.frb.org
vhaddad@princeton.edu
Erik Loualiche
MIT Sloan
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02139
erikl@mit.edu

Since their emergence in the 1980s, buyouts have been a powerful means to alter firm incentives.
Buttheuseofbuyoutshasvariedwidelyovertime. IntheU.S.,peakyearsexperiencecloseto100
public-to-private buyout transactions while trough years experience as few as 10. We propose a
simpleexplanationforthesefluctuations: buyoutactivityrespondstochangesintheaggregaterisk
premium. The discount rate affects firm valuations and in turn the decision of whether to engage
inabuyoutdeal. Wedocumentthatthisintegratedviewofcapitalmarketsprovidesadetailedand
powerfulaccountofthecycleofbuyoutactivity. Ourelementaryexplanationisinstarkcontrastto
existingliteraturethatfocusesontheroleofcredit-specificconditions.
Empirically,variationinbuyoutactivityisbetterexplainedbychangesintheriskpremiumthan
bycreditmarketconditions. Figure1illustrateshowbuyoutactivitydecreaseswhentheaggregate
risk premium is high and increases when it is low. This factor alone explains over 30% of the
total variation in buyout activity, more than three times the variation explained by credit market
conditions. To derive additional testable hypotheses at the firm level, we present a model linking
the buyout decision to a single time-varying cost of capital. We show that the characteristics of
buyouttargetsandtheirvariationacrosshigh-andlow-riskpremiumepisodesuniquelyreflectour
mechanism.
[PlaceFigure1abouthere]
We investigate the impact of the risk premium on buyout decisions through the central trade-
off of performance gains versus the cost of providing incentives. In particular, a buyout brings
better management to the firm at the cost of compensating the acquirer for holding skin in the
game. The risk premium affects both sides of this trade-off. On the performance side, the gains
aremutedwhentheriskpremiumishigh: followingtheGordongrowthmodelintuition,thegains
of a buyout increase with the difference between the firm’s growth rate and the discount rate.1 On
theotherhand,providingincentivestotheacquireriscostly: shehastobearexcessrisktobeduly
motivated to implement changes at the target. When the risk premium increases, that is, when the
marginal willingness to bear risk decreases, the willingness to bear this excess risk also decreases
andcompensatingtheacquirerbecomesmorecostly.
Using a panel of nonstrategic public-to-private deals from 1982 to 2011, we document a novel
setoffactsregardingthequantityandnatureofbuyoutactivity. Oursimpleexplanation,focusedon
the risk premium, provides a unified explanation of these facts, whereas credit-centric hypotheses
are difficult to reconcile with our results. At the aggregate level, buyout activity is negatively
related to the market-wide risk premium. This relation is robust to the inclusion of market signals
corresponding to common hypotheses in the literature: credit market conditions (Axelson et al.
(2013)) or measures of debt-equity mispricing (Kaplan and Stro¨mberg (2009)). The risk premium
1TheNPVofacashflowstreamstartingatX,growingexponentiallyatrateg,anddiscountedatraterisX/(r−g).
1

explains as much as 30% of the variation in activity whereas credit factors alone explain only up
to 10%. Consistent with our emphasis on fundamental conditions, market expected growth is also
positivelyrelatedtobuyoutactivity. Finally,ourtheoryrationalizesthecorrelationbetweenbuyout
activity, leverage, deal pricing, and subsequent returns, as documented, for instance, in Axelson
etal.(2013).
While these aggregate facts strongly suggest that the risk premium is the primary driver of
buyout activity, we also exploit the cross-section of firms to further distinguish the risk premium
fromalternativehypotheses. First,riskierfirmshaveahighercostofcapitalandgreaterilliquidity
costs, making them undesirable buyout targets. Using panel data, we confirm the propensity of
a firm to be bought out is sensitive to risk characteristics. Firms with high market beta or high
idiosyncraticvolatilityarelesslikelytargets.
Going further, the role of risk characteristics varies over time. The greater the systematic risk
of the firm (i.e., beta), the more sensitive the cost of capital to changes in the risk premium. In
addition,theilliquiditycostsofhigh-betafirmsaremoresensitivetochangesintheriskpremium.
Hence, among buyout targets, we expect fewer high-beta firms when the risk premium is high.
Congruentwiththisprediction,weshowthatthedistributionofbuyoutfirms’betasshiftstowards
lower values during periods associated with a high risk premium. In contrast, the idiosyncratic
risk of buyout targets does not change with the risk premium—a fact consistent with our theory.
Theseresultsdistinguishourthesisfromanexplanationpremisedonchangesindebtcapacitythat
predictsthatbothsystematicriskandidiosyncraticriskvarywiththebuyoutcycle.
A second set of tests focuses on the impact of the risk premium in the cross-section of firms.
Firms with greater potential performance improvements should be more sensitive to the risk pre-
mium. Weproxyforhigherpotentialgainsusingthreemeasuresofagencyproblems—acorporate
governance index, a measure of industry competition, and a proxy for cash flows—and find sup-
portive evidence. Firms with poor corporate governance are more sensitive to changes in the risk
premium, as are firms with more potential for a “free cash-flow” problem. In addition, our frame-
work suggests that it is less costly to compensate the acquirer when it is easier to resell the firm,
and thus the buyout activity of more liquid firms should be less sensitive to changes in the risk
premium. We measure the ease of exit for acquirers using average industry-level M&A or IPO
transaction activity and find that more liquid industries are less sensitive to movements in the risk
premium. These results are robust to the inclusion of controls for credit market conditions. The
evidence confirms a unique role for the aggregate risk premium in shaping the costs and benefits
ofbuyoutactivity.
The fundamental trade-off that we emphasize for buyouts is standard in corporate finance and
can be generalized to other corporate transactions. We document the correlation between deal
activity and the risk premium for M&A and IPO activity. M&A activity responds negatively to
2