NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MACRO-FINANCE
John H. Cochrane
Working Paper 22485
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22485
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016
This essay is based on a talk at the University of Melbourne 2016 “Finance Down Under”
conference. I am grateful to Carole Comerton-Forde, Vincent Gregoire, Bruce Grundy and
Federico Nardari for inviting me. I am grateful to Ivo Welch for thoughtful comments The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by John H. Cochrane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Macro-Finance
John H. Cochrane
NBER Working Paper No. 22485
August 2016
JEL No. E00,G10,G12
ABSTRACT
Macro-finance addresses the link between asset prices and economic fluctuations. Many models
reflect the same rough idea: the market's ability to bear risk varies over time, larger in good times,
and less in bad times. Models achieve this similar result by quite different mechanisms, and I
contrast their strengths and weaknesses. I outline how macro-finance models may illuminate
macroeconomics, by putting time-varying risk aversion, risk-bearing capacity, and precautionary
savings at the center of recessions rather than variation in “the” interest rate and intertemporal
substitution. I emphasize unsolved questions and profitable avenues for research.
John H. Cochrane
Hoover Institution
434 Galvez Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
john.cochrane@stanford.edu

MACRO-FINANCE 1
1. Introduction
Macro-financestudiestherelationshipbetweenassetpricesandeconomicfluctuations.
Thesetheoriesarebuiltonsomesimplefacts.
1.1. Facts
Asset pricesand returns are correlatedwith business cycles. Stocks risein good times,
andfallinbadtimes. Thegreatrecessionof2008-2009isonlythemostrecentreminder
ofthiscorrelation. Realandnominalinterestratesriseandfallwiththebusinesscycle.
StockreturnsandbondyieldsalsohelptoforecastmacroeconomiceventssuchasGDP
growthandinflation.1
Stocks have a substantially higher average return than bonds. This number varies a
good deal across samples, but typical estimates put the equity premium between 4%
and 8%. The consensus is drifting to lower numbers, and the equity premium may be
lessgoingforward.Still,even4%ispuzzling.Whydopeoplenotholdmorestocks,given
the power of compound returns to increase wealth dramatically over long horizons? A
4% premium can raise your retirement portfolio value by a factor of 7.4 over 50 years
(e0.04×50 = 7.4).
Theansweris, ofcourse, thatstocksarerisky. Butpeopleacceptmanyrisksinlife–in
lotteriesandatCasinostheyevenseekoutrisks. Theanswer mustbe thatstockshave
aspecialkindofrisk, thattheyfallatparticularlyinconvenienttimesorinparticularly
inconvenientstatesofnature.
The canonical theory of finance captures this special fear. It starts with the pricing
formula
0 = E(M Re )
t+1 t+1
1.To save space, I do not provide citations to this extensive literature here. See reviews in Cochrane
(2004,2007,2011).

MACRO-FINANCE 2
orequivalently(asanapproximation,andexactincontinuoustime)
E(Re ) = −cov (cid:0) M ,Re (cid:1)
t+1 t+1 t+1
whereM denotesthestochasticdiscountfactor,orgrowthofmarginalutility,andRe is
anexcessreturn(thedifferencebetweenthereturnsontwosecurities).
Inthisexpression,expectedreturnsarehighbecausestocksfallatparticularlyinconve-
nienttimes–wheninvestorsarealreadyhungry(highmarginalutility,orhighdiscount
factor). Other risks, which investors take more happily, are not correlated with bad
times.
So,justwhatarethebadtimesorbadstatesofnature,inwhichinvestorsareparticularly
anxious that their stocks do not fall? Well, something about recessions is again an ob-
viouscandidate. Losingmoneyinthestockmarketisespeciallyfearsomeifthatevent
tendstohappenjustasyouloseyourjob, yourbusinessislosingmoney, youmaylose
yourhouse,andsoon.
But just what is it about recessions that causes this fear? How do we measure that
event? Andwhatdoesthislargefearthatstocksmightfallinrecessionstellusaboutthe
macroeconomicsofrecessions?Thesequestionsarewhatmacro-financeisallabout.
The standard power-utility consumption-based model is the simplest macro-finance
model:
(cid:18) u(cid:48)(C ) (cid:19)
0 = E β t+1 Re
u(cid:48)(C ) t+1
t
or
E(Re ) = γcov (cid:0) ∆c ,Re (cid:1) (1)
t+1 t+1 t+1
where ∆c represents consumption growth and γ is the risk aversion coefficient in the
powerutilityfunctionu(C) = C1−γ/(1−γ). Thismodelidentifiestheprecisefeatureof
recessionsthatmakespeoplefearespeciallylossesinthosetimes,andnotothertimes:
consumptionfalls.