NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
QE IN THE FUTURE:
THE CENTRAL BANK’S BALANCE SHEET IN A FISCAL CRISIS
Ricardo Reis
Working Paper 22415
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22415
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2016
I am grateful to Cynthia Balloch, Petra Geraats, Bartosz Mackowiack, Chris Sims, Alejandro
Vicondoa, Mike Woodford, the conference organizers, and participants in talks at Banco Central
do Brasil, Bank of England, Bank of Finland, Bundesbank, Cambridge University, EUI, IMF,
Nova SBE, OFCE-Sciences Po, the PEJ annual meeting, Riksbank, University of Birmingham,
University of Surrey and the University of Warwick for their comments. This research benefited
from the support of a senior George fellowship at the Bank of England. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Ricardo Reis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

QE in the future: the central bank’s balance sheet in a fiscal crisis
Ricardo Reis
NBER Working Paper No. 22415
July 2016
JEL No. E44,E58,E63
ABSTRACT
Analysis of quantitative easing (QE) typically focus on the recent past studying the policy’s
effectiveness during a financial crisis when nominal interest rates are zero. This paper examines
instead the usefulness of QE in a future fiscal crisis, modeled as a situation where the fiscal
outlook is inconsistent with both stable inflation and no sovereign default. The crisis can lower
welfare through two channels, the first via aggregate demand and nominal rigidities, and the
second via contractions in credit and disruption in financial markets. Managing the size and
composition of the central bank’s balance sheet can interfere with each of these channels,
stabilizing inflation and economic activity. The power of QE comes from interest-paying reserves
being a special public asset, neither substitutable by currency nor by government debt.
Ricardo Reis
Columbia University and LSE
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
and NBER
rreis@columbia.edu

1 Introduction
At the start of the 2008 financial crisis, central banks engaged in unconventional policies,
buying many risky assets and giving credit to a wide variety of private agents, but five years
later, the balance sheets of the the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the ECB, and the
Federal Reserve were dominated by only a few items.1 The liabilities consisted largely of
reserves that pay interest, whereas before the crisis there was mostly currency. The assets
included foreign currency and short-term securities issued by the government or backed by
it, as before, but now also a large stock of longer-term government securities. These changes
were the result of quantitative easing (QE) policies, which both increased the size of the
balance sheet of the central bank, by issuing banks reserves, as well as its composition, by
extending the maturity of the bonds held.2
The motivation for these policies was the combination of a financial crisis and zero nom-
inal interest rates, together with the desire to increase liquidity and lower lower long-term
yields (Bernanke, 2015). In standard models of monetary policy, QE is neutral, having no
effectsoninflationorrealactivity(Wallace,1981), sonewtheoriesweredevelopedtosupport
these policies relying on models where short-term interest rates are zero (Bernanke and Rein-
hart, 2004) or where financial frictions during crises prevent arbitrage across asset classes
and drive changes in term premia (Vayanos and Vila, 2009; Gertler and Karadi, 2013). Yet,
the financial crisis is now several years behind and interest rates have already been raised in
United States. When this happens, will QE and the use for it disappear, as did so many of
the other unconventional monetary policies?
Looking towards the future, this paper asks whether QE would have an effect on macroe-
conomic outcomes during a fiscal crisis. The focus on a fiscal crisis is motivated by the
current data: public debt in the United Kingdom, Japan, many European countries, and the
United States is at historically high levels. It is plausible, perhaps even likely, that the next
macroeconomic crisis will be fiscal, as suggested by the recent experience in the Euro-area.
At the same time, while the literature has focussed on understanding QE after a financial
shock, there is no comparable work on the role of QE when the source of the problems is
fiscal.
This paper writes down a simple model of fiscal and monetary policy where, in normal
1Reis (2009) surveys these unconventional monetary policies.
2The literature describing these policies and measuring their impact includes event studies on the re-
sponses of yields (e.g., Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2011), estimated DSGEs on macroeconomic
variables(e.g.,Chen,Cu´rdia,andFerrero,2012),andinstrumental-variablesregressionsonloansupply(e.g.,
Morais, Peydro, and Ruiz, 2015).
1

times, QE is neutral. However, during a fiscal crisis, the central bank’s management of
its balance sheet can have a powerful effect on outcomes through two channels. First, the
composition of the central bank’s balance sheet alters the composition of the privately-held
public debt. In turn, this affects the sensitivity of inflation to fiscal shocks. After a fiscal
shock that makes anticipated fiscal surpluses fall short of paying for the outstanding debt,
the price level increases to lower the real value of the debt. The maturity of the combined
government debt and bank reserves held by the public determines the size and time profile of
this bout of inflation. Unexpected inflation lowers welfare directly through price dispersion,
and indirectly via aggregate demand and output gaps. QE can reduce these welfare losses.
The second channel comes through the costs of default during a fiscal crisis. Banks
suffer losses when government bonds are impaired and, with lower net worth, there is a
credit crunch that causes a recession. In anticipation of this default, government bonds start
paying a risk premium that lowers their ability to serve as safe collateral. Financial markets
may freeze, due to an absence of safe assets, lowering output and welfare. QE can take the
risk of default out of the balance sheet of the banks and into the balance sheet of the central
bank, reducing the extent of the credit crunch and increasing the effective supply of safe
assets.
These channels are new insofar as they have not been used to understand the role of QE.
But both of them follow from familiar economic mechanisms in models of inflation, public
debt, and financial frictions. What the results in this paper highlight is that interest-paying
reserves are a special asset: the central bank is the monopoly issuer of bank reserves, able
to freely set their nominal return while ensuring that they are always fully repaid, and they
are exclusively held by banks. It is these special features that give QE its power.
I turn next to examine two common criticisms of these policies. Isn’t QE just fiscal
policy that could be done (and undone) by changes in the profile of issuance of bonds by
the fiscal authority? Isn’t QE stealth monetary financing of the deficit? Within the model
of this paper, I show that the answer to these two questions is a clear no. Interest-paying
reserves are not the same asset as either short-term government bonds or currency, so QE
is a different policy from debt management or printing money. Moreover, I show that QE
is effective regardless of the level of nominal interest rates and in spite of the expectations
hypothesis of the term structure of interest rates holding exactly. Therefore, limitations to
arbitrage across financial markets or the zero lower bound are not necessary for QE to be
effective.
Before concluding, I describe some limitations of QE within the model. In particular,
2