NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW RIGGED ARE STOCK MARKETS?:
EVIDENCE FROM MICROSECOND TIMESTAMPS
Robert P. Bartlett, III
Justin McCrary
Working Paper 22551
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22551
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016
Neither author has any financial interest or affiliation (including research funding) with any
commercial organization that has a financial interest in the findings of this paper. The authors are
grateful to the University of California, Berkeley School of Law, for providing general faculty
research support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Robert P. Bartlett, III and Justin McCrary. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Rigged Are Stock Markets?: Evidence From Microsecond Timestamps
Robert P. Bartlett, III and Justin McCrary
NBER Working Paper No. 22551
August 2016
JEL No. G10,G15,G18,G23,G28,K22
ABSTRACT
We use new timestamp data from the two Securities Information Processors (SIPs) to examine
SIP reporting latencies for quote and trade reports. Reporting latencies average 1.13 milliseconds
for quotes and 22.84 milliseconds for trades. Despite these latencies, liquidity-taking orders gain
on average $0.0002 per share when priced at the SIP-reported national best bid or offer (NBBO)
rather than the NBBO calculated using exchanges’ direct data feeds. Trading surrounding SIP-
priced trades shows little evidence that fast traders initiate these liquidity-taking orders to pick-off
stale quotes. These findings contradict claims that fast traders systematically exploit traders who
transact at the SIP NBBO.
Robert P. Bartlett, III
890 Simon Hall
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
rbartlett@law.berkeley.edu
Justin McCrary
School of Law
University of California, Berkeley
586 Simon Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-7200
and NBER
jmccrary@berkeley.edu

1. Introduction
A pressing question for contemporary equity markets concerns the extent to which they favor
fast traders at the expense of slower ones. As vividly described in Michael Lewis’ Flash Boys,
these concerns center on the differing speeds at which traders can access data emanating from
one dozen U.S. stock exchanges and approximately fifty non-exchange trading venues. Because
trading rules benchmark trade execution to the national best bid or offer (the “NBBO”) available
across exchanges, traders with faster access to venues’ quotes can effectively foresee the NBBO
on which slower traders rely. Indeed, market rules conventionally encourage brokers to fill
market orders at (or better than) the NBBO as it appears on the two centralized Securities
Information Processors (“SIPs”) to which all exchanges are required to report updates to their
best bids and offers. The latency with which the SIPs process the NBBO thus generates an
information asymmetry between fast traders having access to proprietary data feeds and slow
traders who rely on the SIPs. In principle, this asymmetry could generate risk-free trading
opportunities, with fast traders choosing whether to trade or not at NBBO prices they know to be
stale. Until recently, however, understanding the extent to which these opportunities actually
arise has been hampered by the absence of detailed information concerning the speed advantage
of traders who use exchanges’ proprietary data rather than data from the SIPs.
In this paper, we use new timestamp data provided by the two SIPs to conduct the first
market-wide analysis of the latency with which the SIPs process quote and trade data.1 These
data are the result of a regulatory change obligating exchanges and broker-dealers to report to the
appropriate SIP the precise time (measured in microseconds) at which a trading venue either
updated a quotation or executed a trade.2 Moreover, amendments to the SIP operating
procedures at this time required the two SIPs to record in microseconds the precise time at which
each SIP processed a trade or quotation update submitted by an exchange or broker-dealer.3
Comparing these two timestamps thus permits a direct analysis of the SIP processing latency for
all trades and quote updates across the entire market.
1 Our paper builds on important prior work in this area focusing on BATS trading (Ding, Hanna, and Hendershott (2014)).
2 A microsecond is one-thousandth of a millisecond, or one-millionth of a second.
3 The new timestamps have been required since July 27, 2015 for securities listed on Nasdaq (Tape C Securities) and since
August 3, 2015 for securities listed on the NYSE (Tape A Securities) or on any regional exchange (Tape B Securities). Prior to
these amendments, SIP messages only carried timestamps marked in milliseconds that indicated when the processing of the
messages by a SIP was completed, but not the time a venue processed a trade or a quote. The 2015 timestamp modifications also
required clock synchronization among exchanges to ensure that timestamps are accurate within tolerances of 100 microseconds
or less. See UTP Vendor Alert #2015 – 7: New Timestamp Definitions for July 2015 Release, available at
https://www.nasdaqtrader.com/TraderNews.aspx?id=UTP2015-07.
1

We take advantage of these new data to estimate quote and trade latencies for all stocks
within the Dow Jones 30 during the first eleven months of these new reporting requirements.
Descriptively, we show that the SIP latency in processing both quote updates and trades is, on
average, virtually non-existent for any human trader. This is especially true with respect to quote
updates. We find that the mean time gap between the time a quote update is recorded by an
exchange matching-engine and the time it is processed by a SIP is a scant 1.13 milliseconds.
Mean latency for processing trades, however, is approximately 20 times higher, clocking in at
22.84 milliseconds.4 While latencies are small on average, we document long right-hand tails for
both quote and trade reports. For instance, more than 2% of all quote updates in our sample
transactions from the Nasdaq BSX and the Chicago Stock Exchange have latencies exceeding 10
milliseconds.
We also document that the variation exhibited by quote and trade latencies reflects the
institutional structure of SIP reporting obligations. For example, transaction reports in securities
listed on the NYSE (Tape A securities) and in securities listed on any regional exchange (Tape B
securities) must be sent to the NYSE-SIP located in Mahwah, New Jersey, while those in
securities listed on Nasdaq (Tape C securities) must be sent to the Nasdaq-SIP located 35 miles
south in Carteret, New Jersey. For Tape A securities, this requirement means quote and trade
reports released by the NYSE matching engine arrive at the NYSE-SIP almost instantaneously,
while quote and trade reports in Tape A securities occurring on the Nasdaq matching engine are
certain to arrive at the NYSE-SIP at least 188 microseconds after they occur (the approximate
time it takes light to travel 35 miles). The data confirm this basic institutional prediction,
strengthening our confidence in the quality of measurement.
In addition to documenting basic descriptive information about the SIPs’ reporting latencies,
we utilize the new timestamps to explore empirically the economic significance of these
latencies for liquidity takers such as retail traders. We focus on two aspects of SIP reporting
latency that are often cited as potential problems and that are presently at the center of
Department of Justice investigations into retail market-making firms Citadel and KCG
(Levinson, 2016).
4 The slower processing time for trades largely reflects the fact that nearly one-third of trades occur in non-exchange venues
whereas quote updates are disseminated by exchange matching engines. Excluding trades executed in non-exchange venues,
mean reporting latency for trades is less than 1 millisecond.
2