NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECT OF UNCONVENTIONAL FISCAL POLICY ON CONSUMPTION
EXPENDITURE
Francesco D’Acunto
Daniel Hoang
Michael Weber
Working Paper 22563
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22563
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016
This research was conducted with restricted access to Gesellschaft fur Konsumforschung (GfK) data.
The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of GfK. We
thank the project coordinator at GfK, Rolf Buerkl, for help with the data and insightful comments. We
also thank Rudi Bachmann, David Berger, Carola Binder, Jeff Campbell, Robert Chirinko, John
Cochrane, George Constantinides, Giancarlo Corsetti, Dimitris Georgarakos, Austan Golsbee, Yuriy
Gorodnichenko, Gary Gorton, Refet Guerkaynak, Anne Hannusch, Erik Hurst, Greg Kaplan, Emi
Nakamura, Brent Neiman, Andy Neuhierl, Ali Ozdagli, Jonathan Parker, Lubos Pastor, Christian
Speck, Amir Sufi, Martin Ruckes, Andrea Tambalotti, Giorgio Topa, Joe Vavra, Johannes Wieland,
Mike Woodford, Basit Zafar, and seminar participants at the AEA 2016, Atlanta Fed, Banque de France,
Bank of Italy, UC Berkeley, Bilkent University, Bocconi, Bundesbank, Bundesbank PHF Workshop,
Boston Fed, Cambridge, Chicago, the Chicago Junior Macro and Finance Meetings, 2015 CITE, the
Cleveland Fed Conference, ECB International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, EEA 2015, EIEF,
Federal Reserve Board, 8th joint French Macro Workshop, the 5th meeting of the Macro-Finance Society,
2015 Ifo Conference on Macroeconomics and Survey Data, NBER ME 2015, New York Fed Conference
on Subjective Expectations, 2015 RBA Quantitative Macro Workshop, SED 2015, and Yale for valuable
comments. Weber gratefully acknowledges financial support from the University of Chicago, the Neubauer
Family Foundation, and the Fama-Miller Center. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Francesco D’Acunto, Daniel Hoang, and Michael Weber. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Unconventional Fiscal Policy on Consumption Expenditure
Francesco D’Acunto, Daniel Hoang, and Michael Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 22563
August 2016
JEL No. D12,D84,D91,E21,E31,E32,E52,E65
ABSTRACT
Unconventional fiscal policy uses announcements of future increases in consumption taxes to
generate inflation expectations and accelerate consumption expenditure. It is budget neutral and
time consistent. We exploit a unique natural experiment for an empirical test of the effectiveness
of unconventional fiscal policy. To comply with European Union law, the German government
announced in November 2005 an unexpected 3-percentage-point increase in value-added tax
(VAT), effective in 2007. The shock increased households' inflation expectations during 2006
and actual inflation in 2007. Germans' willingness to purchase durables increased by 34% after
the shock, compared to before and to matched households in other European countries not
exposed to the VAT shock. Income, wealth effects, or intratemporal substitution cannot explain
these results.
Francesco D’Acunto Michael Weber
University of Maryland Booth School of Business
R.H.Smith School of Business University of Chicago
fdacunto@rhsmith.umd.edu 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
Daniel Hoang and NBER
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology michael.weber@chicagobooth.edu
Kaiserstr. 12
76128 Karlsruhe
Germany
daniel.hoang@kit.edu

I Introduction
Governments around the world struggle to stimulate the economy. Large stocks of
sovereign debt limit the scope of fiscal stimulus, whereas the zero lower bound on nominal
interest rates and inflated central bank balance sheets constrain conventional and uncon-
ventional monetary policy. Macroeconomists have recently proposed unconventional fiscal
policy measures to stimulate demand by changing intertemporal prices. Unconventional
fiscal policy differs from fiscal stimulus or tax rebates because it does not rely on income
effects, is time consistent, and is budget neutral.
Shapiro (1991), Feldstein (2002), and Hall (2011) propose pre-announced increases
in value-added tax (VAT) to generate consumer price inflation and stimulate spending
via intertemporal substitution without increasing the federal budget deficit.1 Correia,
Farhi, Nicolini, and Teles (2013) formalize these ideas in a framework with a binding
zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. An increasing path of consumption taxes
and a decreasing path of income taxes generates inflation expectations, negative real
interest rates, and stimulates consumption but does not distort the production decisions
of firms.2 They find these policies can fully offset the zero lower bound constraint without
relying on inefficient commitments on low future interest rates or wasteful government
spending. VAT-change announcements are also a salient policy measure to generate
inflation expectations. Because of these appealing features of unconventional fiscal policy
compared to other fiscal policy or unconventional monetary policy measures, testing for
its effectiveness is important.
This paper proposes an empirical test for the effect of unconventional fiscal policy on
households’ willingness to purchase durable goods. The ideal experiment would consist of
an exogenous announcement of higher future consumption taxes and a cut in income
taxes. We exploit a natural experiment in Germany that is close to such an ideal
experiment. In November 2005, the newly formed German government unexpectedly
announced a 3-percentage-point increase in VAT, effective in January 2007. Two features
make this announcement uniquely suited to test for the effect of unconventional fiscal
policy compared to other changes in VAT. First, the European Union (EU) imposed
the announcement on the German administration to avoid an infringement procedure for
1Feldstein (2002): “This [VAT] tax-induced inflation would give households an incentive to spend
sooner rather than waiting until prices are substantially higher.”
2Eggertsson and Woodford (2004) discuss similar ideas in a Ramsey taxation model.
1

the breach of the Maastricht Treaty. The VAT increase was therefore unexpected and
unrelated to prospective future economic conditions, and qualifies as an exogenous tax
change due to inherited fiscal deficits in the taxonomy of Romer and Romer (2010).3
Second, Germany had no monetary sovereignty as a member of the European Economic
and Monetary Union. The European Central Bank explicitly excluded any increase in
nominal interest rates to counteract the price pressure from a higher VAT in Germany. 4
The VAT announcement affected all German households. We cannot study the
behavior of German households alone, because we miss a counterfactual. Our empirical
design uses matched households in EU countries not exposed to the VAT shock as a
control group for German households, in a difference-in-differences identification strategy.
We match German and foreign households based on observables to ensure no systematic
differences in the demographic composition of German and foreign households drive the
results. We show directly that before the VAT announcement, no difference existed in
the behavior of German households and households in other EU countries. In particular,
German and foreign households behaved similarly in terms of inflation expectations and
purchasing propensities before the VAT announcement. We cannot reject they follow
parallel trends.
The VAT announcement increased German households’ inflation expectations in
2006, and the increase in VAT increased actual consumer price inflation in 2007. The
announcement did not affect the inflation expectations of households in other EU
countries. The VAT announcement increased German households’ willingness to purchase
durable goods throughout 2006, with a peak of a 34% higher willingness to buy durable
goods compared to other EU households in November 2006. A back-of-the-envelope
calculation suggests the 3-percentage-point increase in VAT resulted in 10.3% higher real
durable consumption growth.
Before studying the natural experiment, verifying that European households change
their consumption decisions when their inflation expectations change is crucial. This
condition is necessary for unconventional fiscal policy to affect consumption through
intertemporal substitution. This baseline step is needed because earlier literature finds
3In Section V, we argue in more detail why this shock was unrelated to future economic conditions,
and was exogenous to German households’ expectations regarding current and future income.
4Policymakers believed the increase in consumer price inflation would be temporary and limited to
Germany. EventheGermanrepresentativeontheECBboardatthetimeexcludedanincreaseinnominal
rates to offset inflationary pressure. Weber (2006): “We know what the effects of the VAT increase are;
as is the case for oil prices, we do not consider one-off effects.”
2