NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GEOGRAPHIC DIVERSIFICATION AND BANKS’ FUNDING COSTS
Ross Levine
Chen Lin
Wensi Xie
Working Paper 22544
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22544
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016
We gratefully acknowledge the helpful comments and suggestions from Vicente Cunat, Stuart
Gillan, Gilles Hilary, David Hirshleifer, Christoph Kaserer, Yoonha Kim, Neng Wang, Jay Ritter,
Ivo Welch, Chris Yung, and seminar participants at the Harvard Business School, London School
of Economics, Technical University of Munich, and the University of California Berkeley. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Wensi Xie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Geographic Diversification and Banks’ Funding Costs
Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Wensi Xie
NBER Working Paper No. 22544
August 2016
JEL No. G21,G28,G32
ABSTRACT
We assess the impact of the geographic expansion of bank assets on the cost of banks’ interest-
bearing liabilities. Existing research suggests that expansion can both intensify agency problems
that increase funding costs and facilitate risk diversification that decreases funding costs. Using a
newly developed identification strategy, we discover that the geographic expansion of banks
across U.S. states lowered their funding costs, especially when banks are headquartered in states
with lower macroeconomic covariance with the overall U.S. economy. The results are consistent
with the view that geographic expansion offers large risk diversification opportunities that reduce
funding costs.
Ross Levine Wensi Xie
Haas School of Business Department of Finance
University of California at Berkeley Chinese University of Hong Kong
545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685) Hong Kong
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900 wensixie@baf.cuhk.edu.hk
and NBER
Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu
Chen Lin
Faculty of Business and Economics
The University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong
chenlin1@hku.hk

1
1. Introduction
Does the geographic expansion of a bank’s assets affect its funding costs? Several models
detail how expansion can reduce funding costs. If geographic expansion adds assets to a bank’s
portfolio that are imperfectly correlated with existing assets, this can reduce bank risk and lower
its funding costs, as emphasized by Diamond (1984) and Boyd and Prescott (1986). Similarly, if
a bank expands into geographic areas where the economies are imperfectly correlated with the
bank’s existing local economy, this will enhance the bank’s ability to use its internal capital
market to respond effectively to local liquidity or asset-quality shocks (e.g., Houston, James, and
Marcus, 1997, Houston and James, 1998, Gatev, Schuermann, and Strahan, 2009, and Cornett et
al., 2011). Other models explain how geographic expansion can increase funding costs. For
example, the agency-based models of Jensen (1986), Jensen and Meckling (1976), and
Scharfstein and Stein (2000) suggest that if geographic dispersion creates barriers to shareholders
and creditors governing banks, then bank insiders can more easily extract private rents, which
reduce bank valuations and boost funding costs. Similarly, Brickley, Linck, and Smith (2003)
and Berger et al. (2005) stress that distance can hinder the ability of a bank’s headquarters to
monitor its subsidiaries, which can have detrimental effects on efficiency, asset quality, and
funding costs.
In this paper, we evaluate the impact of geographic expansion on the cost of a bank’s
interest-bearing liabilities. This is important for at least two reasons. From a policy perspective,
many regulations, laws, taxes, and other policies limit the geographic expansion of banks. In
assessing the impact of these policies on the efficiency of financial intermediation, it is critical to
evaluate how they shape a bank’s funding costs—and interest-bearing liabilities account for
about 95% of banking system liabilities. Second, existing empirical work provides valuable, but
conflicting, insights into some of the mechanisms through which geographic expansion might
shape funding costs. Consistent with the predictions of agency-based models, Goetz, Laeven, and
Levine (2013) find that geographic expansion increases lending to bank executives and reduces

2
bank valuations, putting upward pressure on funding costs. In contrast, when banks diversify
geographically, risk tends to fall (e.g., Calomiris, 2000 and Goetz, Laeven, and Levine, 2016)
and banks become more effective at responding to local economic shocks (Cortes and Strahan,
2016), putting downward pressure on funding costs.1 What is missing, however, is an assessment
of how geographic expansion influences overall funding costs.
We estimate the effect of the geographic expansion of bank holding company (BHC)
assets across the U.S. states on the cost of interest-bearing liabilities. To measure funding costs,
we use the implicit interest rate on a bank’s interest-bearing liabilities, i.e., total interest expenses
divided by interest-bearing liabilities (Demirgüç-Kunt and Huizinga, 2004). To measure the
geographic expansion of a BHC’s assets, we use the cross-state distribution of its subsidiaries
and weight each subsidiary by its share of assets in the BHC. To identify the causal effect of
geographic expansion on funding costs, we follow the Goetz, Laeven, and Levine (2013)
procedure for constructing an instrumental variable for geographic expansion.
Specifically, we implement a two-step procedure for constructing an instrumental
variable for BHCs’ geographic expansion. First, we exploit the dynamic process of interstate
bank deregulation across the U.S. states from 1982 through 1995. Starting in 1982, individual
states removed restrictions on BHCs headquartered in “foreign” states from establishing
subsidiaries within the deregulating state’s borders. Not only did states start the process of
interstate bank deregulation in different years, they also followed very different dynamic paths as
states signed bilateral and multilateral reciprocal agreements in a fairly chaotic process over
many years. Thus, there is substantial cross-state heterogeneity in the start and dynamics of
interstate bank deregulation. The passage of the Riegle-Neal Act in 1994 eliminated all
remaining restrictions on interstate banking starting in 1995. An extensive body of research
provides evidence that interstate bank deregulation is exogenous to state economic conditions
1 Also, see Chong (1991), who finds that geographically diversified banks hold less capital, and Houston, James, and
Ryngaert (2001), who examine the impact of bank mergers on valuations.