NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FAMILY DESCENT AS A SIGNAL OF MANAGERIAL QUALITY:
EVIDENCE FROM MUTUAL FUNDS
Oleg Chuprinin
Denis Sosyura
Working Paper 22517
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22517
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Oleg Chuprinin and Denis Sosyura. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Family Descent as a Signal of Managerial Quality: Evidence from Mutual Funds
Oleg Chuprinin and Denis Sosyura
NBER Working Paper No. 22517
August 2016
JEL No. D14,G23
ABSTRACT
We study the relation between mutual fund managers’ family backgrounds and their professional
performance. Using hand-collected data from individual Census records on the wealth and
income of managers’ parents, we find that managers from poor families deliver higher alphas
than managers from rich families. This result is robust to alternative measures of fund
performance, such as benchmark-adjusted return and value extracted from capital markets. We
argue that managers born poor face higher entry barriers into asset management, and only the
most skilled succeed. Consistent with this view, managers born rich are more likely to be
promoted, while those born poor are promoted only if they outperform. Overall, we establish the
first link between family descent of investment professionals and their ability to create value.
Oleg Chuprinin
UNSW Australia Business School
o.chuprinin@unsw.edu.au
Denis Sosyura
Stephen M. Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
701 Tappan St. Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
dsosyura@umich.edu

Introduction
In the majority of financial decisions, shareholders delegate decision rights to professional managers.
Thus, one of the most important tasks of shareholders is to select the most capable, high-type managers as
their agents. Inferring managerial type ex-ante is challenging. For example, the majority of CEOs at
S&P1500 firms have no prior CEO experience. Yet, given the frictions and costs of replacing managers,
this task is of first-order importance for economic outcomes in all public firms.
This paper provides evidence that public information about a manager’s family descent and
access to resources during his formative years serves as a powerful signal of managerial ability. We
exploit the fact that individuals are endowed with different opportunities at birth and, as a result, face
dramatically different entry barriers into managerial roles. For example, some can ascend to leadership
roles with the help of their inherited status, wealth, or access to professional networks, as in the extreme
case of the heirs of family-owned firms. Others are born in poverty and face limited access to education
and professional advancement during their formative years, a crucial period for subsequent career
outcomes (e.g., Bowles and Herbert (2002); Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2005)). Because individuals
from less privileged backgrounds have much higher barriers to entry into prestigious positions, only the
most skilled types can exceed these thresholds and build a career in a management profession.
Delegated asset management provides a convenient setting to test this selection mechanism. First,
because this is a service industry requiring professional qualifications, barriers to entry are particularly
steep. Second, in contrast to industrial firms where daily decisions are made by dozens of managers and
implemented by thousands of employees, managers of solo-managed mutual funds have the principal
authority over the fund’s portfolio. Third, fund managers perform standardized professional tasks within a
well-defined investment universe, and their outcomes are easily comparable in the time-series and cross-
section. In contrast, many corporate decisions are not standardized, and the investment opportunity set of
corporate managers is unobservable. Finally, mutual funds account for over a half of financial wealth of
the average household, and the performance of money managers has a major impact on the majority of
U.S. investors, indicating a question of broad public interest.
1

In this paper, we study the relation between mutual fund managers’ family descent and their
performance. To identify managers’ family characteristics, we hand-collect data on the households where
managers grew up by examining photo images of individual Census records at the National Archives.1
These records provide detailed information on the income, home value, education, and occupation of a
manager’s parents during his childhood, as well as other demographic characteristics. As expected, most
fund managers come from wealthier and more educated families than those in the general population or
even the local community; e.g., the average (median) annual income of managers' fathers at the time of
Census is at the 89th (84th) percentile of the income distribution in the general U.S. male population.2 On
average, managers' fathers report 26% more years of formal education than the median male in their
census tract and own homes valued at 91% higher than the median house in their census tract. Consistent
with the notion that family economic status is an important factor for an individual’s subsequent career
progression, we observe that managers from wealthier backgrounds are more likely to attend private
universities with lower admission rates and higher tuition; e.g., the median undergraduate tuition was five
times as high in universities attended by managers from the top quintile of family wealth than those from
the bottom quintile, while the admission rate was 38 percentage points lower (78% vs 40%).
Our main finding is that mutual fund managers from wealthier backgrounds deliver significantly
weaker performance than managers descending from less wealthy families. For example, managers from
families in the top quintile of wealth underperform managers in the bottom quintile by 2.16% per year
(significant at 1%) on the basis of the four-factor alpha. Similar results hold for alternative measures of
performance, such as benchmark-adjusted fund returns and dollar value extracted from capital markets
(Berk and Van Binsbergen (2015)). E.g., an interquartile-range increase in the manager's family wealth
translates to a monthly loss equivalent to $3.34 million in 2012.
1 See Appendix 2 for the form layout and an example of a photo-image record.
2 See Figure 1 for the graphical comparison of our sample and the general population distribution.
2