NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DEBT AND ENTITLEMENTS
Laurent Bouton
Alessandro Lizzeri
Nicola Persico
Working Paper 22570
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22570
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016, Revised September 2019
We thank the editor Nicola Gennaioli, three anonymous referees, Marina Azzimonti, Micael
Castanheira, Pedro Gete, and Stefanie Stantcheva. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Laurent Bouton, Alessandro Lizzeri, and Nicola Persico. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Political Economy of Debt and Entitlements
Laurent Bouton, Alessandro Lizzeri, and Nicola Persico
NBER Working Paper No. 22570
August 2016, Revised September 2019
JEL No. D72,E62,H60
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a dynamic political-economic model of total government obligations. Its
focus is on the interplay between debt and entitlements. In our model, both are tools by which
temporarily powerful groups can extract resources from groups that will be powerful in the
future: debt transfers resources across periods; entitlements directly target the future allocation of
resources. We prove the following results. First, the presence of endogenous entitlements
dampens the incentives of politically powerful groups to accumulate debt, but it leads to an
increase in total government obligations. Second, fiscal rules can have perverse effects: if
entitlements are unconstrained, and there are capital market frictions, debt limits lead to an
increase in total government obligations and to worse outcomes for all groups. Analogous results
hold for entitlement limits. Third, our model sheds some lights on the influence of capital market
frictions on the incentives of governments to adopt fiscal rules, and implement entitlement
programs. Finally, we identify preference polarization as a possible explanation for the joint
growth of debt and entitlements.
Laurent Bouton Nicola Persico
Georgetown University Kellogg School of Business
Department of Economics room 542 Jacobs Center
37th & O Streets, NW 2001 Sheridan Road
Washington,DC 20057 Evanston, IL 60208
and CEPR and NBER
and also NBER nicola@nicolapersico.com
boutonllj@gmail.com
Alessandro Lizzeri
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
alessandro.lizzeri@nyu.edu

1 Introduction
Increasingly, governments struggle to meet their …scal obligations. Fiscal stress is usually
blamed on government debt and, indeed, debt has ballooned in the U.S. and other OECD
countriesin recent decades. To tame thistrend, more and more countries(asof2015, over
90: see Figure 3 below) have put in place …scal rules that limit government debt and/or
de…cit. Similar rules also exist in many U.S. states (see Figure 4 below).
However, …scal rules often do not target other spending obligations (most notably
pensions and health care) that are major determinants of …scal sustainability: the so-
called entitlement programs. Entitlements are a major determinant of …scal sustainability
inmanyjurisdictionsbecausetheyarelarge(ona‡owbasis, largerthaninterestpayments
ondebt)andbecausebyde…nitiontheycannotbecompressedeasily. IntheUnitedStates,
entitlements have grown rapidly since the 1960s and have long overtaken discretionary
spending.1 A similar pattern in the growth of entitlements holds across OECD countries.2
This growth is viewed as a threat to …scal stability in many countries (see, e.g., Evans,
Kotliko¤, and Phillips 2012, and Steuerle 2014). Sometimes entitlements are practically
the sole determinant of…scalsustainability: thisisthe case forsomeUS stateswheredebt
is strictly capped by state constitutions.
Fiscal rules that target debt but not entitlements generates perverse incentives for
governments to reduce debt but increase future entitlements, with an uncertain e¤ect on
total obligations. In fact, recent research argues that the European Union Stability Pact
has caused de-funding of pensions (Carey 2014), and that U.S. states with stricter …scal
rules have less-funded pensions (Wang 2017). And yet, while leading academics have long
pointed out that debt and entitlements should be recognized as a combined …scal burden
forthegovernment(seeKotliko¤andBurns, 2004), thereisnoacademicworkthatstudies
the political forces that jointly shape debt and entitlements.
In this paper we provide a politico-economic model in which debt and entitlement
levels are jointly determined in equilibrium. Our aim is to study the interplay between
debt and entitlements and thus to investigate the political economy of total government
obligations (i.e., debt plus entitlements). To maximize comparability with the literature
that builds on Alesina and Tabellini (1990), we adhere closely to their basic framework.
Our main departure from the canonical framework is to allow for the coexistence of debt
1See, e.g., Steuerle (2014) and David Crane: “New California Taxes Pay for Pensions, Not Students.”
Bloomberg, April 23 2012. Steuerle and Roeper developed an index of Fiscal Democracy that measures
thepercentageof(projected)revenuesnotclaimedbypermanentprogramscurrentlyin place. IntheUS,
this index dropped from 65% in 1962 to a range between 0 and 20 percent in the period 1998-2012; it is
forecasttostayinthisrangethrough2022,andthereisnoexpectationofimprovementinthemoredistant
future. Evans,Kotliko¤,andPhillips(2012)provideanothermeasureof…scalsustainability–theso-called
duration to game over. In the case of theUS,thismeasurealsopoints tothehigh (oreven unsustainable)
…scal burden of entitlement programs.
2De…ned as: public social expenditure as a percent of GDP in 1960-2014. Source: OECD (2014).

and entitlements.
The key ingredients of our model are the following. In each of two periods, a political
process determines spending on a public good as well as private goods for two groups.
Political power changes over time, as for instance in an intergenerational setting. The
groupthatispowerfulinperiod1(wecallit“younggenerationA”)canusedebttoleverage
future resources to …nance higher current consumption. In addition, young generation A
cansetentitlements,whichwemodelas“pre-committing”somefractionoffutureresources
to a desired allocation. Thus, both debt and entitlements are tools for the temporarily
powerful group to extract resources from groups that will be more powerful in the future.
NotetheassumptionthatentitlementsforgenerationAcannotbechangedoncegeneration
A is old. Albeit stark, this assumption is not counterfactual3 and it has the advantage of
being symmetric to the assumption, which is standard in this literature, that there is no
default on government debt.
We …rst characterize the equilibrium allocation when there are no limits to debt and
entitlements. We …rst show that, in the presence of endogenous entitlements, young gen-
eration A may choose to run a surplus, because future resources may be more e¤ectively
extracted via entitlements. Nevertheless, we also show that total government obligations
increase compared to the model without entitlements. Furthermore, while entitlements
allow generation A to smooth its private consumption over time, they crowd out period-2
public goods.4 These results highlight that abstracting from the presence of entitlements,
as is generally done in the political economy literature on debt, leads one not only to
risk over-estimating the power of the model to account for debt accumulation, but also to
under-estimate its ability to account for total obligations.
We then present our main results, which concern whether …scal rules protect future
generations. In a world with frictionless capital markets, debt limits have no real e¤ects.
For example, forcing a reduction in debt by  will cause young generation A to increase
both its entitlements and private borrowing by exactly , such that young generation A’s
private and public consumption levels, and indeed all agent’s consumption levels in both
periods, are unchanged in equilibrium. Thus, tightening a debt limit results is neutralized
byacombinationoflessgovernmentdebt,moreentitlements,andmoreprivateborrowing.
The same neutrality property holds for limits on entitlements. (This is not to say that
debtandentitlementlimitstogether areneutral: constraintsontotalobligationsdoimpact
3Theentitlementsofcurrentbene…ciarieshaveproveddi¢culttochangewithoutthecurrentbene…cia-
ries’consent. InthevastmajorityofUSstates,forexample,changingfuturebene…tsforcurrentemployees
isextremelydi¢cult;seeMunnellandQuinby(2012). Andacrosstheworld,evenwhenpensionlawshave
been revised, the bene…ts of current retirees have generally been protected. Typically, what is reformed
are the bene…ts of future bene…ciaries. We discuss the mechanisms that protect entitlements in Section
10, but in our model we simply assume that the entitlements of current bene…ciaries cannot be changed
without the current bene…ciaries’ consent.
4As we discuss below, this crowding out is in line with the evolution of government spending in the
U.S. and other OECD countries since the 1960s.
2