NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXECUTIVE LAWYERS:
GATEKEEPERS OR STRATEGIC OFFICERS?
Adair Morse
Wei Wang
Serena Wu
Working Paper 22597
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22597
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016
We thank Andres Almazan, Shashwat Alok, Jennifer Arlen, Paul Calluzzo, Qiang Cheng, Carola
Frydman, Todd Gormley, E. Han Kim, Byungjin Kwak, Ross Levine, Kai Li, Nan Li, Yinghua
Li, Ulrike Malmendier, Steve Salterio, Scott Schaefer, and seminar participants at Auburn
University, Harvard University, Queen’s University, Simon Fraser University, Stanford/Berkeley
joint seminar, Tsinghua University (PBC School), University of Alberta, University of
Amsterdam, University of Minnesota, Yale University, Econometric Society Meetings at the
AEA Meetings, Canadian Law and Economics Association annual meetings, Conference on
Empirical Legal Studies (CELS), NBER Law and Economics meetings, Northern Finance
Association annual meetings (NFA), Singapore Management University Accounting Symposium,
Washington University Corporate Finance Conference, Financial Intermediation Research
Society (FIRS) Conference, Western Finance Association (WFA) Conference, China
International Conference in Finance (CICF) as well as our team of dedicated research assistants,
including Any Ung, Lindsay Carter, Elise Craig, Jun Lee, Erin Shin, Ahrun Thiyagarajah, and
Peter Willett. We thank Blair Morrison, Chief Compliance Officer and Deputy General Counsel
of BMO Financial Group for useful conversations. Wang and Wu thank Queen’s School of
Business Research Program for their generous funding support The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Adair Morse, Wei Wang, and Serena Wu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Executive Lawyers: Gatekeepers or Strategic Officers?
Adair Morse, Wei Wang, and Serena Wu
NBER Working Paper No. 22597
September 2016
JEL No. G32,G34,J33,K22,M52
ABSTRACT
Lawyers now serve as executives in 44% of corporations. Although endowed with gatekeeping
responsibilities, executive lawyers face increasing pressure to use time on strategic efforts. In a
lawyer fixed effects model, we quantify that lawyers are half as important as CEOs in explaining
variances in compliance, monitoring, and business development. In a difference-in-differences
model, we find that hiring lawyers into executive positions associates with 50% reduction in
compliance breaches and 32% reduction in monitoring breaches. We then ask whether firms’
optimal contracting of lawyers into strategic activities implies less lawyer gatekeeping effort.
Using a design comparing executive lawyers hired from law firms to lawyers poached from
corporations, we find that lawyers hired with high compensation delta (indicative of the
importance of strategic goals in compensation contracts) do less monitoring, preventing 25%
fewer breaches than are typically mitigated by having an executive gatekeeper. Reassuringly,
lawyers do not compromise compliance.
Adair Morse Serena Wu
University of California, Berkeley Goodes Hall Queen’s University
545 Student Services Bldg, #1900 143 Union St.
Berkeley, CA 94720 Kingston, ON, Canada K7L 3N6
and NBER swu@business.queensu.ca
morse@haas.berkeley.edu
Wei Wang
Queens University
Kingston, Ontario, K7L 3N6, Canada
wwang@business.queensu.ca

“Lawyers are what today we call crucial gatekeepers, responsible for safeguarding
shareholders’ interests.”
– Former SEC Chairman Christopher Cox1
“I have been there at the beginning of an idea, I have helped implement the idea, and on those
occasions where an idea has turned out poorly, I was there to help clean up the mess, too.”
– Peter Bragdon, SVP, General Counsel, and Secretary of Columbia Sportswear Company2
I. Introduction
The general counsel (or chief legal officer) is arguably the most important internal
governance actor in the firm. This top internal lawyer now sits among the top five (in pay rank)
executives in over 44% of U.S. public corporations. Conditional on being in the inner suite,
executive lawyers earn 35% as much compensation as CEOs. What makes these executive
lawyers unique in firm leadership is their dual role as strategic officers and gatekeeping agents.
Our goals are to quantify the importance of executive lawyers on these dimensions and then to
explore whether the call to add strategic input into business development affects executive
lawyers’ gatekeeping effectiveness.
The legal literature describes the strategic and gatekeeping roles of executive lawyers
(Demott, 2005; Duggin, 2007; Heineman, 2012; Sorkin, 2012). This literature makes a
distinction between two aspects of gatekeeping: SEC financial compliance (specifically,
gatekeeping tasks that require a lawyer to sign off) and monitoring. For our purposes, this is a
helpful distinction for a number of reasons. First, our agenda builds on an important accounting
literature documenting the SEC financial compliance (hereafter, compliance) role of lawyers.
Jagolinzer, Larcker, and Taylor (2011), Krishnan, Wen, and Zhao (2011), Kwak, To, and Suk
1 Address to the Corporate Counsel Institute, March, 8, 2007
2 See Dubey and Kripalani (2013) – page 42.
1

(2012), Choudhary, Schloetzer, and Sturgess (2013), Hopkins, Maydew, and Venkatachalam
(2015), and Goh, Lee and Ng (2015) collectively study the effect of the lawyer on the likelihood
of compliance breaches to accounting and insider trading regulations. Second, the signing-off
function sets apart compliance because the lawyers faces personal exposure to liability, which
surely affects behavior. In the surveys of Deloitte (2011) and KPMG (2012), roughly two-thirds
of general counsels cite maintaining compliance as their greatest concern. Monitoring covers a
large breadth of activities that lawyers guard for potential breach of law or contract, including
antitrust, disclosure, affiliated transactions, and contract infringements.3 Although these potential
legal exposures are important, the general counsel has much more flexibility in choosing how to
use her time to monitor and mitigate risks across this broader set of legal exposures. By contrast,
compliance is a mandatory function. Third, monitoring warrants a stand-alone examination,
given the increasing importance of internal governance for the firm, following hostile takeovers
of the 1980s, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) in the early 2000s, the Dodd-Frank legislation
subsequent to the financial crisis starting in 2008, and most recently, shareholder activism.
In their third role, that of strategic officers, executive lawyers offer their legal expertise as
an input into business development and strategic risk management (Sorkin, 2012). As
motivation, imagine being a CEO or director of a company such as Tesla, Google or Ford. Surely
one would want legal expertise in the strategic team to consider consumer liability as these firms
consider capital expenditure and R&D investments in the self-driving car market. Russell
Reynolds Associates (2013) analyzed their database of 3,000 assessments of corporate
executives and found that “contrary to conventional wisdom, the legal executives go well beyond
spotting legal issues to helping the business actually take risks and find creative solutions.”
3 We build off the important work of Kwak et al. (2012), who provide evidence for monitoring by executive lawyers
by including the appointment of a new general counsel as a factor in predicting litigation risk.
2