NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MEASURING INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS’ SKILL FROM THEIR INVESTMENTS
IN PRIVATE EQUITY
Daniel R. Cavagnaro
Berk A. Sensoy
Yingdi Wang
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 22547
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22547
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016
Andrea Rossi provided exceptionally good research assistance. We thank Arthur Korteweg,
Ludovic Phalippou, and seminar and conference at the 9th Annual London Business School
Private Equity Conference and Ohio State University for helpful suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Daniel R. Cavagnaro, Berk A. Sensoy, Yingdi Wang, and Michael S. Weisbach. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Measuring Institutional Investors’ Skill from Their Investments in Private Equity
Daniel R. Cavagnaro, Berk A. Sensoy, Yingdi Wang, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 22547
August 2016
JEL No. G11,G23,G24
ABSTRACT
Using a large sample of institutional investors’ private equity investments in venture and buyout
funds, we estimate the extent to which investors’ skill affects returns from private equity
investments. We first consider whether investors have differential skill by comparing the
distribution of investors’ returns relative to the bootstrapped distribution that would occur if funds
were randomly distributed across investors. We find that the variance of actual performance is
higher than the bootstrapped distribution, suggesting that higher and lower skilled investors
consistently outperform and underperform. We then use a Bayesian approach developed by
Korteweg and Sorensen (2015) to estimate the incremental effect of skill on performance. The
results imply that a one standard deviation increase in skill leads to about a three percentage point
increase in returns, suggesting that variation in institutional investors’ skill is an important driver
of their returns.
Daniel R. Cavagnaro Yingdi Wang
Dept of Information and Decision Sciences Department of Finance
California State University Fullerton Mihaylo College of Business and Economics
Fullerton, CA 92834 California State University
dcavagnaro@fullerton.edu Fullerton, CA 92834
yingdiwang@fullerton.edu
Berk A. Sensoy
Ohio State University Michael S. Weisbach
2100 Neil Ave. Department of Finance
Columbus, OH 43210 Fisher College of Business
sensoy.4@osu.edu Ohio State University
2100 Neil Ave.
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
weisbach.2@osu.edu

1. Introduction
Institutional investors have become the most important investors in the U.S. economy, controlling
more than 70% of the publicly traded equity, much of the debt, and virtually all of the private equity.
Their investment decisions have far reaching consequences for their beneficiaries: universities’ spending
decisions, pension plan funding levels and consequent funding decisions by states and corporations, as
well as the ability of foundations to support charitable endeavors all depend crucially on the returns they
receive on their investments. For this reason, the highest paid individuals in these organizations are often
their investment officers. This high level of pay is often controversial, and it is not clear from existing
evidence whether these compensation decisions are optimal.1 If investment performance is random, then
it is hard to justify this high level of pay; however, if higher quality investment officers lead to better
returns, then it potentially makes sense to pay high salaries to attract them.
One place where investment officers’ skill is potentially important is their ability to select private
equity funds. The private equity industry has experienced dramatic growth since the 1990s, bringing the
total assets under management to more than $3.4 trillion in June 2013 (Preqin). Most of the money in this
industry comes from institutional investors, and private equity investments represent a substantial portion
of their portfolios. Moreover, the variation in returns across private equity funds is large; the difference
between top quartile and bottom quartile returns has averaged approximately nineteen percentage points.
Evaluating private equity partnerships, especially new ones, requires substantial judgment from potential
investors, who much assess a partnership’s strategy, talents, experience, and even how the various
partners interact with one another. Consequently, the ability to select high quality partnerships is one
place where an institutional investor’s talent is likely to be particularly important. However, it is not
known whether different institutional investors on average receive different returns. Moreover, it is not
1 For example, Harvard University pays its top 5 endowment officers more than $100m annually, a pay package that
has generated much negative attention recently (see Bloomberg, August 27, 2014).
1

clear whether any differences in returns across investors reflect the investors’ skill, their access to better
private equity groups, or just random luck.
In this paper, we consider a large sample of limited partners’ (LPs’) private equity investments in
venture and buyout funds and estimate the extent to which manager skill affects the returns from their
private equity investments. Our sample includes 12,043 investments made by 630 unique LPs, each of
which have at least four private equity investments in either venture capital or buyout funds during the
1991 to 2006 period. We first test the hypothesis that skill in fund selection, in addition to luck, affects
investors’ returns. We then estimate the importance of skill in determining returns. Our results imply that
an increase of one standard deviation in skill leads to about a 3% increase in IRR. The magnitude of this
effect suggests that variation in skill is an important driver of institutional investors’ returns.
We first perform a model-free test of whether there is differential skill in selecting private equity
investments. We use a bootstrap approach to simulate the distribution of LPs’ performance under the
assumption that all LPs are identically skilled (i.e., that there is no differential skill and all differences in
performance reflect random luck). We measure performance first in terms of the proportion of an LP’s
investments that are in the top half of the return distribution for funds of the same type in the same
vintage year, and then in terms of average returns across all of the LP’s private equity investments. The
comparison with the bootstrapped distributions suggests that more LPs do consistently well (above
median) or consistently poorly (below median) in their selection of private equity funds than what one
would expect in the absence of differential skill. Furthermore, statistical tests of the standard deviation of
LP performance shows that there is more variation in performance that what one would expect in the
absence of differential skill. These results hold when restricting the analysis to various subsamples by
time period, fund and investor type. These analyses suggest that there are more LPs who are consistently
able to earn abnormally high returns than one would expect by chance. Some LPs appear to be better than
other LPs at selecting the GPs who will subsequently earn the highest returns.
2