NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE COMPLEXITY OF LIQUIDITY:
THE EXTRAORDINARY CASE OF SOVEREIGN BONDS
Jacob Boudoukh
Jordan Brooks
Matthew Richardson
Zhikai Xu
Working Paper 22576
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22576
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016
We thank seminar participants at NYU-Stern, AQR Asset Management, ICS of Hitotsubashi
University, State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE), Bank of Korea, Shanghai Institute
of Finance (SAIF), and Fudan University; and Yakov Amihud, Robin Greenwood, Antti Ilmanen,
Michael Katz, Lars Nielsen, Yao Hua Ooi, Lasse Pedersen, Thomas Philippon and Marti
Subrahmanyam for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Jacob Boudoukh, Jordan Brooks, Matthew Richardson, and Zhikai Xu. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Complexity of Liquidity: The Extraordinary Case of Sovereign Bonds
Jacob Boudoukh, Jordan Brooks, Matthew Richardson, and Zhikai Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 22576
August 2016
JEL No. F3,G1,G12,G15
ABSTRACT
It is well-documented that government bonds with almost identical cash flows can trade at
different prices. The explanation is that due to higher liquidity the most recently issued bond
tends to trade at a premium to previously issued bonds. This paper analyzes the cross-section of
bond spreads across developed countries over a 17-year time period. Indeed, liquidity has
commonality across countries in the expected direction. However, the paper documents a novel
finding that questions the standard view of liquidity. Under certain conditions, especially related
to credit deterioration and flight to quality, new issue bond spreads tighten and can be negative.
In other words, the liquid bonds become cheaper, not more expensive, relative to their less liquid
counterparts. We offer an explanation based on price pressure and provide empirical support
using data on net flows of investors in sovereign bonds. Of some interest, we are able to reconcile
the differential behavior of bond spreads of the U.S. and Germany versus Belgium, Spain and
Italy during the Eurozone crisis period.
Jacob Boudoukh Matthew Richardson
The Caesarea Center Stern School of Business
Arison School of Business, IDC New York University
3 Kanfei Nesharim St 44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
Herzlia 46150 New York, NY 10012
ISRAEL and NBER
jboudouk@idc.ac.il mrichar0@stern.nyu.edu
Jordan Brooks Zhikai Xu
AQR Capital Management Princeton University and
2 Greenwich Plaza AQR Capital Management
Greenwich, CT xuzhikai19@gmail.com
jordan.brooks@aqr.com

I. Introduction
It is now well documented that there are numerous violations of the law of one price for
financial assets, i.e., securities with almost identical cash flows can trade at different prices. There
is arguably no better illustration of this phenomenon than that of government bonds, in particular,
between the pricing of the most recently issued bond and a matched previously issued counterpart.1
The extant literature finds the yield spread between newly issued and previously issued bonds
(hereby denoted the NI-spread) to be meaningfully positive and time-varying.2 The explanation
advanced in this literature for the existence of this spread is liquidity. Specifically, investors value
the ability to trade the newly issued bonds with immediacy, in relatively large quantities and at the
prevailing price (or with a relatively small price impact), and hence are willing to pay a premium
for these bonds.
The level and variation of liquidity in the government bond market, however, can arise
through a variety of sources, including exogenous transaction costs, demand pressure and inventory
risk, and difficulty in locating trading counterparties (see for example the survey by Amihud,
Mendelson and Pedersen (2005)).3 One of the questions resulting from this literature is the extent
to which these sources are common across government bonds: is the NI-spread explained by
common liquidity shocks (“flight to liquidity”) (e.g., Longstaff (2004) and Goyenko,
Subrahmanyam and Ukhov (2011))? A related literature looks at sovereign government bonds of
various credit quality and decomposes the sovereign spread into a flight to liquidity and aggregate
economy shocks (“flight to quality”) (e.g., Beber, Brandt and Kavajecz (2009), Favero, Pagano and
1
See, for example, Cornell and Shapiro (1990), Amihud and Mendelson (1991), Warga (1992), Boudoukh and
Whitelaw (1993), Kamara (1994), Elton and Green (1998), Jordan, Jorgensen, and Kuipers (2000), Krishnamurthy
(2002), Longstaff (2004), Goldreich, Hanke and Nath (2005), Pasquariello and Vega (2009), and Goyenko,
Subrahmanyam and Ukhov (2011). In the U.S., the spread between new and previous bond issues is often denoted the
on-the-run versus off-the-run spread.
2 In the U.S., the spread between new and previous bond issues is often denoted the on-the-run versus off-the-run
spread. We choose the NI spread because this terminology is less common in international bond markets for reasons
described later.
3 Some specific theories relevant to the liquidity of the government bond market include Amihud and Mendelson
(1986), Grossman and Miller (1988), Boudoukh and Whitelaw (1993), Duffie, Garleanu and Pedersen (2002),
Vayanos (2004), Vayanos and Weill (2008) and Pasquariello and Vega (2009), Favero, Pagano and Von Thadden
(2010), and Banerjee and Graveline (2013).
2

Von Thadden (2010), Bai, Julliard and Yuan (2012), Darbha and Dufour (2015), and Pelizzon,
Subrahmanyam, Tomio, and Uno (2015)).
In this paper, we study the behavior of the spread between newly issued and previously
issued government bonds across a range of countries over an extensive time period, 1998 to 2015.
By construction, the spread reflects the relative pricing of government bonds that differ only by
issuance date and, importantly, not by credit risk. The behavior of the spread is at times startling
and provides a challenge to existing research on liquidity. For example, from 2009 to 2013, the NI-
spreads of Belgian, Italian and Spanish government bonds are consistently negative. In other
words, the price of the liquid newly issued bond falls below the less liquid previously issued bonds.
If, in fact, newly issued bonds are more liquid than previously issued bonds, then how can these
spreads turn negative? Of course, there exist many time periods when the spreads across countries
are positive and move together. Such cases documented in this paper include the default of Russian
debt and the so-called LTCM crisis in August of 1998 (i.e., the failure and then bailout of the large
fixed income hedge fund, Long Term Capital Management) and, to a lesser extent, the bankruptcy
of Lehman Brothers in September 2008.
Our paper provides a framework for understanding these and other stylized facts. In
particular, there are two components to the pricing of liquidity, namely (i) the standard benefit
arising from lower trading and search costs, and (ii) an ambiguous cost-benefit arising in stressful
periods. Current thinking suggests (ii) is a benefit of liquidity as investors “fly” towards liquidity in
times of crisis. That is, the NI-spread should widen. However, we document that, in periods of a
flight to quality, investors will “fly” from, not to, the liquidity of weak sovereigns. Their NI-
spreads actually tighten. This is because, under extreme conditions, newly issued bonds are easier
to trade than previously issued bonds. Price pressure pushes the price of newly issued bonds more
than previously issued bonds.
In equilibrium, investors realize that the newly issue bond of low quality countries could be
subject to price pressure episodes, leading to tighter NI-spreads on average in lower quality
countries. In other words, a flight episode is a time of high marginal utility. That is, because
illiquid bonds of low quality countries can outperform liquid bonds during these episodes, the NI-
spread is tighter for low quality countries. We document that this is indeed the case; the R2
increases from 42% to 71% when sovereign CDS spreads are added to a cross-sectional regression
of average NI-spreads on a common liquidity factor.
3