NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CREDIT EXPANSION AND NEGLECTED CRASH RISK
Matthew Baron
Wei Xiong
Working Paper 22695
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22695
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016
We are grateful to Tobias Adrian, Nick Barberis, Michael Brennan, Markus Brunnermeier,
Priyank Gandhi, Sam Hanson, Dirk Hackbarth, Ravi Jagannathan, Jakub Jurek, Arvind
Krishnamurthy, Luc Laeven, David Laibson, Matteo Maggiori, Alan Moreira, Ulrich Mueller,
Tyler Muir, Christopher Palmer, Alexi Savov, Hyun Shin, Jeremy Stein, Motohiro Yogo, Jialin
Yu, and participants in numerous seminars and workshops for helpful discussion and comments.
We also thank Andrei Shleifer and four anonymous referees whose constructive suggestions
helped to sharpen the analysis. Isha Agarwal provided excellent research assistance. M.B.
received financial compensation from the Federal Reserve Board and the New York Fed while
conducting this research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Matthew Baron and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Credit Expansion and Neglected Crash Risk
Matthew Baron and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 22695
September 2016
JEL No. E02,E03,G01,G02
ABSTRACT
By analyzing 20 developed countries over 1920–2012, we find the following evidence of
overoptimism and neglect of crash risk by bank equity investors during credit expansions: 1)
bank credit expansion predicts increased bank equity crash risk, but despite the elevated crash
risk, also predicts lower mean bank equity returns in subsequent one to three years; 2) conditional
on bank credit expansion of a country exceeding a 95th percentile threshold, the predicted excess
return for the bank equity index in subsequent three years is -37.3%; and 3) bank credit expansion
is distinct from equity market sentiment captured by dividend yield and yet dividend yield and
credit expansion interact with each other to make credit expansion a particularly strong predictor
of lower bank equity returns when dividend yield is low.
Matthew Baron
Johnson Graduate School of Management
Cornell University
401J Sage Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853-6201
baron@cornell.edu
Wei Xiong
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton, NJ 08450
and NBER
wxiong@princeton.edu
A Online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22695

The recent financial crisis in 2007–2008 has renewed economists’ interest in the causes and
consequences of credit expansions. There is now substantial evidence showing that credit
expansions can have severe consequences on the real economy as reflected by subsequent banking
crises, housing market crashes, and economic recessions, e.g., Borio and Lowe (2002), Mian and
Sufi (2009), Schularick and Taylor (2012), and López-Salido, Stein, and Zakrajšek (2015).
However, the causes of credit expansion remain elusive. An influential yet controversial view put
forth by Minsky (1977) and Kindleberger (1978) emphasizes overoptimism as an important driver
of credit expansion. According to this view, prolonged periods of economic booms tend to breed
optimism, which in turn leads to credit expansions that can eventually destabilize the financial
system and the economy. The recent literature has proposed various mechanisms that can lead to
such optimism, such as neglected tail risk (Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny 2012, 2013),
extrapolative expectations (Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny 1998), and this-time-is-different
thinking (Reinhart and Rogoff 2009).
Greenwood and Hanson (2013) provide evidence that during credit booms in the U.S. the
credit quality of corporate debt issuance deteriorates and this deterioration forecasts lower
corporate bond excess returns. While these findings are consistent with debt holders being overly
optimistic at the time of credit booms—especially their finding that a deterioration in credit quality
predicts negative returns for high-yield debt—the low but, on average, positive forecasted returns
for the overall bond markets may also reflect elevated risk appetite of debt holders during credit
expansions. The severe consequences of credit expansions on the whole economy also invite
another important question of whether agents in the economy, other than debt holders, recognize
the financial instability associated with credit expansion at the time of an expansion. While
overoptimism might have caused debt holders to neglect credit risk during credit expansions, this
may not be true of equity holders—and, in particular, bank shareholders, who often suffer large
losses during financial crises and thus should have strong incentives to forecast the possibility of
financial crises.1 On the other hand, a long tradition links large credit expansions with
1 In contrast, bank depositors and creditors are often protected by explicit and implicit government guarantees during
financial crises. Even in the absence of deposit insurance, U.S. depositors in the Great Depression lost only 2.7% of
the average amount of deposits in the banking system for the years 1930–1933, despite the fact that 39% of banks
failed (Calomiris 2010).
1

overoptimism in equity markets (Kindleberger 1978), even though it is challenging to find
definitive evidence of excessive equity valuations.
In this paper, we address these issues by systematically examining the expectations of equity
investors, an important class of participants in financial markets. Specifically, we take advantage
of a key property of equity prices—they reveal the knowledge and expectations of investors who
trade and hold shares. By examining bank equity returns predicted by credit expansion, we can
infer whether bank shareholders anticipate the risk that large credit expansions often lead to
financial distress and whether shareholders demand a risk premium as compensation.
Our data set consists of 20 developed economies with data from 1920 to 2012. We focus on
the bank lending component of credit expansions and measure bank credit expansion as the past
three-year change in the bank-credit-to-GDP ratio in each country, where bank credit is the amount
of net new lending from the banking sector to domestic households and non-financial corporations
in a given country. We use this measure of credit expansion, which excludes debt securities held
outside the banking sector, because data on non-bank credit are historically limited and because
previous studies (e.g., Schularick and Taylor 2012) demonstrate that the change in bank credit is
a robust predictor of financial crises. Furthermore, the build-up of credit on bank balance sheets
(rather than financed by non-bank intermediaries or bond markets) poses the most direct risk to
the banking sector itself. Thus, we analyze whether equity investors price in these risks.
Our analysis focuses on four questions regarding credit expansion from the perspective of
bank equity holders. First, does credit expansion predict an increase in the crash risk of the bank
equity index in subsequent one to three years? As equity prices tend to crash in advance of banking
crises, the predictability of credit expansion for banking crises does not necessarily imply
predictability for equity crashes. By estimating a probit panel regression as the baseline analysis
together with a series of quantile regressions as robustness checks, we find that credit expansion
predicts a significantly higher likelihood of bank equity crashes in subsequent years.
Our second question is whether the increased equity crash risk is compensated by higher
equity returns on average. Note that the predictability of bank credit expansion for subsequent
economic recessions, as documented by Schularick and Taylor (2012), does not necessarily imply
that shareholders should earn lower average returns. If shareholders anticipate the increased
2