NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FIRMS’ MANAGEMENT OF INFREQUENT SHOCKS
Benjamin L. Collier
Andrew F. Haughwout
Howard C. Kunreuther
Erwann O. Michel-Kerjan
Michael A. Stewart
Working Paper 22612
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22612
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016, Revised April 2017
Previously circulated as "Firm Age and Size and the Financial Management of Infrequent
Shocks." We thank James Orr for facilitating the research collaboration, Gregory Niehaus and
Vish Viswanathan for helpful comments and suggestions, Nima Dahir and Juan Zhan for their
research assistance, the Outreach and Education Function at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York for providing the data, and the U.S. Small Business Administration for its data and insights.
This work is partially supported by the Zurich Insurance Foundation, the Center for Risk and
Economic Analysis of Terrorism Events (CREATE) at the University of Southern California
(U.S. Department of Homeland Security’s Center of Excellence), the Travelers-Wharton
Partnership for Risk Management Fund, and the Wharton Risk Management and Decision
Processes Center. The views and opinions presented here are those of the authors, and do not
necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Benjamin L. Collier, Andrew F. Haughwout, Howard C. Kunreuther, Erwann O.
Michel-Kerjan, and Michael A. Stewart. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Firms’ Management of Infrequent Shocks
Benjamin L. Collier, Andrew F. Haughwout, Howard C. Kunreuther, Erwann O. Michel-Kerjan,
and Michael A. Stewart
NBER Working Paper No. 22612
September 2016, Revised April 2017
JEL No. D22,G22,G28,G32,L25,Q54
ABSTRACT
We examine businesses’ financial management of a rare, severe event using detailed firm-level
data collected following Hurricane Sandy in the New York area. Credit played a prominent role
in financing recovery; more negatively affected firms took on debt because of Sandy (38%) than
received insurance payments (15%) in our data. Negatively affected firms were often credit
constrained after the shock. While firms’ demand for insurance is often explained by financing
frictions, we find that the most credit constrained firms after the event, younger firms and smaller
firms, were the least likely to insure before it.
Benjamin L. Collier Erwann O. Michel-Kerjan
Department of Risk, Insurance, The Wharton School
and Healthcare Management University of Pennsylvania
Fox School of Business Center for Risk Management
1801 Liacouras Walk 3730 Walnut Street, 556 JMHH
Philadelphia, PA 19122 Philadelphia, PA 19104-6340
collier@temple.edu erwannmk@wharton.upenn.edu
Andrew F. Haughwout Michael A. Stewart
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Federal Reserve Bank of NY
33 Liberty Street 33 Liberty St.
New York, NY 10045 New York, NY 10045
andrew.haughwout@ny.frb.org mstewart141@gmail.com
Howard C. Kunreuther
Operations and Information Management
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3730 Walnut Street, 500 JMHH
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6366
and NBER
kunreuther@wharton.upenn.edu

Firms and Infrequent Shocks 1
1 Introduction
We examine businesses’ financial management decisions regarding an infrequent, severe risk.
Hurricane Sandy struck the New York area in the fall of 2012, and our data were collected one
year after the event in the affected area through a survey of businesses, which comprised detailed
questions regarding firms’ insurance and credit decisions. The surveyed businesses are small and
medium enterprises (SMEs), firms with 500 employees or fewer, and the data collection
procedures used stratified sampling by age, size, and industry so that the businesses in our
sample reflect the profile of firms in the New York area. We specifically consider how these
businesses financed losses from the event: whether they were insured, if the event increased their
demand for credit, and whether they could access credit. We find that the storm proved a
financial challenge for many firms with smaller firms and younger firms disproportionately
bearing the costs of the disaster.
SMEs play an important economic role. In the U.S., these businesses account for 50 percent of
employment (Caruso, 2015) and 45 percent of GDP (Kobe, 2012).2 Recent media reports
highlight the vulnerability of these businesses to severe events (e.g., to major floods in North
Carolina, Price, 2016; in Louisiana, McWhirter and Simon, 2016; in the United Kingdom, BBC,
2015; and in Chennai, Ghosh and Kondapalli, 2016). Such cases are concerning not only for
these affected communities, but also because the frequency and severity of these events are
increasing.3 Severe weather risks may play a more prominent role in the success and failure of
SMEs in the future.
2
SMEs are often called “small businesses” in the U.S. and commonly classified as businesses with fewer than 500
employees (SBA, 2014). All the businesses in our study and 99.7 percent of U.S. businesses fall into this category
(Caruso, 2015).
3
Globally, natural disasters have caused $2.11 trillion in economic losses and 760,000 fatalities in the last decade
(2004 – 2013, Aon Benfield, 2015). The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2013) cites increasing
evidence that extreme events including heat waves, severe rainfall, drought, and tropical cyclones are all expected to
increase by the late 21st century. Cummins, Suher, and Zanjani (2010) estimate that over the next 75 years the U.S.
government’s exposure alone to the cost of catastrophes could reach $7 trillion. Sandy caused more than $70 billion

Firms and Infrequent Shocks 2
Several aspects of the enterprise would seem to motivate SMEs to finance severe risks through
insurance; however, research on the topic is surprisingly limited. First, while bankruptcy laws
transfer some of the consequences of failure from the owner, the wealth and livelihoods of many
SME owners are frequently tied to the well-being of the business (Herranz, Krasa, and Villamil,
2015). Thus, the firm’s risk management decisions may be heavily influenced by the owner’s
personal financial considerations, which we would expect to be guided by risk aversion. Second,
while large corporations are typically assumed to be risk-neutral, they often manage risk through
hedging and/or insuring, a practice that is frequently explained by financial frictions (e.g., higher
external financing costs in unfavorable states of the world, Froot, Scharfstein, and Stein, 1993;
Bolton, Chen, Wang, 2011; Amaya, Gauthier, and Léautier, 2015). Such financial frictions are
almost certainly greater for SMEs than large corporations and so would be expected to increase
their demand for insurance.4
We find that much of businesses’ losses from Sandy were not financed through insurance.
Hurricane Sandy had a negative financial impact on about one-third of the firms in our data. The
event damaged firms’ assets and disrupted their operations (e.g., through utilities outages and
customer relocation). Many negatively affected firms were uninsured: 29 percent had no
insurance of any kind. Moreover, insured businesses often did not have coverage for the kinds of
losses that Sandy created: 74 percent of businesses with property insurance, 72 percent with
business interruption insurance, and 52 percent of businesses with flood insurance reported that
none of their losses from the event had been covered by their insurance.
Credit played a prominent role in financing recovery for firms negatively affected by Sandy in
our data; more negatively affected firms took on debt because of Sandy (38 percent) than
in damages, making it the second costliest natural catastrophe in U.S. history, after Hurricane Katrina (NOAA HRD,
2014).
4
For example, Khwaja and Mian (2008) assess businesses’ access to credit following an unanticipated liquidity
shortage: the government of Pakistan restricted withdrawals of dollar-denominated deposits following its nuclear
tests in 1998. Dollarized banks reduced lending. Large firms responded by finding credit at less affected banks;
however, smaller firms were generally unable to manage this transition and so borrowed less.