NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE STOCK MARKET AND BANK RISK-TAKING
Antonio Falato
David Scharfstein
Working Paper 22689
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22689
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016
We thank Matthew Baron, Todd Gormley, Robin Greenwood, Sam Hanson, Nellie Liang, Filippo
Mezzanotti, Jeremy Stein, and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Board, Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston, National Bureau of Economic Research, University of Maryland,
University of Pennsylvania, University of Virginia, and Yeshiva University for helpful comments
and discussions. Jane Brittingham, Xavy San Gabriel, Ainsley Daigle, and Mihir Gandhi
provided excellent research assistance. Special thanks go to Andreas Lehnert and Nida Davis for
their help with accessing the confidential supervisory data. Scharfstein thanks the Division of
Research at Harvard Business School for financial support. All remaining errors are ours. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research or the Federal Reserve Board.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Antonio Falato and David Scharfstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Stock Market and Bank Risk-Taking
Antonio Falato and David Scharfstein
NBER Working Paper No. 22689
September 2016
JEL No. G01,G2,G21
ABSTRACT
We present evidence that pressure to maximize short-term stock prices and earnings leads banks
to increase risk. We start by showing that banks increase risk when they transition from private to
public ownership through a public listing or an acquisition. The increase in risk is greater than for
a control group of banks that intended but failed to transition from private to public ownership, a
result that is robust to using a plausibly exogenous instrument for failed transitions. The increase
in risk is also greater than for a control group of banks that were acquired but did not change their
listing status. We establish that pressure to maximize short-term stock prices helps to explain
these findings by showing that the increase in risk is larger for newly public banks that are more
focused on short-term stock prices and performance.
Antonio Falato
Federal Reserve Board
Mail Stop #89
20th Street & Constitution Ave. NW
Washington DC 20551
antonio.falato@frb.gov
David Scharfstein
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 363
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
dscharfstein@hbs.edu

1. Introduction
It is now well understood that risk taking by financial institutions is one of the main
causes of financial crises and severe recessions (Jorda, Schularick and Taylor, 2013). Yet, we
know relatively little about what gives rise to such risk-taking in the first place. Some have tied
the problem to management compensation, which is often structured so that managers benefit
from good performance but bear only a small share of the costs of bad performance (Bolton,
Mehran and Shapiro, 2010; and Bebchuk, Cohen and Spamann, 2010). Others have argued that
explicit or implicit government guarantees of bank debt enable banks to take risks without
bearing their full social costs (Kane, 1985; Pennacchi, 1987; and Farhi and Tirole, 2012). Yet
others have suggested that behavioral biases lead financial firms to neglect the risk of adverse
tail outcomes (Gennaioli, Shleifer and Vishny, 2012).
In this paper, we put forth and empirically examine another explanation – namely that a
focus on short-term stock prices rather than long-run value induces financial institutions to
increase the risk they take. This view is motivated in part by the observation that the growth of
the U.S. banking sector over the past 25 or so years was concentrated among publicly-traded
banks, as can be seen in Figure 1.
Our explanation is based on the "short-termism" model of Stein (1989), which shows that
when firms place weight on short-term stock prices they have incentives to take difficult-to-
observe actions that boost current earnings at the expense of long-run profitability. Stock market
investors rationally attribute higher current earnings in part to better long-run fundamentals and
value, which in turn, creates incentives for firms to pump up short-term earnings. This type of
reasoning has often been used to argue that the stock market induces firms to take less risk
because long-term risky projects like R&D lower short-run profitability. But in banking, the

easiest way to increase short-run profitability is to take more risk. For example, banks can loosen
lending standards, leading them to make more loans with higher yields but also higher default
rates. And they can use more short-term funding, thereby lowering current funding costs but
increasing rollover and run risk.
To examine the effect of the stock market on bank risk-taking we estimate the change in a
bank’s risk when it transitions from private ownership to public stock market ownership. These
transitions occur either when a privately held bank goes public through an initial public offering
(IPO) or when it is acquired by a publicly-traded bank holding company (BHC). We are able to
track a bank following its acquisition because acquired banks often remain legally distinct
companies that still must submit their own regulatory filings and undergo their own supervisory
reviews.
We start by presenting evidence that after banks make this transition they experience a
decline in their confidential safety and soundness ratings as assessed by bank supervisors. The
supervisory ratings include the six so-called "component" ratings (Capital Adequacy, Asset
Quality, Management, Earnings, Liquidity, and Sensitivity to Market Risk), a "composite"
CAMELS rating based on the component ratings, and a loan-level risk rating from the Federal
Reserve's Survey of Terms of Business Lending (STBL). In addition, we document that after a
transition to public ownership there is an increase in risk as measured by a decline in capital
ratios, a shift to riskier activities, and a greater reliance on short-term funding, among other
measures of risk.
While this evidence is consistent with stock market pressure leading to an increase in
risk, it is difficult to interpret this empirical relationship as being causal; the factors that give rise
2