NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW QUANTITATIVE EASING WORKS:
EVIDENCE ON THE REFINANCING CHANNEL
Marco Di Maggio
Amir Kermani
Christopher Palmer
Working Paper 22638
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22638
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016
A previous version of this paper was circulated under the title, “Unconventional Monetary Policy
and the Allocation of Credit.” For helpful comments and discussions, we thank our discussants,
Florian Heider, Anil Kashyap, Deborah Lucas, Philipp Schnabl, and Felipe Severino; Adam
Ashcraft, Charles Calomiris, Andreas Fuster, Robin Greenwood, Sam Hanson, Arvind
Krishnamurthy, Michael Johannes, David Romer, David Scharfstein, Jeremy Stein, Johannes
Stroebel, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Annette Vissing-Jørgensen, and Paul Willen; workshop
participants at Berkeley and Columbia; and seminar participants at NBER Monetary Economics,
the Econometric Society 2016 Meetings, the EEA 2016 meetings, Federal Reserve Board, HEC
Paris, Northwestern-Kellogg, NYU-Stern, NY Fed/NYU Stern Conference on Financial
Intermediation, the Paul Woolley Conference at LSE, Penn State, San Francisco Federal Reserve,
Stanford, Stanford GSB, St. Louis Fed Monetary Policy and the Distribution of Income and
Wealth Conference, University of Minnesota-Carlson, University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign, and USC-Price. We also thank Sam Hughes, Sanket Korgaonkar, Christopher Lako,
and Jason Lee for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Marco Di Maggio, Amir Kermani, and Christopher Palmer. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Quantitative Easing Works: Evidence on the Refinancing Channel
Marco Di Maggio, Amir Kermani, and Christopher Palmer
NBER Working Paper No. 22638
September 2016, Revised September 2016
JEL No. E21,E58,E65,G01,G18,G21,R28
ABSTRACT
Despite massive large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs) by central banks around the world since the
global financial crisis, there is a lack of empirical evidence on whether and how these programs
affect the real economy. Using rich borrower-linked mortgage-market data, we document that
there is a “flypaper effect” of LSAPs, where the transmission of unconventional monetary policy
to interest rates and (more importantly) origination volumes depends crucially on the assets
purchased and degree of segmentation in the market. For example, QE1, which involved
significant purchases of GSE-guaranteed mortgages, increased GSE-eligible mortgage
originations significantly more than the origination of GSE-ineligible mortgages. In contrast,
QE2’s focus on purchasing Treasuries did not have such differential effects. We find that the
Fed’s purchase of MBS (rather than exclusively Treasuries) during QE1 resulted in an additional
$600 billion of refinancing, substantially reducing interest payments for refinancing households,
leading to a boom in equity extraction, and increasing consumption by an additional $76 billion.
This de facto allocation of credit across mortgage market segments, combined with sharp
bunching around GSE eligibility cutoffs, establishes an important complementarity between
monetary policy and macroprudential housing policy. Our counterfactual simulations estimate
that relaxing GSE eligibility requirements would have significantly increased refinancing activity
in response to QE1, including a 20% increase in equity extraction by households. Overall, our
results imply that central banks could most effectively provide unconventional monetary stimulus
by supporting the origination of debt that would not be originated otherwise.
Marco Di Maggio Christopher Palmer
Harvard Business School Haas School of Business
Baker Library 265 University of California, Berkeley
Soldiers Field 545 Student Services Building #1900
Boston, MA 02163 Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER cjpalmer@berkeley.edu
mdimaggio@hbs.edu
Amir Kermani
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Building #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
kermani@berkeley.edu

1 Introduction
In recent years, many central banks have undertaken unconventional monetary policy to stimulate
their economies, mainly through long-duration large-scale asset purchase programs (LSAPs). A
common feature of these programs is their significant size; the Federal Reserve, for example, has
increased the size of its balance sheet more than fivefold ($3.6 trillion) since 2008 (see Figure 1).
However, LSAPs have varied significantly in the type of assets purchased by central banks, e.g.,
from Treasuries and Agency debt in the U.S. to ETFs and corporate bonds in Japan. Despite
the newfound popularity of LSAPs worldwide, their effectiveness and the channels through which
they affect the real economy have been at the center of a vigorous policy and academic debate.
We contribute to this debate by investigating the channels through which LSAPs impact the real
economy and, in particular, household debt issuance.1
There is no clear consensus on whether LSAPs do benefit an economy or on potential transmis-
sion mechanisms. Non-standard open-market operations are inconsequential in a frictionless world,
as shown by Wallace (1981) and Eggertsson and Woodford (2003). Moving away from a friction-
less world, the literature on unconventional monetary policy has suggested multiple explanations
for why LSAPs may have real effects. We highlight three of these pathways—see Krishnamurthy
and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011) for a comprehensive treatment of such channels along with empirical
evidence from asset yields on the relative importance of each. First, under the portfolio-balancing
channel, the central bank affects the return of different assets by affecting their relative supply.2
Second, the segmentation channel posits that LSAPs are effective when capital-constrained inter-
mediaries in the secondary market are unable to arbitrage in the short run across different market
segments (e.g., Vayanos and Vila, 2009, He and Krishnamurthy, 2013 and Greenwood et al., 2015).3
Third, the capital-constraints channel highlights how LSAPs can offset the decline in private lend-
1Asdiscussedbelow, the“whatyoubuymatters” pointwasfirstmadebyKrishnamurthyandVissing-Jørgensen
(2011) using asset prices and credit spreads.
2LSAPs could have real effects by taking safe assets out of the market and therefore inducing cautious investors
to take more risk. For related arguments, see Gurley and Shaw (1960), Tobin and Brainard (1963), Tobin (1969),
and Brunner et al. (1973).
3We refer to this channel as the duration-segmentation channel if the inhibiting segmentation is along asset
duration. Thekeyassumptioninthesemodelsisthatmostinvestorsintheassetmarketspecializeintradingaspecific
assetclass–orhavestrongpreferencesforaspecificassetclass–whiletherearefewcapital-constrainedintermediaries
who arbitrage between different markets. Thus, by directly purchasing specific assets, the Fed increases the price of
thatassetclassmorethanothersintheshortrun. Themoreconstrainedthearbitrageursare,thelongeritwilltake
other asset class prices to be affected by the LSAPs.
2

ing from disruptions in financial intermediation (see Gertler and Karadi, 2011 and Curdia and
Woodford, 2011).4
Under the portfolio-balancing and duration-segmentation channels, only the duration (or riski-
ness)ofassetspurchaseddrivestheireffectivenessbecauseinvestorswillreallocatetheirresourcesto
other similar assets not purchased by the central bank. However, if investors specialize in trading a
specific asset class, or if the financial intermediation sector is constrained, there will be only limited
spilloversofcentral-bankpurchasestootherassetclasses, andtheeffectivenessandallocativeeffects
of LSAPs will depend on not only the duration but also the specific type of assets purchased. In
other words, to the extent that portfolio rebalancing or duration-segmentation is driving the effec-
tiveness of LSAPs, we should observe spillovers from central-bank purchases to other assets with
similar duration. An absence of such spillovers would support the view that LSAPs stimulate real
activity through the capital constraints channel/narrow-segmentation channel. This paper provides
new empirical evidence for this narrow segmentation channel.
Identifying the effects of aggregate policies is particularly challenging given that such policies
intentionally respond to current and anticipated aggregate shocks. For traction, most of the litera-
ture has used event studies of short-run asset-price changes immediately surrounding central bank
policy announcements. We supplement such before/after comparisons with an identification strat-
egy that exploits the segmentation of the U.S. mortgage market and the legal restriction that the
Fed can only purchase mortgages guaranteed by the Government Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs).
The outstanding balance on GSE-guaranteed mortgages must be less than so-called conforming
loan limits and must have loan-to-value ratios at or below 80 percent.5 This allows us to estimate
the effects of quantitative easing by contrasting how each LSAP campaign affected refinancing ac-
tivities in the conforming and non-conforming segments. Specifically, finding spillovers between
these two segments supports the portfolio-rebalancing channel or duration-segmentation channels
of unconventional monetary policy, while rejecting spillovers would be more consistent with the
4In contrast to the segmentation channel, the capital constraint channel highlights the role of loan originators,
ratherthaninvestorsinthesecondarymarket,beingconstrained. Itpositsthatdisruptionsinprivatelendingmight
be alleviated by the Fed’s financing of loans to the most affected sectors, i.e. Fed supporting mortgage originations
in response to the housing market crash.
5Animportantexceptiontothe80%LTVcutoffwasmadepossiblebytheHomeAffordableRefinancingProgram
(HARP), a policy we show had visible effects on the effectiveness of Fed MBS purchases. Additionally, mortgages
with (often expensive) private mortgage insurance (PMI) are exempt from the 80% LTV requirement, although the
PMI industry was virtually nonexistent in 2009.
3