NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LOAN PRODUCT STEERING IN MORTGAGE MARKETS
Sumit Agarwal
Gene Amromin
Itzhak Ben-David
Douglas D. Evanoff
Working Paper 22696
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22696
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016
The authors thank Caitlin Kearns, Mike Mei, and Michael Murto for outstanding research
assistance and Han Choi for editorial assistance. They also thank Viral Acharya, Gadi Barlevy,
Mike Berry, Jason Keller, Steve Kuehl, Elizabeth Laderman, Geng Li, Leonard Nakamura,
Mitchell Petersen, Amit Seru, Greg Udell, Lena Vanterpool, Alicia Williams and Marva Williams
for constructive input. All errors are those of the authors. The views expressed in this paper are
those of the authors and do not reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Federal
Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22696.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Sumit Agarwal, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, and Douglas D. Evanoff. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Loan Product Steering in Mortgage Markets
Sumit Agarwal, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, and Douglas D. Evanoff
NBER Working Paper No. 22696
September 2016
JEL No. D12,D18,G18,G21,K2
ABSTRACT
We present evidence of a particular type of loan steering in which lenders lead borrowers to take
out high margin mortgage products. We identify this activity by comparing borrowers who were
rejected by lenders but were subsequently approved by their affiliates (steered borrowers) to other
initially rejected borrowers who obtained loans elsewhere. Although steered borrowers default
less, they pay significantly higher interest rates and are more likely to borrow through contracts
with unconventional features, such as negative amortization or prepayment penalties. Female
borrowers, single borrowers with no co-signers, and borrowers in low-income locations are more
likely to be steered.
Sumit Agarwal Itzhak Ben-David
McDonough School of Business Department of Finance
Room 427 Fisher College of Business
Georgetown University The Ohio State University
3700 O Street NW 2100 Neil Avenue
Washington, DC 20057 Columbus, OH 43210
ushakri@yahoo.com and NBER
bendavid@fisher.osu.edu
Gene Amromin
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Douglas D. Evanoff
230 South LaSalle Street Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60604-1413 230 South LaSalle Street
gamromin@frbchi.org Chicago, IL 60604-1413
devanoff@frbchi.org

1 Introduction
At the height of the housing market boom of the 2000s, accusations of unscrupulous
lender behavior abounded. Examples included excessive fees, high interest rates, obscured
prepayment penalties, and clauses barring borrowers from seeking judicial redress for predatory
behavior by lenders (Engel and McCoy, 2002). Yet, the vast majority of the evidence to date has
been anecdotal in nature or came from select examples of regulatory enforcement actions or
isolated lawsuits. Some research was undertaken to evaluate whether particular groups were
targeted with predatory loan terms (Goldstein, 2002; Staten and Elliehausen, 2001; Immergluck
and Smith, 2003; Bocian, Ernst, and Li, 2008). However, there has not been a comprehensive,
methodical evaluation of whether lenders engaged in business practices—broadly referred to as
steering—that led households to mortgage products that were too expensive or contained hidden
risks. Conducting such evaluations is difficult since identifying instances of steering in the data
requires overcoming two major hurdles. First, one needs to separate cases in which lenders
steered borrowers into a product from cases in which borrowers themselves expressed demand
for the product. Second, assessing the optimality of a selected product is problematic in itself as
the econometrician does not observe the full set of borrower characteristics and constraints. An
ideal empirical setting to detect steering activity would be to observe borrowers demanding one
product, and measure whether lenders concur or try to market a different product, with features
that are unambiguously inferior to the borrower.
In the absence of transaction-level negotiation data, we develop a methodology to
identify steered loans. We do this by contrasting the outcomes of two observationally equivalent
groups of borrowers whose mortgage applications were rejected by one lender, but subsequently
approved by another. Borrowers in one group had their applications approved by an affiliate of
the original lender, while others were approved by unaffiliated entities. We contend that
borrowers in the former group are more likely to have been steered.
The identification strategy behind this approach can be illustrated with the following
thought experiment, summarized in Figure 1. A borrower enters a lending institution seeking a
mortgage and their loan application is evaluated. If they are judged to be a poor credit risk, their
application is rejected outright. However, if their credit risk is acceptable they might still be told
that they do not qualify for the specific loan applied for, but would qualify for another mortgage
product from an affiliate of the organization. The applicant is thus ‘steered’ to an affiliate, which
1

approves the new loan product. In making this decision, the original lender takes the risk that the
rejected applicant will apply for a loan with a competitor. To lessen this risk, the lender may
choose to deploy this strategy with borrowers more likely to follow the referral, i.e., those that
are perceived to be less financially sophisticated. All rejected applicants retain the option of
pursuing their loan applications elsewhere, i.e., with a lender unaffiliated with the original entity,
and some of them will be successful in obtaining mortgage credit. These are the applicants that
we consider to be ‘non-steered’.1 If the initial rejection of the ‘steered’ applicants was based on
reasons largely unrelated to credit quality, we would expect the ‘steered’ group to be
systematically different from the ‘non-steered’ group in terms of their subsequent loan
performance. Moreover, if the initial rejection was motivated by the possibility of guiding the
applicants towards a different set of mortgage products (possibly those that are more profitable to
the lender), we would also expect the two groups to differ in terms of eventual contract
outcomes. Finally, if the likelihood of successful steering was a function of borrower financial
sophistication, we would expect the ‘steered’ group to contain a higher share of individuals with
characteristics associated with lower levels of financial literacy.
The focus on borrowers whose original applications were rejected allows us to deal with
the first empirical hurdle of not observing the borrower’s demand function. All borrowers in our
sample are rejected on their original attempt, whose latent parameters presumably reflect the
borrowers’ most desired outcome. The eventual contract captures the differences that lender
paths have on observed outcomes (e.g., mortgage characteristics) rather than borrower’s own
demand for these features. Closely matching borrower characteristics in the two groups further
allows us to ascribe the difference in outcomes to lender behavior rather than differences in the
underlying borrower preferences. Put differently, the sample is designed in a way that makes it
plausible to assume that desired (and rejected) contract choices are similar between the steered
and non-steered groups. Lender actions then become the focal point for analyzing differences in
the actual observed outcomes.
To implement this strategy, we focus on a subset of lenders who are organized under
bank holding companies (BHCs), and thus are likely to be more closely affiliated with each
1 Strictly speaking, observing a loan being originated by an affiliate of the lender that rejected the original
application only implies the possibility of steering. For ease of exposition, we will be using the term “steered
borrowers” rather than “potentially steered borrowers” throughout the paper.
2