NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BORROWING REQUIREMENTS, CREDIT ACCESS, AND ADVERSE SELECTION:
EVIDENCE FROM KENYA
William Jack
Michael Kremer
Joost de Laat
Tavneet Suri
Working Paper 22686
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22686
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016, Revised September 2019
The authors would like to thank Egor Abramov, William Glennerster, Matthew Goodkin-Gold,
Kamran Jamil, Benjamin Marx, Adam Ray, Itzchak Raz, Indrani Saran and Kevin Xie for
exceptional research assistance. Our gratitude also goes out to Suleiman Asman, Antony
Wainaina and Nadir Shams for excellent management, field supervision and data collection. We
are grateful to Joshua Angrist, Michael Boozer, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster and to seminar
audiences at the CEGA East Africa Evidence Summit, Nairobi; Georgetown University; Harvard
University; the IGC Trade and Development Conference at Stanford University; the IPA
Microfinance Conference; the MIT Development Lunch; Northwestern; Notre Dame; University
of California, San Diego; Tinbergen Institute, Amsterdam; and the World Bank for comments.
We thank the Gates Foundation, Google and the Agricultural Technology Adoption Initiative for
funding. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by William Jack, Michael Kremer, Joost de Laat, and Tavneet Suri. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Borrowing Requirements, Credit Access, and Adverse Selection: Evidence from Kenya
William Jack, Michael Kremer, Joost de Laat, and Tavneet Suri
NBER Working Paper No. 22686
September 2016, Revised September 2019
JEL No. O13,O16
ABSTRACT
Do the stringent formal sector borrowing requirements common in many developing countries
restrict credit access, technology adoption, and welfare? When a Kenyan dairy's savings and
credit cooperative randomly offered some farmers the opportunity to replace loans with high
down payments and stringent guarantor requirements with loans collateralized by the asset itself
— a large water tank — loan take-up increased from 2.4% to 41.9%. (In contrast, substituting
joint liability requirements for deposit requirements did not affect loan take up.) There were no
repossessions among farmers allowed to collateralize 75%of their loans, and there was only a
0.7% repossession rate among those offered 96% asset collateralization. A Karlan-Zinman test
based on waiving borrowing requirements ex post finds evidence of adverse selection with
lowered deposit requirements, but not of moral hazard. A simple model and rough calibration
suggests that adverse selection may deter lenders from making welfare-improving loans with
lower deposit requirements, even after introducing asset collateralization. We estimate that 2/3 of
marginal loans led to increased water storage investment. Real effects of loosening borrowing
requirements include increased household water access, reductions in child time spent on water-
related tasks, and greater school enrollment for girls.
William Jack Joost de Laat
Georgetown University University of Utrecht
Billy.Jack@georgetown.edu joostdelaat@gmail.com
Michael Kremer Tavneet Suri
Harvard University MIT Sloan School of Management
Department of Economics 100 Main Street, E62-517
Littauer Center M20 Cambridge, MA 02142
Cambridge, MA 02138 and NBER
and NBER tavneet@mit.edu
mkremer@fas.harvard.edu

1 Introduction
Formal-sector lenders in developing countries often impose very tight borrowing require-
1
ments, such as high deposit requirements or guarantor requirements. To the extent that these
2
requirementsrestrictcreditaccess,investment,technologyadoption,andwelfare,theremaybe
3
astrongcaseforstepstoencouragelenderstoloosentheseborrowingrequirements,forexam-
4
plebylooseningregulatorycapsoninterestrates,strengtheninglegalandcontractenforcement
5
institutionstoexpandthescopeforcollateralizationofdebt,orevensubsidizinglenders. While
6
the evidence summarized in Banerjee et al. (2015) suggests both limited take up and limited
7
impact of expanding credit access through standard microfinance contracts, it is possible that
8
movingfromtheveryrestrictiveborrowingrequirementsinmanydevelopingcontractstobor-
9
rowingrequirementsmoretypicalofdevelopedcountrieswouldhaveabiggerimpact.
10
Weexaminetheimpactofreplacingloanswithhighdownpaymentsandstringentguarantor
11
requirements with asset- collateralized loans, similar to the mortgages and car loans that are
12
common in developed countries. In particular, we studied a Kenyan dairy's saving and credit
13
cooperative which randomly offered different borrowing conditions to different members. Its
14
standardborrowingconditionsrequiredthatonethirdofloansbesecuredwithdepositsbythe
15
borrower, and that the remaining two thirds be secured with cash or shares from guarantors.
16
Allowingborrowerstocollateralizeloansforwatertanksusingassetspurchasedwiththeloans
17
dramatically increased borrowing. Only 2.4% of farmers borrowed under the savings cooper-
18
ative's standard borrowing conditions. The loan take up rate increased to 23.9% under 25%
19
deposit or guarantor requirements and 75% tank-collateralization. The take-up rate further in-
20
creased to 41.9% when all but 4% of the loan could be collateralized with the tank. Thus more
21
than 90% of those who wished to borrow at the available interest rate were credit-constrained.
22
Resultsweresimilarinaseparateout-of-sampletest.
23
However, we find no evidence that joint liability expands credit access. There was no sta-
24
tistically significant difference in loan take up between farmers offered loans with a 25 percent
25
1

deposit requirement and those offered the opportunity to substitute guarantors for all but 4
26
percentoftheloanvalue.
27
Defaults did not increase with moderate deposit requirements and asset collateralization. In
28
particular, there were no tank repossessions when 75% of the loan could be collateralized with
29
thetankitselfand25%wascollateralizedwithdepositsfromtheborrowerand/orguarantors.
30
Reducingthedepositrequirementto4%with96%asset-collateralizationinduceda0.7%repos-
31
session rate overall, corresponding to a 1.63% repossession rate among the marginal farmers
32
inducedtoborrowbythelowerborrowingrequirements. Thehypothesisofequalratesoftank
33
repossession under a 4% deposit requirement and under a 25% deposit or guarantor require-
34
ment is rejected at the 5.25% level using a Fisher exact test. Karlan-Zinman tests based on ex
35
post waivers or borrowing requirements suggest that this difference is entirely due to adverse
36
selection,ratherthanthetreatmenteffectsassociatedwithmoralhazard.
37
A simple model suggests that under adverse selection, a lender with market power facing
38
interestratecaps,suchasthesavingsandcreditcooperativewestudy,willsetdepositrequire-
39
mentsabovethesociallyoptimallevelevenwithassetcollateralization. Toseethis,notethatat
40
themargin,raisingdepositrequirementsselectsoutunprofitableborrowersbutimposesacost
41
on credit-constrained inframarginal borrowers, and a profit-maximizing lender will not inter-
42
nalizethesecoststoinframarginalborrowers. Aroughcalibrationsuggeststhatthecooperative
43
couldincreaseprofitsbymovingto75%butnot96%assetcollateralization. Consistentwiththe
44
resultsofthecalibration,afterlearningtheresultsoftheprogram,thelenderchangeditspolicy
45
toallow75%collateralizationwiththetank,butnottoallow96%collateralization.
46
Withregardstoinvestments,wefindthatthoseofferedtheopportunitytocollateralizeloans
47
with the tanks were more likely to have purchased tanks and had more water storage capacity
48
overall. Theseresultsalsosuggestthatimprovingcreditaccesscaninfluencetechnologyadop-
49
tion (Zeller et al., 1998). Consistent with Devoto et al. (2013), our results suggest that credit
50
provisioncancontributetoincreasedaccesstocleanwaterinthedevelopingworld. Childrenof
51
households offered less restrictive credit terms spent somewhat less time collecting water and
52
2