NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO RARE EVENTS EXPLAIN CDX TRANCHE SPREADS?
Sang Byung Seo
Jessica A. Wachter
Working Paper 22723
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22723
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2016
We thank Pierre Collin-Dufresne, Hitesh Doshi, Kris Jacobs, Mete Kilic, Nick Roussanov, Ivan
Shaliastovich, Pietro Veronesi, Amir Yaron and seminar participants at AFA annual meetings,
University of Houston, and the Wharton School for helpful comments. We thank the Rodney L.
White Center for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Sang Byung Seo and Jessica A. Wachter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Rare Events Explain CDX Tranche Spreads?
Sang Byung Seo and Jessica A. Wachter
NBER Working Paper No. 22723
October 2016
JEL No. G12,G13
ABSTRACT
We investigate whether a model with a time-varying probability of economic disaster can explain
the pricing of collateralized debt obligations, both prior to and during the 2008-2009 financial
crisis. Namely, we examine the pricing of tranches on the CDX, an index of credit default swaps
on large investment-grade firms. CDX senior tranches are essentially deep out-of-the money put
options because they do not incur losses until a large fraction of previously stable firms default.
As such, these products clearly reflect the market’s assessment of rare-event risk. We find that the
model can simultaneously explain prices on CDX senior tranches and on equity index options at
parameter values that are consistent with the equity premium and with aggregate stock market
volatility. Our results demonstrate the importance of beliefs about rare disasters for asset prices,
even during periods of relative economic stability.
Sang Byung Seo
Department of Finance
University of Houston
220D Melcher Hall
4750 Calhoun Road
Houston, TX 77204-6021
sseo@bauer.uh.edu
Jessica A. Wachter
Department of Finance
2300 SH-DH
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
jwachter@wharton.upenn.edu

1 Introduction
The period from 2005 to September of 2008 witnessed a more than 100-fold increase in the
cost of insuring against economic catastrophe. This cost can be seen from the pricing of
derivative contracts written on the CDX, an index of credit default swaps on investment-
grade firms. During the 2005–2009 period, tranches on the CDX were actively traded:
investors could purchase and sell insurance that would pay off only if a certain fraction of
firms represented by the CDX went into default. The most senior tranches were structured
to pay off only if corporate defaults became extremely widespread, more so than during the
Great Depression.
While the costs to insure the senior tranches on the CDX were close to zero through most
of 2006 and 2007, fluctuations began to appear in late 2007, culminating in sharply rising
prices in the summer and fall of 2008. Ex post, of course, such insurance did not pay off. In
fact only a very small number of firms represented by the CDX index have gone into default.
Yet, the pricing of these securities strongly suggests a substantial, and time-varying, fear of
economic catastrophe.
The CDX and its tranches are an example of the structured finance products that pro-
liferated in the period prior to the financial crisis of 2008–2009.1 In the years following,
both the academic literature and the popular press have deeply implicated structured fi-
nance in the series of events beginning with the near-default of Bear Stearns in March 2008
and culminating in collapse of Lehman brothers later that year.2 Yet, despite the central-
ity of structured products to the crisis and its aftermath, there have been few attempts to
quantitativelymodelthesesecuritiesinawaythatconnectsthemtotheunderlyingeconomy.
In this paper, we investigating whether an equilibrium model with rare economic disas-
1See Longstaff and Rajan (2008) for a description of structured finance products.
2See, for example, Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), Gorton and Metrick (2012), and Salmon (2009).
1

ters, in the spirit of Barro (2006) and Rietz (1988), can explain the time series of the cost to
insure the CDX index and its tranches. Unlike previous quantitative models of structured
finance, firm prices in our model are derived endogenously from assumptions on investor
preferences and cash flows.3 Firm prices embed rare disaster fears, as well as risks that are
idiosyncratic. Importantly, our model can explain options as well as as equity prices (the
model is also consistent with the average return and volatility on the aggregate market).
We can therefore use it to back out a time series of rare disaster probabilities from option
prices alone. When we use these probabilities to calculate model-implied values for CDX
index and tranche prices, we find that it can explain the low spreads on senior tranches prior
to the crisis, the high spreads during the crisis, and the timing of the increase in spreads.
Our results imply that CDX spreads reflect an assessment of the risk in the economy that is
consistent with other asset classes.
Our findings relate to a recent debate concerning the pricing of CDX tranches. Coval,
Jurek, and Stafford (2009) examine the pre-crisis behavior of CDX tranches, pricing these
tranches with a static options model that assumes that cash flows occur at a fixed maturity.4
Setting firm parameters so that the CDX itself is correctly priced, they find that spreads
for the senior tranches are too low in pre-crisis data. They conjecture that investors were
willing to provide insurance on these products, despite receiving low spreads, because of a
naive interpretation of credit risk ratings. Indeed, these products were highly rated because
3Onestrandofthecreditderivativeliteraturemodelsdefaultasanexogenouseventwhichistheoutcome
of a Poisson process (Duffie and Singleton, 1997). Such models are known as “reduced form.” A second
strand builds on the assumption is that default occurs when firm value passes through a lower boundary
(Black and Cox, 1976). Such models are known as “structural.” Nonetheless, structural models typically
take the price process and the risk-neutral measure as exogenous. In our paper, both are derived from
investor preferences and beliefs.
4Specifically, if all cash flows occur at year five, then in principle CDX prices can be calculated using
state prices derived from five-year options.
2