NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FIGHTING CRISES
Gary Gorton
Guillermo Ordoñez
Working Paper 22787
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22787
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2016
We thank Mark Gertler, Todd Keister, Pamela Labadie, Ricardo Reis, Eric Rosengren, Geoffrey
Tootell and seminar participants at the Boston Fed, Wharton, the 2015 AEA Meetings in Boston,
the 2016 NAESM in Philadelphia, the 2016 SED Meetings in Toulouse and the “Innovations in
Central Banking” Conference at the St. Louis Fed for comments and suggestions. This paper
previously circulated under the title “How Central Banks End Crises.” The usual waiver of
liability applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22787.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Gary Gorton and Guillermo Ordoñez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Fighting Crises
Gary Gorton and Guillermo Ordoñez
NBER Working Paper No. 22787
October 2016
JEL No. E32,E58,G01
ABSTRACT
In fighting a financial crisis, opacity (keeping the names of banks borrowing at emergency
lending facilities secret) and stigma (the cost of having a bank’s name revealed) are desirable to
restore confidence. Lending facilities raise the perceived average quality of all banks’ assets.
Opacity reduces the costs of these facilities, creating an information externality that prevents runs
even on banks not participating in lending facilities. Stigma is costly but keeps banks from
revealing their participation, making opacity sustainable. The key tool for implementing optimal
opacity while fine tuning stigma is the haircut for bonds offered as collateral in lending facilities.
Gary Gorton
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu
Guillermo Ordoñez
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Economics
428 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
ordonez@econ.upenn.edu

1 Introduction
During the financial crisis of 2007-2008 the Federal Reserve introduced a number of
new emergency lending programs, including the Term Auction Facility, the Term Se-
curitiesLendingFacility,andthePrimaryDealersCreditFacility,whichprovidepub-
lic funds to financial intermediaries in exchange for private assets. Also as part of
their Emergency Economic Stabilization Act, the U.S. Treasury implemented similar
programs, such as the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP). These facilities were
specifically designed to hide borrowers’ identities.1 Secrecy was also integral to the
special crisis lending programs of the Bank of England and the European Central
Bank.2 Plenderleith (2012), asked by the Bank of England to review their Emergency
Lending Facilities (ELA) during the financial crisis, wrote: “Was secrecy appropriate
in2008? Inlightofthefragilityofthemarketsatthetime. . . itwasrighttoendeavor
to keep ELA operations covert. . . in conditions of more systemic disturbance, as in
2008, ELA is likely to be more effective if provided covertly” (p. 70). Even before the
FederalReservecameintoexistence,privatebankclearinghouseswouldalsoopenan
emergencylendingfacilityduringbankingpanicskeepingtheidentitiesofborrowing
bankssecret. SeeGortonandTallman(2016).
The secrecy of all these lending facilities has been widely criticized for hiding the
identities of weak or insolvent banks, resulting in fierce calls for transparency. Dur-
ing the recent crisis, for instance, Bloomberg and Fox News sued the Fed (under the
Freedom of Information Act) to obtain the identities of borrowers.3 In this paper,
however,weshowthatlendingfacilitiesthatreplace“badprivateassets”with“good
public bonds” in secret are indeed optimal. Secrecy creates an information external-
ity by raising the average quality of assets in the banking system without replacing
all bad assets, mitigating the desire of depositors to examine banks’ assets, thereby
avoiding a withdrawal of funds (runs hereafter) from those banks that are found to
havelessthanaverageassetquality. Acrisishereisaninformationevent,asinDang,
1Bernanke(2010): “. . . [becauseof]thecompetitiveformatoftheauctions,theTAF[TermAuction
Facility]hasnotsufferedthestigmaoftheconventionaldiscountwindow”(p.2). Also,seeArmantier
etal.(2015). InthecaseofTARPtherewerefiercecriticismsaftertheirimplementationbytheSenate
CongressionalOversightPanelaboutitslackoftransparency. Seehttp://www.jec.senate.gov/
public/index.cfm/2009/3/03.1.09.
2For an overview see Bank for International Settlements (BIS) Committee on the Global Financial
System(2008).
3BloombergL.P.v. BoardofGovernorsoftheFederalReserveSystem,649Supp2d263. FoxNews
Networkv. BoardofGovernorsoftheFederalReserveSystem,639F.Supp2d388. SeeKarlson(2010).
1

Gorton, and Holmstro¨m (2013) and Gorton and Ordonez (2014a). Lending facilities
recreate confidence and avoid inefficient examination of banks’ portfolios. Secrecy
minimizesthecostofthosefacilities.
Our view of a bank run is in contrast to the more standard view of run as coordina-
tion failures and captures both depositors seeking to withdraw from banks and repo
lenders wanting to withdraw via higher haircuts on the collateral or not rolling over
their loans at all. As these runs are motivated by suspicion about the bank’s back-
ing collateral, the Central Bank may lend cash against collateral using an emergency
lending facility, or lend Treasury bonds against collateral as in the Term Securities
Lending Facility (TSLF) to raise the perceived average quality of the backing collat-
eral. Our arguments below apply in either case, but we will, for consistency, speak
throughout of a facility like the TSLF where government bonds are lent against pri-
vate collateral. Additionally, we will speak of the “Central Bank”, but we also think
ofthatasincludingfiscalauthorities’facilities,aswithTARP.
Bonds are “good assets” because they are backed by taxation, but this is costly as
taxation is usually distortionary.4 Then, to minimize the cost of issuing bonds these
have to be pooled with private assets, but this is only feasible if there is secrecy that
allowsthepooling.
Inourmodel,forsimplicity,householdsarebornwithendowmentsalreadydeposited
in a bank which they can withdraw immediately to consume or keep in the bank. A
bankisaninstitutionwithproprietaryaccesstoaproductiveinvestmentopportunity,
or a “project” hereafter, and needs funds to invest. Each bank also has a legacy asset
(hereafter simply an “asset”) that is used to back deposits. We assume the quality
of the asset is unknown unless costly (private) information is produced. If no infor-
mation is produced, even banks with a bad asset can avoid early withdrawals and
invest in the project. The underlying problem in the economy is a scarcity of good
assets (“safe debt” to back repo, for example). When good assets are scarce, an effi-
cient substitute is ignorance about which assets are good and which are bad. In that
case, good and bad assets are pooled in an informational sense. When this pooling
results in a high enough perceived average value of banks’ portfolios, depositors do
4The distortionary taxation may be in the form of inflation if the Central Bank is lending cash
against collateral via emergency lending facilities. Sometimes the Central Bank can sterilize the out-
flow of cash, and sometimes the result is inflation or compromised monetary policy more generally.
SeeSinclair(2000).
2