NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SECURING PROPERTY RIGHTS
A.Patrick Behrer
Edward L. Glaeser
Giacomo A.M. Ponzetto
Andrei Shleifer
Working Paper 22701
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22701
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. We are grateful to Alejandro Ponce from the World
Justice Project for providing us with their data, and especially to Joseph Shapiro for his data on
water pollution. We are grateful to Abhijit Banerjee, Lucian Bebchuk, Kevin Chen, Oliver Hart,
Louis Kaplow, Robbie Minton, Yusuf Neggers, Jesse Shapiro, Henry Smith, Ilya Somin, Dan
Svirsky, Gabriel Unger, and the referees of this journal for extremely helpful advice. Ponzetto
acknowledges financial support from the Centre de Recerca en Economia Internacional (CREI),
through the European Research Council (ERC), under the European Union’s Horizon 2020
Programme, Grant Agreement 714905 (“Citizens, Institutions and Globalization”), the Spanish
Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness (grants RYC-2013-13838 and SEV-2015-0563) and
the Government of Catalonia (grant 2014 SGR 830 and CERCA program).
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22701.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Edward L. Glaeser, Giacomo A.M. Ponzetto, Andrei Shleifer, and A. Patrick Behrer. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Securing Property Rights
A. Patrick Behrer, Edward L. Glaeser, Giacomo A.M. Ponzetto, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 22701
September 2016, Revised July 2020
JEL No. H13,K11,O43
ABSTRACT
A central challenge in securing property rights is the subversion of justice through legal skill,
bribery, or physical force by the strong—the state or its powerful citizens—against the weak. We
present evidence that undue influence on courts is a common concern in many countries,
especially among the poor. We then present a model of a water polluter whose discharges
contaminate riparian properties belonging to multiple owners, and we compare property rules,
liability rules, and regulation from the efficiency viewpoint. When the polluter can subvert the
assessment of damages, property rules are preferred to liability rules when there are few parties
and bargaining is feasible, but they excessively deter efficient pollution when bargaining between
many parties fails. Regulation that enforces partial abatement may be preferred to either of the
extreme rules. Our model helps explain the evolution of the legal treatment of water pollution
from property rules to liability rules to regulation. An empirical analysis of water quality in the
U.S. before and after the Clean Water Act shows that the effects of regulation are consistent with
several predictions of the model.
A. Patrick Behrer Giacomo A.M. Ponzetto
Harvard University CREI, Universitat
Economics Department Pompeu Fabra, IPEG and
Littauer Center Barcelona GSE
Cambridge, MA 02138 C/ Ramon Trias Fargas,
behrer@g.harvard.edu 25-27 08005 Barcelona
Spain
gponzetto@crei.cat
Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics 315A Andrei Shleifer
Littauer Center Department of Economics
Harvard University Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138 Littauer Center M-9
and NBER Cambridge, MA 02138
eglaeser@harvard.edu and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu

“The question I have to decide is, whether the appeal to me by the defendant to deprive the plaintiff of his
right of way and give him money damages instead, can be entertained. I think it cannot. [If it were,] of
course that simply means the Court in every case, at the instance of the rich man, is to compel the poor
man to sell him his property at a valuation. ... I am quite satisfied nothing of the kind was ever intended,
and that if I acceded to this view ... I should add one more to the number of instances which we have from
the days in which the Bible was written until the present moment, in which the man of large possessions
has endeavoured to deprive his neighbour, the man with small possessions, of his property, with or
without adequate compensation.” (Krehl v. Burrell, 7 Ch.D. 553 [1878])
“The whole point of a property regime is to restrain the strong from resorting to their strength…
The weak are no longer vulnerable to unrestrained depredations, and they now have the chance of
becoming rich without becoming strong… The only thing that is certain to be certain under property is
effective protection of the weak against violent dispossession by the strong, and vice versa” (Kennedy and
Michelman 1980, p. 723).
1. Introduction
Economists since Montesquieu (1748) and Smith (1776) have seen protection of property rights as
essential for growth and prosperity.1 Yet, property in much of the world today remains insecure. Even in
the developed world, exposure to dangerous pollution, or trespass by hunters or neighbors’ cattle, are
common concerns. In the developing world, the land and property of the weaker members of society are
vulnerable to outright takings by the stronger ones—be they tribal chiefs, powerful neighbors, or even
men taking from women (Ali, Deininger and Goldstein 2014; Ali et al. 2014). People everywhere fear
expropriation by the state through eminent domain without just compensation (Munch 1976; Chang 2010;
1 For the aggregate evidence in favor of this consensus, see, e.g., Barro (1990), De Long and Shleifer (1993), and
Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001). For micro evidence, see Besley (1995), De Soto (2000), Field (2005,
2007), Goldstein and Udry (2008), Dell (2010), and Hornbeck (2010).
2

Singh 2012; Somin 2015). At the heart of insecurity of property is the belief that institutions of law and
order such as the police and the courts fail to protect the weak in conflicts with the strong.
We provide some evidence that such subversion of justice is a major concern for people in
developing countries today. We then show theoretically that several key aspects of securing property can
be understood from this perspective. Using a model of a “strong” water polluter who can influence a court
in its determination of damages, and multiple “weak” affected property owners who cannot, we compare
the efficiency of alternative legal rules, including property rules, liability rules, and regulation. The
assumption of a strong polluter who can subvert the determination of damages is a central innovation of
our model. The assumption of multiple victims is a standard way to model the limits of bargaining.
In this model, the upside of a property rule relative to a liability rule is that it grants land owners
protection that is invulnerable to subversion by the polluter. The downside is that it relies on bargaining to
attain efficiency, and when bargaining fails it stops efficient pollution. Regulation can address these
inefficiencies by mandating abatement up to a pre-specified level, and enforcing this mandate with stark
penalties like those of a property rule. Intuitively, regulation is thus equivalent to a partial property rule.
Both regulation and the property rule have the upside of reducing harm when courts are
subverted, and the downside of being relatively inflexible. Regulation, however, does not fully stop
pollution when bargaining fails. It is a crude instrument, like the property rule, but nonetheless avoids
both extremes of no pollution or unabated pollution. Therefore it can do better than either pure legal rule.
We then apply our approach to water pollution across U.S. counties, showing how historically court-
enforced liability rules failed to protect private property from externalities, especially in the more corrupt
places, and how regulation through the 1972 Clean Water Act has improved water quality.
Figure 1, based on surveys of around 1,000 households in each of 102 countries by the World
Justice Project (WJP), illustrates the basic fact that motivates our analysis. It reports, for all sample
countries with population above 50 million, aggregating over the surveyed households in each country,
responses to the following question. “In your opinion, most judges decide cases according to: (single
3