NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
NECESSITY AS THE MOTHER OF INVENTION:
MONETARY POLICY AFTER THE CRISIS
Alan S. Blinder
Michael Ehrmann
Jakob de Haan
David-Jan Jansen
Working Paper 22735
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22735
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2016
Prepared for the 64th Panel Meeting of Economic Policy in Florence, 14-15 October 2016. The paper
presents results from a survey among heads of central banks and academic economists. We are very
grateful for all their contributions. We also thank the editors, our referees, Ben Bernanke, Chris Sims,
Christiaan Pattipeilohy, Gabriele Galati, Jan Willem van den End, Klaus Adam, Marcel Fratzscher,
Mark Watson, Mervyn King, and Richhild Moessner as well as seminar and conference participants
at the Bank of Canada, de Nederlandsche Bank, the European Central Bank, the 48th MMF Group
Annual Conference, Brunel University and the University of Lisbon for thoughtful comments. We
thank Henk van Kerkhoff and Mario Cannella for statistical assistance. This paper was written before
the second author joined the European Central Bank. Views expressed in this paper do not necessarily
coincide with those of the European Central Bank, de Nederlandsche Bank, the Eurosystem, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research. The Managing Editor in charge of this paper is Refet Gürkaynak.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Alan S. Blinder, Michael Ehrmann, Jakob de Haan, and David-Jan Jansen. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Necessity as the Mother of Invention: Monetary Policy after the Crisis
Alan S. Blinder, Michael Ehrmann, Jakob de Haan, and David-Jan Jansen
NBER Working Paper No. 22735
October 2016
JEL No. E52,E58
ABSTRACT
We ask whether recent changes in monetary policy due to the financial crisis will be temporary or
permanent. We present evidence from two surveys—one of central bank governors, the other of
academic specialists. We find that central banks in crisis countries are more likely to have
resorted to new policies, to have had discussions about mandates, and to have communicated
more. But the thinking has changed more broadly—for instance, central banks in non-crisis
countries also report having implemented macro-prudential measures. Overall, we expect central
banks in the future to have broader mandates, use macro-prudential tools more widely, and
communicate more actively than before the crisis. While there is no consensus yet about the
usefulness of unconventional monetary policies, we expect most of them will remain in central
banks’ toolkits, as governors who gain experience with a particular tool are more likely to assess
that tool positively. Finally, the relationship between central banks and their governments might
well have changed, with central banks “crossing the line” more often than in the past.
Alan S. Blinder Jakob de Haan
Department of Economics De Nederlandsche Bank
Princeton University Westeinde 1
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021 PO Box 98
and NBER 1000 AB Amsterdam
blinder@princeton.edu The Netherlands
and University of Groningen, The Netherlands Germany
Michael Ehrmann and CESifo, Munich, Germany
European Central Bank jakob.de.haan@rug.nl
D-60640 Frankfurt am Main
GERMANY David-Jan Jansen
michael.ehrmann@ecb.int De Nederlandsche Bank
Westeinde 1
PO Box 98
1000 AB Amsterdam
The Netherlands
d.jansen@dnb.nl

1. INTRODUCTION
The global financial crisis has had a profound impact on the practice of monetary policy in a
range of countries. Due to the speed and force of developments in financial markets and of the
economy more broadly, monetary policymakers rarely had the luxury of performing extensive
ex ante analyses of prospective changes in their responsibilities, instruments, or
communications. Necessity was often the mother of invention.
The key question today is to what extent these changes will prove to be temporary, primarily
motivated by the financial crisis, or whether we are seeing permanent changes in the practice
of monetary policy. These are not easy questions to answer in 2016 because the crisis is still
recent—indeed, it is arguable that it continues in some countries—and since few, if any,
central banks have completed their “exit” from the extraordinary policies induced by the
crisis.
In this paper, we aim to shed light on this question primarily via two new (and almost
identical) surveys of opinion—one of governors of central banks, the other of academic
specialists.1 We concentrate on what, to us, seem to be the four main sub-questions: Have
there been important, and lasting, changes in central bank mandates, monetary policy
instruments, central bank communications, and the place of the central bank within the
government? In addition to the survey data, we take stock of the findings of the academic
literature and, here and there, add our own opinions.
To collect the views of central bank governors and academics, we conducted two surveys
between February and May 2016. In the first survey, we contacted the heads of 95 central
banks via e-mail with a questionnaire consisting of 13 questions.2 In all, 55 questionnaires
were returned to us, for a gratifying (these days) response rate of 58%. Concerning
1 In related survey work, Siklos (2016) reports results for 39 central banks, while Carré et al. (2013) report results for 15
central bankers and 31 (mainly European) economists. Siklos (2016) examines to what extent central banks have changed
their communication strategy since 2007. He concludes that while differences between inflation targeting and non-inflation
targeting central banks persist, these differences have become smaller. He also finds that inflation targeters put more
emphasis on communicating about macro-prudential policies than non-inflation targeters. This result is in line with our
finding that inflation targeters are more likely to adopt macro-prudential policies than non-inflation targeters. Carré et al.
(2013) analyse to what extent the pre-crisis consensus on monetary policy making has changed since the crisis. In line with
our findings, they report that central bankers are generally less eager than academics to permanently adopt changes in
monetary policy introduced in response to the financial crisis.
2 The questionnaires are available in an appendix. We did not contact the heads of National Central Banks from the euro area,
nor the Presidents of the regional Federal Reserve Banks.
1

backgrounds, 16 of the completed questionnaires came from governors of banks in advanced
economies (AE), 32 from BIS members, 20 from institutions that used inflation targeting prior
to the financial crisis and 12 from countries that were hit by the financial crisis according to
the database of Laeven and Valencia (2013) (Table 1).3
For the second survey, we sent a similar questionnaire to 401 academic economists from the
relevant research programs of the NBER and the CEPR.4 We received 159 questionnaires,
which corresponds to a disappointing response rate of just below 40%. Of the responding
academics, 101 currently reside in the U.S. (though many of those are not native Americans),
while 31 are located in the euro area, 14 are in the U.K., and 13 are in a range of other (mainly
European) countries. It is worth emphasizing that while the academic sample is dominated by
respondents from the U.S., the euro area, and the U.K., the central bank sample is not. For this
reason, we sometimes report tabulations that try to “match” the geographies better. We also
tracked the backgrounds of our responding academics. Most have been trained in the United
States: 84% hold a U.S. PhD. Around a quarter have previously worked in a central bank. In
contrast to the central bank governors, most academic respondents (82%) are residents and
citizens in countries that were hit by the financial crisis.
Two methodological points about surveying in general, and surveying central bank
governors in particular, bear emphasis—as we know from questions we have received from
readers and seminar participants. The first is that survey instruments must be brief and the
questions easy for respondents to answer else the response rate will be extremely low. Our
academics’ questionnaire could be completed easily in five minutes, maybe in three, and yet
the response rate didn’t reach 40%. Second, you cannot ask central bank heads sensitive
questions, even if you guarantee confidentiality (which we did). They are a tight-lipped group
that knows how to keep secrets. So we restricted ourselves to questions that, we imagined,
central bankers would probably be willing to answer in public.5
With that in mind, here are our key findings: Necessity has indeed been the trigger for many
central bank inventions—central banks in crisis countries are much more likely to have
resorted to new policies, to have had discussions about their mandates, to have communicated
3 These subgroups overlap, of course.
4 We include three NBER Programs: Economic Fluctuations and Growth, International Finance and Macroeconomics, and
Monetary Economics. We also include three CEPR Programme Areas: International Macroeconomics and Finance, Monetary
Economics and Fluctuations, and Macroeconomics and Growth.
5 We think we succeeded. We didn’t get many blanks.
2