NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A REAL ESTATE BOOM WITH CHINESE CHARACTERISTICS
Edward Glaeser
Wei Huang
Yueran Ma
Andrei Shleifer
Working Paper 22789
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22789
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2016
We thank the editors Enrico Moretti, Gordon Hanson, and Timothy Taylor for helpful comments,
and Kevin Chen and You Yang for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22789.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Edward Glaeser, Wei Huang, Yueran Ma, and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Real Estate Boom with Chinese Characteristics
Edward Glaeser, Wei Huang, Yueran Ma, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 22789
October 2016, Revised November 2016
JEL No. E60,G10,R21,R28,R31
ABSTRACT
Chinese housing prices rose by over 10 percent per year in real terms between 2003 and 2014,
and are now between two and ten times higher than the construction cost of apartments. At the
same time, Chinese developers built 100 billion square feet of residential real estate. This boom
has been accompanied by a large increase in the number of vacant homes, held by both
developers and households. This boom may turn out to be a housing bubble followed by a crash,
yet that future is far from certain. The demand for real estate in China is so strong that current
prices might be sustainable, especially given the sparse alternative investments for Chinese
households, so long as the level of new supply is radically curtailed. Whether that happens
depends on the policies of the Chinese government, which must weigh the benefits of price
stability against the costs of restricting urban growth.
Edward Glaeser Yueran Ma
Department of Economics Harvard University
315A Littauer Center yueranma@g.harvard.edu
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138 Andrei Shleifer
and NBER Department of Economics
eglaeser@harvard.edu Harvard University
Littauer Center M-9
Wei Huang Cambridge, MA 02138
Harvard University and NBER
1050 Mass. Avenue ashleifer@harvard.edu
Cambridge, MA 02138
huangw@nber.org

Between 2000 and 2010, American housing went through a spectacular boom/bust cycle, which
made and broke fortunes and left financial wreckage in its wake. According to Federal Housing
Finance Agency, real prices of U.S. homes grew by 5 percent per year between 1996 and 2006,
and then declined by 6.4 percent per year between 2007 and 2012. Annual construction exceeded
1.9 million housing units in 2005 and 2006, and then dropped to an average of 688,000 units per
year between 2009 and 2013.
This U.S. housing cycle looks stable and dull relative to the great Chinese real estate boom. In
China’s top cities, real prices grew by 13.1 percent annually from 2003 to 2013 (Fang et al.,
2015). Real land prices in 35 large Chinese cities increased almost 5-fold between 2004 and
2015 (Wu, Gyourko, and Deng, 2015). As prices rose, so did construction. Between 2003 and
2014, Chinese builders added 100 billion square feet of floor space, or 74 square feet for every
person in China.1 Over this time, China built an average of 5.5 million apartments per year. In
2014, 29 million people worked in China’s construction industry, or 16 percent of urban
employment. By comparison, construction industry accounted for 8 percent of total employment
in the US and 13 percent of that in Spain at the peak of their most recent housing booms.
We begin by reviewing these facts and two other striking differences between the housing booms
in the U.S. and China. Unlike in the U.S., high vacancy rates are a distinct feature of Chinese
housing markets. Vacancies include both completed units unsold by developers, and purchased
units that remain unoccupied. We estimate that this stock of empty housing now adds up to at
least about 20 billion square feet.
The final profound difference from the U.S. is the much greater and quite distinctive public
sector engagement with real estate in China, beginning with the fact that all urban land is owned
by the government, and private individuals only buy and sell “use rights,” which were originally
bought from local governments and run for a maximum of 70 years. It is unclear what the
government will do when those use rights expire. While many U.S. local governments,
especially on the coasts, fight against new development, Chinese local governments encourage
building to boost local output and employment, as well as to raise revenue from land sales. The
1 http://www.stats.gov.cn/tjsj/ndsj/2014/indexeh.htm, and Chivakul et al. (2015).
2

U.S. government subsidizes housing through tax and credit policies, but does not have nearly as
aggressive a home-building promotion program as its Chinese counterpart.
The dramatic size of the Chinese boom has left the world wondering whether the Chinese real
estate is a bubble waiting to burst. We approach this question by analyzing the determinants of
demand and supply of housing in China. On the demand side, we examine the economic,
demographic, cultural, and speculative factors shaping demand. We also consider valuations of
apartment prices in China as a gauge of frothiness. Fang et al. (2015) find that price to income
ratios range from 6 to 10 in their sample of Chinese cities -- high but not unusually so. They also
show that Chinese price growth is not faster than income growth. Their data stop in 2012, and
relies on mortgage applicants with relatively high incomes. Since then, prices continued to rise
dramatically in some cities. As of 2016, a 90 square meter apartment in Beijing or Shanghai
fetches more than 25 times average household income. Even so, conclusions on the valuation of
Chinese housing based on demand factors turn critically on difficult-to-forecast national growth
rates. If China continues to grow very fast, high prices can be justified.
The supply-side approach to housing fundamentals is to compare housing prices to the physical
costs of construction, and an assessment of the long-run price of land. Building costs can be
precisely estimated, but land values are hard to predict in markets where supply is constrained by
geography and regulation. The supply approach to Chinese housing suggests the prices are far
too high, especially outside the few top cities. Construction costs are typically less than one-
third of the selling price of finished space in these cities. Absent regulation, land is not scarce in
the country as a whole, especially away from the coast. The rapid pace of construction and the
vast number of vacant units support the view that supply is currently quite elastic.
To put our empirical results together, we simulate possible prices in 20 years. We assume that
speculative demand for housing cannot be sustained in the long run and home prices stabilize at
about 10 times income, a high but not implausible level by global standards. If income growth is
robust and housing supply growth is effectively muted, then equilibrium prices in 20 years for
apartments in top tier cities could exceed 2 million RMB. But even if income growth stays high,
real returns on housing will be negative if future supply is as ample as it has been in the past.
3