NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO RECESSIONS ACCELERATE ROUTINE-BIASED TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE?
EVIDENCE FROM VACANCY POSTINGS
Brad Hershbein
Lisa B. Kahn
Working Paper 22762
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22762
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2016, Revised September 2017
We are grateful to Jason Abaluck, Joe Altonji, David Autor, Tim Bartik, David Berger, Nick
Bloom, Jeff Clemens, David Deming, David Green, John Horton, Hilary Hoynes, Peter Kuhn,
Fabian Lange, Steve Malliaris, Adrien Matray, Alicia Sasser Modestino, Daniel Shoag, Henry
Siu, Basit Zafar, four anonymous referees and seminar participants at the 2016 AEAs, the Atlanta
Fed, Boston College, Boston University, Brookings, Georgetown University, Harvard, the LSE,
MIT, NBER Summer Institute (Macro and Labor), Northwestern, Princeton, Rutgers, SOLE/
EALE 2015 meetings, Trans Pacific Labor Seminar 2015, University of British Columbia,
University of Chicago, University of Illinois, University of Kansas, University of Michigan,
University of Notre Dame, University of Pennsylvania, University of Pittsburgh, University of
South Florida, and the WEAI 2016 meetings. We are especially indebted to Dan Restuccia, Jake
Sherman, and Bledi Taska for providing the Burning Glass data. Jing Cai provided excellent
research assistance with CPS data. A previous version of this paper was titled "Is College the
New High School? Evidence from Vacancy Postings." The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Brad Hershbein and Lisa B. Kahn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Recessions Accelerate Routine-Biased Technological Change? Evidence from Vacancy
Postings
Brad Hershbein and Lisa B. Kahn
NBER Working Paper No. 22762
October 2016, Revised September 2017
JEL No. D22,E32,J23,J24,M51,O33
ABSTRACT
We show that skill requirements in job vacancy postings differentially increased in MSAs that
were hit hard by the Great Recession, relative to less hard-hit areas. These increases persist
through at least the end of 2015 and are correlated with increases in capital investments, both at
the MSA and firm-levels. We also find that effects are most pronounced in routine-cognitive
occupations, which exhibit relative wage growth as well. We argue that this evidence is
consistent with the restructuring of production toward routine-biased technologies and the more-
skilled workers that complement them, and that the Great Recession accelerated this process.
Brad Hershbein
W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research
hershbein@upjohn.org
Lisa B. Kahn
Yale University
School of Management
P. O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
lisa.kahn@yale.edu

1 Introduction
The employment shift from occupations in the middle of the skill distribution toward those
in the tails is one of the most important trends in the U.S. labor market over the last 30
years. Previous research makes the compelling case that a primary driver of this job polar-
ization is routine-biased technological change (RBTC), whereby new machine technologies
and overseas labor substitute for middle-skill jobs in the U.S. and are in turn complementary
1
to high-skill cognitive jobs. Until recently, RBTC had been thought to be a gradual, secular
phenomenon. However, a long theoretical literature beginning with Schumpeter’s (cid:16)creative
destruction(cid:17) (1939) suggests adjustments to technological change may be more episodic. In
boom times, high opportunity costs, or frictions such as adjustment costs, may inhibit re-
sourcesfrombeingreallocatedoptimallyinthefaceoftechnologicalchange. Recessionslower
2
the opportunity cost and can produce large enough shocks to overcome these frictions.
Whether adjustments to new technology are smooth or lumpy is important for policy
and for our understanding of recoveries. The recoveries from the last three U.S. recessions
(1991, 2001, 2007(cid:21)09) have been jobless: employment was slow to rebound despite recovery
in aggregate output. The reasons for jobless recovery are not well understood, but a small
theoretical literature points to adjustment costs as a potential mechanism, since they can
generate reallocation that is concentrated in downturns (Berger 2012, Koenders and Roger-
son 2005, Jaimovich and Siu 2012). Such lumpy adjustment may leave a mass of displaced
workers with the wrong skills for new production. Jaimovich and Siu (2015) provide sugges-
tive evidence that countercyclical reallocation, in the form of RBTC, and jobless recovery
are linked. They show that the vast majority of the declines in middle-skill employment have
occurred during recessions and that, over the same time period, recovery was jobless only
in these occupations. However, there is still relatively little direct evidence on how (cid:28)rms
restructure employment in the face of technological change, and, in particular, whether this
3
restructuring is gradual or episodic.
In this paper we investigate how the demand for skills changed over the Great Recession.
We use a new data set collected by Burning Glass Technologies that contains the near-
universe of electronically posted job vacancies in 2007 and 2010(cid:21)2015. Exploiting spatial
variation in economic conditions, we establish a new fact: the skill requirements of job ads
increase in metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) that su(cid:27)ered larger employment shocks in
1
See for example the seminal work of Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003); Autor, Katz, and Kearney
(2008); Goos and Manning (2007); and Autor and Dorn (2013).
2
Many theoretical papers predict this phenomenon. See for example Hall (1991, 2005); Mortensen and
Pissarides(1994); CaballeroandHammour(1994,1996); Gomes,Greenwood,andRebelo(2001); andKoen-
ders and Rogerson (2005).
3
For example, Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017) (cid:28)nd that the the di(cid:27)usion of industrial robots across U.S.
commutingzonesreducedaggregateemploymentandwages,Harrigan,Reshef,andToubal(2016)showthat
jobpolarizationwasmorepronouncedinFrench(cid:28)rmswithgreatersharesoftechnology-relatedoccupations,
and Hawkins, Michaels and Oh (2015) show that capital investments and employment reductions frequently
occur together in Korean manufacturing plants, but these papers focus on long run changes.
2

the Great Recession, relative to the same areas before the shock and other areas that experi-
encedsmallershocks. Ourestimatesimplythatadspostedinahard-hitmetroareaareabout
5 percentage points (16%) more likely to contain education and experience requirements and
about 2(cid:21)3 percentage points (8-12%) more likely to state requirements for cognitive and
computer skills. Moreover, the vast majority of this (cid:16)upskilling(cid:17) persists through the end of
our sample in 2015. That is, even while most measures of local labor-market strength had
converged back to pre-recession levels, di(cid:27)erences in advertised skill demands remain. This
is true holding constant a rich set of controls for the availability of skilled labor and the
composition of ads across (cid:28)rms and occupations. In fact, we (cid:28)nd that the very (cid:28)rms that
upskilled early in the recovery drive the persistence later in our sample period.
These patterns collectively raise the possibility that a structural shift in the demand for
skilloccurreddisproportionatelyinharder-hit MSAs. In particular, theskill requirementswe
explore (education, experience, cognitive, and computer) are known to complement routine-
biased technologies (Autor, Levy, and Murnane 2003; Brynjolfsson and McAfee 2011). If
a structural shift in line with RBTC is occurring, we would expect changes in these skill
requirements to be accompanied by an accelerated adoption of such technologies, as well.
Indeed, we (cid:28)nd that increases in skill requirements are correlated with capital investments at
both the MSA and (cid:28)rm levels. First, using the Ci Technology Database from Harte-Hanks,
a market intelligence (cid:28)rm, we show that harder-hit MSAs exhibited a relative increase in
IT investments, as measured by the adoption of personal computers, at the same time as
they upskilled in job postings. These di(cid:27)erences across MSAs emerge only after the Great
Recession and, once again, persist through our sample period. Second, we link (cid:28)rms in our
job postings database to those in the Harte-Hanks database, as well as to publicly traded
(cid:28)rms in Compustat. We show that the (cid:28)rms increasing their capital investments, based on
PC adoption and physical capital holdings, are also more likely to upskill. Thus, increased
demand for labor skill appears closely linked to both general and IT capital investment.
If this increased investment is in fact related to routine-biased technologies, we would
expect to see the strongest changes to labor characteristics for the jobs most susceptible to
such technologies(cid:22)routine ones. We thus additionally focus on di(cid:27)erent types of routine
occupations, exploring joint changes in skill requirements, employment, and wages. Follow-
ing Acemoglu and Autor (2011), we distinguish routine-cognitive occupations (e.g., clerical,
administrative, and sales) from routine-manual ones (e.g., production and operatives), and
we supplement the job ads data with Current Population Survey (CPS) and Occupational
Employment Statistics (OES) data. For routine-manual occupations, we see evidence con-
sistent with (cid:28)rms’ substitution of technology for labor(cid:22)a sharp increase in layo(cid:27) risk for
harder-hitMSAsearlyon, andpersistentlydepressedemployment, withnoparticularimpact
on skill requirements. This is the traditional view exhibited in the polarization literature:
employment losses concentrated in occupations we expect to be most readily replaceable
by machines. Consistent with Jaimovich and Siu (2015), we show that these changes also
3