NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STANDING ON THE SHOULDERS OF GIANTS:
THE EFFECT OF PASSIVE INVESTORS ON ACTIVISM
Ian R. Appel
Todd A. Gormley
Donald B. Keim
Working Paper 22707
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22707
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016
We thank Nicole Boysen, Alon Brav, Alex Edmans, Slava Fos, Nickolay Gantchev, Christopher
Hennessey, Andrew Karoyli, Hyunseob Kim, Nadya Malenko, Pedro Matos, Jordan Nickerson,
Min Pyo, Christopher Schwarz, Jules van Binsbergen, seminar and brown bag participants at
Baylor University (Hankamer), Boston College (Carroll), Cornell University (Dyson), Lancaster
University, London Business School, London School of Economics, Pennsylvania State
University (Smeal), University of Pennsylvania (Wharton), Washington University in St. Louis
(Olin), and participants at the Carnegie Mellon University Accounting Conference, European
Finance Association Annual Meeting (Norway), FTSE 2016 World Investment Forum, FSU
SunTrust Beach Conference, National Bureau of Economic Research Conference on Long-Term
Asset Management, 2016 Norwegian Financial Research Conference, University of Kentucky
Finance Conference, and Western Finance Association Annual Meeting (Park City) for helpful
comments, Louis Yang for his research assistance, Alon Brav for sharing activism data, and the
Rodney L. White Center for Financial Research for financial support. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Ian R. Appel, Todd A. Gormley, and Donald B. Keim. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Standing on the Shoulders of Giants: The Effect of Passive Investors on Activism
Ian R. Appel, Todd A. Gormley, and Donald B. Keim
NBER Working Paper No. 22707
September 2016
JEL No. D22,G23,G30,G34
ABSTRACT
We analyze whether the growing importance of passive investors has influenced the campaigns,
tactics, and successes of activists. We find activists are more likely to pursue changes to corporate
control or influence (e.g., via board representation) and to forego more incremental changes to
corporate policies when a larger share of the target company’s stock is held by passively managed
mutual funds. Furthermore, higher passive ownership is associated with increased use of proxy
fights and a higher likelihood the activist obtains board representation or the sale of the targeted
company. Overall, our findings suggest that the increasingly large ownership stakes of passive
institutional investors mitigate free-rider problems associated with certain forms of intervention
and ultimately increase the likelihood of success by activists.
Ian R. Appel Donald B. Keim
Boston College The Wharton School
Carroll School of Management Finance Department
Department of Finance University of Pennsylvania
140 Commonwealth Ave. 3620 Locust Walk
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467 Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
USA keim@wharton.upenn.edu
ian.appel@bc.edu
Todd A. Gormley
Olin Business School
Washington University in St. Louis
One Brookings Drive
Campus Box 1133
St. Louis, MO 63130
gormley@wustl.edu

“This is the biggest shift in the battle for corporate control since private
equity was invented in the 1980s…activists realize they can influence [the]
concentrated shareholder base at many companies, and they’re tapping
into the desires of shareholders to see change take place.”
— James Rossman, head of corporate preparedness at Lazard
The New York Times, March 18, 2014
1. Introduction
The willingness of investors to engage in activism has grown rapidly in recent years. Hundreds of
activist campaigns are launched each year, and as noted by The Economist, the current “scale of their
insurrection in America is unprecedented.”1 Evidence also suggests the goals of activists have become more
ambitious, and their success rate has improved. For example, activists increasingly wage proxy fights to
obtain board representation, and more than 70% of these campaigns were successful in 2014.2
At the same time, stock ownership by passive institutional investors has grown rapidly. Passively
managed mutual funds, which seek to deliver the returns of a market index (e.g., S&P 500) or particular
investment style (e.g., large-cap value), have quadrupled their ownership share of the U.S. stock market
over the last 15 years and now account for more than a third of all mutual fund assets (see Fig. 1). The
institutions that offer these funds, like Vanguard and Blackrock, are now often the largest shareholders of
U.S. companies, resulting in a significant increase in ownership concentration for many firms. In this paper,
we examine whether these two concurrent trends are related. In particular, we analyze whether the
increasingly large and concentrated ownership stakes of passive institutional investors influence the types
of campaigns undertaken by activists, the tactics they employ, and their eventual outcomes.
One possibility is that the increased presence of passive institutions facilitates activism. Activist
investors face a classic free-rider problem (Grossman and Hart, 1980) when considering intervention in a
firm – the activist bears all costs associated with intervention, yet the benefits accrue across all
shareholders. The large and concentrated ownership stakes of passive institutions might help overcome
this problem by facilitating activist investors’ ability to rally support for their demands (Brav et al., 2008;
Bradley et al., 2010) and by decreasing the coordination costs of activism (e.g., during the proxy
solicitation process). Furthermore, gaining the support of one or more passive institutions may lend
1 See “Capitalism’s unlikely heroes: why activist investors are good for the public company,” The Economist, February
7, 2015. The Wall Street Journal also notes that activists have “cemented their position as a force in U.S. markets and
boardrooms; see “Activists are on a roll, with more to come,” The Wall Street Journal, January 1, 2015.
2 For example, in an article titled, “Activist Investors Ramp Up, and Boardroom Rifts Ensue,” The Wall Street Journal
reports that the number of companies targeted by an activist seeking board representation has more than doubled in
the last five years. And in a separate article, “CEOs Test: Contending With Activist Investors,” The Wall Street Journal
reports that activists seeking a board seat obtained at least a partial victory in 72% of such campaigns in 2014, up from
a success rate of 57% in 2008.
1

credibility to a campaign and improve the likelihood of success, thereby increasing the expected benefits
of activism.3 Finally, the inability of passive institutions to sell poorly performing stocks in their
portfolios (due to their mandate to closely track underlying indexes) might make them willing and
influential partners in an activist campaign, further increasing an activists’ likelihood of success.
However, it is also possible that the growing clout of passive institutions might hamper activism.
If, for example, passive investors “take little interest in how firms are run… [and] dislike becoming deeply
involved in management” (The Economist, 2015), the increasing market share of such “lazy investors”
could make it more difficult for activists to rally support for their demands. Some activists also argue that
index fund managers have a potential conflict of interest because corporate pension plans are one of the
largest investors in index funds, and a fear of losing these investors may deter them from supporting
activists.4 Finally, as long-term investors, passive institutions might not share the same goals as activists if
they have shorter-term objectives. For example, Larry Fink, the CEO of Blackrock, has expressed his
unwillingness to support activist demands he sees as short-sighted and detrimental to long-term value,
including demands for increased debt, dividends, and repurchases.5
Identifying the impact of passive investors on activists’ choices and success rates poses an
empirical challenge. The primary concern is that of omitted variables—because passive institutional
portfolios are related to the composition of the indexes they track, passive ownership of a stock might be
correlated with factors that directly affect activists’ tactics and success rates. For example, poor past
performance might cause both a stock’s removal from a popular index, thus reducing passive ownership,
and also increase the likelihood of activism. Thus, naïve correlations between passive institutional
ownership and activism outcomes might not reflect a causal relation.
To overcome this challenge, we exploit variation in stock ownership by passive mutual funds that
occurs around the cutoff point used to construct two widely-used market benchmarks, the Russell 1000 and
Russell 2000 indexes. The Russell 1000 comprises the largest 1,000 U.S. stocks, in terms of market
capitalization, and the Russell 2000 comprises the next largest 2,000 stocks. As shown in Appel, Gormley,
and Keim (2016) (hereafter AGK), benchmarking by passive funds leads to a sharp difference in ownership
3 For example, the activist hedge fund ValueAct was successful in obtaining a seat on Microsoft’s board with less than
1% of stock because Microsoft recognized that other large institutional investors backed the fund’s demand. And
consistent with the potential decisive role these large investors can play, the activist hedge fund Jana Partners gauged
potential support from large institutional investors before making demands of management at Agrium. See “New
alliances in the battle for corporate control,” The New York Times, March 18, 2014.
4 For example, see hedge fund manager William A. Ackman’s annual letter to the investors of Pershing Square Capital
Management in December 2015.
5 See “Blackrock’s Larry Fink: Typical Activists Are Too Short-Term,” The Wall Street Journal, January 16, 2014.
2