NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MEASURING LIQUIDITY MISMATCH IN THE BANKING SECTOR
Arvind Krishnamurthy
Jennie Bai
Charles-Henri Weymuller
Working Paper 22729
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22729
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2016
We thank Viral Acharya, Christa Bouwman, Markus Brunnermeier, Allen Berger, Adam
Copeland, Darrell Duffie, Michael Fleming, Itay Goldstein, Gary Gorton, Samuel Hanson, Song
Han, Larry Harris, Benjamin Hébert, Yi Li, Angela Maddaloni, Antoine Martin, Stefan Nagel,
Mitchell Petersen, Klaus Schaeck, Philipp Schnabl, Mark Seasholes, David Skeie, Philip E.
Strahan, and seminar participants at AFA (2016), WFA (2014), EFA (2014), SFS Finance
Calvacade (2014), FDIC Annual Conference (2014), BIS Research Network meeting (2014),
European Bank Association s Annual Financial Stability Conference (2014), Mitsui Finance
Symposium (2015), the Role of Liquidity in the Financial System Conference (2015), Stanford
University, New York University, Copenhagen Business School, Georgetown University, and
University of Rhode Island for helpful comments. We also thank participants in discussions at the
BIS, European Central Bank, International Monetary Fund, the Federal Reserve Board, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Deutsche Bundesbank, Bank of
France, Bank of England, and the Department of the Treasury's Office of Financial Research.
Jonathan Choi, Jay Im, and Jiacui Liu provided excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22729.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Arvind Krishnamurthy, Jennie Bai, and Charles-Henri Weymuller. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Measuring Liquidity Mismatch in the Banking Sector
Arvind Krishnamurthy, Jennie Bai, and Charles-Henri Weymuller
NBER Working Paper No. 22729
October 2016
JEL No. E44,E51,G21,G28
ABSTRACT
This paper implements a liquidity measure, “Liquidity Mismatch Index (LMI),” to gauge the
mismatch between the market liquidity of assets and the funding liquidity of liabilities. We
construct the LMIs for 2882 bank holding companies during 2002-2014 and investigate the time-
series and cross-sectional patterns of banks' liquidity and liquidity risk. Aggregate banking sector
liquidity worsens from +$4 trillion before the crisis to -$6 trillion in 2008, and reverses back to
the pre-crisis level in 2009. We also show how a macro-prudential liquidity stress test can be
conducted with the LMI metric, and that such a stress test could have revealed the fragility of the
banking system in early 2007. In the cross section, we find that banks with more ex-ante liquidity
mismatch have a higher stock-market crash probability and are more likely to borrow from the
government during the financial crisis. Thus the LMI measure is informative regarding both
individual bank liquidity risk as well as the liquidity risk of the entire banking system. We
compare the LMI measure of liquidity to other measures such as Basel III's liquidity coverage
ratio and net stable funding ratio, and show that LMI performs better in many dimensions. The
outperformance of LMI partially results from the contract-specific time-varying liquidity
sensitivity weights which are driven by market prices.
Arvind Krishnamurthy Charles-Henri Weymuller
Stanford Graduate School of Business Sciences Po Paris
Stanford University 27 rue Saint Guillaume
655 Knight Way 75007 Paris
Stanford, CA 94305 France
and NBER charleshenri.weymuller@sciencespo.fr
akris@stanford.edu
Jennie Bai
Georgetown University
3700 O St. N.W.
Washington DC, 20057
jb2348@georgetown.edu

1 Introduction
Liquidity plays an enormous role in financial crises. In the classic model of Diamond and Dybvig
(1983), the illiquidity of bank assets coupled with the liquidity promised through bank liabilities
leaves banks vulnerable toruns and financial crises. In the 2007-2009financial crisis,the US govern-
ment provided several trillion dollars of reserves to the financial sector to forestall and ameliorate
a liquidity crisis.1 Recognizing the importance of liquidity, regulators have taken steps to improve
the liquidityof banks since the financial crisis. The Basel III committee has implemented minimum
liquidity standards for commercial banks, including the liquidity coverage ratio and the net stable
funding ratio. In 2012, the Federal Reserve incorporated a liquidity stress test (the Comprehensive
Liquidity Assessment and Review) as part of its oversight of the largest banks.
These policy measures have run ahead of research, and raise important questions for researchers
to answer. We lackan agreed upon frameworkfor examiningwhen governmentregulationof private
liquidity choices is desirable, and what instruments should be used to best implement liquidity
regulations. A small and growing academic literature has sought to address these questions (see
Holmstrom and Tirole (1998), Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2004), Farhi, Golosov,and Tsyvinski
(2009), Perotti and Suarez (2011), Allen (2014), Diamond and Kashyap (2015)). We also lack
an agreed upon framework for how to measure the liquidity of financial firms and the financial
sector. Beyond simple intuitions for special cases — long-term loans are illiquid assets while cash
is liquid, and short-term debt liabilities leave a bank prone to liquidity risk while long-term debt
liabilitiesreduce liquidityrisk— welackageneralmeasurement systemforliquiditythatcanhandle
a sophisticated financial sector.
As Allen (2014)and Diamond and Kashyap (2015)note, there is a strikingcontrastbetween the
analysis of capital and liquidity regulations. With capital, there is consensus on how to measure
capital and why it should be regulated, although disagreements persist on the optimal level of
requirements. With liquidity, there is little consensus beyond the recognition that liquidity is hard
to measure.
This paper develops and implements a liquidity measurement system. It builds on earlier theo-
1Fleming (2012) notes that across its many liquidity facilities, the Federal Reserve provided over $1.5 trillion of
liquidity support during the crisis. The number is much higher if one includes other forms of government liquidity
support. Lending by the Federal Home Loan Bank peaked at $1 trillion in September 2008. The Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation guarantees whereby insurance limitswereincreased in thecrisisprovided afurther guaranteed
support of$336 billionasofMarch 2009 (He,Khang,and Krishnamurthy (2010)). TheUSTreasuryalso offered $431
billion of liquiditysupport through the Troubled Asset ReliefProgram (TARP).
1

retical work by Brunnermeier, Gorton, and Krishnamurthy (2012) and is also related to Berger and
Bouwman (2009)’s empirical approach to measuring liquidity. Adopting the terminology in Brun-
nermeier et al. (2012), the “Liquidity Mismatch Index (LMI),” measures the mismatch between the
market liquidity of assets and the funding liquidity of liabilities. LMI is based on a stress liquidity-
withdrawalscenario. In short, it measures the liquidityof a firm assuming that all claimantson the
institution act under the terms of their contract to extract the maximum liquidity from the firm,
and the firm reacts by maximizing the liquidity it can raise from its assets. Brunnermeier et al.
(2012) derive their liquidity metric in settings with a fixed liquidity-stress horizon (i.e., overnight).
We extend their measure to encompass dynamic settings: the LMI today is the appropriately “dis-
counted” valueofthe expected LMI tomorrow. Therecursiveconstructionhandlesthe measurement
of the liquidityof different maturityliabilities,as for example, a two-dayliabilitytoday will become
a one-day liabilitytomorrow.
In additiontoincorporatingtime(maturity)intheliquiditymeasure, ourapproachalsoaccounts
for the time-varying state of liquidity conditions. We do so by linking the liquidity stress-horizon
underlying the liquidity computation to asset market measures of market and funding liquidity.
Other measures, including Basel’s liquidity measures and the Berger and Bouwman (2009) measure
restrictmeasurementtoafixed liquidity-stresshorizon. Onboth ofthese points,coherentlyincorpo-
ratingtimeandstatesviathemarketmeasures ofliquiditypremia,ourapproachimproveson Berger
and Bouwman (2009). As we will show in empirical results, varying the time-horizon contributes
significantly to the superior performance of the LMI to other liquidity measures.
Whatmakesagoodliquiditymeasure? The measuremustbe theoreticallyfounded. Thepreced-
ing arguments regarding the recursive principle and incorporation of market prices are theoretical
arguments in favorof our construction. The bulk of this paper shows that our theoreticallyfounded
LMI performs well on empirical dimensions. First, we show that the LMI is useful for macropru-
dential purposes. A liquidity metric should capture liquidity imbalances in the financial system,
offering an early indicator of financial crises. It should also quantitatively describe the liquidity
condition of the financial sector, and the amount of liquiditythe Fed may be called upon to provide
in a financial crisis. The LMI performs well on these dimensions. An important aspect of the LMI
is that it can be aggregated across banks to measure the liquidity mismatch of a group of banks or
the entire financial sector. Liquidity measures which are based on ratios, such as Basel’s liquidity
2