NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SECURITIES LENDING AS WHOLESALE FUNDING:
EVIDENCE FROM THE U.S. LIFE INSURANCE INDUSTRY
Nathan Foley-Fisher
Borghan Narajabad
Stephane Verani
Working Paper 22774
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22774
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2016
All authors are in the Division of Research and Statistics of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System. For providing valuable comments, we would like to thank, without
implication, Tobias Adrian; Jack Bao; Celso Brunetti; Jon Danielsson; Stefan Gissler; Michael
Gordy; Diana Hancock; Yesol Huh; Sebastian Infante; Victoria Ivashina; Anastasia Kartasheva;
Frank Keane; Beth Kiser; Florian Nagler; Michael Palumbo; Pedro Saffi; Larry Schmidt; Enrique
Schroth; Andreas Uthemann; and participants in the NBER 2016 Conference on Long-Term
Asset Management, the Society for Economic Measurement 2016 Annual Meeting, the European
Finance Association 2016 Annual Meeting, the European Economic Association 2016 Annual
Meeting, as well as seminars at the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and Philadelphia, LSE
Systemic Risk Centre, Bank for International Settlements, Swiss National Bank, Graduate
Institute Geneva, UC Santa Barbara and Federal Reserve Board. We are grateful to Della
Cummings and Melissa O’Brien for exceptional research assistance. The views in this paper are
solely the authors’ and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, any other person associated with the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Nathan Foley-Fisher, Borghan Narajabad, and Stephane Verani. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Securities Lending as Wholesale Funding: Evidence from the U.S. Life Insurance Industry
Nathan Foley-Fisher, Borghan Narajabad, and Stephane Verani
NBER Working Paper No. 22774
October 2016
JEL No. G11,G22,G23
ABSTRACT
The existing literature assumes that securities lenders primarily respond to demand from
securities borrowers and reinvest their cash collateral in short-term markets. We offer compelling
evidence for a supply channel, using new data matching U.S. life insurers' individual bond
lending and reinvestment decisions to the universe of securities lending transactions. We show
that an insurer's decision to lend a bond is positively correlated with liquidity transformation in its
lending program, even after controlling for demand for that bond. We discuss how using
securities lending cash collateral as a source of wholesale funding might impair securities markets
in times of stress.
Nathan Foley-Fisher Stephane Verani
Federal Reserve Board Federal Reserve Board
20th Street and Constitution Avenue 20th Street and Constitution Avenue
NW Washington, DC 20551 NW Washington, DC 20551
nathan.c.foley-fisher@frb.gov stephane.h.verani@frb.gov
Borghan Narajabad
Federal Reserve Board
20th Street and Constitution Avenue
NW Washington, DC 20551
borghan.narajabad@frb.gov

Introduction
Securities lending is widely understood to play an important role in the functioning of securities
markets. By agreeing to purchase an asset and return it at a later date, securities borrowers—
typically dealers acting for themselves or on behalf of clients such as hedge funds—temporarily
gain economic ownership of the asset in exchange for collateral, which is usually cash in the
U.S. In addition to managing inventory, financial institutions borrow securities to facilitate
short positions, to avoid delivery fails and to use the borrowed security as collateral in other
transactions. In the absence of securities lending, a large volume of securities would be tied up
in institutions that hold big asset portfolios—pension funds, mutual funds, and life insurance
companies—for asset-liability management or regulatory reasons.
In this paper, we study the securities lending market from the lenders’ perspective. To
understand the decision processes that we analyze, it is helpful to consider the stylized map of
shadow banking depicted in Figure 1. The cloud represents the general functioning of securities
markets, illustrated with the example of hedge funds taking long and short positions. Securities
market participants typically borrow both cash funding and securities using broker-dealers as
intermediaries. Broker-dealers obtain cash from several sources, for example, money market
mutual funds (MMFs) through short-term funding markets. Securities lenders decide whether
to lend assets from their portfolio and whether to invest the cash collateral they receive back
into short-term markets or into long-term markets.1 In the latter case, they may invest, for
example, in relatively longer-term corporate bonds or asset-backed securities.
The existing literature implicitly or explicitly assumes that securities lending is primarily
driven by demand from borrowers and that lenders reinvest their cash collateral through short-
termmarkets.2 SomeexamplesincludeDuffie,Gârleanu&Pedersen(2002),whostudytheeffect
of search and bargaining in the securities lending market on pricing in the securities market,
abstracting from the reinvestment decisions of securities lenders (Figure 2a). Brunnermeier &
Pedersen (2009) and Gorton & Metrick (2012) consider securities market transactions funded
throughmarginaccountsandbilateralrepurchaseagreements(repo),abstractingfromthesource
of securities (Figure 2b). And Krishnamurthy, Nagel & Orlov (2014) focus on the cash provided
to broker-dealers from MMFs and securities lenders through short-term funding markets, taking
as given the lending and reinvestment decisions of securities lenders (Figure 2c).3
1 Althoughagentlendersareofteninvolvedinthesecuritieslendingprocess,aswedescribeinSection1,their
role is incidental to our analysis.
2 Lenders may reinvest in short-term markets directly through tri-party repo or indirectly through MMFs.
3 Inaddition,thesecuritieslendingmarkethasbeenstudiedempiricallytobetterunderstandtheconnections
between the securities lending market and pricing in the securities market (including, for example, D’avolio
(2002),Nashikkar&Pedersen(2007),Saffi&Sigurdsson(2011),Asquith,Au,Covert&Pathak(2013),Kaplan,
Moskowitz&Sensoy(2013),andKolasinski,Reed&Ringgenberg(2013)),andhasbeenexploitedtostudyequity
2

We offer compelling evidence for an alternative, supply-driven, motive for securities lending.
Thissupplychannelarisesbecausetheshort-termcashcollateralavailableinexchangeforlending
securities represents a potential source of wholesale funding for lenders. By lending securities at
relatively short duration to create and maintain a pool of cash collateral, lenders can finance a
portfolio of longer-duration, higher-yielding assets. The liquidity and maturity transformations
associated with this strategy allow lenders to increase the return on their asset portfolio. To
be sure, our empirical analysis does not attempt to test the demand channel against the supply
channel to establish the dominant motive for securities lending. Rather, our analysis seeks
to provide the first empirical evidence for a supply channel that shapes the decision to lend
securities conditional on the demand channel already established by the literature.
To establish a supply channel in the market for securities lending, we analyze a new dataset
that combines data on U.S. life insurers lending programs with the market for securities lending.
Specifically, we match every U.S. life insurer’s bond portfolio, as well as their lending and
reinvestment decisions, to the universe of securities lending transactions. We collect new annual
regulatory data made available from 2011, which specify the bonds in an insurer’s portfolio
that are on loan at the time of filing as well as the composition of the insurer’s cash collateral
reinvestment portfolio. We combine this information with microdata on loan transactions from
the most comprehensive source on the securities lending market, including the amount of each
bond borrowed and the terms of the loans. By matching these data at the security level, we
can assess how life insurers’ decisions to lend individual bonds are related to lending market
conditions. To our knowledge, our study is the first to focus on the securities lending market for
bonds, where life insurers play a major role.
We use these data to investigate the relationship between the decision to lend securities and
the degree of liquidity transformation in the cash collateral reinvestment portfolio. The main
empirical challenge is to obtain variation in the decision to lend securities that is independent
of demand factors. First, the demand for securities may vary with observable and unobservable
time- and security-specific characteristics. Second, including equilibrium market variables as a
controlfordemandmaynotbeappropriate. Theconcernisthat,whenspecifyingthefactorsthat
determine the lending decision, omitting any variable that jointly determines the equilibrium
market variables will likely invalidate all the coefficient estimates. We demonstrate the severity
of the empirical challenge by showing that the cost of borrowing a bond is a function of the
distribution of holdings in that bond. Intuitively, this new finding suggests that lenders of hard-
to-find bonds can get a better deal on their transaction—as in Duffie (1996)—and the terms of
votingpreferences(Aggarwal,Saffi&Sturgess(2015)). Thesestudiesdonotconsiderhowsecuritieslendersmay
reinvest the cash collateral they receive from lending their securities.
3