NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ACHIEVING PRICE STABILITY BY MANIPULATING THE CENTRAL BANK’S
PAYMENT ON RESERVES
Robert E. Hall
Ricardo Reis
Working Paper 22761
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22761
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2016, Revised July 2017
A previous version of this paper circulated in 2014 under the name “Controlling Inflation under
New Style Central Banking.” Hall’s research was supported by the Hoover Institution, while
Reis’s work was initially supported by a grant from INET and later by a grant from the ERC. This
research is part of the National Bureau of Economic Research’s Economic Fluctuations and
Growth, and Monetary Economics Programs. We are grateful to Andy Atkeson, Marco Del
Negro, Isabel Horta Correia, Narayana Kocherlakota, Monika Piazzesi, and Michael Woodford
for helpful comments, and to Andrea Alati and Laura Castillo-Martinez for research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22761.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Robert E. Hall and Ricardo Reis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Achieving Price Stability by Manipulating the Central Bank’s Payment on Reserves
Robert E. Hall and Ricardo Reis
NBER Working Paper No. 22761
October 2016, Revised July 2017
JEL No. E31,E42,E58
ABSTRACT
Today, all major central banks pay or collect interest on reserves, and stand ready to use the
interest rate as an instrument of monetary policy. We show that by paying an appropriate rate on
reserves, the central bank can pin the price level uniquely to a target. The essential idea is to
index payments on reserves to the price level and the target price level in a way that creates a
contractionary financial force if the price level is above the target and an expansionary force if
below. Our payment-on-reserves policy process does not require terminal conditions like Taylor
rules, exogenous fiscal surpluses like the fiscal theory of the price level, liquidity preference as in
quantity theories, or local approximations as in new Keynesian models. The process
accommodates liquidity services from reserves, segmented financial markets where only some
institutions can hold reserves, and nominal rigidities. We believe it would be easy to implement.
Robert E. Hall
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
rehall@gmail.com
Ricardo Reis
Department of Economics
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC1 2AE
United Kingdom
r.a.reis@lse.ac.uk

We focus on the process of monetary policy—the way the central bank controls interest
rates to stabilize the economy and achieve low and stable inflation. Before the 2008 financial
crisis, central banks for decades adjusted nominal interest rates in interbank markets by
changing a relatively small volume of reserves. This process for implementing monetary
policy worked well in advanced countries and many less advanced ones, and while it was
interrupted when nominal interest rates hit the zero lower bound, in principle, it could work
equally well as soon as economies escape from the bound. Post crisis, central banks adopted
a new process for monetary policy. Now, they maintain high reserves by paying close to
market interest on them, and set the interest rate on reserves. Changes in the reserve rate
quickly feed into changes in interbank and other short rates.
This new process of central banking comes with both challenges and opportunities. The
literature so far has mostly focussed on the implications of having large volumes of reserves
outstanding and the purchases of less liquid assets that they funded, generally longer-term
government and corporate bonds. Quantitative easing policies, as they are known, on the
one hand allowed central banks to respond to financial crises (Gertler and Karadi, 2013),
but on the other hand may jeopardize their financial stability because higher interest rates
lower portfolio values and increase the burden of interest payments (Hall and Reis, 2015).
Less thought has been put into how this new process a↵ects the ability of the central bank
to control inflation (Reis, 2016a).
We study the use of payments on reserves to control inflation. Because the reserve
rate controls other short rates, a central bank could follow the prevailing central-banking
paradigm involving nominal interest rate rules, as laid out in Woodford (2003) and the
extensive literature on the Taylor rule. But that literature has some disturbing elements—in
particular, it rules out indeterminacy by assuming away explosive paths for inflation This
paper reconsiders the fundamentals of the process by which a central bank intervenes in the
economy to steer the price level. We propose a new process for setting the remuneration of
reserves that is robust and free from the possibility of indeterminacy. We call it the robust
reserve rate process.
Our proposal process combines two simple principles:
1. The asset that the central bank ordains to be the monetary unit has a purchasing
power in terms of output that is the inverse of the price level: 1/p.
2

2. In an economy with real interest rate r, if an entity issues a safe asset that pays o↵
1+r units of output next period, the current market price in terms of output is one.
Reserves are such an asset: they are the unit of account and the central bank pays interest
on them. The conclusion is that if the payment on reserves is 1+r units next period, the
price level today can only be 1. Thus, the central bank has achieved its price level target
with a monetary policy process that uses the payment on reserves as its instrument. The
process depends only on observable financial variables and pins down the price level to its
target uniquely and globally. To set the price level to a target greater than one, the central
bank makes a payment on reserves that is proportionally lower, so the purchasing power of
a unit of reserves is lower and its reciprocal, the price level, is higher.
In an economy with a fully flexible price level and price-level neutrality, in the sense
that the real interest rate r is independent of the price level, the central bank chooses the
price level by setting its payment on reserves to r. Absent price-level neutrality, the central
bank’s choice of payment on reserves a↵ects both the interest rate and the price level. But
it remains the case that the economy’s equilibrium involves a combination of a price level
and an interest rate that satisfies the condition that the return from holding reserves equals
the economy’s real interest rate. If the price level is partially flexible, the central bank can
set the price level to a target within the set of feasible price levels; the interest rate will be
high if the target price is low within that set and low if the target price is high. If the price
level is completely fixed, the central bank’s choice of payment on reserves sets the interest
rate to achieve financial equilibrium but cannot achieve a price level di↵erent from the fixed
level.
This result generalizes to any asset issued by the central bank as long as (i) it is the
monetary unit and (ii) the central bank sets its remuneration. This applies to a variety of
deposits by financial institutions at the central banks around the world, including in the
United States bank reserves, balances in overnight reverse repurchase agreements, and term
deposits at the Federal Reserve. Moreover, a generalization of the payment promised on
reserves yields a policy that makes the price level or inflation rate variable over time, not
necessarily a price level fixed at 1 with zero inflation.
This paper probes the foundations of this process of price setting. Throughout the paper,
we make a terminological distinction between the process of monetary policy—the way the
central bank intervenes to set the price level—and the monetary policy rule—the way the
3