NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECT OF AIR POLLUTION ON INVESTOR BEHAVIOR:
EVIDENCE FROM THE S&P 500
Anthony Heyes
Matthew Neidell
Soodeh Saberian
Working Paper 22753
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22753
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2016
Anthony Heyes receives ongoing financial support from the Canada Research Chair (CRC)
program operated by the Government of Canada for his work in environmental economics. He is
also part-time Professor of Economics at the University of Sussex. We are grateful to Josh Graff
Zivin, Michaela Pagel, Juan-Pablo Montero, Roberton Williams III, Bernard Sinclair-Desgagne,
Charles Mason and seminar participants at University of Paris, University of Wisconsin at
Madison and CIRANO Montreal for constructive discussions. Errors are ours. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Anthony Heyes, Matthew Neidell, and Soodeh Saberian. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Air Pollution on Investor Behavior: Evidence from the S&P 500
Anthony Heyes, Matthew Neidell, and Soodeh Saberian
NBER Working Paper No. 22753
October 2016
JEL No. G02,J24,Q53
ABSTRACT
We provide detailed empirical evidence of a direct effect of air pollution on the efficient
operation of the New York Stock Exchange, linking short-term variations in fine particulate
matter (PM2.5) in Manhattan to movements in the S&P 500. The effects are substantial – a one
standard deviation increases in ambient PM2.5 reduces same-day returns by 11.9% in our
preferred specification – and remarkably robust to a variety of specifications and a battery of
robustness and falsification checks. Furthermore, the intra-day effects that we observe are
difficult to reconcile with competing hypotheses. Despite investors being dispersed
geographically we find strong evidence that the effect is strictly local in nature, consistent with
the high concentration of market influencers in New York. While we are agnostic as to the
underlying mechanism, we provide evidence suggestive of the role of decreased risk tolerance
operating through pollution-induced changes in mood or cognitive function.
Anthony Heyes Soodeh Saberian
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of Ottawa University of Ottawa
Faculty of Social Sciences 120 University Private
120 University, Room 9029 Ottawa, Canada K1N 6N5
Ottawa CANADA K1N 6N5 saberian.soodeh@gmail.com
Anthony.Heyes@uottawa.ca
Matthew Neidell
Department of Health Policy and Management
Columbia University
722 W 168th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10032
and NBER
mn2191@columbia.edu

1. Introduction
Despite the long-standing theoretical appeal of the efficient market hypothesis
(Fama, 1965), researchers have uncovered significant empirical deviations from it.
Findings have included unexplained movements in aggregate prices, such as excessive
price volatility (Shiller, 1981) and the equity premium puzzle (Mehra and Prescott,
1985), inadequate incorporation of new information (Roll, 1984), the inexplicable role of
location specific factors (Froot and Dabora, 1999), and the influence of trader emotions
due to external stimuli (Saunders, 1993; Kamstra et al., 2003; Cueva at al., 2015).
Building on emerging economic evidence that links air pollution with a wide range of
human impacts, including cognition, mood and worker productivity (Graff Zivin and
Neidell, 2012; Chang et al., 2016; Lavy et al., 2014), we push this one step further by
looking at the effect of local air pollution on stock market returns. While we remain
largely agnostic on the precise mechanisms at play, we hypothesize that pollution
decreases the risk attitudes of investors via short-term changes in brain and/or physical
health.
Specifically, we estimate the effect of plausibly exogenous short-run changes in
fine particulate matter (PM ) in Manhattan over a 15 year period on daily returns of the
2.5
S&P 500, one of the most commonly used benchmarks for the overall New York Stock
Exchange (NYSE).2 The stocks quoted on the S&P 500 come from firms widely
differentiated by activity and geography, making it unlikely that daily variations in the
fundamentals that determine the fair value of those firms could be correlated with daily
2 Some recent correlational studies on air pollution and investor behavior include Lepori (2016), Li and
Peng (2016), and Demir and Ersan (2016). Our analysis extends on this research through extensive
attention to potential sources of confouding.
2

variations in air quality in the vicinity of Wall Street. We control flexibly for a wide
range of potentially-confounding meteorological considerations and other air pollutants
to isolate the effect of PM from competing environmental factors. Furthermore, by
2.5
controlling for time-specific factors using day of week fixed effects and year-by-week
fixed effects, our analysis excludes many additional potential confounding factors, such
as the well-established effect of length of day on investor mood (Kamstra et al., 2003).
We find a significant negative effect of PM on S&P 500 returns. In our
2.5
preferred specification, a one standard deviation increase in daily ambient PM
2.5
concentrations causes a statistically significant 11.9% reduction in daily percentage
returns. The magnitude is comparable to estimates of the effect of variations in daily
weather conditions on returns (Goetzmann and Zhu, 2005; Hirshleifer et al., 2003). The
result proves remarkably robust to a variety of different assumptions about confounding
and a variety of falsification checks. We drill further into the data by conducting an intra-
day analysis. We find that PM concentrations throughout the day, but not the other
2.5
environmental variables, affect returns; this pattern is consistent with PM having indoor
2.5
penetration rates of over 90%, making it difficult to reconcile with competing hypotheses.
Critics of such local-based effects point out that any inefficient behavior by
Manhattan-based investors creates arbitrage opportunities for those located elsewhere.
This would imply our results are spurious, and air quality in New York City serves as a
proxy for more general changes in the fundamental value of stocks traded in the S&P
500. Since these stocks come from firms whose activities are widely dispersed across the
country and beyond, we can explore this threat by testing specifically for a local effect.
Using data from all pollution monitors across the U.S., we find that pollution in New
3