NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE IMPACT OF CONSUMER CREDIT ACCESS ON EMPLOYMENT, EARNINGS
AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Kyle Herkenhoff
Gordon Phillips
Ethan Cohen-Cole
Working Paper 22846
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22846
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2016
We are grateful for discussions with Naoki Aizawa, Carter Braxton, Andy Glover, Jonathan
Heathcote, Loukas Karabarbounis, Miles Kimball, Javier Miranda, Fabrizio Perri, Ellen
McGrattan, Anusha Nath, Ben Pugsley, Victor Rios-Rull, Sam Schulhofer-Wohl, Antionette
Schoar, Nawid Siassi, Jialan Wang, Moto Yogo, and Owen Zidar. We thank seminar participants
at Alberta, ASU, the Board of Governors, Konstanz SaM, Michigan, the Minneapolis Fed, U. of
Missouri, Montreal, NBER-SI, PET, SAET, SED, UT Austin, UNC, and the WCEG. We thank
Brian Littenberg and the Census for their hospitality and ongoing support. Herkenhoff and
Phillips thank the Washington Center for Equitable Growth for generous funding. Cohen-Cole
and Phillips thank the NSF (Grant No. 0965328) for funding and TransUnion for providing credit
data. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to
ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. This research uses data from the Census
Bureau's Longitudinal Employer Household Dynamics Program, which was partially supported
by the following National Science Foundation Grants SES-9978093, SES-0339191 and
ITR-0427889; National Institute on Aging Grant AG018854; and grants from the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Kyle Herkenhoff, Gordon Phillips, and Ethan Cohen-Cole. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Impact of Consumer Credit Access on Employment, Earnings and Entrepreneurship
Kyle Herkenhoff, Gordon Phillips, and Ethan Cohen-Cole
NBER Working Paper No. 22846
November 2016
JEL No. D04,D1,D12,D14,D22,D31,D83,E2,E21,G23,G3,G33,K35,K36,L22,M5,M52,O16
ABSTRACT
How does consumer credit access impact job flows, earnings, and entrepreneurship? To answer
this question, we build a new administrative dataset which links individual employment and
entrepreneur tax records to TransUnion credit reports, and we exploit the discrete increase in
consumer credit access following bankruptcy flag removal. After flag removal, individuals flow
into self-employment. New entrants earn more, borrow significantly using unsecured and secured
consumer credit, and are more likely to become an employer business. In addition, after flag
removal, non-employed and self-employed individuals are more likely to find unemployment-
insured "formal" jobs at larger firms that pay greater wages. These estimates imply that firms
believe previously bankrupt workers are 3.8% less productive than non-bankrupt workers, on
average. These results suggest that consumer credit access matters for each stage of
entrepreneurship and that credit-checks may be limiting formal sector employment opportunities.
Kyle Herkenhoff Ethan Cohen-Cole
Department of Economics Econ-One
University of Minnesota ecohencole@gmail.com
kfh@umn.edu
Gordon Phillips
Tuck School of Business
Dartmouth College
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
gordon.m.phillips@gmail.com
A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22846

While much is known theoretically and empirically about the interaction between credit
constraints and startup rates (inter alia Cooley and Quadrini [2001], Hurst and Lusardi
[2004], Buera et al. [2009], Hurst and Pugsley [2011], Greenstone et al. [2014], Buera et al.
[2015]), little is known about the way access to consumer credit affects individual job flows,
startup decisions, or subsequent earnings.1 How does consumer credit access affect the
transitionrateintoandoutofemploymentandself-employment? Whataretheconsequences
of these transitions for labor earnings and business income?
The central issue with determining the causal impact of personal credit on employment
outcomes is that personal credit is highly correlated with an individual’s quality as well
as their wealth and access to funds. Thus, it is hard to separate out wealth effects and
fundamental ability from access to credit. Our approach to this question is to examine
individuals after bankruptcy flags are removed from consumer credit reports, similar to
Musto [2004]. These removals occur, by law, no more than ten years after bankruptcy
and give rise to large increases in credit ratings, while not reflecting large changes in an
individual’s credit worthiness.
We use a standard difference-in-difference approach in which we compare cohorts of
bankrupt individuals whose flags are removed to adjacent cohorts of bankrupt individuals
whose flags are not yet removed. We apply this methodology to a new dataset which merges
millions of credit histories and self-employment tax records to administrative US Census
employment records. We show that consistent with prior studies such as Musto [2004],
access to credit increases dramatically among the subgroup of individuals who have their
bankruptcyflagsremoved. Weshowthattheseincreasesincreditaccessaffectanindividual’s
employment outcomes and the likelihood of starting an employer firm. We then verify our
results in the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), a public cross-sectional survey.2
We frame the subsequent discussion in terms of two competing economic forces generated
by a bankruptcy flag removal: (i) the credit-access effect: credit constraints loosen after
1The topic of startups and access to consumer credit has received much attention following the housing
bust (inter alia Robb and Robinson [2012], Fairlie and Krashinsky [2012], Chatterji and Seamans [2012],
Schmalzetal.[2013],Adelinoetal.[2013],Jensenetal.[2014],Kerretal.[2014]),however,onlyrecentlyhave
studies emerged which assess the impact of consumer credit on job flows and unemployment quantitatively,
e.g. Athreya and Simpson [2006], Karahan and Rhee [2011], Midrigan and Philippon [2011], Chen [2012],
Carroll et al. [2012] , Chen et al. [2013], Herkenhoff [2013], Schott [2013], Kehoe et al. [2014] as well as
empirically, e.g. Mian and Sufi [2012], Bethune [2015], Mehrotra and Sergeyev [2015], Herkenhoff et al.
[2015].
2See online appendix J for SCF comparison.
2

flag removal allowing individuals to start self-employed businesses or borrow to smooth
consumption while searching for an unemployment-insured (UI) job (we refer to UI jobs as
formal sector jobs, and non-UI jobs such as self-employment as informal sector jobs) (ii) the
credit-check effect: individuals who were non-employed or self-employed subsequently find
jobs in the formal sector after flag removal. Our main contribution is to provide suggestive
evidenceofthesetwoeconomicforcesaswellasprovideacompletepictureofhowthediscrete
rise in consumer credit following bankruptcy flag removal affects job flows, the transition
rate from non-employer to employer businesses, and earnings. Our approach is to build a set
of facts that when viewed together, provide consistent evidence that the credit-access and
credit-check effects influence employment outcomes.
We first study self-employment, and we show that the self-employment rate does not
change among individuals whose bankruptcy flag is removed versus those whose flag is not
removed. However, the lack of movement in the self-employment rate masks offsetting move-
ments in gross flows. Relative to the control group whose flags are not removed, those whose
flags are removed have both gross flows into self-employment increase by .16% per annum
and gross flows out of self-employment increase by about .17% per annum. As a result, these
flows offset and the stock remains constant.
Examining individuals who transition into self-employment, we show that cohorts who
transition into self-employment after a bankruptcy flag removal borrow $15k more than
cohorts who transition into self-employment prior to flag removal. This represents a 12.4%
increase in borrowing relative to the sample average.3 They borrow mainly in the form of
mortgages, HELOCs and credit cards, and they earn ∼$1k more Schedule C net income
at any time horizon we observe (an increase of about 4% relative to the sample average).4
They are also more likely to enter capital intensive industries such as manufacturing and
industries with high external finance needs.
We then use the new Integrated Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) to measure
transitions from self-employment to employer firms. Those who enter self-employment after
bankruptcy flag removal are .7% more likely to own an employer firm in the LBD compared
to those who enter self-employment before bankruptcy flag removal. This represents a 200%
increase over the sample average LBD firm ownership rate. Among those who own an
3The average total balance across all forms of credit one year prior to removal is $121k in our sample.
4Relative to national averages, this is still a 2.2% treatment effect. The median self-employment income
is $45,000 and calculated as the pooled average of all heads of household who have positive self-employment
income from the 1998 SCF through the 2010 SCF, weighted.
3