NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INSURERS' RESPONSE TO SELECTION RISK:
EVIDENCE FROM MEDICARE ENROLLMENT REFORMS
Francesco Decarolis
Andrea Guglielmo
Working Paper 22876
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22876
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016
Andrea Guglielmo is an associate at Analysis Group, Inc. Research for this article was
undertaken when he was a student at the University of Wisconsin - Madison. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of Analysis
Group or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Decarolis is grateful to the Sloan
Foundation (grant 2011-5-23 ECON) for financial support. We are also grateful for the comments
received from Pierre Andre Chiappori, Vilsa Curto, Mark Duggan, Liran Einav, Randy Ellis,
Amit Gandhi, Jesse Gregory, Ken Hendricks, Kate Ho, Brad Larsen, Jon Levin, Tim Layton,
Maria Polyakova, Mike Riordan, Alan Sorensen, Chris Taber, Pietro Tebaldi and Bob Town and
from the participants at the seminars at Boston University, Columbia, EIEF, Stanford, Università
Bocconi and the University of Wisconsin Madison where earlier versions of this paper were
presented.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Francesco Decarolis and Andrea Guglielmo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Insurers' Response to Selection Risk: Evidence from Medicare Enrollment Reforms
Francesco Decarolis and Andrea Guglielmo
NBER Working Paper No. 22876
December 2016, Revised February 2017
JEL No. I1,I13,I18,L22
ABSTRACT
Evidence on insurers’ behavior in environments with both risk selection and market power is
largely missing. We fill this gap by providing one of the first empirical accounts of how insurers
adjust plan features when faced with potential changes in selection. Our strategy exploits a 2012
reform allowing Medicare enrollees to switch to 5-star contracts at anytime. This policy increased
enrollment into 5-star contracts, but without risk selection worsening. Our findings show that this
is due to 5-star plans lowering both premiums and generosity, thus becoming more appealing for
most beneficiaries, but less so for those in worse health conditions.
Francesco Decarolis
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and EIEF
and also NBER
fdc@bu.edu
Andrea Guglielmo
Analysis Group, Inc
Prudential Center Plaza III
111 Huntington Ave, B
Boston, MA 02199
andrea.guglielmo.85@gmail.com

I Introduction
The behavior of insurers is a crucial component of the functioning of any insurance market.
Understanding such behavior is thus key to evaluate reforms like the creation of the health-
care marketplaces under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) and the
growingly privatized provision of Medicare throughout the Part C and Part D programs.1
The question of how competition works in environments with potential risk selection (either
advantageous or adverse) is, however, still unsettled from a theoretical perspective and there
is still much to be learned on the complex interaction between market power and selection.
More specifically, nearly all the recent literature on selection markets focuses on pricing
distortions while abstracting from how selection affects the broader set of characteristics
of the contracts offered. The supply-side analysis presented in this paper is, instead, about
how health plans respond in terms of both premiums and benefits to additional opportunities
for beneficiaries to move among plans, possibly in response to health shocks. Therefore, our
contribution follows in the tradition initiated by the seminal theoretical studies of Rothschild
andStiglitz(1976)andGlazerandMcGuire(2000)inwhichplansaltertheirproductseeking
to attract good risks. Although a handful of earlier studies have already shown evidence
of insurers taking actions to attract good and deter bad health risk,2 our contribution is
to provide a particularly clean identification strategy to quantify how both premiums and
benefits respond to a potential change in selection driven by a policy reform stimulating
consumers’ mobility between plans and to do so in a context, that of Medicare Advantage,
that is characterized by the presence of market power.3
Reliable evidence on this type of behavior is hard to collect because it is rare to observe
1Part C, also known as Medicare Advantage, is a substitute for the traditional Medicare services (i.e.,
Part A covering in-hospital services and Part B covering physicians, surgeons and other outpatient hospital
services. Part D is a program offering prescription drug insurance.
2Several of these contributions, from the early study of Ellis and McGuire (2007) to the more recent
contributions of Carey (2016) and Shepard (2016), will be discussed next.
3Using Part C data for 2006-2011, Curto et al. (2014) estimate that plan margins are on the order
of 16 percent above their (variable) costs of coverage. Similar estimates are found by Guglielmo (2016)
with a shorter dataset (2008-2011): by looking separately at plan types, he finds that HMOs and LPPOs
generate the most profit per enrollee, amounting to a markup of 12 percent, while PFFS plans’ markup
is approximately 9.5 percent. These estimates are also broadly consistent with the average markup of 13
percent reported the MedPAC annual report 2010.
1

changes in selection risk within a market. Furthermore, even when selection risk changes
for a subset of plans, it is often impossible to find a set of plans that can serve as a valid
comparison group since the equilibrium in the whole market is affected. Our analysis over-
comes this difficulty by exploiting the combined effects of a Medicare reform that altered
the potential selection risk of the highest quality (5-star) Part C and D plans and the geo-
graphical dispersion of such plans over the US. This allows us to separately observe treated
and control geographical markets both before and after this policy change, thus allowing a
quantile differences-in-differences approach that we use to study distributional changes in
contract features in the treated markets relative to the control ones. Our main finding is
that the policy triggered a response that involved not only changing premiums, but also
adjusting benefits. This made 5-star plans more appealing for most beneficiaries through
lower premiums, but less so for those in worse health through higher out of pocket costs.
The starting point of our analysis is a Medicare reform changing the enrollment rules,
most notably allowing enrollment outside the open enrollment period for a subset of plans.
As in most insurance markets, beneficiaries select their Part C or D plan for coverage year
t during a window of time in the fall of year t−1.4 However, starting with the enrollment
year 2012, a reform allowed enrollees to switch to 5-star Part C or D plans at any point
during the year. Despite the official motivation for this reform (known as “5-star Special
Enrollment Period” or “5-star SEP”), which was to foster enrollment into high quality plans,
the reform exposes 5-star plans to an evident selection risk: enrollees could initially select
cheap plans and then move to expensive 5-star plans with generous coverage only after
being hit by health shocks. The selection risk associated with within-year plan changes
is different from the typical selection problem studied in the existing Medicare literature
involving choices made in the open enrollment period and is potentially more severe as
people select plans after learning their health status. Limiting this type of selection is
typically seen as important for the proper functioning of managed care markets and, indeed,
4While the open enrollment period length can very from 2 months to 2 weeks in employer sponsored
health insurance, the open enrollment period in Medicare is fixed. Specifically in Medicare, as well as in the
ACA exchanges, the open enrollment period is from October 15th to December 7th. This open enrollment
period only applies to those who are already Medicare beneficiaries and not to individuals turning 65 who
become eligible for Medicare.
2