NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PREPAYMENT RISK AND EXPECTED MBS RETURNS
Peter Diep
Andrea L. Eisfeldt
Scott Richardson
Working Paper 22851
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22851
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2016, Revised March 2017
We would like to thank Attakrit Asvanunt, Mikhail Chernov, Itamar Drechsler, Brett Dunn, Mark
Garmaise, Ronen Israel, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Francis Longstaff, William Mann, Tobias
Moskowitz, and Tyler Muir, as well as seminar participants at AQR, the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, and NYU Stern for comments and suggestions. All errors are ours. Eisfeldt has an
ongoing consulting relationship with AQR. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Peter Diep, Andrea L. Eisfeldt, and Scott Richardson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Prepayment Risk and Expected MBS Returns
Peter Diep, Andrea L. Eisfeldt, and Scott Richardson
NBER Working Paper No. 22851
November 2016, Revised March 2017
JEL No. E02,G12,G2
ABSTRACT
We present a simple, linear asset pricing model of the cross section of Mortgage-Backed Security
(MBS) returns in which MBS earn risk premia as compensation for their exposure to prepayment
risk. We measure prepayment risk and estimate security risk loadings using real data on
prepayment forecasts vs. realizations. Estimated loadings are monotonic in securities' coupons
relative to the par coupon, as predicted by the model. Prepayment risks appear to be priced by
specialized MBS investors. In particular, we find convincing evidence that prepayment risk prices
change sign over time with the sign of a representative MBS investor's exposure to prepayment
risk.
Peter Diep Scott Richardson
AQR AQR Capital Management
2 Greenwich Plaza and London Business School
Greenwich, CT 06830 srichardson@london.edu
peter.diep@aqr.com
Andrea L. Eisfeldt
UCLA Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza
Suite C4.10
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
andrea.eisfeldt@anderson.ucla.edu

1 Introduction
We develop a model of the time series and cross section of treasury-hedged returns
to Mortgage-Backed Securities (MBS), and find robust empirical support for our
model’s main implications. Our model is a simple and transparent linear asset pricing
model. Its key feature is that prepayment risk which is not readily hedgeable using
US treasuries is priced by specialized MBS investors, as in Gabaix, Krishnamurthy,
and Vigneron (2007). These specialized investors require prepayment risk premia
which vary over time and across securities depending on the share of MBS which is
trading above par value. We find that a tradable strategy optimized according to our
theory across securities and over time has a Sharpe ratio which is 2.7 times that of a
passive, value-weighted MBS index.
While prepayments due to interest rate movements of government securities can
be hedged, the requirement of a hedging model leads to model risk. Moreover, it is
even more challenging, if not impossible, to hedge against prepayment risk driven by
shocks to spreads between government and mortgage rates, changing credit condi-
tions, house price appreciation, and regulatory changes. As result, MBS which load
on the unhedgeable component of prepayment risk can exhibit risk premia even if
returns are effectively duration hedged to US treasuries. We show that this is indeed
the case by measuring MBS securities’ loadings on prepayment risk shocks measured
using actual forecast and realized prepayment data and showing that these risk load-
ings are priced. However, we also show that the factor risk prices change sign over
time. Such time varying risk premia have important implications for the time series
and cross section variation in MBS average returns. Indeed, failing to account for
time varying risk premia leads to estimates for expected returns which are misleading
because positive expected returns are biased towards zero.
We show that the composition of the market between discount and premium
securities drives the sign of prepayment risk premia. This idea, first proposed by
Gabaix et al. (2007), makes sense in the context of segmented markets and specialized
MBS investors. Discount securities trade below face value and are prepaid at face
value. Thus, for discount securities, or securities with prices below par, prepayment
is value increasing. The opposite is true for premium securities, whose value declines
1

with early prepayment at a face value which is lower than their market value. As
interest rates move, the moneyness of borrowers’ options to prepay, and the prices of
outstanding securities relative to the par security, vary considerably. As a result, the
composition of the MBS universe changes substantially over time, and the market
moves between being mainly comprised by discount securities to primarily premium.
Thus,prepaymentscanbevalueincreasingforthemarketoverallwhenthemajorityof
MBS,weightedbytheirremainingprincipalbalance, aretradingatadiscounttotheir
face value, and value decreasing when the market features more premium securities.
We provide evidence that MBS markets are indeed segmented. In particular, when
prepayment is wealth decreasing for a representative MBS investor who holds the
MBS market, we find negative prepayment risk prices. On the other hand, when
early prepayment increases the wealth of such an investor, we find a positive price of
prepayment risk.
We provide a simple, linear asset pricing model for the cross section of hedged
MBS returns which features two prepayment risk factors, and prices of risk for these
two factors which vary with market composition. The first risk factor is a level factor,
which shifts prepayments across all coupon levels up or down. The second factor is a
rate-sensitivity factor. This factor determines how sensitive borrowers are to prepay-
ment options, conditional on their option moneyness. Although active MBS investors
duration hedge, they cannot hedge shocks to the level of prepayments, or shocks to
borrowers’ sensitivity to their rate incentive. These “level” and ”rate-sensitivity” fac-
tors were termed “turnover” and “refi” risk by Levin and Davidson (2005). Chernov
etal.(2015)greatlyextendthisideaand, usingastructuralestimation, deriveimplied
time series for these two factors from their model and data on MBS prices.
Our study makes several contributions. First, we provide the first comprehensive
study explaining a long time series and broad cross section of MBS expected returns.
We study the pattern of expected returns in this important fixed income market using
a linear factor model which is straightforward to estimate and easy to interpret.
Second, we are the first to show that risk premia are earned on MBS investments
which load on prepayment risk in a study which uses actual prepayment data to
measure innovations to prepayment risk factors. We find substantial evidence that
non-interestratedrivenprepaymentshocksdriveMBSreturns,andthishasimportant
2