NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CROSS-BORDER PRUDENTIAL POLICY SPILLOVERS:
HOW MUCH? HOW IMPORTANT?
EVIDENCE FROM THE
INTERNATIONAL BANKING RESEARCH NETWORK
Claudia M. Buch
Linda Goldberg
Working Paper 22874
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22874
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016
The authors thank participants of the International Banking Research Network, in particular
Matthieu Bussiere, Jana Ohls, and Dennis Reinhardt, for many thoughtful exchanges and
contributions. Special thanks go to the teams that prepared the prudential instruments database
(Eugenio Cerutti, Ricardo Correa, Elisabetta Fiorentino, and Esther Segalla) in collaboration with
the International Monetary Fund and to all country teams providing the input for the meta-
analysis. Simone Auer, Stijn Claessens, Ricardo Correa, Ralph De Haas, John Driscoll, Martial
Dupaigne, Peter Egger, Alexander Guembel, Galina Hale, Robert Hills, Christian Hellwig,
Augustin Landier, Ouarda Merrouche, Camelia Minoiu, Gianmarco Ottaviano, Alexander Popov,
Rhiannon Sowerbutts, and Phil Strahan provided valuable comments on an earlier draft of this
paper. Excellent research assistance was provided by Jacob Conway and Guzel Valitova. The
views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and should not be interpreted as
reflecting the view of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, the
Deutsche Bundesbank, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All errors are our own.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Claudia M. Buch and Linda Goldberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Cross-Border Prudential Policy Spillovers: How Much? How Important? Evidence from the
International Banking Research Network
Claudia M. Buch and Linda Goldberg
NBER Working Paper No. 22874
December 2016
JEL No. F34,G01,G21
ABSTRACT
The development of macroprudential policy tools has been one of the most significant changes in
banking regulation in recent years. In this multi-study initiative of the International Banking
Research Network, researchers from fifteen central banks and two international organizations use
micro-banking data in conjunction with a novel dataset of prudential instruments to study
international spillovers of prudential policy changes and their effects on bank lending growth.
The collective analysis has three main findings. First, the effects of prudential instruments
sometimes spill over borders through bank lending. Second, international spillovers vary across
prudential instruments and are heterogeneous across banks. Bank-specific factors like balance
sheet conditions and business models drive the amplitude and direction of spillovers to lending
growth rates. Third, the effects of international spillovers of prudential policy on loan growth
rates have not been large on average. However, our results tend to underestimate the full effect by
focusing on adjustment along the intensive margin and by analyzing a period in which relatively
few countries implemented country-specific macroprudential policies.
Claudia M. Buch
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14
D-60431 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
claudia.buch@bundesbank.de
Linda Goldberg
Federal Reserve Bank-New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER
linda.goldberg@ny.frb.org

1. Introduction
The development of macroprudential policy tools is one of the most significant policy changes in
the past decade. Macroprudential policies aim at mitigating systemic risks in financial markets.
Macroprudential tools are often explicitly applied to banks and are mostly implemented at the
national level. Examples of such tools are bank capital requirements, counterparty
concentration limits, interbank exposure limits, loan-to-value ratios, and reserve requirements.
The desired targets might be bank lending growth, the resilience of banks to shocks, or asset
markets that are deemed to be frothy or mispriced.
The effectiveness of these tools is a key consideration. Analysis of early experiences with
macroprudential instruments shows that some tools can reduce banks’ asset growth within
countries (Claessens, Ghosh, and Mihet 2014). However, effectiveness may be weakened when
risky or excessive lending moves outside of the regulatory perimeter to non-covered entities or
activities (Bengui and Bianchi 2014; Aiyar, Calomiris, and Wieladek 2014; Reinhardt and
Sowerbutts 2015) or to other geographic regions (Houston, Lin, and Ma 2012).
The international financial openness of countries and the global nature of financial
institutions present added challenges (Obstfeld 2014).1 International spillovers through banks
matter for instrument effectiveness within a country’s borders and are relevant for the broader
issues of policy frameworks, externalities, reciprocity, and welfare. Yet, there is little systematic
evidence that establishes whether spillovers are common, important, and support or hinder the
attainment of policy goals. The gap in knowledge is particularly acute when it comes to evidence
drawn from and relevant for a broad range of countries. Providing this evidence on prudential
policy effects and international spillovers is the subject of this multi-study initiative of the
International Banking Research Network (IBRN).2 15 country teams examine domestic effects
and international spillovers of prudential instruments using detailed confidential micro-banking
data. In addition, researchers from the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) and from the
European Central Bank (ECB) provide cross-country perspectives. The analyses focus on
evidence for international policy spillovers through multiple channels: Inward transmission
1 For a more detailed discussion of macroprudential toolkits, see Arregui et al. (2013), Claessens, Ghosh, and
Mihet (2014), or Ostry et al. (2011).
2 The IBRN was founded in 2012 to analyze issues pertinent to internationally active banks. The current list of
participating central banks and institutions is available at http://www.newyorkfed.org/IBRN/index.html. Most
central bank teams have access to confidential bank-level data on domestic and cross-border banking activities.
In a previous project, the IBRN analyzed the transmission of liquidity risk domestically and internationally
through the activities of global banks, with a meta-analysis (Buch and Goldberg 2015) and eleven country
studies published in the IMF Economic Review (November 2015).
1

addresses how foreign regulations affect the domestic activities of domestic banks or foreign
affiliates (bank branches or subsidiaries) located in the host country; Outward transmission to
foreign economies addresses the effects of foreign policies on the foreign activities of a
reporting country’s global banks. All country teams implement the same baseline regression
models for analyzing inward or outward transmission. In addition, country teams address issues
specific to their banking markets or banks’ business models. In some cases, teams differentiate
adjustment of lending by their global banks’ branches (which are subject to the capital
requirements of their parents) versus subsidiaries (which are, in addition, subject to regulations
in the host country).
This paper provides an overview of the full initiative, including its methodological and
database contributions, and it presents a meta-analysis that generates key cross-country
results. By design, the empirical studies we summarize are very homogenous because all teams
used the same baseline regression model. Hence, publication biases that can affect meta-
analyses that draw on only published research are not an issue here. Also, largely due to data
availability, previous studies of international spillovers are more restricted as they consider
fewer or less precisely dated policy instruments or countries, or as they cannot account for
differences across banks or channels of policy transmission internationally.3
The IBRN has worked toward closing several gaps that have limited prior analyses. The IBRN
provides cross-country evidence on regulatory spillovers using the same methodological
framework and consistent data – both bank-specific and in terms of prudential instruments –
across countries. As researchers apply a common research methodology, the IBRN’s broadly
relevant insights go well beyond the single-country case studies. In order to identify effects of
prudential policies, the project uses micro-data, and it exploits variation in prudential
instruments across countries, bank balance sheet characteristics, and the location of foreign
affiliates. Micro-data help in solving the identification problem which beleaguers impact
assessment studies based on aggregate data. Identification using heterogeneity and in the
international context is greatly aided by the degree of granularity of the data involved. To
facilitate results which are comparable across countries, the IBRN and International Monetary
Fund (IMF) developed a new database that contains more precise measures of prudential
regulation than were available to prior researchers. Described in Cerutti, Correa, Fiorentino, and
Segalla (2015), the quarterly database spans 64 countries and the period from 2000 to 2014.
3 Most available studies cover the domestic consequences of domestic prudential policies. Examples include
Bruno and Shin (2014), IMF (2011), Jiménez et al (2012) and Vandenbussche et al. (2015).
2