NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RELATIONSHIP LENDING AND THE GREAT DEPRESSION
Jon Cohen
Kinda Cheryl Hachem
Gary Richardson
Working Paper 22891
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22891
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016, Revised January 2020
We thank Joseph Johnson, Padma Sharma, and Daniel Tracht for excellent research assistance.
We also thank Ben Bernanke, Gabe Chodorow-Reich, Oli Coibion, Jonathan Dingel, Joe
Haubrich, Erik Hurst, Chris Koch, Fabrizio Perri, Johannes Wieland, and three anonymous
referees, as well as seminar and conference participants at Chicago Booth, UW-Madison, FRB
Cleveland, NBER SI 2016 Monetary Economics, the 2018 Texas Monetary Conference, and the
University of Michigan for helpful comments. Kinda Hachem thanks Chicago Booth for financial
support in earlier stages of this work. The views in this paper are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Jon Cohen, Kinda Cheryl Hachem, and Gary Richardson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Relationship Lending and the Great Depression
Jon Cohen, Kinda Cheryl Hachem, and Gary Richardson
NBER Working Paper No. 22891
December 2016, Revised January 2020
JEL No. E44,G01,G21,L14,N22
ABSTRACT
The collapse of long-term lending relationships amplified the Great Depression. We demonstrate
this by developing a new measure of lending relationships that can be calculated from widely
available data at any level of aggregation. Our approach exploits differences in the
responsiveness of loan rates to bank funding costs and is supported by historical evidence and
theoretical arguments. The new measure reveals that the marginal impact of bank suspensions on
economic activity was higher in more relationship-intensive areas, providing the first formal
evidence that relationship lending propagated the real effects of banking sector distress in the
early 1930s.
Jon Cohen Gary Richardson
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of Toronto University of California, Irvine
Max Gluskin House 3155 Social Sciences Plaza
150 St. George Street, 322 Irvine, CA 92697-5100
Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G7 and NBER
Canada garyr@uci.edu
jon.cohen@utoronto.ca
Kinda Cheryl Hachem
University of Virginia
Darden School of Business
100 Darden Boulevard
Charlottesville, VA 22906
and NBER
hachemk@darden.virginia.edu

1 Introduction
The Great Depression was the longest and deepest downturn in U.S. history. Scholars have
long debated how the collapse of commercial banking in the early 1930s contributed to the
contraction of commerce and industry. The pioneering work of Bernanke (1983) inspired a
large literature that seeks to estimate the size and signi…cance of this credit channel. The
assumption that underlies almost all of these papers is that bank suspensions had real e¤ects
because they destroyed –or at the very least prevented the immediate redeployment of –
some critical input into the bank lending process that impacts the cost of credit. Absent
this assumption, it is di¢ cult to explain why bank suspensions would contribute to such a
deep and protracted decline in economic activity. But what exactly was this critical input
and why was it so di¢ cult to redeploy? Despite the abundant scholarship on the Great
Depression, data limitations have impeded attempts to answer this question.
In this paper, we demonstrate that the critical input impaired by bank suspensions was
the soft information that banks had acquired about the quality of their borrowers over the
course of multi-period lending relationships. Soft information cannot be directly observed
by the econometrician and the type of microeconomic data on bank-…rm interactions used
to construct proxies for it in modern analyses of relationship lending are unavailable for the
1920sand1930s. Weresolvethisproblembydevelopinganewmeasureofcontinuinglending
relationshipsthatcanbeconstructedfromdataaggregatedatanylevelorfrequency,enabling
comparison to the time-series and panel data typically analyzed by macroeconomists. We
then use our measure to show that disruptions to continuing relationships as a result of bank
suspensions in the early 1930s contributed to the severity of the Great Depression.
Our measure is based on the idea that loan rates charged in continuing relationships are
less responsive to changes in bank funding costs than are those charged on other loans. We
start by comparing average interest rates on two types of bank loans: one that historical
sources describe as relational (commercial loans) and one that they describe as transactional
(brokers’loans). We …nd that the average interest rate on the relationship loans was less
2

responsive to changes in bank funding costs than was the average interest rate on the trans-
actional loans. We present a model based on Hachem (2011) to help understand why this
was the case. We choose this model because its assumptions are consistent with the insti-
tutional details of the period we study, namely the short-term and uncollateralized nature
of commercial loans, the potential sequencing of these loans as part of longer-term lending
relationships, and the competitive nature of bank lending.
At the heart of the model are the asymmetric information problems inherent in …nancial
intermediation. The …rst is adverse selection, which exists because borrowers have private
information about their ability to operate certain projects. The second is moral hazard,
where higher loan rates increase a borrower’s incentive to undertake projects with high
default risk. Moral hazard generates a threshold loan rate above which borrowers shift
their unobservable e¤orts towards riskier projects. Heterogeneous ability implies that this
threshold depends on the borrower’s type. A continuing relationship lender is able to use
information gleaned about his borrower’s type during previous interactions to determine the
threshold and decide whether or not to pass an increase in bank funding costs through to
the borrower. New relationship lenders and/or transactional lenders cannot condition this
decision on the borrower’s type because they lack information about it.
The model predicts that the incentive compatible contract o¤ered by a continuing re-
lationship lender eliminates risk-shifting by reducing the pass-through from bank funding
costs to loan rates for some borrowers. From this, it can be shown that relationship loan
rates are on average less elastic with respect to bank funding costs than are transactional
loan rates. The di¤erence is driven by continuing rather than new relationships. Moreover,
the elasticity of the weighted average of all loan rates in a region is decreasing in the degree
to which that region’s banks are engaged in continuing relationships. Our new measure of
continuing lending relationships is based on this last prediction.
We use data from the consolidated balance sheets and income statements of national
banks, as reported by the Comptroller of the Currency in the 1920s, to implement our
3