NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXCHANGE TRADED FUNDS (ETFS)
Itzhak Ben-David
Francesco Franzoni
Rabih Moussawi
Working Paper 22829
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22829
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2016, September 2017
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Itzhak Ben-David, Francesco Franzoni, and Rabih Moussawi. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs)
Itzhak Ben-David, Francesco Franzoni, and Rabih Moussawi
NBER Working Paper No. 22829
November 2016, September 2017
JEL No. G12,G14,G15
ABSTRACT
Over nearly a quarter of a century, ETFs have become one of the most popular passive
investment vehicles among retail and professional investors due to their low transaction costs and
high liquidity. By the end of 2016, the market share of ETFs topped over 10% of the total market
capitalization traded on US exchanges, while representing more than 30% of the overall trading
volume. ETFs revolutionized the asset management industry by taking market share from
traditional investment vehicles such as mutual funds and index futures. Because ETFs rely on
arbitrage activity to synchronize their prices with the prices of the underlying portfolio, trading
activity at the ETF level translates to trading of the underlying securities. Researchers found that
while ETFs enhance price discovery, they also inject non-fundamental volatility to market prices
and affect the correlation structure of returns. Furthermore, ETFs impact the liquidity of the
underlying portfolios, especially during events of market stress.
Itzhak Ben-David Rabih Moussawi
Department of Finance Villanova University
Fisher College of Business 800 Lancaster Ave,
The Ohio State University Bartley 1003
2100 Neil Avenue Villanova, PA 19085
Columbus, OH 43210 Rabih.Moussawi@villanova.edu
and NBER
bendavid@fisher.osu.edu
Francesco Franzoni
Swiss Finance Institute
Via G. Buffi 13
6904, Lugano - Switzerland
and University of Lugano
francesco.franzoni@usi.ch

1 Introduction
Since the mid-1990s, exchange traded funds (ETFs) have become a popular investment
vehicle due to their low transaction costs and intraday liquidity. ETF sponsors issue securities that
are traded on the major stock exchanges, and, for the most part, these instruments aim to replicate
the performance of an index. ETFs have shown spectacular growth. By the end of 2016, they
represented over 10% of the market capitalization of securities traded on US stock exchanges,
more than 30% of the overall daily trading volume, and around 20% of the aggregate short interest.
This article synthesizes the academic literature on ETFs with a focus on trading and
markets. First, we provide a brief overview of the mechanics of ETFs. Second, we analyze the
research that explores the popularity of passive asset management in general and ETFs in
particular. Third, we survey the literature discussing the effects of ETFs on the quality of financial
markets.
In the first part of this article, we describe how ETFs work and what distinguishes them
from other pooled investment vehicles. ETFs either hold a basket of securities passively (physical
replication) or enter into derivative contracts delivering the performance of an index (synthetic
replication), or they do a mix of the two. They issue securities that are claims on the underlying
pool of securities.1 ETF shares are traded on stock exchanges, and investors can take either long
or short positions. Two mechanisms keep ETF prices in line with those of the basket that they aim
to track: primary and secondary market arbitrage. The first mechanism involves the creation and
redemption of ETF shares by special intermediaries called authorized participants (APs). When
ETF prices and the prices of the underlying securities diverge, APs typically buy the less expensive
asset (ETF shares or a basket of the underlying securities) and exchange it for the more expensive
asset, leading to the creation or redemption of ETF shares. The second mechanism, is arbitraging
ETFs and their underlying portfolios (through long and short positions) by market participants, in
an attempt to benefit from the closing of price discrepancies between the two assets. The price
1 Exchange traded pooled investment vehicles are collectively designated as exchange traded products (ETPs). These
include ETFs; exchange traded notes (ETNs), which are senior debt notes and do not invest in a portfolio of securities
or a portfolio of derivatives on those securities; and exchange traded commodities (ETCs), which provide investors
exposure to individual commodities or baskets and can be structured as funds or notes. In this review article, we
restrict our attention to ETFs, which have been the main focus of the literature, given that they represent 95% of the
ETP value in the United States.
2

pressure from the trades leads to convergence of prices. Since such trading involves the risk that
in any finite time horizon prices will not converge, it is an arbitrage only in a loose sense.
The second part of this article describes the rise of passive investment and the role of ETFs
in the passive asset management space. Passive asset management has expanded in recent decades,
raising questions about what is driving this phenomenon and its implications for financial markets
and investors. While some researchers view this trend as evidence that financial markets are
becoming more efficient, others warn that passive investments may have adverse effects on price
efficiency and welfare. Several studies document that ETFs capture market share that was
previously taken by traditional passive investment vehicles like index mutual funds, closed-end
funds, and index futures.
The third part of the article focuses on how ETFs impact financial markets. In general,
researchers disagree about the effects of ETFs on the securities market. In principle, the positive
and negative effects of ETFs are not necessarily mutually exclusive. Some researchers argue that
ETFs have little adverse effects on financial markets and even present some evidence of improved
price efficiency, while others present evidence that ETFs lead to negative consequences to markets
by increasing non-fundamental return volatility, altering correlation patterns, and reducing the
liquidity of securities. In particular, scholars have raised the concern that the mechanical basket
arbitrage trading that characterizes ETFs can propagate liquidity shocks across markets, and thus
deteriorate the quality of prices. This concern is especially acute given that ETFs are traded by
high-turnover investors, who potentially generate liquidity shocks into prices at high frequencies.
Also, ETF ownership appears to induce excessive correlation of the securities in their baskets.
Finally, recent episodes of extreme market turbulence (e.g., the Flash Crash on May 6, 2010, and
the events of August 24, 2015) have revealed that the liquidity provision in ETFs is subject to
sudden dry-ups.
Overall, ETFs have transformed the asset management world by introducing low-cost
investment vehicles that are traded continuously. The academic literature acknowledges this
financial innovation but also points to some potential weaknesses that appear to be sufficiently
important to draw regulatory scrutiny.
3