NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXTENDING INDUSTRY SPECIALIZATION THROUGH CROSS-BORDER ACQUISITIONS
Laurent Frésard
Ulrich Hege
Gordon Phillips
Working Paper 22848
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22848
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2016
We thank David Denis (the editor), two anonymous referees, Kenneth Ahern, Miguel Ferreira,
Cesare Fracassi, Murray Frank, Rose Liao, Pedro Matos, Tomasz Michalski, Holger Mueller, and
seminar participants at MIT, Monash University, the University of Toronto, the University of
Maryland, the University of Pittsburgh, the University of Warwick, the 2016 American Finance
Association Meetings, the 2015 FIRS conference, the 2015 LBS Corporate Finance Symposium,
the 2015 Ohio State Corporate Finance Conference, the 2014 Washington University Conference
on Corporate Finance, and the HEC Paris-Princeton Finance Workshop for helpful comments. A
previous version of the paper has circulated under the title "Extending Comparative Advantage
through Cross-Border Acquisitions". The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Laurent Frésard, Ulrich Hege, and Gordon Phillips. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Extending Industry Specialization through Cross-Border Acquisitions
Laurent Frésard, Ulrich Hege, and Gordon Phillips
NBER Working Paper No. 22848
November 2016
JEL No. D22,D4,D53,G34,L1,L11
ABSTRACT
We investigate the role of industry specialization in horizontal cross-border mergers and
acquisitions. We find that acquirers from more specialized industries in a country are more likely
to buy foreign targets in countries that are less specialized in these same industries. The role of
industry specialization in foreign acquisitions is more prevalent when contracting inefficiencies
and exporting costs limit arms' length relationships. The economic gains in cross-border deals are
larger when specialized acquirers purchase assets in less specialized industries. These results are
consistent with an internalization motive for foreign acquisitions, through which acquirers can
apply localized intangibles on foreign assets.
Laurent Frésard Gordon Phillips
University of Maryland Tuck School of Business
Van Munching Hall 4144 Dartmouth College
7699 Mowatt Ln. 100 Tuck Hall
College Park, MD 20742 Hanover, NH 03755
lfresard@rhsmith.umd.edu and NBER
gordon.m.phillips@gmail.com
Ulrich Hege
Toulouse School of Economics
Toulouse, France
ulrich.hege@tse-fr.eu
A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22848

I Introduction
The last thirty years have witnessed a boom in cross-border mergers and acquisitions,
with a large range of countries and industries participating in the globalization of corpo-
rate acquisitions.1 A growing literature investigates the reasons why firms stretch their
boundaries internationally, and the locations in which they acquire assets. In this pa-
per, we argue and provide novel evidence that the volume, direction, and value creation
of cross-border acquisitions are related to firms’ willingness to deploy mobile intangible
advantages on foreign assets.
Our analysis builds on the internalization theory of international expansion that pre-
dicts that firms can create value through foreign acquisitions by internalizing markets
for some of their proprietary assets and expanding their use internationally within firm
boundaries rather than at arm’s length (e.g. Caves (1971) or Hymer (1976)). This mode
of global expansion should prevail when firms benefit from specific advantages that can
easily be transferred geographically, but that are difficult to exchange via market rela-
tionships in foreign countries. Hence, the types of assets that firms seek to deploy abroad
via foreign acquisitions are likely to be specific intangible resources, which are both highly
mobile and hard to trade at arm’s length (e.g. Markusen (1995)). According to the inter-
nalization motive, firms acquire control of assets overseas to profitably expand the scale
of mobile intangible advantages (e.g. knowhow or skills) on foreign targets’ immobile
capabilities (e.g. machines and equipment or distribution network).
We posit that firms’ mobile intangible advantages contain an important localized in-
dustry component which is reflected in the specialization of their industry. Indeed, a
large literature in economics shows that industry specialization reflects differences in the
relative efficiency of economic activities across countries as originally laid out by Ricardo
(1817) in his theory of comparative advantage. We postulate that these cross-country dif-
ferences in the relative efficiency of industries arise primarily because of differences in the
prevalence of industry-specific intangible assets as in Glaeser (2010)).2 Intangibles such as
1For instance, according to a recent report by Baker & McKenzie, there were more than 11,000 cross-
border acquisitions in 2014, valued at $1.3 trillion, surpassing every year on record, except 2007. In the
recent period, cross-border deals represents around 40% of all acquisitions, and comprises the largest
deals, such as the acquisition of Holcim by Lafarge in April for $39 billion.
2Ellison and Glaeser (1999) show that only 20% of industry agglomeration patterns can be ascribed
1

knowhow or management skills typically concentrate geographically, generating agglom-
eration economies through localized knowledge flows (e.g. Porter (1990) or Ellison and
Glaeser (1999)). Examples of such industry clusters include watch-making in Switzerland,
informationtechnologyintheUnitedStates(“SiliconValley”), ormachineryandchemical
manufacturing in Germany. We argue that the presence of geographically concentrated
intangibles gives firms located in specialized clusters access to unique industry-specific
intangible advantages that can be deployed abroad via acquisitions.
Using specialization at the country-industry level to measure mobile intangible advan-
tages, we find strong support for the internalization motive for cross-border acquisitions.
We conduct our analysis on a large sample of 36,105 horizontal cross-border deals cumu-
latively valued in excess of $3.2 trillion involving private and public acquirers and targets
from 46 countries and 85 industries over the period from 1990 through 2010. Across
175,950 industry-country pairs (46 × 45 × 85 combinations of countries and industries)
we find that the intensity of acquisition flows between two countries (e.g., Switzerland and
the US) in a given industry (e.g., watches) is positively related to differences in their spe-
cializationinthatindustry(e.g.,specializationoftheSwissandAmericanwatchindustry).
Even after controlling for a host of country determinants of cross-border acquisitions (e.g.
size, economic development, or institutional quality), firms in more specialized industries
acquire control of assets in less specialized industries. The role of industry specialization
is economically large. For the average industry, a one standard deviation increase in the
difference in specialization between two countries is associated with an increase of 14.6%
in the number of deals, and a 56.5% increase in aggregate transaction value.
The strong link between industry specialization and cross-border acquisitions is per-
vasive and highly robust. It persists after we control for various country-industry charac-
teristics that are known to explain foreign acquisition activity and that could be related
to differences in specialization, such as differences across countries in industries’ size, val-
uation, access to capital, governance, product market competition, or global economic
importance. In addition, we conduct extensive robustness tests to make sure our results
hold under alternative specifications, including for instance different definitions of indus-
tries, or datasets to construct industry specifications. Also, our results are robust to
tonaturalcostadvantages, leavinglocalizedintra-industryspilloversalikelycandidatefortheremaining
fraction.
2