NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REAL ESTATE BUBBLES AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
Edward L. Glaeser
Working Paper 22997
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22997
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016
I gratefully acknowledge conversations with Andrei Shleifer. Esteban Rossi-Hansberg provided
helpful comments. Financial support was provided by the Taubman Center for State and Local
Government. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Edward L. Glaeser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Real Estate Bubbles and Urban Development
Edward L. Glaeser
NBER Working Paper No. 22997
December 2016
JEL No. G15,R10,R30
ABSTRACT
Why are real estate bubbles so common? Can these bubbles actually do some good? Real estate
booms have regularly occurred throughout the world leaving painful busts and financial crises in
their wake. This paper suggests that real estate is a natural investment for more passive debt
investors, including banks, because real estate’s flexibility makes it better collateral than
specifically built production facilities. Passive capital’s preference for real estate will be
particularly strong when agency problems bedevil equity investments. Consequently, passive
capital may flow disproportionately into real estate and the errors of passive capital can generate
real estate bubbles. The preference of banks for more fungible real estate assets can also explain
why real estate is so often the source of financial crises. In principle, real estate bubbles can be
welfare enhancing, if cities would otherwise be too small either because of agglomeration
economies or building restrictions. But given reasonable parameter values, the large welfare cost
of any financial crisis associated with a real estate bubble is likely to be much higher than the
modest benefits of extra building. The benefits of real estate bubbles are welfare “triangles” while
the costs of widespread default are welfare “rectangles,” which is why bubbles rarely appear to be
benign events.
Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

I. Introduction
Housing prices have increased by 15.9 percent annually between 2003 and 2013 in China’s most
successful cities in real terms (Fang et al., 2015). Between 2011 and 2014, China built 106.5
billion square feet of floor space (Glaeser et al, 2016). Inevitably, some have claimed that the
Chinese property market is a bubble waiting to burst, for real estate crises have been common in
the developing world. The late 1990s Asian financial crisis was associated with extensive
building and declining real estate prices in Bangkok, Djakarta and even Hong Kong. Japan’s
massive post-1990 real estate bust set the stage for that country’s lost two decades.
Glaeser, Huang, Ma and Shleifer (2016) argue that Chinese real estate prices might maintain
their value if new supply is limited over the next 15 years, but divining the future of Chinese real
estate prices is not the purpose of this paper. This paper addresses the larger question of why real
estate booms and busts are so common and whether they can be good for growth. The urban
history of the U.S. is replete with real estate speculation, and at least some of that speculation
ended without catastrophe (Glaeser, 2013).
Section II of this paper provides brief discussions of past U.S. and Asian real estate booms.
Typically, historically, bubble-like events have occurred at moments of extraordinary positive
change, such as revolutions in transportation and building technology or widespread industrial
growth. Consequently, high prices were plausibly sensible given reasonable beliefs about the
future demand for space. High prices were also often associated with large booms in building
both structures and infrastructure. New York’s traditional skyline owes its shape to that city’s
late 1920s real estate boom.
Section III provides a simple model to explain why real estate booms are so common. Land has
been the most common store of wealth throughout human history, both because it is harder to
expropriate than other assets, both intrinsically and because western law was partially built
around the process of defending land ownership (Glaeser, Ponzetto and Shleifer, 2016). Well-
defined property rights for land make it suitable collateral. Moreover, buildings are typically less
specific than factories, which means that it is easier for creditors to realize value out from
2

foreclosed real estate. The attraction of real estate to passive debt investors means that credit
booms have often enabled developers to make large and leveraged bets on real estate. Strong
property rights and the relative flexibility of buildings do not make bubbles inevitable, but they
do explain why extra optimism can often lead to real-estate related activity.
In the model, there are both passive and active investors, where active investors can manage their
investments and passive investors must trust managers. In the event of a default, passive
investors lose value, but they lose less value with real estate than with factories. Consequently,
active capital (which is in limited supply) specializes in industry while passive capital specializes
in buildings. If there is erroneous over-optimism, then the flow of passive capital into real estate
will rise and there will be a bubble. Since the supply of active capital is limited, over-optimistic
beliefs increase the level of real estate investment more than they increase investment in the
export industry.
Olivier (2000) argued that there were conditions under which rational asset bubbles were
growth-enhancing and the same is true about irrational real estate bubbles. Urban economists
have long believed that there are positive (as well as negative) externalities associated with
working in cities. These agglomeration economies can mean that cities are too small, in the
absence of appropriate government policy. Cities can also be too small if government policy
excessively restricts new construction. An irrationally optimistic belief about future demand for
a city can lead to the city being over-developed, relative to private profit maximization. Yet, that
over-development may be optimal from a social perspective if agglomeration economies are at
work, as they appear to be in China (Chauvin et al., 2016).
There are also negative externalities associated with urban living, such as congestion and
contagious disease, and these can be exacerbated by urban growth. Yet much of the new Chinese
construction appears to be replacing older, more dilapidated and perhaps more dangerous
structures with newer, perhaps safer buildings. Consequently, this new construction may be
reducing the downsides of density in urban China.
In theory, real estate bubbles can be welfare enhancing but there is no guarantee that any
particular bubble will produce such a positive outcome. Most importantly, real estate bubbles
lead to foreclosures and potentially widespread social costs from financial dislocation. In Section
IV, I show that given reasonable parameter values, the foreclosure-related losses from a burst
3