NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STEPPING ON A RAKE:
REPLICATION AND DIAGNOSIS
John H. Cochrane
Working Paper 22979
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22979
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016, Revised October 2017
Previously circulated as “Stepping on a Rake: Replication and Diagnosis.” Computer programs
and updated drafts may be found at http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/. I thank two
referees, Eric Leeper (the editor), and Zhengyang Jiang for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by John H. Cochrane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Stepping on a Rake: Replication and Diagnosis
John H. Cochrane
NBER Working Paper No. 22979
December 2016, Revised October 2017
JEL No. E31,E4,E5
ABSTRACT
The fiscal theory of the price level can describe monetary policy. Governments can set interest
rate targets and thereby affect inflation, with no change in fiscal surpluses. The same basic
mechanism describes interest rate targets, forward guidance, open market operations, and
quantitative easing. It does not require any monetary, pricing, or other frictions. In the presence of
long-term debt, higher interest rates lead to temporarily lower inflation, a challenging sign. I
derive and replicate the results of the Sims (2011) “stepping on a rake” model, which first
produced this negative sign, and produces realistic impulse-response functions. I show that Sims'
result is robust to many model features, but essentially requires long-term debt.
John H. Cochrane
Hoover Institution
434 Galvez Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
john.cochrane@stanford.edu
Computer programs available on my webpage is available at
http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/

1. Introduction
The fiscal theory of the price level does not just describe inflation and deflation driven by
fiscal events. The fiscal theory of the price level also offers a cogent and unified description of
monetary policy: how governments can set interest rate targets; and how governments can affect
inflation and the real economy, by interest rate targets, by forward guidance about interest rate
targets, and by varying the quantity and maturity structure of government debt in open-market
and quantitative-easing operations, all without changes in fiscal surpluses.
Inthepresenceoflong-termdebt, aninterestraterisecanproduceatemporarilylowerinflation
rate in this fiscal theory. Higher nominal interest rates mean lower nominal bond prices, which
lower the nominal market value of outstanding government debt. If expected future surpluses do
not change, as I assume of “monetary policy,” and at the existing price level, the market value of
government debt is then less than its real value to consumers and investors. People then try to
buy government debt, and to buy less goods and services, i.e. aggregate demand declines. The
price level declines, until the real value of nominal debt again matches the real present value of
primary surpluses. Since the inflation-lowering effect of higher rates depends on long-term bond
prices, and thus centrally on expected future short term rates, this mechanism is also a model of
forward guidance.
Similarly, in the presence of long-term debt, buying back some long term debt, with no change
in surpluses, means less debt coming due at future dates, backed by unchanged surpluses. This
reduces the future price level. The extra money from today’s bond purchase drives up today’s
price level, an inflationary stimulus. The higher current and lower future price level imply a lower
long-term interest rate. This is a version of quantitative easing.
Eventually, however, the Fisher effect wins out, and persistently higher nominal interest rates
mean higher inflation. Sims (2011) calls this pattern of responses to a persistent interest rate rise
“stepping on a rake.” He offers it as an explanation of the 1970s: Attempts to lower inflation by
raising interest rates, without fiscal reform, temporarily lowered inflation, but then inflation came
back even more strongly.
This fiscal theory of monetary policy requires no frictions at all – no money demand, special
liquid asset, sticky prices, financial frictions, liquidity constraints, irrational expectations, and so
forth. Yes, one may add frictions and elaborations to obtain realistic dynamics. In particular,
pricing frictions deliver output effects of monetary policy. But we can now start with a simple
supply and demand benchmark, which delivers basic signs and intuitions, and then add frictions to
2

match dynamics, as we do elsewhere in economics, rather than require frictions to even get going,
i.e. to determine the price level, to describe the central bank’s ability to control interest rates and
inflation, or to produce the basic sign of monetary policy.
Sims (2011) is a ready-made example. Sims specifies an interest rate target which rises with
inflation and output; fiscal surpluses that respond to output, with larger deficits in recessions; a
standard forward-looking sticky-price Phillips curve; a habit-like preference for smooth consump-
tion; and long-term government debt. His policy parameters are in the “passive-money / active-
fiscal” region of the Leeper (1991) categorization: Interest rates respond less than one for one to
inflation, and fiscal surpluses do not respond to validate revisions in the value of government debt
coming from arbitrary changes in the price level.
Simsshowsthatariseininterestratesproducesatransitorydeclineininflation(seethetopleft
panel of figure 2 below). If the interest rate rise is persistent, inflation eventually rises. Sims also
generatessmoothimpulseresponsefunctionswithsignsandmagnitudestypicaloftheactive-money
New-Keynesian literature.
1.1. Context
One may be surprised that I focus on the temporary inflation decline rather than the eventual
long-terminflationriseinresponsetopersistentlyhigherinterestrates. Commonintuitionsuggests
thathigherinterestrateslowerinflation,sotheshort-runnegativeresponseseemseasy,andthelong
run positive response seems a novelty. Indeed, Sims’ analysis of the 1970s was novel. Conventional
wisdom says that inflation grew out of control in the 1970s because rates were not raised high
enough or for long enough, not because they were raised too much or for too long.
However,ithassincebecomeclearthatthistheoreticalpresumptionshouldbereversed. Models
with forward-looking people, including standard new-Keynesian models, produce higher long-run
inflation in response to persistently higher interest rates. They have great trouble to produce even
a temporarily lower inflation. The intuition is simple: In these models, the Fisher relation, that
nominal interest rate equals real rate plus expected inflation, is a stable steady state. Real rates
settle down eventually, so inflation is attracted to the nominal rate.
In fact, other than by this fiscal-theory mechanism, we do not have a simple, modern (rational
agents, market clearing) economic model that robustly produces even a short-run negative effect
of interest rates on inflation. (The qualifiers simple, modern, economic, and robust are important
to this statement. See Cochrane (2017a) for extensive discussion.) Thus, the ability to produce a
3