NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ELITE COLLEGES AND UPWARD MOBILITY TO TOP JOBS AND TOP INCOMES
Seth D. Zimmerman
Working Paper 22900
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22900
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016, Revised September 2018
This paper was previously circulated under the title ‘Making the One Percent: The Role of Elite
Universities and Elite Peers.’ I thank Joseph Altonji, Marianne Bertrand, Eduardo Engel,
Francisco Gallego, Martin Hackmann, Lisa Kahn, Adam Kapor, Amanda Kowalski, Fabian
Lange, Costas Meghir, Craig Palsson, Jamin Speer, Ebonya Washington, and numerous seminar
participants for valuable comments. I thank Justine Hastings and Christopher Neilson for detailed
discussions and for their collaboration in developing the datasets used for this project. I thank
Cristobal Huneeus and Federico Huneeus for valuable comments and for support in data access. I
thank DEMRE Directors Ivan Silva and Eduardo Rodriguez for access to college application
data. I thank Pablo Maino, Valeria Maino, and Nadia Vazquez for assistance with archival
research. I thank SII staff for their support in access to tax records. I thank Anely Ramirez for her
invaluable contributions to data collection and institutional research. I thank Sean Hyland and
Raimundo Smith for excellent research assistance. I thank the Yale Program in Applied
Economics and Policy, the Cowles Structural Microeconomics Program, and the University of
Chicago Booth School of Business for financial support. All errors are my own. Required
disclosure: Information contained herein comes from taxpayers’ records obtained by the Chilean
Internal Revenue Service (Servicio de Impuestos Internos), which was collected for tax purposes.
Let the record state that the Internal Revenue Service assumes no responsibility or guarantee of
any kind for the use or application made of the aforementioned information, especially in regard
to the accuracy, currency, or integrity. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Seth D. Zimmerman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Elite Colleges and Upward Mobility to Top Jobs and Top Incomes
Seth D. Zimmerman
NBER Working Paper No. 22900
December 2016, Revised September 2018
JEL No. I24,I26
ABSTRACT
This paper asks whether elite colleges help students outside of historically advantaged groups
reach top positions in the economy. I combine administrative data on income and leadership
teams at publicly traded firms with a regression discontinuity design based on admissions rules at
elite business-focused degree programs in Chile. The 1.8% of college students admitted to these
programs account for 41%of leadership positions and 39% of top 0.1% incomes. Admission
raises the number of leadership positions students hold by 44% and their probability of attaining a
top 0.1% income by 51%. However, these gains are driven by male applicants from high-tuition
private high schools, with zero effects for female students or students from other school types
with similar admissions test scores. Admissions effects are equal to 38% of the gap in rates of top
attainment by gender and 54% of the gap by high school background for male students. A
difference-in-differences analysis of the rates at which pairs of students lead the same firms
suggests that peer ties formed between college classmates from similar backgrounds may play an
important role in driving the observed effects.
Seth D. Zimmerman
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
seth.zimmerman@chicagobooth.edu
An online appendix is available at
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22900/Zimmerman_Top_Jobs_appendix.pdf

1 Introduction
This paper asks whether elite colleges help students outside of historically advantaged groups
reach top positions in the economy. What determines upward mobility into top jobs and top
incomesisthesubjectofalongstandingdebate,thestakesofwhichhavegrownovertimeastop
incomeshareshaverisen.1 Eliteuniversitiesareanimportantcausalchanneltoexplorebecause
theirgraduatesholdlargesharesoftoppositions. Forexample,CapelliandHamori(2004)report
that 10% of Fortune 100 executives in 2001 attended an Ivy League college, while Cohen et al.
(2008) find that 10% of publicly traded firms in the US have at least one senior manager from
Harvard. Whathappensateliteuniversitiesmayaffectnotjustaccesstotopjobsforindividual
students,butthecompositionoftoppositionsoverall. Further,helpingtalentedstudentsaccess
economicopportunityregardlessofbackgroundisacorepolicyobjectiveforcollegesingeneral
andeliteuniversitiesinparticular(HoxbyandAvery2013,Chettyetal.2017).
Inthispaper,IcombineadministrativeandarchivaldatafromChilewitharegressiondisconti-
nuitydesigntostudyhowadmissiontoelitebusiness-focuseddegreeprogramsaffectstherates
at which students from different backgrounds reach top positions in the economy. I link data
on applications to elite degree programs dating back more than 40 years to administrative tax
recordsaswellastorecordsoftopmanagementteamsatpubliclytradedcorporations,anduse
variationinadmissionsoutcomesgeneratedbyscore-basedcutoffrulestoidentifythecausalef-
fectsofadmission. Inadditiontofacilitatingmeasurementoftopoutcomesandcrediblecausal
inference,theChileansettingisaninformativeonebecauseintergenerationalincomeelasticities,
top income shares, and measures of business transparency suggest opportunities for upward
mobilitysimilartothoseinmanyLatinAmericanandEUmemberstates.2
I have three findings. First, a small number of highly selective, business-focused degree pro-
gramsaccountforlargesharesofleadershippositionsandtopincomes. Second,gainingadmis-
siontooneoftheseprogramsratherthanalessselectiveprogramraisesmeanincomeandrates
oftopattainmentformalestudentsfromwealthybackgrounds, butnotforotherstudents. Ad-
missionthuswidensgapsintopattainmentbygenderandbaselinesocioeconomicstatus(SES).
Third, elevated returns for high-SES men are hard to explain with differences in baseline skills,
propensity to work in high-paying industries, or college completion rates. However, college
classmates from wealthy backgrounds are more likely to lead the same firms than comparable
pairsofnon-peersorclassmatesfromlow-SESbackgrounds. Peertiesformedbetweenhigh-SES
classmatesmaybeonemechanismthroughwhicheliteuniversitiesraisetopattainment.
1See, e.g., Miller (1949), Miller (1950), Urahn et al. (2012), or Rivera (2016) for a discussion of mobility to top
positions,andAtkinsonetal.(2011)orAlvaredoetal.(2013)fortrendsintopincomeshares.
2NoraretheyobviouslyworsethanintheUS.SeeSection2fordetails.
1

Theanalysisproceedsinthreesteps. Ifirstpresentnewdescriptiveevidenceonthedistribution
offirmleadershipandtopincomeattainmentbyeducationalbackgroundandstudentcharacter-
istics. I use data on the population of college-bound high-school graduates3 from 1980 through
2001,andfocusontwomeasuresoftopattainment: holdinganexecutivemanagementposition
or board seat at a publicly traded firm, or having an income in the top 0.1% of the observed
income distribution. I measure these outcomes for students who are between 12 and 39 years
removed from the year of college application, or roughly ages 30 through 57. This allows time
forstudentstocompleteschoolingandreachtheircareerpeaks.
I find that the 1.8% of students admitted to three business-focused majors at the two most se-
lective universities in Chile (henceforth ‘elite degree programs’) make up 41% of all directors
and top managers, 27% of the top 1% of the income distribution between 2005 and 2013, 39%
of the top 0.1%, and 45% of the top 0.01%. The gap between rates of leadership attainment at
these elite degree programs and the average program is roughly similar to the gap observed
in the US between Ivy League graduates and the average college graduate. Conditional on se-
lectivity,majormatters: studentsintopbusiness-focusedprogramsare16.6timesmorelikelyto
haveanincomewithinthetop0.1%ofthedistributionthanstudentsinequallyselectivemedical
programs, where average incomes are also high. For students at elite degree programs, gender
andfamilybackgroundarecriticaldeterminantsoftopattainment. Takingattendanceatahigh-
tuition private high school as a proxy for parental SES, I find that compared to male students
from other backgrounds (female students), high-SES male students hold 3.4 (6.7) times more
leadershippositionsandare4.2(11.4)timesmorelikelytohavetop0.1%incomes.
Thesecondstageoftheanalysisusesaregressiondiscontinuitydesignbasedonadmissionscut-
offstomeasurethecausaleffectsofelitedegreeprogramsontherateatwhichstudentsreachtop
positions. Studentscrossingthethresholdforadmissiontoelitedegreeprogramsaremostoften
drawnfromlessselectiveprogramsinsimilarfields. Thismeansthateffectscanbeinterpretedin
termsofchangingselectivitywithincareerpath,ratherthan,forexample,switchesfrommedical
tobusinesscareerswithintopuniversities.
Admission to an elite degree program raises the number of leadership positions students hold
by44%andtheprobabilityofattaininganincomeinthetop0.1%ofthedistributionby51%rel-
ativetothebelow-thresholdmean. However,gainsaccrueonlytomaleapplicantsfromprivate
high schools, for whom rates of leadership (top income) attainment rise by 54% (69%). Effects
forwomenandmalestudentsnotfromprivate highschoolsaresmallandstatisticallyindistin-
guishablefromzero. Thedifferencebetweentheeffectofadmissionformalevs. femalestudents
is equal to 36% of the gender gap in top income attainment for students at top programs. The
3Specifically,thepopulationofstudentswhotakearequiredcollegeadmissionsexam.
2