NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BACKTESTING EUROPEAN STRESS TESTS
Thomas Philippon
Pierre Pessarossi
Boubacar Camara
Working Paper 23083
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23083
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017
We are grateful to our discussant Til Schuermann, as well as Christian Gourieroux, Christian
Gollier, Mark Carey, Paul Willen, Anna Kovner, and seminar participants at the NBER Summer
Institute, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, the European Central Bank, the Banque de France,
and Sciences Po. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Thomas Philippon, Pierre Pessarossi, and Boubacar Camara. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Backtesting European Stress Tests
Thomas Philippon, Pierre Pessarossi, and Boubacar Camara
NBER Working Paper No. 23083
January 2017
JEL No. G01,G18,G2,G21,G28,G32
ABSTRACT
We provide a first evaluation of the quality of banking stress tests in the European Union. We use
stress tests scenarios and banks’ estimated losses to recover bank level exposures to
macroeconomic factors. Once macro outcomes are realized, we predict banks’ losses and
compare them to actual losses. We find that stress tests are informative and unbiased on average.
Model-based losses are good predictors of realized losses and of banks’ equity returns around
announcements of macroeconomic news. When we perform our tests for the Union as a whole,
we do not detect biases in the construction of the scenarios, or in the estimated losses across
banks of different sizes and ownership structures. There is, however, some evidence that
exposures are underestimated in countries with ex-ante weaker banking systems. Our results have
implications for the modeling of credit losses, quality controls of supervision, and the political
economy of financial regulation.
Thomas Philippon Boubacar Camara
New York University ACPR-Banque de France
Stern School of Business Paris
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190 France
New York, NY 10012-1126 Boubacar.CAMARA@acpr.banque-france.fr
and NBER
tphilipp@stern.nyu.edu
Pierre Pessarossi
ACPR - Banque de France
Paris
France
Pierre.PESSAROSSI@acpr.banque-france.fr

Stress tests have become a major tool of banking supervision in the United States and in
Europe. Regulatory stress tests are used to set bank capital levels and validate dividend policies.
Stresstestingexercisesmobilizelargehumanandfinancialresourcesamongregulatorsandbankers.
Regulators need to design the scenarios, run their own models, and monitor closely the answers
provided by the banks. The banks, on the other hand, allocate considerable time and effort to
comply with the guidelines and estimate their losses at a fairly granular level.
Yet, despite the clear importance of stress tests, their quality has not yet been formally tested.
In fact, the data from the tests are typically used only once, to assess the health of the banks.
Stress tests data, despite their richness and granularity, have not been used for further research.
The issue, of course, is to figure out a way to use the data, since the scenarios of the stress tests
(almost) never actually happen. The central scenario should be close to the realized one on average
but that is not very useful since we are precisely interested in deviations from this central scenario.
The adverse scenarios, on the other hand, are more interesting but they are, by definition (and
thankfully) usually far from the realized one.
Our goal in this paper is to provide a first assessment of the quality of stress tests in Europe.
We want to know whether stress tests results provide reliable information for regulators on the
resilience of banks. To do so, we propose an approach in two steps. In a first step, we use
the European stress test results to estimate bank loss rates sensitivity to macroeconomic shocks.
Once we obtain these sensitivities, we compute loss rate predictions under actual macroeconomic
outcomes. These predicted loss rates can then be backtested using actual market and accounting
data.
European Stress tests require banks to model loss rates on their credit exposures under a
baseline scenario and under an adverse scenario. These scenarios cover all countries from the
European Union. Banks report their projected losses in all countries where they have significant
exposures. We use the data from the exercise (i.e. the scenarios for macroeconomic factors –
GDP growth, inflation, and unemployment rates – and loss rate projections reported by banks) to
2

estimate banks’ sensitivity to macroeconomic shocks.
We obtain six main results. First, a simple logistic-linear model of bank loss rates fits
the stress data well. Second, stress tests scenarios are not biased in favor of countries with ex-
ante fragile banking systems. Third, model-estimated losses are unbiased predictors of realized
losses across all the banks in our sample, and for small and large banks separately. Fourth,
the 2011 stress tests did not have the same quality as the 2014 stress tests, consistent with the
theoretical prediction of Faria e Castro et al. [2017] that a common backstop (however incomplete)
allows regulators to perform more informative stress tests. Fifth, however, we find some evidence
that estimated exposures are under-estimated in countries with ex-ante fragile banking sectors.
Finally, we show that our estimated exposures predict the cross sectional variation of bank stock
returns after macro announcements, which shows that market participants agree with our model’s
predictions (we cannot tell, however, if they learned the exposures from the stress tests themselves,
or if they knew them all along).
Overview of the EBA 2014 Stress Tests In 2014, the European Banking Authority (EBA)
conducted Euro-wide stress tests on 123 banks covering approximately 80% of total banking assets
in the EU [EBA, 2014].1 The EU-wide stress test was coordinated by the EBA across the EU
and carried out in cooperation with the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), the European
Commission, the European Central Bank (ECB), and the relevant national regulators. The various
tasks involved in the stress tests were split as follows. The ECB was responsible for the overall
quality assurance and for the asset quality review that provides the starting point of the stress
test. The ESRB and the European Commission provided the underlying macroeconomic scenarios.
The EBA developed the common methodology and ensured the disclosure of the results. The ECB
and the national authorities could decide follow up actions.
The starting point of the stress test is the balance sheet of banks at end of December 2013.
1The total assets of banks participating to the exercise represent almost 22 trillion.
3