NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MAXIMIZING THE IMPACT OF CLIMATE FINANCE:
FUNDING PROJECTS OR PILOT PROJECTS?
Matthew J. Kotchen
Working Paper 23023
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23023
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Matthew J. Kotchen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Maximizing the Impact of Climate Finance: Funding Projects or Pilot Projects?
Matthew J. Kotchen
NBER Working Paper No. 23023
January 2017
JEL No. G18,H2,Q4,Q5
ABSTRACT
This paper contributes to the understanding of how to maximize the impact of publicly provided
climate finance to leverage the private sector. Agencies seeking to promote private investment in
support of climate change mitigation and adaptation may have a choice between subsidizing
projects or pilot projects. Pilots are either scaled down versions of full projects or an experimental
phase that generates better information about whether a full project is likely to succeed or fail.
Drawing on insights about the value of experimentation for entrepreneurship and raising private
capital, the theoretical model developed herein provides guidance about when subsidizing
projects or pilots is more efficient.
Matthew J. Kotchen
School of Forestry & Environmental Studies,
School of Management,
and Department of Economics
Yale University
195 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
matthew.kotchen@yale.edu

1 Introduction
The term “climate …nance” refers generally to public and private …nancing from
regional, national, and international entities in support of climate change mitiga-
tion and adaptation. The need for e¢cient deployment of climate …nance is on
the rise. In December 2015, representatives from 195 countries signed the Paris
climateagreement,rea¢rmingthegoaloflimitingtheglobalaveragetemperature
to less than 2 degrees Celsius above the preindustrial level (Article 2, UNFCCC
2015). With the agreement having entered into force in April 2016, achieving the
Paris goal—or even something close to it—will require fundamental changes to
the world’s energy systems, including the promotion of greater energy e¢ciency
and the scaling up of zero- and low-carbon sources of energy (IPCC 2014). The
…nancing required to achieve the transition—in addition to growing …nancial de-
mands for climate change adaptation—will be substantial. The World Economic
Forum (2013) estimates the need for $700 billion per year above and beyond the
$5 trillion per year in business as usual infrastructure investment through 2030.
The actual amount of global climate …nance that took place in 2014 is esti-
mated at $391 billion (Buchner et al. 2015). Of this amount, $148 billion (38
percent) was from public sources, and $243 billon (62 percent) was from private
investment. While a signi…cant majority of climate …nance is raised and spent
within the same country, the developed countries have pledged to scale up their
provision of climate …nance in developing countries to at least $100 billion per
year by 2020 (UNFCCC 2009, 2015). In addition to public and private …nancial
‡ows through bilateral channels, several multilateral agencies focus explicitly on
climate …nance, including the Global Environmental Facility (GEF), the Climate
Investment Funds (CIFs), and the recently created Green Climate Fund (GCF).
Multilateral development banks themselves are also increasing their already sig-
ni…cant emphasis on climate …nance. In 2015, for example, the World Bank set
the goal of increasing climate related …nance from 21 percent of its portfolio to
28 percent by 2020 (World Bank 2015).
Along with the growing demand and supply of climate …nance has come
1

greater recognition that public sources of funding alone will be insu¢cient to
meet the challenges of climate change. The proverbial Holy Grail of climate …-
nance is …nding new and e¤ective ways to use public money to leverage larger
pools of private …nance in support of climate change mitigation and adaptation.
Indeed, the goal of using public resources to leverage the private sector is explicit
in most channels of climate …nance, and serves as the basis of political pressure
to mobilize more. There is nevertheless surprisingly little economic research on
how to most e¢ciently deploy public resources to achieve this goal.1
This paper contributes to the understanding of how to maximize the impact
of publicly provided climate …nance to leverage the private sector. I consider the
speci…c question of whether public money is more e¢ciently spent on subsidiz-
ing projects or pilot projects. I de…ne pilots as an experimental phase prior to
project execution where the primary objective is to generate better information
about whether a full project is likely to succeed or fail. Many climate related
investments, such as renewable energy projects in developing countries, are as-
sociated with a high degree of uncertainty, with reasons ranging from adminis-
trative feasibility to political stability, in addition to basic …nancial viability. An
experimental phase in the form of a pilot project enables learning more about a
project’slikelysuccessbeforecommittingtothefull, andpotentiallymuchlarger,
investment. Public agencies seeking to promote private investment may therefore
have a choice between subsidizing projects or pilot projects. This paper provides
guidance about when subsidizing one or the other is more e¢cient.
The model builds upon the notion of staged investment within the literatures
onentrepreneurshipandventurecapital(Sahlman1990; Gompers1995; Gompers
andLearner2004), andinparticularonNanda andRhodes-Kropf’s (2016) model
1I am not aware of any theoretical economic research on the use of public resources to
leverage the private sector in the context of mobilizing climate …nance. Two empirical papers
that evaluate the e¤ectiveness of climate …nance to leverage the private sector in international
development are Buntaine and Pizer (2014) and Kotchen and Negi (2015). More conceptually,
Stewart, Kingsbury and Rudyk (2009) provide an edited volume that considers a number of
regulatory frameworks and areas of need for international climate …nance. More recently,
Fischer (2016) develops a theoretical model for the study of climate …nance as a strategic
export subsidy that is subject to both external bene…ts and free riding.
2