NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CORPORATE CONTROL AROUND THE WORLD
Gur Aminadav
Elias Papaioannou
Working Paper 23010
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23010
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016
We thank Julian Franks, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer for
useful suggestions and comments. All errors are our sole responsibility. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Gur Aminadav and Elias Papaioannou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Corporate Control around the World
Gur Aminadav and Elias Papaioannou
NBER Working Paper No. 23010
December 2016
JEL No. F30,G3,G34,G38,K11,K12,K31
ABSTRACT
We provide an autopsy of the patterns of corporate control and ownership concentration in a
dataset covering more than 40,000 listed firms from 127 countries over 2004 2012. Employing a
plethora of original and secondary sources, big data techniques, and applying the Shapley-Shubik
algorithm to quantify shareholder’s voting power we trace ultimate controlling shareholders from
the complex, pyramidal, and often obscure corporate structures. First, we show that there are
large differences in the type of corporate control (widely held firms with and without significant
equity blocks, firms controlled by families, governments, and other public-private firms) across
and within continents. Corporate structures appear persistent as the recent global financial crisis
did not affect them much. Second, we examine the role of legal traditions on corporate control.
There are economically large differences on corporate structure across legal families, with the
share of controlled (widely-held) firms being the highest (lowest) in French civil-law countries,
followed by German and then Scandinavian civil law countries. State ownership and control by
individual/families via complex corporate structures is pervasive in civil-law countries. And
while equity blocks are commonplace across widely-held firms all around the world and across
all legal families, the share of widely-held firms with large blocks is the highest in French civil-
law countries. Moreover, ownership concentration is considerably higher in French civil-law (and
to a lesser extent in German civil-law) countries as compared to common-law countries. These
patterns apply to very large, big, medium-sized and small listed firms and are not driven by
regional differences, the level of economic development, or industrial structure, suggesting that
legal origin has sizable long-lasting consequences on corporate structure. Third, as legal origin
may affect corporate control via multiple channels, we examine the role of some likely
mechanisms. We find that shareholder protection rights against self-dealing activities of insiders
correlate strongly with corporate control and ownership concentration. Legal formalism and
creditor’s rights do not seem to play a role. Yet, the "reduced-form" link between legal origin and
corporate control (and ownership concentration) is also driven by entry and labour market
regulation.
Gur Aminadav
Regent's Park
NW1 4SA, London
United Kingdom
gaminadav@london.edu
Elias Papaioannou
London Business School
Regent's Park
Sussex Place
London NW1 4SA
United Kingdom
and NBER
papaioannou.elias@gmail.com
An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23010

1 Introduction
Understanding the driving forces and consequences of the various types of corporate control are core in-
quiries of corporate finance (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 1999; Tirole, 2010). While most
theory distinguishes between widely—held corporations, where ownership is dispersed and no single share-
holder dominates corporate decisions, and controlled firms where a dominant-influential shareholder or
family exerts control (Shleifer and Vishny, 1997), the structures of corporate ownership and control are
more complex (Laeven and Levine, 2008).1 Pyramids that allow shareholders to influence corporate deci-
sions in excess of their cash-flow rights (Dyck and Zingales, 2004) and cross-holdings of equity in business
groups, such as the keiretsu in Japan and the Korean chaebols, are pervasive. At the same time, corporate
control is typically hidden behind holding companies incorporated in financial off-shore centers (Zucman,
2015). A binary distinction between controlled and widely-held firms may be too coarse, as in many
widely-held corporations some individuals/families or institutional investors hold equity blocks and may
thus have considerable power (Edmans and Holderness, 2016). And often there are shareholders who form
coalitions with smaller investors in an effort to exert corporate control (Bennedsen and Wolfenzon, 2000).
Following the influential contribution of La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1999), a volumi-
nous literature in corporate finance has tried to document the patterns of ownership concentration and
control across countries or in a single country over time. The literature (discussed below) then searched for
the main correlates of corporate ownership and examined the role of investor protection and legal quality
(see La Porta et al. (2006)). However, there are many open issues.
First, stands measurement. It is inherently hard to identify ultimate shareholders from the complex
network of equity holdings and to assess their role in corporate affairs. For this reason previous research
has either focused on a relatively small number of (typically large) firms and countries (e.g., La Porta et
al. 1999; Claessens, Djankov, and Lang, 2000; Faccio and Lang, 2002), or has used larger firm samples in
a single economy (e.g., Franks, Mayer, and Rossi, 2009, on British corporations) or a handful of countries
(Franks, Mayer, Volpin, and Wagner, 2012).
Second, is heterogeneity. The size distribution of firms is highly skewed; even when one examines
typically large publicly traded firms, differences in size are enormous (see Gabaix (1999)). And theory and
case-study evidence point out that corporate control patterns and their determinants may differ system-
atically across very large, big, medium, and relatively small listed corporations (Holderness (2016a,b)).
A third issue regards mechanisms. The literature is far from reaching a consensus on the role of
investorprotectionrights,courts,productandlabourmarketregulationoncorporatecontrolandownership
concentration. Isolating the role of each feature is challenging, as it is always hard quantifying these
institutionalfeatures,thesampleofcountriesislimited,andbecauselegalaspectfeaturescorrelatestrongly
with the regulation of product and labour markets (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2006)).
1Almeida and Wolfenzon (2006) and Burkart, Panunzi, and Shleifer (2003) are notable exceptions.
0

1.1 Results Preview
In this paper we try to advance on these fronts. Our first contribution is to provide a comprehensive
description of ownership patterns and corporate control for the widest-possible sample of countries and
listed firms. Employing big data techniques, extensive manual checks, and relying on a plethora of data
sources (e.g., regulatory filings, company reports, government publications, private data providers), we
augment and correct Bureau van Dijk’s ORBIS’s database on corporate ownership in an effort to identify
ultimate controlling shareholders fromthe complex and often esoteric structures of corporate holdings. We
then apply a game-theoretic algorithm based on the Shapley-Shubik power index and identify ultimate
controlling shareholders for more that 40000 listed firms from 127 countries both before and after the
recent world financial crisis (2004 2012). Our corporate control identification algorithm improves over
−
previousworkswhohaveappliedadhoc votingrightscutoffstoclassifyfirmsascontrolled(andwidelyheld).
The algorithm for example is especially useful for measuring control in firms where we observe multiple
individuals/families and other entities (institutional investors, government) holding large equity blocks, a
common phenomenon (Laeven and Levine, 2007). Using the newly-compiled database we provide a broad
overviewofthepatternsofcorporatecontrolaroundtheworld. Wedistinguishbetweenthreetypesoffirms,
widely-held corporations without any block shareholder, widely-held corporations (without a controlling
shareholder)butwithoneor multipleblock equitystakes, andcontrolledfirmswitha dominantcontrolling
shareholder. We also split controlled firms based on the type of dominant shareholder to state-controlled
(national governments, municipalities and state agencies), family-controlled (where a single individual or
family exert power), and controlled by other (listed or private) firms. There are large differences on
corporate control around the world, both across and within continents. Corporate structure patterns
appear persistent, as the 2007 2009 global financial crisis did not alter it much.
−
Second, given the literature’s emphasis we re-examine the "reduced-form" link between legal origin
and corporate control. Given the large differences on firm size across countries and the potential of
differential effects of the legal system on corporate control, we examine in detail heterogeneity, as there
have been concerns on the robustness of previous works that used samples of large firms in a small number
of countries. The cross-country analysis uncovers the following.
1. There are economically large differences in corporate control across legal families, with the share
of controlled firms being the highest in French civil-law countries, followed by German and then
Scandinaviancivillawcountries. Theshareof controlledfirmsisthelowestincommonlawcountries.
TheresultsaresimilarwhenwelookatownershipconcentrationthatisthehighestinFrenchcivil-law
countries and the lowest in common-law countries.
2. Equity blocks are commonplace across the world. While we observe blocks in the majority of widely-
held corporations in both civil-law and common-law countries, the share of widely-held firms with
large blocks is the highest in French civil-law countries.
1