NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WILL AD BLOCKING BREAK THE INTERNET?
Ben Shiller
Joel Waldfogel
Johnny Ryan
Working Paper 23058
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23058
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017
Johnny Ryan is an employee of PageFair, a firm that measures the extent of ad blocking and
offers ad-recovery technologies that enable publishers to display ads in a manner that adblockers
cannot block. Neither Shiller nor Waldfogel has received any compensation for the research in
the paper. PageFair was allowed to review the paper for accuracy but did not have control over
the paper's findings nor conclusions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Ben Shiller, Joel Waldfogel, and Johnny Ryan. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Will Ad Blocking Break the Internet?
Ben Shiller, Joel Waldfogel, and Johnny Ryan
NBER Working Paper No. 23058
January 2017
JEL No. L81,L82
ABSTRACT
Ad blockers allow Internet users to obtain information without generating ad revenue for site
owners; and by 2016 they were used by roughly a quarter of site visitors. Given the ad-supported
nature of much of the web, ad blocking poses a threat to site revenue and, if revenue losses
undermine investment, a possible threat to consumers' access to appealing content. Using unique,
proprietary, and site-specific data on the share of site visitors using ad blockers at a few thousand
sites, along with Alexa traffic data, we explore the impact of ad blocker usage on site quality, as
inferred from traffic ranks, 2013-2016. We find that each additional percentage point of site
visitors using ad blockers raises (worsens) its traffic rank by about 0.6 percent over a 35 month
period, with stronger effects at initially worse-ranked sites. We provide additional evidence of
causality by showing that the relationship between traffic trends and eventual ad blocking does
not predate ad blocking. Plausible instruments for ad blocking also deliver consistent results.
Effects of ad blocking on revenue are compounded by the fact that ad blocking reduces visits,
while also generating less revenue from remaining visitors employing ad blockers. We conclude
that ad blocking poses a substantial threat to the ad-supported web.
Ben Shiller Johnny Ryan
Brandeis University PageFair
Department of Economics johnny@pagefair.com
Waltham, MA 02453
shiller@brandeis.edu
Joel Waldfogel
Frederick R. Kappel Chair in Applied Economics
3-177 Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
jwaldfog@umn.edu

Copyright protection is an important theoretical determinant of incentives for creation of
new products, and recent research documents the relationship between legal intellectual property
regime and the quality and quantity of new output.1 Beyond legal rules alone, intellectual
property is in general protected by a combination of law and technology that may together allow
sellers to appropriate enough of consumers’ willingness to pay to finance the creation of new
products. The development of various digital technologies over the past few decades has
undermined sellers’ ability to appropriate consumers’ willingness to pay, raising the possibility
of a diminished supply of new information and entertainment products. For example, new
digital technologies have challenged traditional revenue models through direct piracy (e.g.
Napster), diversion of attention to aggregators rather than the underlying information sources
(e.g. Google News), and pure-play advertising platforms such as Craigslist, which divert revenue
from newspaper classified ads.2
Despite these and related challenges, much of the commercial information on the web is
provided under ad-financed business models. While a growing number of newspaper sites have
moved behind paywalls (Chiou and Tucker, 2013), most other commercial information sources
rely on advertising. The finance of information production with ad revenue has come under
threat with the development of ad blocking technologies. Ad blockers, such as Ad block Plus,
are browser extensions that allow users to browse the web without having to see sites’ ads. As a
1 See Giorcelli and Moser (2016).
2 See, for example. Oberholzer-Gee and Strumpf (2006), Rob and Waldfogel (2006), and Seamans and Zhu (2010),
among others. Ad blocking is not the first technology that allows consumption without compensation to rights
holders. Digital video recorders such as TiVo allowed users to fast forward through ads, threatening their revenue
generating potential. See Wilbur (2008). In 2012 Aereo created a service distributing broadcast television online
without paying rights holders transmission fees. ABC sued and won, shuttering Aereo. See
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/26/business/media/supreme-court-rules-against-aereo-in-broadcasters-
challenge.html .
1

result, many site visitors obtain information without seeing ads, clicking through to advertisers'
sites, or otherwise generating revenue for site owners. The use of ad blockers has grown sharply
in recent years. By some estimates, roughly a quarter of site visitors used ad blockers by 2016, a
magnitude of ad blocking that may produce a serious threat to site revenue and, if revenue losses
undermine investment, a possible threat to consumers' access to appealing content.3 This is the
question this paper seeks to explore.4
The mechanism we have in mind, as in the traditional literature on the relationship
between intellectual property revenue appropriation and supply, is that reduced revenue may
undermine a site's ability to invest, which could then manifest itself as a diminished site that is
less appealing to potential visitors. Web users might then visit the degraded sites less, reducing
the sites’ traffic. While getting data on the relevant issues - site traffic and site-specific measures
of ad blocker usage - is challenging, we have put together a dataset that allows us to explore this.
Using unique, proprietary, and site-specific data on the share of site visitors using ad blockers at
a few thousand sites, matched with Alexa traffic data, we explore the impact of ad blocker usage
on site traffic between 2013 and 2016.
Aggregate ad blocking has grown rapidly between 2013 and 2016, and during this period,
we find that sites with a high proportion of ad blocking visitors experience deterioration in their
traffic ranks, relative to sites with fewer ad blocking visitors. In our main analyses, we find that
each additional percentage point of site visitors using ad blockers raises (worsens) a site’s traffic
rank by about 0.6 percent over a 35 month period, with the effects concentrated in sites that are
initially lower ranked. We have two ways of dealing with possible concerns about unobserved
3 http://www.emarketer.com/Article/US-Ad-Blocking-Jump-by-Double-Digits-This-Year/1014111
4 Anderson and Gans (2011) develop a theoretical model of ad-blocking showing the possibility of a downward
spiral in which ad blocking leads websites to carry more ads, further reducing their appeal.
2