NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WINTER IS COMING:
THE LONG-RUN EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON CONFLICT, 1400-1900
Murat Iyigun
Nathan Nunn
Nancy Qian
Working Paper 23033
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23033
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017
We thank Isaiah Andrews, Tim Armstrong, Susan Athey, Steve Berry, Marshall Burke, Melissa
Dell, Michael Greenstone,Solomon Hsiang, Benjamin Jones, DanKeniston, Kyle Meng, Stelios
Michalopoulos, Ted Miguel, Nicholas Ryan, Joseph Shapiro, Chris Udry, and EricWeese for their
insights; the participants at the Zurich Applied Economics Seminar, University of Lausanne
Applied Seminar, University of Geneva Seminar, LSE/UCL Development Seminar, Stanford
Development Seminar, University of California at Berkeley Development Seminar, Duke
University Development Seminar, NBER Political Economy, the Toulouse
DevelopmentWorkshop and the Yale Political Economy and Development Conference for useful
comments; Erin Fletcher, Nicola Fontana, Anna Hovde, Eva Ng, Joshua Schabla, Brittney
Stafford-Sullivan and Jaya Wen for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Murat Iyigun, Nathan Nunn, and Nancy Qian. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Winter is Coming: The Long-Run Effects of Climate Change on Conflict, 1400-1900
Murat Iyigun, Nathan Nunn, and Nancy Qian
NBER Working Paper No. 23033
January 2017
JEL No. N43,N53,O13,P16,Q34
ABSTRACT
We investigate the long-run effects of cooling on conflict. We construct a geo-referenced and
digitized database of conflicts in Europe, North Africa, and the Near East from 1400-1900, which
we merge with historical temperature data. We show that cooling is associated with increased
conflict. When we allow the effects of cooling over a fifty-year period to depend on the extent of
cooling during the preceding period, the effect of cooling on conflict is larger in locations that
experienced earlier cooling. We interpret this as evidence that the adverse effects of climate
change intensify with its duration.
Murat Iyigun Nancy Qian
Department of Economics MEDS
University of Colorado Kellogg SOM
Campus Box 256 Northwestern University
Boulder, CO 80309 2001 Sheridan Rd.
murat.iyigun@colorado.edu Evanston, Il 60208
and NBER
Nathan Nunn nancy.qian@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge St
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
nnunn@fas.harvard.edu

1 Introduction
Climatechangeisoneofthemostpressingproblemsfacedbycountriestoday. Recentstudiespro-
videalargebodyofimportantevidenceontheadverseeffectsofweathershocksoneconomicand
politicaloutcomesintheshorttomediumruns(BurkeandEmerick,2015;Delletal.,2012;Horn-
beck, 2012; Hsiang and Jina, 2014; Miguel et al., 2004). However, much less progress has been
madeinunderstandingtheeffectsoflonger-runchangesintheclimate.1 Thisisimportant,because
climatechangeisinherentlyalong-runphenomenon,anditisunclearwhetherlong-runeffectswill
bemoreorlessdetrimentalthanshort-runeffects. Ontheonehand,theremaybewhattheliterature
commonlyreferstoas“adaptation”. Populationsmayrelocate,ortheymayadoptnewtechnologies,
production processes, crops, or even social or institutional structures that better suit the new envi-
ronment. Thus,whileindividualsareunabletoadapttoshort-runfluctuationsinweather,theymay
be able toadapt to longer-run changesin climate. If this is thecase, then long-term effectsmay be
weakerthantheshort-runeffects. Ontheotherhand,theremaybe“intensification”,atermcoined
by Dell et al. (2014) to refer to the compounding effects of prolonged climate change that occurs
overanextendedperiodoftime. Forexample,oneyearofdroughtmayhavefewadverseeffectsby
itself, but a year of drought that follows three successive years of drought may have larger adverse
effectsif,forexample,foodstoreshaveeroded. Prolongedperiodsofclimatechange,overdecades
or centuries, may also begin to affect more fundamental factors, such as institutions, governance,
orevenculture. Thus,itispossiblethatlong-termeffectsmaybegreaterthanshort-termeffects.
The goal of this paper is to provide a better understanding of the long-run effects of climate
change, and the potential channels through which these effects operate. To do this, one needs to
examinetheeffectsofclimatechangeoverlongperiodsoftime. Sincewedonotyethavesufficient
time series to examine the effects of modern global warming, we attempt to make progress on this
importantquestionbyexaminingperiodsofdramaticcoolingthatoccurredinEurope,NorthAfrica
andtheNearEastbetween1400and1900CE.
Our analysis examines the long-run effects of cooling on conflict and warfare – outcomes fea-
1SeeDelletal.(2014)foranoverviewoftheclimatechangeliterature.
1

tured prominently in the literature on economic and political development, and for which reliable
measuresareavailabletoresearchers. Tomeasurehistoricalconflict,weconstructanewdatasetof
all wars and each of their battles that were fought between 1400 and 1900 CE in Europe, the Near
East,andNorthernAfrica. Theconflictdataareconstructedusingtwosources,Brecke(1999,forth-
coming)andClodfelter(2008),whichprovideinformationonknownwars,includingthelocations
and dates of all battles fought during a war. Over a period of six years, we manually digitized the
information and geo-referenced each battle (defined as a conflict event during a war) to construct
adataset thatrecordsthe dateandlocationof over2,700conflicts inEurope,North Africaandthe
NearEastbetween1400and1900CE.
Wemergetheconflictdatawithhistoricalclimatedatathatwereconstructedbygeologistsand
climatologists(Mannetal.,2009a). Theoriginaldatasetincludesgriddedannualaveragetemper-
ature (0.5 degree by 0.5 degree grid-cells) from 500 to 2000, which covers the entire globe.2 Our
baselinesampleisatthedecadeandgrid-celllevel,whereeachgrid-cellis400kmby400km. Our
grid-cells are large both to match the resolution of the climate data, and also to capture potential
spilloversinconflictcausedbyenvironmentalfluctuations. Forexample,disruptionstoagricultural
productivity can lead to migration, which will lead to conflict not just in the original location, but
inthedestinationofthemigrantsaswell.
The length of the 500-year panel allows us to estimate the impacts of climate change over the
long term, as well as test for the presence of adaptation and intensification effects. The period we
examine includes an era that is commonly referred to as the “Little Ice Age” by climatologists and
historians. This was a period of extreme cooling. During this time, glaciers expanded and seas
froze as far south as present-day Turkey. Temperature declines were accompanied by increased
variabilityinprecipitation. Recordlevelsofprecipitation,whichwereprecededand/orfollowedby
droughts,significantlyreducedagriculturalproductivity,whichinturnledtofaminesandconflicts
that took various forms, including rebellions, uprisings, and foreign invasions. During the Little
IceAge,therewastemporalandspatialvariationintheintensityofcooling.
2SeeSection4foradetaileddiscussion.
2