NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK HEALTH POST-CRISIS
Kyriakos T. Chousakos
Gary B. Gorton
Working Paper 23167
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23167
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2017
This paper was prepared for the Banque de France Financial Stability Review. We thank Thomas
Bonczek, Arun Gupta, Toomas Laarits, and Adriana Robertson for comments and suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Kyriakos T. Chousakos and Gary B. Gorton. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bank Health Post-Crisis
Kyriakos T. Chousakos and Gary B. Gorton
NBER Working Paper No. 23167
February 2017
JEL No. E32,E44,G01,G2,G21
ABSTRACT
Economic growth is persistently low following a financial crisis, possibly because of a continuing
weal banking system. In a financial crisis bank health is significantly damaged. Post-crisis
regulatory changes have aimed at restoring bank health, but measuring bank health by Tobin's Q,
we find that the ill health of banks in the recent U.S. financial crisis and the Euro crisis has
persisted, especially compared to other crises in advanced economies. The low Q's cannot be
explained by the state of the macro-economy. The results seem to suggest that bank regulatory
changes may be repressive.
Kyriakos T. Chousakos
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Ave
New Haven, CT 06511
kyriakos.chousakos@yale.edu
Gary B. Gorton
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu

Introduction
Why does low economic growth persist following a financial crisis?1 While there are many possible
explanations for the persistence of low growth following a financial crisis, one important possibility is that
banks do not recover quickly. By definition, a financial crisis, runs on the banking system, is bad for the
health of banks. Bank health is clearly important because we know that after a financial crisis unhealthy
banks reduce lending. Many studies point to a transmission channel of post-crisis bank distress as causing
lower economic growth.2 But, how bad is a crisis for bank health? And, how long are banks ill? We explore
these questions across countries and crises using Tobin’s Q as a summary measure of bank health. We
examinebanks’healthforfive(andten)yearsbeforeafinancialcrisisandfive(andten)yearsafterafinancial
crisis. In essence, Tobin’s Q is a measure of the viability of banks’ business models. We find that European
and American banks suffered shocks to their health in the financial crises and that this sickness has persisted
for five years (and ten years) after the Euro Crisis and the U.S. Financial Crisis, respectively. This pattern
of a shock to bank health and the persistence of ill health is not present in other bank crises in advanced
economies.
Banks suffer declines in capital during a financial crisis, and after a crisis they must adjust to new bank
regulations. After the recent U.S. and Euro financial crises, new international and national bank regulatory
reforms have included higher capital requirements, higher liquidity requirements, limitations on leverage
ratios, and the introduction of stress tests. In some countries the activities of banks were constrained, e.g.,
the Volcker Rule. And, in the U.S. the assessment for deposit insurance was changed to be based on total
liabilities, regardless of the bank’s level of insured deposits. Securitization became moribund following the
recent crises, raising banks’ funding costs. Further, in the aftermath of the recent crisis banks have faced
billions of dollars of fines with legal uncertainty still remaining. And, banks have struggled in a low interest
rate and low growth environment.
The recent crises in the U.S. and Europe, significantly worse in terms of output declines compared to
other modern crises in advanced economies, show persistently ill banks compared to the other crises, as
measured by Tobin’s Q. We also find that the dispersion of bank Q-ratios has declined post-crisis. Low Q
banks may have failed, but low Q dispersion seems hard to explain as being due to capital leaving banking
(for low Q banks), just when capital ratios have been increased. Another explanation is that low, bunched,
1 Loweconomicgrowthfollowingfinancialcrisesisdocumented,forexample,byCerraandSaxena(2008)andReinhartand
Rogoff(2014).
2See,forexample,Gibson(1995),RosengrenandPeek(2000),CalomirisandMason(2003),Dell’aricciaetal.(2008),Ivashina
andScharfstein(2010),Mladjan(2012),Iyeretal.(2014),Chodorow-Reich(2014),Frydmanetal.(2015),LeeandMezzanotti
(2014),CarlsonandRose(2015). Thesepapersshowthatpost-crisisdeclinesinlendingaresignificantlyduetobankloansupply,
ratherthantoalowdemandforloans,whichmayalsobepresent.
1

Q-ratios are due to regulation making all banks essentially the same and inefficient. This persistence suggests
that traditional bank business models may no longer be viable. It also suggests that new regulations have
not served to revitalize banking, but may have had the opposite effect. As measured by Tobin’s Q, the future
of U.S. and European banks is not bright.
ThispaperisrelatedtoSarinandSummers(2016)andCalomirisandNissim(2014). SarinandSummers
(2016) examine a variety of measures of bank riskiness pre- and post-crisis, e.g., stock price volatility, credit
default swaps, option-implied volatility, and find that banks are riskier post-crisis than before the crisis. They
write that: “. . . our findings are most consistent with a dramatic decline in franchise [charter] value of major
financial institutions, caused at least in part by new regulations” (abstract). Our findings are consistent
with this. We, however, focus on a different issue, namely, the pattern of bank health pre- and post-crisis in
different crises across countries. Calomiris and Nissim (2014) study the cross section of U.S. banks’ Tobin’s
Q’s pre- and post- the recent U.S. financial crisis, relating their panel to measures of banks’ activities. They
find that low Q’s indicate (in cross-section) that banks’ investments in intangibles (e.g., human capital,
information technology) are expected to generate negative economic profits in the future. This conclusion is
also consistent with what we find, although we do not focus on a cross section of banks but on a cross section
of countries.
We proceed as follows. In Section 1 we discuss the use and role of Tobin’s Q in studying banking. We
also discuss our data. Section 2 contains the main results. Final thoughts are contained in Section 3.
1 Measuring Bank Health
1.1 Tobin’s Q
While Tobin’s Q is widely used in economics, it plays a particular role in the case of banks because
of bank “charter value”.3 In general, charter value derives from rents or quasi-rents on assets-in-place and
future investment opportunities. Banks make loans, which involves banks in the production of valuable
private information about borrowers. This information is valuable for future loans and the associated bank
relationship makes it hard for borrowers to switch banks. See Slovin et al. (1993) and Darmouni (2016). For
a bank, rents or quasi-rents accruing from this information production are an intangible asset which the bank
loses if it fails. These informational quasi-rents are the bank’s private “charter value”. In addition, charter
3Thisissometimescalled“franchisevalue”. SeeMarcus(1984). Highbankchartervalue(Qgreaterthanone)isviewedas
providinganincentiveforbankstoavoidrisk,forfearoflosingthisintangibleasset. Thereisanempiricalliteraturedocumenting
thedeclineinU.S.bankchartervaluesinthe1980s. SeeKeeley(1990),GortonandRosen(1995)andDemsetzetal.(1996).
2