NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANKRUPTCY SPILLOVERS
Shai Bernstein
Emanuele Colonnelli
Xavier Giroud
Benjamin Iverson
Working Paper 23162
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23162
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2017
We are grateful to Effi Benmelech, Jess Cornaggia, Song Ma, Enrico Moretti, Holger Mueller,
Charles Nathanson, Josh Rauh, Amit Seru, as well as seminar participants at Stanford, NYU,
Penn State University, University of Toronto, the 2017 Jackson Hole Finance Conference, and
the Yale Junior Finance Faculty Conference for helpful comments and suggestions. Any opinions
and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the
views of the U.S. Census Bureau or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All results have
been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Shai Bernstein, Emanuele Colonnelli, Xavier Giroud, and Benjamin Iverson. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bankruptcy Spillovers
Shai Bernstein, Emanuele Colonnelli, Xavier Giroud, and Benjamin Iverson
NBER Working Paper No. 23162
February 2017
JEL No. G33,R12
ABSTRACT
How do different bankruptcy approaches affect the local economy? Using U.S. Census microdata
at the establishment level, we explore the spillover effects of reorganization and liquidation on
geographically proximate firms. We exploit the random assignment of bankruptcy judges as a
source of exogenous variation in the probability of liquidation. We find that within a five-year
period, employment declines substantially in the immediate neighborhood of the liquidated
establishments, relative to reorganized establishments. Most of the decline is due to lower growth
of existing establishments and, to a lesser extent, reduced entry into the area. The spillover effects
are highly localized and concentrate in the non-tradable and service sectors, particularly when the
bankrupt firm operates in the same sector. These results suggest that liquidation leads to a
reduction in consumer traffic to the local area and to a decline in knowledge spillovers between
firms. The evidence is inconsistent with the notion that liquidation leads to creative destruction,
as the removal of bankrupt businesses does not lead to increased entry nor the revitalization of the
area.
Shai Bernstein Xavier Giroud
Stanford Graduate School of Business MIT Sloan School of Management
655 Knight Way 100 Main Street, E62-639
Stanford, CA 94305 Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER and NBER
shaib@stanford.edu xgiroud@mit.edu
Emanuele Colonnelli Benjamin Iverson
Stanford University Northwestern University
Department of Economics 2001 Sheridan Road
579 Serra Mall Evanston, IL 60208
Stanford, CA 94305 b-iverson@kellogg.northwestern.edu
e.colonnelli@gmail.com

I. Introduction
Bankruptcy institutions play a significant role in resolving insolvency and financial distress in the
economy. Since 1980, more than 1.8 million businesses have filed for bankruptcy in the U.S. Most
of these cases are resolved through either reorganization (Chapter 11 under the U.S. Bankruptcy
code), that attempts to rehabilitate the distressed firm, or liquidation (Chapter 7 under the U.S.
Bankruptcy code), in which the firm ceases to exist and all assets are auctioned. Given their
importance, bankruptcy institutions have spurred a large literature that mostly focused on how
these two regimes affect the bankrupt firms and their claim holders.1 Yet, bankruptcy institutions
may have far-reaching implications on other economically related firms that are not represented in
courts. In this paper, we explore the spillover effects these two bankruptcy regimes, liquidation and
reorganization, may impose on the local economy.
In theory, the impact of liquidation—relative to reorganization—on the local economy is am-
biguous. The agglomeration literature highlights the importance of complementarities that arise
between geographically proximate firms (for recent surveys, see Duranton and Puga (2004); Glaeser
and Gottlieb (2009); Moretti (2010)). If agglomeration matters—i.e., if spatial concentration of
economic activity benefits firms within the agglomeration—liquidation might disrupt agglomera-
tion economies and therefore hurt neighboring firms. In this case, reorganization may lead to a
more desirable outcome, as firms are allowed to restructure, continue their operations, and preserve
existing agglomeration linkages.
On the other hand, liquidation could benefit the local economy. In particular, if inefficient
companies are liquidated, their assets (such as buildings, capital, and labor) can be absorbed by
the local economy and redeployed toward more productive uses, attracting new entrants to the
area, enhancing synergies with neighboring firms, and contributing to the revitalization of the
neighborhood. In other words, liquidation can initiate a “creative destruction” process in which
inefficientassetsarereplacedbymoreefficientones.2 Ontheotherhand, reorganizationmaypermit
1See, e.g., Baird (1986, 1993); Aghion et al. (1992); Hart (2000).
2Creative destruction is the driving mechanism in the “cleansing theories” of recessions (e.g., Caballero and
Hammour(1994,1996)),accordingtowhichtheprocessofliquidationandreallocationofproductionfactorsisamain
function of recessions. As Schumpeter (1934) states it, “depressions are not simply evils, which we might attempt to
suppress, but forms of something which has to be done, namely, adjustment to change” (p. 16).
2

the continuation of inefficient firms due to conflicts of interest and agency problems among claim
holders (e.g., Bebchuk (1988); Gertner and Scharfstein (1991)). This may prevent the reallocation
of assets to better uses, limiting potential synergies with local firms and the revitalization of the
area.
Ultimately, whether these two bankruptcy procedures create positive or negative spillovers is an
empiricalquestion. However,estimatingthesespillovereffectsischallenging. First,manycompanies
have multiple establishments, which makes it difficult to determine the relevant local area and
identify all establishments that are potentially affected by the bankrupt firm. Second, the decision
to liquidate versus reorganize is not random. The primary concern is that liquidation is likely more
prevalent in declining areas. Hence, finding an association between liquidation and a subsequent
decline in economic activity could be spurious, merely reflecting a negative trend at the local level.
To overcome the first obstacle, we use detailed micro data at the establishment level from the
U.S. Census Bureau. Specifically, we combine the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) with
bankruptcy filings from LexisNexis Law to obtain a comprehensive dataset of 91,000 establishments
belonging to bankrupt firms. Using the geo-codes from the LBD, we determine the relevant local
area for each bankrupt establishment and then study how bankruptcy affects other establishments
at the same location.3
To overcome the second obstacle—the endogeneity of the decision to liquidate versus reorga-
nize—weemployaninstrumentalvariable(IV)approachthatexploitsthefactthatU.S.bankruptcy
courts use a blind rotation system to assign cases to judges, effectively randomizing filers to judges
within each court division. The assignment of bankruptcy judges is therefore orthogonal to the
filer’s characteristics and, importantly, to the local economic conditions in the vicinity of the filer’s
establishments. Judges differ in their propensity to force the liquidation of companies by pushing
them to Chapter 7, as opposed to allowing them to reorganize in Chapter 11. The random allo-
cation of filers to bankruptcy judges thus results in the assignment of similar companies to judges
who differ in their propensity to treat the firms with different bankruptcy procedures. We exploit
3Using Census data allows us to consider all industries. This is in sharp contrast to most of the literature on
agglomerationthatexaminesthemanufacturingsectoronly. Manufacturingisfounddisproportionatelyinsmall-and
medium-size cities, as well as the rural fringes of cities (Kolko (2000)). Hence, exploring the entire population of
bankrupt firms allows us to explore relations across all industries and all geographies, including larger and denser
cities.
3