NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEVIATIONS FROM COVERED INTEREST RATE PARITY
Wenxin Du
Alexander Tepper
Adrien Verdelhan
Working Paper 23170
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23170
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2017
First version: November 2015. The views in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors
and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, any other person associated with the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. We thank Claudio Borio, Francois Cocquemas, Pierre Collin-
Dufresne, Doug Diamond, Xavier Gabaix, Benjamin Hebert, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Robert
McCauley, Charles Engel, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Sebastian Infante, Martin Lettau, Hanno
Lustig, Matteo Maggiori, Warren Naphtal, Brent Neiman, Jonathan Parker, Thomas Philippon,
Arvind Rajan, Adriano Rampini, Fabiola Ravazzolo, Andrew Rose, Hyun Song Shin, Jeremy
Stein, Saskia Ter Ellen, Fabrice Tourre, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, and seminar and conference
participants at the AFA meeting in Chicago, the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank
for International Settlements, Berkeley, Chicago, the European Central Bank, the Federal Reserve
Board, the Federal Reserve Bank at Dallas, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Harvard, the International Monetary Fund, MIT Sloan, the
NBER Summer Institute, Northwestern, UNC Chapel Hilll, Wharton, Vanderbilt, and
Washington University for comments and suggestions. All remaining errors are our own. The
paper previously circulated under the title “Cross-currency Basis.”
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Wenxin Du, Alexander Tepper, and Adrien Verdelhan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Deviations from Covered Interest Rate Parity
Wenxin Du, Alexander Tepper, and Adrien Verdelhan
NBER Working Paper No. 23170
February 2017
JEL No. F31,G15
ABSTRACT
We find that deviations from the covered interest rate parity condition (CIP) imply large,
persistent, and systematic arbitrage opportunities in one of the largest asset markets in the world.
Contrary to the common view, these deviations for major currencies are not explained away by
credit risk or transaction costs. They are particularly strong for forward contracts that appear on
the banks' balance sheets at the end of the quarter, pointing to a causal effect of banking
regulation on asset prices. The CIP deviations also appear significantly correlated with other
fixed-income spreads and with nominal interest rates.
Wenxin Du Adrien Verdelhan
Federal Reserve Board MIT Sloan School of Management
Division of International Finance 100 Main Street, E62-621
20th Street and Constitution Avenue NW Cambridge, MA 02142
Washington, DC 20551 and NBER
wenxin.du@frb.gov adrienv@mit.edu
Alexander Tepper
Columbia University
Graduate School of Architecture,
Planning and Preservation
1172 Amsterdam Ave
New York, NY 10027
at3065@columbia.edu

1 Introduction
Theforeignexchangeforwardandswapmarketisoneofthelargestandmostliquidderivative
markets in the world with a total notional amount outstanding equal to $61 trillion and an
average daily turnover equal to $3 trillion (Bank of International Settlements, 2013, 2014).
Thecornerstoneofcurrencyforwardandswappricing, presentedinalleconomicsandfinance
textbooks and taught in every class in international finance, is the covered interest rate
parity (CIP) condition. In this paper, we document deviations from the CIP post crisis and
investigate their causes.
We show that the CIP condition is systematically and persistently violated among G10
currencies, leading to significant arbitrage opportunities in currency and fixed income mar-
kets since the 2008 global financial crisis. Our findings are a puzzle for all no-arbitrage
models in macroeconomics and finance. Since the arbitrage opportunities exist at very short
horizon, such as overnight or one-week, our findings are also a puzzle for the classic limits-
of-arbitrage models that rely on long-term market risk à la Shleifer and Vishny (1997). The
systematic patterns of the CIP violations point to the key interaction between costly finan-
cial intermediation and international imbalances in funding supply and investment demand
across currencies in the new, post-crisis regulatory environment. In particular, we provide
evidence of the impact of post-crisis regulatory reforms on CIP arbitrage.
The intuition for the CIP condition relies on a simple no-arbitrage condition. For ex-
ample, an investor with U.S. dollars in hand today may deposit her dollars for one month,
earningthedollardepositrate. Alternatively, theinvestormayalsoexchangeherU.S.dollars
for some foreign currency, deposit the foreign currency and earn the foreign currency deposit
rate for one month. At the same time, the investor can enter into a one-month currency
forward contract today, which would convert the foreign currency earned at the end of the
month into U.S. dollars. If both U.S. and foreign currency deposit rates are default-free and
the forward contract has no counterparty risk, the two investment strategies are equivalent
and should thus deliver the same payoffs. Therefore, the difference between U.S. dollar and
1

foreign currency deposit rates should be exactly equal to the cost of entering the forward
contract, i.e. the log difference between the forward and the spot exchange rates, with all
rates observed at the same date.
The cross-currency basis measures the deviation from the CIP condition. It is the differ-
ence between the direct dollar interest rate from the cash market and the synthetic dollar
interest rate from the swap market obtained by swapping the foreign currency into U.S.
dollars. A positive (negative) currency basis means that the direct dollar interest rate is
higher (lower) than the synthetic dollar interest rate. When the basis is zero, CIP holds.
Before the global financial crisis, the log difference between the forward and the spot rate
was approximately equal to the difference in London interbank offer rates (Libor) across
countries (Frenkel and Levich, 1975; Akram, Rime, and Sarno, 2008). In other words, the
Libor cross-currency basis was very close to zero. As is by now well-known, large bases
appeared during the height of the global financial crisis and the European debt crisis, as the
interbank markets became impaired and arbitrage capital was limited.
We show that Libor bases persist after the global financial crisis among G10 currencies
and remain large in magnitude. Our sample includes the most liquid currencies, with a total
daily turnover above $2 trillion (Bank of International Settlements, 2013): the Australian
dollar, the Canadian dollar, the Swiss franc, the Danish krone, the euro, the British pound,
theJapaneseyen, theNorwegiankrone, theNewZealanddollar, andtheSwedishkrona. The
average annualized absolute value of the basis is 24 basis points at the three-month horizon
and 27 basis points at the five-year horizon over the 2010–2016 sample. These averages hide
largevariationsbothacrosscurrenciesandacrosstime. Inthecurrenteconomicenvironment,
thecross-currencybasiscanbeofthesameorderofmagnitudeastheinterestratedifferential.
For example, the five-year basis for the Japanese yen was close to −90 basis points at the
end of 2015, which was even greater in magnitude than the difference (of about −70 basis
points) between the five-year Libor interest rate in Japan and in the United States.
2