NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE MACROECONOMIC EFFECTS OF GOVERNMENT ASSET PURCHASES:
EVIDENCE FROM POSTWAR US HOUSING CREDIT POLICY
Andrew Fieldhouse
Karel Mertens
Morten O. Ravn
Working Paper 23154
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23154
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2017, Revised July 2017
We are grateful to the Department of Housing and Urban Development as well as Shane Sherlund
for providing data, and to participants at various seminars for useful comments. Karel Mertens
acknowledges the hospitality of the Economics Department at Colombia University where parts
of the research were conducted. Financial support from the ADEMU (H2020, No. 649396)
project and from the ESRC Centre for Macroeconomics is gratefully acknowledged. The views in
this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Dallas, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Andrew Fieldhouse, Karel Mertens, and Morten O. Ravn. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Macroeconomic Effects of Government Asset Purchases: Evidence from Postwar US
Housing Credit Policy
Andrew Fieldhouse, Karel Mertens, and Morten O. Ravn
NBER Working Paper No. 23154
February 2017, Revised July 2017
JEL No. E44,E5,G28,R38
ABSTRACT
We document the portfolio activity of federal housing agencies and provide evidence on its
impact on mortgage markets and the economy. Through a narrative analysis, we identify
historical policy changes leading to expansions or contractions in agency mortgage holdings.
Based on those regulatory events that we classify as unrelated to short-run cyclical or credit
market shocks, we find that an increase in mortgage purchases by the agencies boosts mortgage
lending, in particular refinancing, and lowers mortgage rates. Agency purchases influence prices
in other asset markets, stimulate residential investment and expand homeownership. Using
information in GSE stock prices to construct an alternative instrument for agency purchasing
activity yields very similar results as our benchmark narrative identification approach.
Andrew Fieldhouse Morten O. Ravn
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Cornell University University College London
404 Uris Hall London WC1E 6BT
Ithaca, NY 14853 UK
andrew.fieldhouse@gmail.com m.ravn@ucl.ac.uk
Karel Mertens
Department of Economics
Cornell University
404 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
km426@cornell.edu

1 Introduction
TheresidentialmortgagemarketintheUnitedStatesisoneofthelargestcapitalmarketsintheworldandby
far the dominant source of credit for American households. The mortgage market finances housing, which
is a key component of both household wealth and aggregate spending, see e.g. Leamer (2007). Many ac-
counts of the causes and propagating factors of the 2007/08 financial crisis assign an important role to a
boom and bust in the availability of mortgage credit.1 The US mortgage market is also subject to heavy
governmentinvolvementthroughvariousfederalagencies,includingthehousinggovernment-sponsoreden-
terprises(GSEs). Inthedecadesprecedingthe2007/08crisis,thevariousagenciescollectivelyaccumulated
alargeshareofthetotaloutstandingUSmortgagedebtontheirbalancesheets. Inthispaper,weinvestigate
whether agency portfolio purchases of mortgage assets influence the availability and cost of housing credit,
andwhethertherearespilloverstootherdebtmarketsandeconomicactivitymorebroadly.
While the history of agency activity offers a rich source of variation to study the effects of government
assetpurchases,italsopresentsanumberofchallenges. Thelargestagencies,FannieMaeandFreddieMac,
havebeenprivatelyownedformuchoftheirexistenceandthereforecarryresponsibilitiestostockownersas
wellastotheirpublicmissionsofproviding“stability”and“ongoingassistance”inmortgagemarkets. Both
profitandpublicobjectivescausetheseagenciestosystematicallyandrapidlyrespondtomarketconditions,
such that changes in their mortgage purchasing activity reflect changes in housing credit demand and many
other influences. Some of the correlation between agency balance sheets on the one hand and credit growth
ormortgageratesontheotheristhereforelikelytoreflectreversecausality.
We propose two different strategies to isolate changes in agency purchasing activity free of confounding in-
fluences. Ourfirstandprincipalstrategyistofocusonhistoricalcreditpolicyinterventionsaffectingagency
mortgage holdings, in the spirit of the approaches in Romer and Romer (1989, 2010) and Ramey (2011) to
studying monetary and fiscal policy. Based on a narrative analysis of the regulatory history of the housing
agencies, we identify and quantify significant policy events affecting agency purchases. These include ad-
justmentstocapitalrequirements,portfoliocaps,orstatutoryborrowingauthority,directappropriationsand
1Seee.g. MianandSufi(2009),Justiniano,Primiceri,andTambalotti(2014),orDiMaggioandKermani(2016).
1

capital injections by the Treasury, or changes to the pool of mortgages eligible for agency purchase, such as
changesinconformingloanlimitsorauthorizationstoenternewmortgagemarketsegments.
Creditpolicychangesareoftenreactionstocyclicalconditionsinmortgageandhousingmarkets,therecent
crisis being a prime example. However, many interventions are motivated by other longer run objectives
such as increasing homeownership. Based on an extensive analysis of historical sources, we classify each
significant credit policy change as motivated by either cyclical considerations or by other non-cyclical ob-
jectives.2 This results in an indicator summarizing the non-cyclically motivated policy events, which we
use as an instrumental variable in regressions of a variety of outcome variables on measures of agency pur-
chasing activity. Similar to the approach in Ramey and Zubairy (2016) to estimating government spending
multipliers, we estimate the cumulative effects of an increase in agency purchases on mortgage credit and
originations,aswellasimpulseresponsestonewsshocksaboutfutureagencypurchasingactivity.
Our second and complementary identification approach is based on instrumenting measures of agency pur-
chasingactivitywithorthogonalizedinnovationsinFannieandFreddieexcessstockreturns. Thisalternative
strategy is analogous to Fisher and Peters (2010), who use excess return innovations in major US defense
stocks as a measure of news shocks to military spending. Passmore (2005) estimates that the advantages
granted by federal housing credit policy account for much of the market value and portfolio size of Fannie
andFreddie. WeshowthatnewsaboutpolicyinterventionsaffectingGSEbalancesheetsisreflectedintheir
stockmarketvaluation. Positionedlastinacausalorderingbehindcreditaggregates,interestrates,andother
macro variables, we find that residual variation in Fannie and Freddie excess stock returns predicts agency
mortgage purchases. This motivates us to use this residual variation as an alternative instrumental variable
toestimatetheresponseofcreditaggregatestoshockstoagencymortgagepurchases.
It is not clear ex ante that government purchases of mortgage assets have meaningful effects on the cost
and availability of housing credit. If financial market frictions are relatively unimportant, an increase in
agencypurchasesmayhavelittleimpactonthevolumeofmortgagecredit,andsimplyleadtocrowdingout
2Thefullnarrativeanalysisisinacompanionbackgroundpaper, FieldhouseandMertens(2017), availableathttp://www.
nber.org/papers/w23165.
2