NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GROSS CAPITAL FLOWS BY BANKS, CORPORATES AND SOVEREIGNS
Stefan Avdjiev
Bryan Hardy
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
Luis Servén
Working Paper 23116
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23116
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017
We thank Luis Catão, Eugenio Cerutti, Stijn Claessens, Branimir Gruic, Gian Maria Milesi-
Ferretti, and Philip Wooldridge for useful comments and suggestions, Bat-el Berger for excellent
assistance with the BIS IBS data, and Rosa Lim for excellent research assistance. We are grateful
to seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute 2017, CEPII, and the BIS. All errors are
our own. This work was partly funded by the World Bank’s Knowledge for Change and Strategic
Research programs. The views expressed here are ours only and do not necessarily reflect those
of the institutions that the authors are affiliated with or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2017 by Stefan Avdjiev, Bryan Hardy, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Luis Servén. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Gross Capital Flows by Banks, Corporates and Sovereigns
Stefan Avdjiev, Bryan Hardy, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Luis Servén
NBER Working Paper No. 23116
January 2017
JEL No. F00,F2,F21,F3,F32,F41,F42
ABSTRACT
We construct a new quarterly data set of international capital flows broken down by sector:
banks, corporates and sovereigns. Using our novel data set, we establish several key facts that
demonstrate the importance of distinguishing in- and outflows by the domestic sectoral identity.
We find that public sector flows may serve as a countervailing force to private sector flows,
especially in emerging markets (EMs), as these flows respond differently not only to country-
specific fundamentals but also to global shocks. The high inflow-outflow correlation observed in
total capital flow data is driven by within-sector flows, especially those of AE banks. In general,
inflows and outflows of AEs and inflows to EMs are primarily AE banks’ transactions, and, as a
consequence, respond similarly to capital flow drivers. By contrast, EM outflows respond
differently to global shocks and changes in fundamentals, leading to lower inflow-outflows
correlations for EMs.
Stefan Avdjiev Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
Bank for International Settlements Department of Economics
Centralbahnplatz 2 University of Maryland
Basel 4002, Switzerland Tydings Hall 4118D
stefan.avdjiev@bis.org College Park, MD 20742-7211
and CEPR
Bryan Hardy and also NBER
Bank for International Settlements kalemli@econ.umd.edu
Centralbahnplatz 2
4051 Basel Luis Servén
Switzerland The World Bank
bryan.hardy@bis.org 1818 H St NW
Washington DC 20433
lserven@econ.lafaena.com.

1 Introduction
The history of financial crises has taught us that the vulnerability to external shocks can vary
greatly depending on which economic sector(s) are on the receiving side of capital inflows.
Sovereign debt proved to be the Achilles’ heel in the Latin American crises, while private
sector debt financed by capital inflows was the key source of fragility in the Asian financial
crises. Duringtheglobalfinancialcrisisof2008(GFC),intheUS,theculpritwasthedomestic
household debt held by global banks. By contrast, in the European debt crisis of 2010-12,
sovereigns’andbanks’externalborrowingtookthecenterstage.
In spite of this anecdotal evidence, breakdowns of gross capital flows by sector have re-
ceived little attention in the empirical literature due to lack of data for a large set of countries
andalongtimeperiodatthebusinesscyclefrequency. Ourpaperfillsthisgapbyconstructing
a new comprehensive dataset based on residency principle for gross capital inflows and out-
flows at the quarterly frequency. We include a much larger set of countries than all the other
publicly available datasets for quarterly capital flows, featuring a balanced panel of 85 coun-
triesforinflowsand31countriesforoutflows,startingin1996anddecomposingbothinflows
and outflows by the borrowing and lending domestic sector, (e.g. inflows into the corporate
sector of a country, outflows from the banking sector of the country, etc.).1 We focus on debt
flows, rather than equity, as debt flows constitute the lion share of aggregate capital flows
duringtheperiodwestudy,aswedocument.
Our approach is fundamentally different than standard decomposition of capital flows by
instruments and asset classes, such as portfolio equity and debt flows or other investment
flows. Corporates can borrow using all these instruments (equity, bonds and loans), whereas
sovereigns most typically issue bonds. For our purposes, what matters is the identity of the
borrower and the lender, rather than instruments through which the borrowing and lending
is done. Our dataset on capital flows by sector provides new insights into the dynamic deter-
minants of capital flows, sheds light on the ultimate risk bearing agents, and highlights stark
differencesbetweenprivateandpublicborrowersanddomesticandforeignlendersbysector.
Usingourdataset,wedocumentseveralimportantstylizedfacts. Wefindthatpublicsector
1Asinthestandardresidencyprinciplebasedbalanceofpaymentsdata(BOPdata),inourdata,inflowsand
outflowsareonnetbasis,whereinflowsrefertothe(changesin)positionsofnon-residentsandoutflowsreferto
the(changesin)positionsofresidents. Thus,negativeinflowsmeanforeigninvestorsare”leaving”thecountry
bydivestingandnegativeoutflowsmeandomesticresidentsarereducingtheirexternalassets.
1

flowsmayserveasacountervailingforcetoprivatesectorflows,especiallyinEMs. Thisisbe-
cause,inEMs,publicsectorflowsarecountercylicalwhereasbankandcorporatesectorsflows
are procyclical.2 In addition, EM public sector flows respond to global shocks in the opposite
directiontoprivateflows.3 InAEs,publicsectorflowsareprocyclicalandtheydonotrespond
to global shocks. Furthermore, we find that global shocks and country-specific GDP growth
explain less of the variation in capital flows after the 2008 crisis, due to lower flows by AE
banks and EM corporates. However, EM banks’ flows still correlate strongly with both global
shocks and GDP after GFC.4 Lastly, we show that the correlation between capital inflows and
outflowsisdrivenbywithinsectorflows,particularlythoseofAEbanks. Toestablishourstyl-
ized facts about the drivers of flows, we run separate quarterly panel regressions of flows on
countries’ownlaggedGDPgrowth(pullfactor)andglobalshocks/financialconditionsusing
theVIXindex(pushfactor)withcountryfixedeffects,identifyingfromthewithinvariation.5
In terms of capital outflows, flows from banks and corporates in AEs respond negatively
to global shocks. In EMs, however, it is bank and public outflows that respond significantly.
For domestic cycles, onlyAE banks’outflows areprocyclical. Outflows from EM investorsdo
not systematically respond to the domestic cycle for any sector, with the possible exception of
the public sector. This is an important result, since it implies that during a downturn/crisis
in a given emerging market, domestic private agents do not bring their investment back (re-
trench) to their own country. During stress periods, when foreigners flee from EMs, it is the
sovereigns who may provide much needed risk sharing. However, during a downturn in ad-
vanced economies, it is their banks that bring funds back to the country, helping to offset the
shock.
2Aguiar and Amador (2011), Gourinchas and Jeanne (2013), and Alfaro, Kalemli-O¨zcan, and Volosovych
(2014) separate public and private flows at annual frequency and show that they move in opposite direction
as a function of country-specific growth. They focus on net flows and show that a country may run a current
accountsurplusduringepisodesofhighgrowth,butprivatesectormightbeborrowingonnetatthesametime.
Focusingonassetclassonly,JuandWei(2010),whoshowthatFDIcanflowinonnetandreservescanflowout
onnet.
3Horn, Reinhart,andTrebesch (2020)showasimilarresult in200yearsofdata wherewhenprivateinflows
leaveduringwars,naturaldisastersandfinancialcrises,officialflowstosovereignborrowerscomein.
4This is consistent with Amiti, McGuire, and Weinstein (2018), who find that the common factor in interna-
tional bank lending strongly diminished after the 2008 crisis, indicating that global push factors now have less
influence. WeshowthatthisisduetodiminishedroleofAEbanksininternationalcapitalflows.
5Severalpapersdocumentthatgrossflowsrespondsystematicallytochangesinglobalconditions. SeeForbes
and Warnock (2012), Milesi-Ferretti and Tille (2011), Cerutti, Claessens, and Puy (2015), Broner, Didier, Erce,
and Schmukler (2013), J. Caballero (2016), Obstfeld (2012), Cata˜o and Milesi-Ferretti (2014), Borio and Disyatat
(2011), Lane (2013), Cerutti, Claessens, and Rose (2018), and Barrot and Serve´n (2018), Rey (2013), Nier, Sedik,
andMondino(2014). Ourcontributiontothisliteratureisthatweshowthepatternsfoundbythisliteratureare
drivenbyflowsinandoutofbanksandcorporates.
2