NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CIRCUMVENTING THE ZERO LOWER BOUND WITH MONETARY POLICY
RULES BASED ON MONEY
Michael T. Belongia
Peter N. Ireland
Working Paper 23157
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23157
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2017
We have benefited greatly from discussions with Jerry Jordan, David Laidler, Edward Nelson,
Jack Tatom, and John Taylor on topics related to those covered here and comments from three
anonymous referees on earlier drafts of this paper. Neither of us received any external support
for, or has any financial interest that relates to, the research described in this paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Michael T. Belongia and Peter N. Ireland. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Circumventing the Zero Lower Bound with Monetary Policy Rules Based on Money
Michael T. Belongia and Peter N. Ireland
NBER Working Paper No. 23157
February 2017
JEL No. E31,E32,E37,E42,E51,E52,E58
ABSTRACT
Discussions of monetary policy rules after the 2007-2009 recession highlight the potential
ineffectiveness of a central bank’s actions when the short-term interest rate under its control is
limited by the zero lower bound. This perspective assumes, in a manner consistent with the
canonical New Keynesian model, that the quantity of money has no role to play in transmitting a
central bank’s actions to economic activity. This paper examines the validity of this claim and
investigates the properties of alternative monetary policy rules based on control of the monetary
base or a monetary aggregate in lieu of the capacity to manipulate a short-term interest rate. The
results indicate that rules of this type have the potential to guide monetary policy decisions
toward the achievement of a long-run nominal goal without being constrained by the zero lower
bound on a nominal interest rate. They suggest, in particular, that by exerting its influence over
the monetary base or a broader aggregate, the Federal Reserve could more effectively stabilize
nominal income around a long-run target path, even in a low or zero interest-rate environment.
Michael T. Belongia
University of Mississippi
Department of Economics
Box 1848
University, MS 38677
mtbelong@olemiss.edu
Peter N. Ireland
Boston College
Department of Economics
140 Commonwealth Ave.
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3859
and NBER
irelandp@bc.edu

Circumventing the Zero Lower Bound with Monetary Policy Rules Based on Money
The Federal Reserve Act, as amended in 1977, directs the Fed to pursue “goals of
maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.” From one
perspective, the Act can be viewed as directing the central bank to follow a targeting rule
because it specifies that the Fed is to achieve a particular set of objectives. Examples of
targeting rules include proposals that would have the central bank stabilize nominal income [e.g.,
Bean (1983), Sumner (1989), Feldstein and Stock (1994) and Woodford (2012)] or the price
level [e.g., Svensson (2003)]. Moreover, in the language of Debelle and Fischer (1994), the Act
can be interpreted as preserving “instrument independence” in the sense that it allows the Fed to
pursue these goals by using whatever monetary policy tools are available to it.1
Monetary policy also can be implemented by adoption of an instrument rule. In this case,
the policy rule gives guidance as to how a central bank’s instrument or intermediate target should
be set to accomplish the ultimate objective of central bank actions. In contrast to a targeting rule,
an instrument rule gives the central bank “goal independence” because it allows the central bank
to determine the specific objective(s) of monetary policy; the well-known Taylor (1993) Rule,
the monetary base rules outlined by Meltzer (1987) and McCallum (1988), and Milton
Friedman’s (1960) k-percent rule are examples of instrument rules. To be fair, these rules are
1 The full quote from the Federal Reserve Act reads: “The Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System and the Federal Open Market Committee shall maintain long run growth of the
monetary and credit aggregates commensurate with the economy's long run potential to increase
production, so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and
moderate long-term interest rates” (emphasis added). If, as discussed by, e.g., Meltzer (1991), a
strategy of targeting the fed funds rate is associated with procyclical money growth, it is not
clear whether proposed interest rate rules will generate money growth that conforms to this part
of the Act’s mandate. This possibility motivates the idea of using money within a two-pillar
approach to policy as discussed near the end of this paper.
1

constructed on the basis of goals like those in the Federal Reserve Act but set specific numerical
values for policy objectives whereas the Act itself is silent on this issue.
Apart from questions about the relative merits of targeting rules and instrument rules,
recent discussions of monetary policy rules have been forced to deal with a different issue.
Because most central banks implement monetary policy by influencing the behavior of a short-
term interest rate and an interest rate rule is part of the standard New Keynesian model, both
practice and theory imply that monetary policy can lose its ability to stimulate economic activity
when that short-term interest rate reaches its zero lower bound. As central bank actions after the
market crash of 2008 made this apparent constraint a reality, much of the recent discussion about
monetary policy rules has turned to “unconventional” tools that might allow monetary policy to
escape this “liquidity trap.”
In what follows, we describe an alternative approach to the specification of a targeting
rule by focusing on the central bank’s ability to set a path for the quantity of money and
exploiting the connection between variations in the quantity of money and other nominal
magnitudes. The general approach taken is due to Working (1923) and is in the same spirit as a
modified version of the P-star model due to Orphanides and Porter (2000). Finally, because
discussions like those in Fair and Howrey (1996), Svensson (2003, 2005), and McCallum and
Nelson (2005a, 2005b) explain the difficulties associated with any effort to determine whether
one type of rule is superior to the other, we use this general framework to investigate how the
behavior of nominal income or the price level is related to rule-based paths for the money
supply.2 If a rule of this type is shown to be tractable it will offer a policy framework in which
2 Gartner (2008) examines monetary policy rules from a public choice perspective and also
concludes that there appears to be no clear criterion by which one type of rule could be judged to
be superior to an alternative.
2