NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FUNDING LIQUIDITY WITHOUT BANKS:
EVIDENCE FROM A SHOCK TO THE COST OF VERY SHORT-TERM DEBT
Felipe Restrepo
Lina Cardona Sosa
Philip E. Strahan
Working Paper 23179
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23179
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2017
The opinions in this paper represent those of the authors and do not reflect the views of the
Central Bank of Colombia or the National Bureau of Economic Research. The authors thank
seminar participants at the Bank of Canada, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the
University of Pittsburgh.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Felipe Restrepo, Lina Cardona Sosa, and Philip E. Strahan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Funding Liquidity without Banks: Evidence from a Shock to the Cost of Very Short-Term
Debt
Felipe Restrepo, Lina Cardona Sosa, and Philip E. Strahan
NBER Working Paper No. 23179
February 2017
JEL No. G21
ABSTRACT
In 2011, Colombia instituted a tax on repayment of bank loans, thereby increasing the cost of
short-term bank credit more than long-term credit. Firms responded by cutting their short-term
loans for liquidity management purposes and increasing their use of cash and trade credit. In
industries where trade credit is more accessible (based on U.S. Compustat firms), we find
substitution into accounts payable and little effect on cash and investment. Where trade credit is
less available, firms increase cash and cut investment. Thus, trade credit offers a substitute source
of liquidity that can insulate some firms from bank liquidity shocks.
Felipe Restrepo Philip E. Strahan
Ivey Business School at Western University Carroll School of Management
frestrepo@ivey.ca 324B Fulton Hall
Boston College
Lina Cardona Sosa Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
Central Bank of Colombia and NBER
lcardoso@banrep.gov.co philip.strahan@bc.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
How do firms respond when bank liquidity dries up? In most economies, banks pre-
dominate as suppliers of liquidity and payments mechanisms between counter-parties. Demand
deposits and credit lines (or, equivalently, very short-term loans) are fundamental payments
products supplied almost uniquely by banks (Kasyhap, Rajan and Stein, 2002; Gatev and
Strahan, 2009). Many firms use credit lines both to make payments and to smooth out liquidity
needs over time, drawing funds when payments need to be made (i.e., making payroll or paying
for supplies) and re-paying those funds when payments are received (i.e., after realizing sales
receipts). Demand deposits and credit lines differ mainly in that the latter include a credit aspect
(they are not pre-funded by the customer), whereas the former do not. Firms with limited access
to lines of credit use deposits (out of their buffer stock of cash) to make payments, and they use
trade credit with suppliers and customers to smooth payments over time.1
This paper offers a clean and well-identified setting to estimate how firms respond to a
negative shock to very short-term bank loans. We show that firms substitute into cash and trade
credit as alternative sources of liquidity. In industries where trade credit is less available, the
increase in cash is large and leads to cuts in investment. In contrast, in industries with better
access to trade credit, firms increase accounts payable but neither their cash balances nor
investment change after the shock. Together, these results have two implications. First, cash is a
costly substitute for bank liquidity facilities. Holding cash can be costly, both because cash
1 Banks also supply term loans as a source of credit to firms, usually structuring them with a short-maturity as a key
contracting tool to help solve information and monitoring problems. Outside of real estate and other projects
collateralizable by hard assets, most bank loans are short term, thus requiring borrowers to roll them over frequently.
This discipline in turn provides banks the option to restrict or deny credit, thereby improving borrower ex ante
incentives. Diamond (1991) offers the seminal theoretical treatment of debt maturity and argues that small and
information-intensive firms are often only able to borrow short-term. Stohs and Mauer (1996) provide empirical
support for this prediction.
1

yields low, after-tax returns and because cash exacerbates agency problems (Jensen (1986); Yun,
(2009)). Moreover, when external funds are costlier than internal, firms needing to raise their
stock of cash (because short-term bank credit has become expensive) must draw funds away
from investment.2 Second, for some industries trade credit offers liquidity services that can
substitute for bank-provided liquidity without distorting real decisions (investment).
The empirical setting is Colombia, whose two unique institutional features we exploit to
identify how an increase in the cost of – or, equivalently, a decrease in the supply of – bank
liquidity affects firms. First, in Colombia bank liquidity is more available for ‘preferential
clients,’ those with annual sales above a specific sales cutoff set by banks, than it is for smaller
firms. The large preferential firms have access to Treasury Facilities, which are very short-term
extensions of credit from banks that allow firms to manage their liquidity needs. Large firms use
these facilities to make payments but not to finance real investment (due to their very short
maturity). Smaller firms also have access to bank credit lines for liquidity management, but
these come with much more restricted access and tighter covenants.3 Second, in 2011 Colombia
initiated a new law that taxed each re-payment on any bank loan. The change made short-
maturity Treasury Facilities and other very short-term debt instruments prohibitively expensive,
2 Sufi (2009) argues that many firms, in fact, must self-insure against liquidity shocks because their access to credit
lines is limited by low cash flow, a key contractual control mechanism that banks use to monitor their borrowers.
Credit lines expose banks to substantial credit risk as well as liquidity risk because firms may want to draw funds
when cash flow is low due to poor fundamentals. Cash-flow based covenants help lenders alleviate this risk, but also
imply that lines do not provide firms insurance against low cash flow in bad states. In fact, Lins et al (2010) survey
CFOs from the largest firms across 29 countries and conclude that credit lines are a more important source of liquidity
than cash among their sampled firms, but also that firms will simultaneously hold cash buffers to self-insure against
bad states. Thus, credit lines are often used to allow firms to take advantage of future uncertain investment
opportunities.
3 Small firms can also access short-term debt (say a 30-day loan), but supply is more constrained and conditions (rates,
collateral, covenant) less favorable. Operationally, firms with sales below the sales threshold would bank out of a
branch office; in contrast, firms with higher sales are assigned to a loan officer/account manager who gives this
customer preferential treatment.
2