NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STUDENTS IN DISTRESS:
LABOR MARKET SHOCKS, STUDENT LOAN DEFAULT, AND FEDERAL INSURANCE PROGRAMS
Holger M. Mueller
Constantine Yannelis
Working Paper 23284
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23284
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2017
We thank David Berger, Jan Eberly, Caroline Hoxby, Amir Kermani, Theresa Kuchler, Andres
Liberman, Adam Looney, Johannes Stroebel, Jeremy Tobacman, Eric Zwick, and seminar
participants at NYU, Berkeley, and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau for helpful
comments. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Treasury or any other organization. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Holger M. Mueller and Constantine Yannelis. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Students in Distress: Labor Market Shocks, Student Loan Default, and Federal Insurance Programs
Holger M. Mueller and Constantine Yannelis
NBER Working Paper No. 23284
March 2017
JEL No. H81,I22,I26,J24
ABSTRACT
The collapse in home prices during the Great Recession triggered a sharp drop in consumer
demand by households, leading to massive employment losses. This paper examines the
implications of these labor market shocks for the dramatic rise in student loan defaults, which
originated during this time period. Linking administrative student loan data at the individual
borrower level to de-identified tax records and exploiting Zip code level variation in home price
changes, we show that the drop in home prices during the Great Recession accounts for
approximately 24 to 32 percent of the increase in student loan defaults. Consistent with a labor
market channel, we find a strong relationship between home prices, employment losses, and
student loan defaults at the individual borrower level, which is concentrated among low income
jobs. Comparing the default responses of home owners and renters, we find no evidence of a direct
liquidity effect of home prices on student loan defaults. Lastly, we show that the Income Based
Repayment (IBR) program introduced by the federal government in the wake of the Great
Recession reduced both student loan defaults and their sensitivity to home price fluctuations, thus
providing student loan borrowers with valuable insurance against adverse income shocks.
Holger M. Mueller
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street
Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
hmueller@stern.nyu.edu
Constantine Yannelis
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street
Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
cyanneli@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
Student loans constitute the largest source of non-mortgage household debt in the United
States,withanoutstandingbalanceof$1.4trillion. Giventhesignificanceofstudentloans
forthefinancingof highereducation, therecentsurgeinstudentloandefaultsisalarming.
SincethebeginningoftheGreatRecession,studentloandefaultrateshavenearlydoubled.
Between 2007 and 2010 alone, two-year cohort default rates increased from 6.7 percent
to 9.1 percent (U.S. Department of Education). The sharp rise in student loan defaults
has important consequences not only for the federal budget–more than 92 percent of
all student loans are federal loans–but also for the defaulting student loan borrowers.1
Unlike other types of loans, student loans are not dischargeable in bankruptcy, and wages
can be garnished for the rest of a borrower’s lifetime. Thus, besides the usual stigma
associated with loan defaults, such as tainted credit scores and limited future access to
credit markets, the expectation of wages being garnished may affect borrowers’ job search
and incentives to work, while the fact that loan defaults can be observed by employers
may affect their prospects of finding a job in the first place.2
As prior research has shown, the massive collapse in home prices during the Great
Recession triggered a sharp drop in consumer spending by households (Mian, Rao and
Sufi 2013; Stroebel and Vavra 2016; Kaplan, Mitman, and Violante 2016). This drop in
consumer spending, in turn, led to a worsening of labor market outcomes: across different
U.S. regions, those experiencing larger drops in home prices experienced significantly
larger declines in employment (Mian and Sufi 2014; Giroud and Mueller 2017). Linking
administrative student loan data from the U.S. Department of the Treasury to individual
tax return data from IRS records, we examine the implications of these labor market
1Student loans are the largest financial asset held by the federal government, accounting for 45.6
percent of all federally owned financial assets (Financial Accounts of the United States, 2016 Q3).
2Using panel data from the NLSY97, Ji (2016) finds that student loan borrrowers spend 8.3 percent
less timeon theirjobsearch relativetonon-borrowers. As aresult, theyearn4.2percentlessannuallyin
their first ten years after graduation. These findings are supported by survey evidence showing that 55
percentofstudentloanborrowersage18to34“acceptedajobquickertohaveincomesooner”becauseof
their student debt, while about 30 percent said that they “considered different industries or companies”
(Earnest 2016). Other survey evidence shows that 47 percent of U.S. employers use credit checks to
screen applicants, suggesting that loan defaults are likely to impact hiring decisions (SHRM 2010).
2

shocks for the rise in student loan defaults. Our student loan data represent a four
percent random sample of all student loans that are either disbursed or guaranteed by
the federal government. Our final sample consists of over one million annual observations
of student borrowers who were in repayment during the Great Recession.
Our focus on the massive collapse in home prices and worsening of labor market
outcomes informs the academic debate on the rise in student loan defaults. In that
debate, a leading explanation is that the increase in defaults is largely driven by shifts
in the composition of student borrowers toward “non-traditional” borrowers attending
community colleges and, especially, for-profit institutions (Deming, Goldin, and Katz
2012; Looney and Yannelis 2015).3 These borrowers tend to be older, come from less
affluent family backgrounds, have lower completion rates, and experience weaker labor
market outcomes. As Looney and Yannelis (2015) argue, all of these factors contribute
to higher default rates. As the share of non-traditional borrowers increases over time,
aggregate default rates have risen, mechanically, so to speak. Much recent research has
been devoted to understanding better the for-profit education sector, reflecting its rising
importance within the overall U.S. education system.4
Figure 1 provides suggestive evidence of a link between home prices and student loan
defaults based on aggregated time series data. As home prices began to plummet at
the onset of the Great Recession, student loan default rates began to rise. While the
evidence in Figure 1 is suggestive, our empirical analysis exploits detailed variation in
home price changes at the Zip code level during the Great Recession. Prior literature
has argued that the massive collapse in home prices during the Great Recession has a
causal effect on changes in consumer spending and local labor market outcomes (Mian,
Rao and Sufi 2013; Mian and Sufi 2014; Stroebel and Vavra 2016; Kaplan, Mitman, and
Violante 2016; Giroud and Mueller 2017). But even if the association between home
price changes and local labor market outcomes were not causal, this would only mildly
3“Repayment outcomes tend to be worse among borrowers who attend for-profit or community col-
leges; those who are low-income or independent; those who attend part time; and, especially, those who
do not complete their degrees. Many of these types of borrowers accounted for a disproportionate share
of the increase in student borrowing during the Great Recession” (CEA 2016, pp. 4-5).
4See, e.g., Turner 2006; Deming, Goldin, and Katz 2012; Cellini and Goldin 2014.
3