NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINTECH, REGULATORY ARBITRAGE, AND THE RISE OF SHADOW BANKS
Greg Buchak
Gregor Matvos
Tomasz Piskorski
Amit Seru
Working Paper 23288
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23288
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2017, Revised September 2018
Seru is the corresponding author. We thank Sumit Agarwal, Mark Carey, Michael Cembalest,
Stijn Claessens, John Cochrane, Darrell Duffie, Douglas Diamond, Andreas Fuster, Radha
Gopalan, Holger Mueller, Chris Palmer, Thomas Philippon, Raghuram Rajan, Philipp Schnabl,
John Sedunov, Hyun Shin, Johannes Stroebel, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Nancy Wallace, Toni
Whited (the editor), Ariel Zetlin-Jones, Luigi Zingales and seminar participants at Baruch
College, Bank for International Settlements, Chicago Fed, Cleveland Fed, Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau, Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Housing Finance Policy Center, New York
University, Rutgers, Stanford University, University of Wisconsin and conference participants at
Conference for Empirical Legal Studies, CFAR and JFI Conference, ECB conference on
monetary policy and financial intermediation, FDIC 17th Annual Fall Research Conference,
Kellogg Fintech Conference, NBER Summer Institute, NBER Financial Market Regulation, OFR
FRBC Financial Stability and FINTech Conference, Philadelphia Fed Fintech Conference: The
Impact on Consumers, Banking, and Regulatory Policy, and SITE conference on Financial
Regulation for helpful comments. We thank Monica Clodius and Sam Liu for outstanding
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Greg Buchak, Gregor Matvos, Tomasz Piskorski, and Amit Seru. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Fintech, Regulatory Arbitrage, and the Rise of Shadow Banks
Greg Buchak, Gregor Matvos, Tomasz Piskorski, and Amit Seru
NBER Working Paper No. 23288
March 2017, Revised September 2018
JEL No. G2,L5
ABSTRACT
Shadow bank market share in residential mortgage origination nearly doubled from 2007-2015,
with particularly dramatic growth among online “fintech” lenders. We study how two forces,
regulatory differences and technological advantages, contributed to this growth. Difference in
difference tests exploiting geographical heterogeneity induced by four specific increases in
regulatory burden–capital requirements, mortgage servicing rights, mortgage-related lawsuits,
and the movement of supervision to Office of Comptroller and Currency following closure of the
Office of Thrift Supervision--all reveal that traditional banks contracted in markets where they
faced more regulatory constraints; shadow banks partially filled these gaps. Fintech lenders
appear to offer a higher quality product and charge a premium of 14-16 basis points. Relative to
other lenders, they seem to use different information to set interest rates. A quantitative model of
mortgage lending suggests that regulation accounts for roughly 60% of shadow bank growth,
while technology accounts for roughly 30%.
Greg Buchak Tomasz Piskorski
University of Chicago Columbia Business School
5807 S Woodlawn Ave 3022 Broadway
Chicago, IL 60637 Uris Hall 810
buchak@uchicago.edu New York, NY 10027
and NBER
Gregor Matvos tp2252@columbia.edu
McCombs School of Business
University of Texas, Austin Amit Seru
2110 Speedway, Stop B6600 Stanford Graduate School of Business
CBA 6.724 Stanford University
Austin, TX 78712 655 Knight Way
and NBER ¸˛Stanford, CA 94305
Gregor.Matvos@mccombs.utexas.edu and NBER
aseru@stanford.edu

1. Introduction
In the last decade, the consumer finance market has undergone a dramatic change.
Intermediation has shifted from traditional banks to shadow banks: non-depository institutions
falling outside the scope of traditional banking regulation.1 This change has coincided with a shift
away from “brick and mortar” originators to online intermediaries.2 Despite the scarcity of
systematic evidence, regulators, policymakers, and academics have been engaged in an intense
debate over the potential consequences of these developments.3 In this paper, we undertake a
systematic examination of the evolution of shadow banking in the largest consumer loan market
in the US, the ten trillion dollar consumer mortgage market. We seek to explore the economic
forces that could explain the drastic change in the nature of intermediation.
We show that shadow banks’ market share in mortgage origination has nearly doubled
from roughly 30% in 2007 to 50% in 2015 (see Fig. 1-3). This growth has been particularly robust
in the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) market, which serves less creditworthy borrowers,
with shadow banks holding 75% market share in 2015. An important segment of growth in shadow
banks were fintech lenders that primarily originate mortgages online. These lenders expanded
rapidly since 2007 and accounted for a quarter of shadow bank origination in 2015.
Two broad hypotheses have attempted to explain the decline in traditional banking:
increased regulatory burden on traditional banks and disruptive technology. The regulation
hypothesis contends that following the financial crisis, traditional banks have been subject to
increasing legal and regulatory burdens. These burdens have raised costs and limited the scope of
products that traditional banks can provide, reducing lending. Shadow banks, which do not face
these burdens, have gained market share by stepping into the gaps left by traditional banks.
The technology hypothesis contends that improving lending technology, particularly
among new shadow bank entrants, has driven the shift away from traditional banks. Fintech
shadow banks have gained market share because their technology allows them to lend more
cheaply or to provide better products. For example, Quicken Loans, the third largest mortgage
lender in 2015, offers the “Rocket Mortgage” product, whose application is almost entirely online
and involves no human loan officer. This innovation saves labor and office space costs and is
significantly more convenient according to consumer reviews.4 Additionally, fintech lenders may
1 We use the term “shadow bank” to refer to nonbank (nondepository) lenders, consistent with the definition of the
Financial Stability Board (FSB), whose members cover G20 national regulators, the International Monetary Fund, the
World Bank, and the Bank of International Settlements. See also Adrian and Ashcraft (2016).
2 Goldman Sachs Report, March 3, 2015: “The future of finance: the rise of the new shadow bank.”
3 Bank of International Settlements, 2017: “FinTech credit. Market structure, business models and financial stability
implications.” http://www.bis.org/publ/cgfs_fsb1.pdf
4 https://www.nerdwallet.com/blog/mortgages/quickenloansandrocketmortgagereview/ [accessed on 11/8/2016]
2

be better able to screen potential borrowers, leveraging alternative sources of information and the
big data approaches inherent in technology-based lending.
Our paper tests both explanations and then digs more deeply to understand the specific
regulatory and technology forces at work. Our first approach to examining whether an increased
regulatory burden is a driving force behind the decline of traditional mortgage banking is to
compare lending of banks to all shadow banks, irrespective of their fintech affiliation. We find that
shadow banks are more likely to serve riskier, less creditworthy FHA borrowers and areas with
larger minority populations. Given that several enforcement actions and lawsuits had specifically
targeted banks’ treatment of less creditworthy and minority borrowers, this evidence is consistent
with shadow banks expanding in segments where regulatory burden has risen substantially.
Shadow banks and traditional banks also differ dramatically in mortgage financing. While
traditional banks continue to hold between 30% and 50% of their originated loans on balance sheet,
shadow banks finance their originations almost entirely through securitization and the originate-
to-distribute model. While the private securitization market dried up following the crisis,
government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) like Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have come to play a
dominant role in guaranteeing shadow bank originations. These implicit government guarantees
that shadow banks overwhelmingly rely on is another example though which regulatory activity
has advantaged shadow banks.
With respect to loan pricing, we find negligible differences in traditional and shadow bank
interest rates. This finding hides important heterogeneity within shadow banks, with non-fintech
shadow banks offering slightly lower interest rates and fintech shadow banks offering substantially
higher interest rates. We explore this heterogeneity when studying technology but conclude that
that while non-fintech shadow banks pass some regulatory cost savings to borrowers, given the
concurrent increase in market share of fintech shadow banks, cost advantages alone cannot explain
shadow bank growth.
Finally, to link regulation and shadow bank growth more explicitly, we study the impact
of four specific increases in regulatory burden: capital requirements, mortgage servicing rights
(MSRs), mortgage-related lawsuits, and the movement of supervision to Office of Comptroller
and Currency (OCC) following closure of the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS), widely
considered to be a lax regulator (Agarwal et al., 2014; Granja and Leuz, 2017). To avoid confounds
related to credit demand differences across counties, such as differences in economic
fundamentals, we exploit changes in the regulatory burden within a differences in differences
framework. Our tests reveal that shadow banks gained market share and expanded lending in
counties whose banks were more exposed to increases in regulatory burdens. Moreover, the timing
of specific regulatory changes is closely linked to the rise of shadow banks in exposed counties.
3