NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCIAL FRICTIONS AND EMPLOYMENT DURING THE GREAT DEPRESSION
Efraim Benmelech
Carola Frydman
Dimitris Papanikolaou
Working Paper 23216
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23216
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2017
We thank Andrew Ellul, Joseph Ferrie, Jose Liberti, Joel Mokyr, Paige Ouimet (discussant),
Marco Pagano, Giorgio Primiceri, Fabiano Schivardi (discussant), Amit Seru, Andrei Shleifer,
Jeremy Stein, Toni Whited (discussant) and seminar participants at the CSEF-EIEF-SITE
Conference on Finance and Labor, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, NBER Corporate
Finance Summer Institute (2016), Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern's Economic
History workshop, 2016 Tsinghua Finance Workshop, and Wharton for very helpful comments.
Eileen Driscoll, Jenna Fleischer, Sam Houskeeper, Ari Kaissar, Daniel Trubnick, and Yupeng
Wang provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Efraim Benmelech, Carola Frydman, and Dimitris Papanikolaou. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Frictions and Employment during the Great Depression
Efraim Benmelech, Carola Frydman, and Dimitris Papanikolaou
NBER Working Paper No. 23216
March 2017
JEL No. E24,E5,G01,G21,G31,J6,N42
ABSTRACT
We provide new evidence that a disruption in credit supply played a quantitatively significant
role in the unprecedented contraction of employment during the Great Depression. To analyze the
role of financing frictions in firms' employment decisions, we use a novel, hand-collected dataset
of large industrial firms. Our identification strategy exploits preexisting variation in the need to
raise external funds at a time when public bond markets essentially froze. Local bank failures
inhibited firms' ability to substitute public debt for private debt, which exacerbated financial
constraints. We estimate a large and negative causal effect of financing frictions on firm
employment. Interpreting the estimated elasticities through the lens of a simple structural model,
we find that the lack of access to credit may have accounted for 10% to 33% of the aggregate
decline in employment of large firms between 1928 and 1933.
Efraim Benmelech Dimitris Papanikolaou
Kellogg School of Management Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road 2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208 Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER and NBER
e-benmelech@kellogg.northwestern.edu d-papanikolaou@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Carola Frydman
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
c-frydman@kellogg.northwestern.edu

The Great Depression was the most severe and prolonged economic downturn of the
modern industrialized world. From 1929 to 1933, real output in the United States contracted
by 26%, and the unemployment rate increased from 3.2% to 25%, reaching its highest recorded
level in American history (Margo, 1993). Despite the severity of the Depression and its
undoubted influence on macroeconomic thinking, the causes of the rise in unemployment
during the 1930s are still not well understood and remain important today, almost 90 years
after the world entered its worst economic crisis. This paper provides new evidence that
financial frictions were responsible for much of the decline in employment of large American
firms during this period.
Financial frictions are one of several factors that may have played an important role in
the Great Depression. In a seminal paper, Bernanke (1983) argues that an increase in the
real costs of intermediation reduced the ability of some borrowers to obtain credit, which in
turn contracted aggregate demand and exacerbated the downturn. Although this view has
often been used to explain the protracted contraction in output, financial imperfections also
offer a potential explanation for the staggering rise in unemployment during the Depression.
When there is a lag between the payments to labor and the realization of revenues, firms
need to finance their labor activity throughout the production process (see, e.g., Greenwald
and Stiglitz, 1988). Moreover, unlike physical capital, labor cannot serve as collateral, which
makes it harder to finance to some extent. Thus, any difficulties in obtaining external finance
may have severe effects on firms’ employment decisions. Despite the potential appeal of this
explanation, the lack of firm-level data for the 1930s has posed an obstacle for understanding
the effect of finance on employment during the Great Depression. In this paper we aim to fill
this void.
Using newly collected data, we estimate the effects of financial frictions on the contraction
in employment of large industrial firms during the Great Depression. Our identification
strategy uses the preexisting variation in the value of long-term debt that became due during
the crisis. We find that firms more burdened by maturing debts cut their employment levels
more. These effects were particularly severe for firms located in areas where local banks were
in distress and that could therefore not easily substitute public debt for bank financing. Our
analysis suggests that financial frictions can explain between 10% and 33% of the overall
drop in employment in our sample from 1928 to 1933.
Our understanding of unemployment during the 1930s is heavily based on either aggregate
or establishment-level data (see Margo, 1993, for a review). Establishment-level data contain
no financial information, however, and cannot therefore adequately measure the needs for
external finance. Our analysis, by contrast, is based on a novel, hand-collected dataset from
1

the Moody’s Manual of Investments, which includes approximately one thousand of the largest
industrial firms in the economy, a group of businesses that have received limited attention
in quantitative research on the Depression. Perhaps surprisingly, our data reveal that large
enterprises suffered greatly during the crisis: the average firm in the sample experienced a
24% decline in employment from 1928, the year before the onset of the crisis, to 1933, when
unemployment peaked. The profitability of large firms also collapsed over this period, from
an average return on assets (ROA) of 9% to merely 1%.1 By using firm-level data we can link
information on employment to the firms’ operating characteristics and financing needs. Most
important, we collect detailed information on the value and maturity structure of the firms’
outstanding bonds, allowing us to measure the variation in the needs for external finance
across firms.
To identify the effect of financial frictions on firm employment changes, we employ two
main strategies. First, similar to Almeida, Campello, Laranjeira, and Weisbenner (2011), we
exploit variation across firms in the maturity of corporate bonds, the primary source of debt
financing of large firms at that time (Jacoby and Saulnier, 1947). The economic downturn
led to a collapse of the public bond markets from 1930 to 1934 (Hickman, 1960). Firms that
happened to have bonds that matured during this time could not easily refinance them, and
were therefore more likely to be constrained in allocating cash between servicing their debt
and paying their workers. We find that a firm in the 90th percentile of the value of maturing
debt (scaled by assets) contracted its employment between 1928 and 1933 by about 5% more
than the median firm in the sample, which had no bonds maturing. Since our specifications
control for leverage, among other observable characteristics, the estimated effects are not
driven by differences in total indebtedness across firms. Moreover, the corporate bonds that
matured during the crisis were primarily issued well in advance of the onset of the Depression.
Our findings are unlikely to be influenced by changes in the firms’ investment opportunities,
and in their demand for external finance, in response to the negative economic shock. Our
second identification strategy exploits spatial variation by interacting the variation in the
firms’ maturing debt with the conditions of the local banking system where these firms
operated.
From 1929 to 1933, thousands of commercial banks experienced financial distress and
suspended operations. These bank “failures” likely resulted in a contraction of credit supply
1These facts are consisted with the evidence reported in Graham, Hazarika, and Narasimhan (2011), who
also study the outcomes of large industrial firms using data collected from the Moody’s Manuals. (Graham
et al., 2011) show that firms’ pre-crisis leverage ratios were positively associated with the likelihood of
becoming distressed during the Great Depression. Our study differs from Graham et al. (2011) in that
we focus on a different outcome—employment—and use a different identification strategy, based on the
preexisting variation in the need to refinance maturing debt.
2