NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXCHANGE RATE POLICIES AT THE ZERO LOWER BOUND
Manuel Amador
Javier Bianchi
Luigi Bocola
Fabrizio Perri
Working Paper 23266
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23266
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2017, Revised June 2018
We thank Mark Aguiar, Fernando Alvarez, Katherine Assenmacher, Giancarlo Corsetti, Marco
Del Negro, Michael Devereux, Martin Eichenbaum, Charles Engel, Doireann Fitzgerald, Gita
Gopinath, Olivier Jeanne, Matteo Maggiori, Guido Sandleris, and Iván Werning for excellent
comments. We also thank participants of several seminars and conferences for very valuable
insights. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis or the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Manuel Amador, Javier Bianchi, Luigi Bocola, and Fabrizio Perri. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Exchange Rate Policies at the Zero Lower Bound
Manuel Amador, Javier Bianchi, Luigi Bocola, and Fabrizio Perri
NBER Working Paper No. 23266
March 2017, Revised June 2018
JEL No. F31,F32
ABSTRACT
We study the problem of a monetary authority pursuing an exchange rate policy that is
inconsistent with interest rate parity because of a binding zero lower bound constraint. The
resulting violation in interest rate parity generates an inflow of capital that the monetary authority
needs to absorb by accumulating foreign reserves. We show that these interventions by the
monetary authority are costly, and we derive a simple measure of these costs: they are
proportional to deviations from the covered interest parity (CIP) condition and the amount of
accumulated foreign reserves. Our framework can account for the recent experiences of “safe-
haven” currencies and the sign of their observed deviations from CIP.
Manuel Amador Luigi Bocola
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Department of Economics
Research Department Northwestern University
90 Hennepin Avenue 2001 Sheridan Road
Minneapolis, MN 55401 Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER and NBER
amador.manuel@gmail.com luigi.bocola@northwestern.edu
Javier Bianchi Fabrizio Perri
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Research Department
90 Hennepin Avenue Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Minneapolis, MN 55401 90 Hennepin Avenue
and NBER Minneapolis MN 55401
javieribianchi@gmail.com fperri@umn.edu

1 Introduction
Many central banks often manage, implicitly or explicitly, their exchange rate. In a financially in-
tegrated world, the path for the exchange rate determines, together with nominal interest rates, the
relativedesirabilityofassetsdenominatedindomesticandforeigncurrency. Alongtradition,which
dates back at least to Krugman (1979), has focused on how inconsistent fiscal and monetary policies
can make domestic assets less attractive than foreign ones and lead to episodes of capital outflows,
depletionofforeignreserves,andcurrencydevaluations.
Since the global financial crisis, however, several countries have experienced opposite dynam-
ics, that is, capital inflows, accumulation of foreign reserves, and currency appreciations. The case
of Switzerland is emblematic in this respect. Over the period 2010-2017, despite a zero or negative
nominalinterestrate,Switzerlandexperiencedalargeincreaseinprivatecapitalinflowsthatwasac-
companied by an equally large increase in holdings of foreign reserves by the Swiss National Bank,
whichwasattemptingtopreventanappreciationoftheSwissfranc.
In this paper, we argue that episodes of this sort can arise because of a conflict between an ex-
changeratepolicyandthezerolowerboundconstraintonnominalinterestrates. Tounderstandour
argument,considerasituationinwhichamonetaryauthorityispeggingtheexchangerate,butthere
are future states of the world in which it would abandon the peg and appreciate. If nominal interest
ratesareatzeroathomeandabroad,localcurrencyassetswillbeattractivetoforeignersbecausethe
expected future appreciation is not offset by lower domestic interest rates. We show that this force
inducescapitalinflowsthatneed tobeabsorbedbythemonetaryauthoritythroughforeignexchange
interventions, and that such unconventional interventions are costly. We provide a measure of these
costs and show that they can be substantial. For the Swiss franc, the monthly costs of the exchange
ratepoliciescarriedoutbytheSwissNationalBankpeakedatabout0.6%ofmonthlygrossdomestic
product. Moreover, our framework can help to rationalize the recent emergence of deviations from
coveredinterestparityforeconomieswithnominalinterestratesclosetozero.
Weformalizethisargumentinacanonicalsmallopeneconomymodelwithtwomainingredients.
First, we assume that foreign financial intermediaries that trade with the domestic economy face
potentially binding financial constraints, a feature implying that arbitrage in international financial
markets might fail. That is, risk-adjusted returns on domestic currency assets could be higher than
those on foreign ones, and only a finite amount of capital would flow into the country. Second, we
introduce money in the model, which leads to a potentially binding zero lower bound on nominal
interest rates, as is standard in monetary models. In such a framework, we study the problem of a
benevolentmonetaryauthoritythatusesitsbalancesheettoimplementagivenstate-contingentpath
foritsexchangerate.
1

Let’sstartfromthe(riskaugmented)interestrateparitycondition,
(1+i∗) (cid:18)
e
(cid:19)
(1+i t ) = E t [e t /e t t +1 ] −Cov t Λ t+1 ,(1+i t ) e t+ t 1 , (IP)
where i and i∗ are, respectively, the nominal interest rates on risk-free bonds at home and abroad,
t t
e t is the exchange rate (the price of foreign currency in terms of domestic currency), and Λ t+1 is the
financial intermediaries stochastic discount factor. This equation defines the level of i that makes
t
intermediaries indifferent between holding domestic or holding foreign currency bonds given the
foreigninterestrateandtheexchangeratepolicy.1
The Central Bank’s exchange rate policy (e t , e t+1 ) does not conflict with the zero lower bound if
equation (IP) holds for some non-negative i t , given i t ∗ and Λ t+1 . In such a scenario, the monetary
authoritycanalwaysimplementthedesiredexchangeratepolicybychoosingalevelofi thatmakes
t
intermediaries indifferent between investing in the small open economy or not. We show that, in
this case, it is optimal for the monetary authority to choose this particular nominal rate. As a result,
interest parity holds, and capital flows between the small open economy and the rest of the world
ariseonlytoabsorbthedesiredexcessdomesticnetsavingsoftheprivatesector.
This implementation, however, is not feasible when the exchange rate policy conflicts with the
zero lower bound, that is, when there is no non-negativei that is consistent with equation (IP). The
t
zero lower bound then implies that in any equilibrium that implements the exchange rate policy (e ,
t
e t+1 ), interest rate parity will be violated. In this regime, foreign intermediaries have incentives to
purchase domestic currency assets, generating a potentially large inflow of capital toward the small
open economy. We show that in this situation, the private sector does not have incentives to absorb
thisinflowofcapital,andthemonetaryauthorityisforcedtoissuedomesticliabilitiesandaccumulate
foreignassets. Byissuinghigh-yieldingdomesticassetsandpurchasinglow-yieldingforeignones,the
trades of the monetary authority induce a resource cost for the small open economy. To implement
itsdesireexchangeratepolicy,itisoptimalforthemonetaryauthoritytosetinterestratesatzero,so
astominimizethesecosts,whileaccumulatingforeignreserves.
Equation (IP) clarifies the conditions under which a given exchange rate policy might conflict
with the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. The conflict is more likely to arise when (i)
the foreign nominal interest rate is low, (ii) there is an expected future appreciation of the domestic
currency, or (iii) when the currency of the small open economy is perceived to be a “safe haven”,
that is, when future appreciations coincide with “bad” times for intermediaries (generating a high
covariancebetweenΛ t+1 andtheexchangerate).
Inourview,thesethreecircumstancesdescribewelltheenvironmentfacedbytheSwissNational
Bank (SNB) after the global financial crisis. In an effort to dampen the appreciation pressures on the
1Thedeterministiclog-linearizedversionreducestoi t =i t ∗+ln(e t+1 )−ln(e t ),whichistheusualconditionfornominal
exchangeratedeterminationinworkhorseopen-economymodels(seeEngel,2014,forarecentsurvey).
2