NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MAPPING THE INTERCONNECTEDNESS BETWEEN EU BANKS AND SHADOW
BANKING ENTITIES
Jorge Abad
Marco D'Errico
Neill Killeen
Vera Luz
Tuomas Peltonen
Richard Portes
Teresa Urbano
Working Paper 23280
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23280
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2017
The views expressed in this paper are our own, and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
ESRB, EBA, their member institutions, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Any
remaining errors are our own. The authors would like to thank Claudia Guagliano, Olaf Weeken,
Nicola Garbarino, Jan Klacso, the ESRB’s Joint ATC-ASC Expert Group on Shadow Banking
(JEGS), co-chaired by Steffen Kern and Richard Portes, and the ESRB’s Advisory Scientific
Committee (ASC) for helpful comments and discussion.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23280.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Jorge Abad, Marco D'Errico, Neill Killeen, Vera Luz, Tuomas Peltonen, Richard
Portes, and Teresa Urbano. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Mapping the Interconnectedness between EU Banks and Shadow Banking Entities
Jorge Abad, Marco D'Errico, Neill Killeen, Vera Luz, Tuomas Peltonen, Richard Portes, and
Teresa Urbano
NBER Working Paper No. 23280
March 2017
JEL No. F65,G21,G23
ABSTRACT
This paper provides a unique snapshot of the exposures of EU banks to shadow banking entities
within the global financial system. Drawing on a rich and novel dataset, the paper documents the
cross-sector and cross-border linkages and considers which are the most relevant for systemic risk
monitoring. From a macroprudential perspective, the identification of potential feedback and
contagion channels arising from the linkages of banks and shadow banking entities is particularly
challenging when shadow banking entities are domiciled in different jurisdictions. The analysis
shows that many of the EU banks’ exposures are towards non-EU entities, particularly US-
domiciled shadow banking entities. At the individual level, banks’ exposures are diversified
although this diversification leads to high overlap across different types of shadow banking
entities.
Jorge Abad Tuomas Peltonen
CEMFI European Systemic Risk Board Secretariat
Casado del Alisal 5 Sonnemannstraße 20
28014 Madrid D60314 Frankfurt am Main
Spain Germany
jorge.abad@cemfi.edu.es tuomas.peltonen@esrb.europa.eu
Marco D'Errico Richard Portes
University of Zurich London Business School
Plattenstrasse 14 Regent's Park
8032 Zurich London NW1 4SA
Switzerland UNITED KINGDOM
marco.derrico@uzh.ch and NBER
rportes@london.edu
Neill Killeen
European Systemic Risk Board Secretariat Teresa Urbano
Sonnemannstraße 20 European Banking Authority
D60314 Frankfurt am Main Canary Wharf
Germany London E14 5AA
neill.killeen@esrb.europa.eu United Kingdom
teresa.urbano@eba.europa.eu
Vera Luz
European Banking Authority
Canary Wharf
London E14 5AA
United Kingdom
vera.luz@eba.europa.eu

“Policymakersandresearchersneedbettermodelsanddatatounderstandtheinterconnections
betweenthebankingsystemandnonbankfinancialinstitutions.”
-StanleyFischer,December2015
1 Introduction
The substantial growth of the shadow banking system in recent years has led to in-
creasedmonitoringofthispartofthefinancialsector.1 Giventhat‘shadowbankingen-
tities’canformpartofcomplexfinancialintermediationchainswhichcanalsoinclude
banks and insurance corporations (Pozsar et al. 2013, Cetorelli 2014), understanding
thenatureoftheirlinkagesisimportant. Theglobalfinancialcrisisexposedshortcom-
ingsintheassessmentofcross-sectorandcross-borderlinkagesinthefinancialsystem.
Theinteractionofbanksandinsurancecorporationswithshadowbankingentitiesled
to the amplification of risks and spillovers which were transmitted across sectors and
national borders. As shadow banking entities are subject to varying degrees of su-
pervision, there was a lack of transparency and comprehensive macroprudential risk
monitoringoftheirlinkagesandactivities.
Owing to their heterogeneous activities, shadow banking entities can be direct
counterpartiestobanksinanumberofmarketsincludingderivativeandfundingmar-
kets. In addition, banks may be exposed to shadow banking entities through their
common membership of a corporate group, through the provision of explicit or im-
plicit backstops or indirectly through their common exposures to assets.2 Moreover,
liquidity support provided by banks to off-balance sheet entities can further reinforce
the link and potential contagion paths between the regular banking system and the
shadow banking system (BCBS, 2015). As a result of these linkages, significant shocks
1Forexample,accordingtoESRB(2016a),abroadmeasureoftheshadowbankingsystemintheEU,
comprisingtotalassetsofinvestmentfundsandotherfinancialinstitutions(OFIs)representedapproxi-
mately36%oftotalEUfinancialsectorassetsattheendof2015andhasgrownby22%sincetheendof
2012.
2SeeClaessensandRatnovski(2014)andBCBS(2015)foradiscussiononexplicitandimplicitback-
stops. TheresultsofGornicka(2016)lendsupporttotheviewthatguaranteesprovidedbysponsoring
institutions are an important element of shadow banking. Furthermore, Clerc et al. (2016) examine
thechannelsthroughwhichindirectcontagioncanspreadacrossthefinancialsystem,includingfund-
ingandassetmarkets,andhighlighttheroleofthemarketpricechannelandinformationspilloversin
propagatingshocks.
2

intheshadowbankingsystemcanhavepotentialspillovereffectsonotherpartsofthe
financialsystem.
Since the global financial crisis, policymakers and regulators have sought to im-
prove the monitoring framework for assessing the interconnectedness of the shadow
banking system with the aim of mitigating systemic risks. The increasing size and
complexity of the shadow banking system, coupled with its interconnectedness with
the banking sector underlines the need for effective financial stability monitoring. At
the global level, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) has coordinated efforts in improv-
ing data coverage for monitoring developments within the shadow banking system.3
AttheEuropeanlevel,theEuropeanSystemicRiskBoard(ESRB)hasfocusedonmoni-
toringpotentialfinancialstabilityrisks,includingthoserisksandnegativeexternalities
posedbyentitiesandactivitieswithintheshadowbankingsystem.4
While the interconnectedness between banks and shadow banking entities is often
cited as a key financial stability concern, we are not aware of other studies which doc-
umentanddescribethenatureoftheselinkagesusingEUbankandexposure-levelin-
formation. Fischer(2015)pointstotheimportanceofmappingthelinkagesofshadow
bankingentities. Henotes“animportantareainneedofdevelopmentiseconomicmodelling
oninterconnectedness,particularlyontheinteractionofshadowbanking,banksandthebroader
financialsystem... suchresearchcouldguideregulatoryeffortstocollectdataandsetpoliciesto
limitpossibleinstabilitiesassociatedwithinterconnectedness.”Furthermore,asdescribedin
ESRB(2016b),macroprudentialpoliciesbeyondthebankingsectorshouldfocusonthe
components of the financial system where systemic risks are higher. In order to assess
thepotentialimpactofspillovers,detailedanalysesontheinterconnectionsofdifferent
components of the financial system are required. Understanding the cross-sector and
cross-border linkages will therefore equip policymakers and regulators with the nec-
essary surveillance tools and can form a key input in the design of macroprudential
3See, for example, FSB (2011) which outlines the FSB’s approach to strengthen the oversight and
regulation of the shadow banking system. The FSB publish annual monitoring reports on the global
shadowbankingsystem. SeeFSB(2015).
4See ESRB (2016a) and Grillet-Aubert et al. (2016) for a description of the monitoring framework
developedbytheESRBforassessingdevelopmentsandriskswithintheEUshadowbankingsystem.
3