NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK CAPITAL REDUX:
SOLVENCY, LIQUIDITY, AND CRISIS
Òscar Jordà
Björn Richter
Moritz Schularick
Alan M. Taylor
Working Paper 23287
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23287
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2017
This work is part of a larger project kindly supported by research grants from the
Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF) and the Institute for New Economic
Thinking. Schularick acknowledges support from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG)
under Germany´s Excellence Strategy – EXC 2126/1– 39083886, as well as a Fellowship from
the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago. We are indebted to a large number
of researchers who helped with data on individual countries. Matthew Baron and Malik Mazbouri
kindly shared data with us. We are particularly thankful to João Azevedo and Marco Wysietzki
for outstanding research assistance. We benefited from helpful comments by conference and
workshop participants attending the 2017 CESifo Area Conference on Macro, Money, and
International Finance, the 5th Empirical Macroeconomics Workshop at Ghent University, the
Fifth CEPR Economic History Symposium, the 6th Workshop in Financial Economics at the
University of Bonn, the ECB, the NBER DAE Program Meeting, the EHA 2017 Annual Meeting,
the IDB/Banco Central de Chile 2019 Workshop, and seminar participants at Bank of Finland,
Bocconi University, Imperial College, SAFE Frankfurt, and UC Davis.All errors are our own.
The views expressed herein are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be
interpreted as reflecting the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or San Francisco,
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, or the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23287.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2017 by Òscar Jordà, Björn Richter, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bank Capital Redux: Solvency, Liquidity, and Crisis
Òscar Jordà, Björn Richter, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 23287
March 2017, Revised July 2020
JEL No. E44,G01,G21,N20
ABSTRACT
What is the relationship between bank capital, the risk of a financial crisis, and its severity? This
paper introduces the first comprehensive analysis of the long-run evolution of the capital structure
of modern banking using newly constructed data for banks’ balance sheets in 17 countries since
1870. In addition to establishing stylized facts on the changing funding mix of banks, we study
the nexus between capital structure and financial instability. We find no association between
higher capital and lower risk of banking crisis. However, economies with better capitalized
banking systems recover faster from financial crises as credit begins to flow back more readily.
Òscar Jordà Moritz Schularick
Economic Research, MS 1130 University of Bonn
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Department of Economics
San Francisco, CA 94105 Adenauerallee 24-42
and University of California, Davis 53113 Bonn
oscar.jorda@gmail.com Germany
and CEPR
Björn Richter moritz.schularick@uni-bonn.de
Institute for Macroeconomics and Econometrics
University of Bonn Alan M. Taylor
Kaiserplatz, 7-9 4th floor Department of Economics and
53113, Bonn, Germany Graduate School of Management
https://sites.google.com/view/bjoernrichter University of California
brichter@uni-bonn.de One Shields Ave
Davis, CA 95616-8578
and CEPR
and also NBER
amtaylor@ucdavis.edu

1 ntroduction
. I
Systemic banking crises are a recurring phenomenon in modern economic history. Recent
macro-finance research points to a general pattern where buoyant conditions in credit
markets, measured by increases in the quantity of credit (Jorda`, Schularick, and Taylor,
2013 2017 2012
; Mian, Sufi, and Verner, ; Schularick and Taylor, ), or by low expected
2016
returns on credit assets (Krishnamurthy and Muir, ), presage banking crises and severe
downturns. A key question for macroprudential regulators is whether higher capital ratios
are associated with lower crisis risks, or at least will alleviate their economic fallout. Their
instinct is to increase the loss-absorption capacity of banks, at least in recent years. However
as we will show, financial crises have overwhelmed even the highest of defenses.
Bankers have an incentive to take excessive risks if the payouts from their bets are
1977
asymmetric and creditors do not monitor banks closely (Merton, ). A remedy might be
to increase equity capital: more skin in the game should induce more prudent behavior and
thereby reduce the probability that financial institutions will face large losses that put their
1997 2011
existence at risk (Holmstrom and Tirole, ; Mehran and Thakor, ). But this view has
2018
not gone unchallenged. Rajan ( ) raised fundamental doubts whether equity governance
is able to discipline banks ex ante. The regulatory response to the global financial crisis has,
by and large, embraced higher capital buffers and regulation of bank leverage. This is not
the first time that capital ratios have been raised in response to a systemic banking crisis, as
2010
Grossman ( ) reports. But despite all regulatory efforts, crises have not gone away.
A competing explanation for why financial crises happen starts from the observation
that when credit booms are underway, neither financial markets nor the bankers themselves
are necessarily aware that the risks on the balance sheets are rising. Recent research by
2017 2017 2014
Baron and Xiong ( ), Fahlenbrach et al. ( ), as well as Cheng et al. ( ) documents
evidence of overoptimism by insiders and market-wide neglect of crash risk during credit
1978
booms. These findings mesh well with the older insights of Kindleberger ( ), Minsky
1977 1986 2000
( , ), and Shiller ( ) where, time and again, financial markets have become
overly exuberant only to be disappointed later. They also echo the ideas proposed in recent
2018 2013 2018
theoretical work by Bordalo et al. ( ), Simsek ( ), as well as Greenwood et al. ( ).
In line with the empirical evidence on overoptimism and neglected crash risk, in these
models excessive credit booms are the product of behavioral biases—such as extrapolative
belief formation—and not due to incentive problems of rational agents. In this context,
higher capital will do little to moderate such overoptimism during the buildup of risks,
although it may still act as a buffer for losses once optimism wanes.
Howtheniscapitalstructurerelatedtobankingcrisisriskandseverity? Ultimatelythisis
1

150
an empirical question, and we answer it by turning to years of modern financial history
17
across advanced economies. Our paper belongs to a growing literature in macrofinance
that relies on long-run and cross-country perspectives to produce new knowledge about
rare crisis events and the role of financial factors in the business cycle (Jorda`, Schularick,
2013 2016 2009
and Taylor, ; Krishnamurthy and Muir, ; Reinhart and Rogoff, ; Romer and
2017 2012
Romer, ; Schularick and Taylor, ).
The backbone of our study is a newly constructed aggregate data set for the advanced
1870 2015
economies over the – period which covers three core categories of the funding mix
of financial intermediaries: capital, deposits, and other (non-deposit) debt instruments. The
new panel data complement prior work on the asset side of banking systems, and bank
2017
credit in particular (see Jorda` et al., ). Looking ahead, we expect that the new data we
release here will become an important resource for future research, over and above their
contribution to this study.
We make three main contributions, corresponding to three parts of the paper. First, we
establish new stylized facts on the long-run evolution of the capital structure of banking
systems in advanced economies. Importantly, we correct the widely held view that capital
2007 08
ratios decreased substantially in the decades preceding the – crisis. On the contrary,
even unweighted (i.e., not risk-adjusted) capital ratios have remained remarkably stable
2 30
over the entire post-WW period. Capital-to-asset ratios fell from around % in the late
19 5 10 1950 1
th century to about %– % in (see Figure below). Since then they have remained
in a tight range across all the countries in our sample.
Such stability in capital ratios is quite striking compared to the “hockey stick pattern”
seen in many other financial variables in advanced economies, such as aggregate balance
2017
sheets and mortgage lending (Jorda`, Schularick, and Taylor, ). Instead, the most notable
long-run change in banks’ funding structures occurred in the composition of debt liabilities.
1950
For example, in , bank debt funding consisted almost entirely of deposits. The share
1970
of non-deposit debt liabilities increased rapidly starting in the s. On the eve of the
2007 08 50
– crisis, the deposit share of debt funding had shrunk to % of total debt liabilities.
In short, the important development in the capital structure of banks was not a decline
in equity capital, but rather the banks’ increasing reliance on non-deposit and potentially
“runnable” debt funding.
In the second part of the paper, we study the relationship between the capital structure
of banks and systemic banking crises. We establish stylized correlations by comparing the
predictive ability of capital ratios, as a measure of “skin in the game”, to that of credit
expansions and the two liquidity measures: the loans-to-deposits ratio and the share of
non-deposit liabilities to debt. In line with the recent literature, we identify systemic
2