NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE CROSS SECTION OF BANK VALUE
Mark Egan
Stefan Lewellen
Adi Sunderam
Working Paper 23291
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23291
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2017, Revised July 2021
We thank Itay Goldstein (the editor), two anonymous referees, Philip Bond, David Denis,
Francisco Gomes, Gary Gorton, Sam Hanson, Christopher Hennessy, Anil Kashyap, Andrew
Koch, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Simon Kwan, Gregor Matvos, Philip Ostromogolsky, Elias
Papaioannou, Anna Pavlova, Richard Portes, Amiyatosh Purnanandam, Hélène Rey, David
Scharfstein, Philipp Schnabl, Amit Seru, Henri Servaes, Jesse Shapiro, Andrei Shleifer, Holger
Spamman, David Sraer, Vania Stavrakeva, Jeremy Stein, Phil Strahan, Chad Syverson, Alex
Ufier, Haluk Unal, Vikrant Vig, Vish Viswanathan, Toni Whited, Andrew Winton, Kairong Xiao,
Luigi Zingales, and participants at numerous conferences and seminars for helpful comments.
Part of this research was conducted while Egan was an employee of the University of Minnesota
and while Lewellen was an employee of London Business School and Carnegie Mellon
University. Lewellen thanks the Research and Materials Development Fund at London Business
School for financial support. Egan and Sunderam gratefully acknowledge funding from the
Harvard Business School Division of Research. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2017 by Mark Egan, Stefan Lewellen, and Adi Sunderam. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Cross Section of Bank Value
Mark Egan, Stefan Lewellen, and Adi Sunderam
NBER Working Paper No. 23291
March 2017, Revised July 2021
JEL No. G2,G21
ABSTRACT
We study the determinants of value creation in U.S. commercial banks. We develop novel
measures of individual banks’ productivities at collecting deposits and making loans, which we
relate to bank market values. We find that deposit productivity is responsible for two-thirds of the
value of the median bank and most variation in value across banks. Variation in productivity is
driven by differences across banks in technology, customer demographics, and market power. We
also find evidence of synergies between deposit-taking and lending. Our findings suggest that
there is significant heterogeneity in banks’ abilities to capture value by manufacturing safe assets.
Mark Egan Adi Sunderam
Harvard Business School Harvard Business School
Baker Library 365 Baker Library 359
Soldiers Field Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163 Boston, MA 02163
and NBER and NBER
megan@hbs.edu asunderam@hbs.edu
Stefan Lewellen
Pennsylvania State University
360 Business Building
University Park, PA 16802
United States
lewellen@psu.edu

Raising deposits and making loans are the central activities of banks. But how important is
each activity to the business of banking, and what drives variation in the answer across banks?
How much of a bank’s value comes from its ability to issue information-insensitive deposits to
consumers who value such debt? And how much comes from its ability to screen and monitor
borrowers?
In this paper, we systematically examine the cross section of banks to understand the quantita-
tivecontributionsofdeposit-takingandlendingtobankvalue. Webeginbydevelopinganeconomic
framework in which banks have two divisions: (i) a deposit-producing division that raises funds
by offering consumers services and interest payments, and (ii) a revenue-producing division that
takes funding as an input and converts it into risk-adjusted revenue by making loans and hold-
ing securities. We focus on the traditional banking activities of deposit taking and lending, rather
than on non-traditional banking activities like investment banking, trading, and private wealth
management, because the banks in our sample are largely traditional banks.1 We then use tools
from industrial organization to construct novel estimates of a bank’s productivity in each division
in a manner analogous to the literature on the productivity of non-financial firms. Our framework
therefore allows us to estimate “primitive” measures of deposit productivity and asset productivity
for each bank at each point in time.
Intuitively, a bank with high deposit productivity is able to collect more deposits than a less
productivebank,holdingfixedthe“inputs”itusestocollectthosedeposits,suchasitsdepositrate
andnumberofbranches. Forexample,BB&TandSunTrusteachhadabout$150billionofdeposits
in 2015Q4, and they paid similar deposit rates. However, SunTrust generated its deposits with
23% fewer branches. Thus, our measures label SunTrust the more deposit-productive bank, since
itgeneratedthesameamountofdepositswithfewerinputs. Analogously,abankwithhigherasset
productivity is able to generate more risk-adjusted revenue with the same asset base.2 For exam-
ple, given similar asset bases of approximately $200 billion, BB&T generated more revenue from
traditional banking activities than SunTrust in 2015Q4 despite having lower levels of observable
risk. Thus, our measures label BB&T as the more asset-productive bank.
To estimate how productive a bank is at raising deposits, we construct a consumer demand
system for deposits that builds upon existing work by Dick (2008), Egan, Hortaçsu, and Matvos
1For the median bank in our sample, deposits comprise 86% of the bank’s liabilities, and interest and deposit fee
incomecomprise90%oftotalincome.
2Wefocusontraditionalbankingassets(i.e.,interestonloansandsecuritiesheldinthebankingbook)andnotthose
associatedwithnon-traditionalbanking(i.e.,tradingandinvestmentbanking).
1

(2017), and Xiao (2020). In our framework, banks compete for deposits by setting interest rates
in a standard Bertrand-Nash differentiated products setting, which we estimate using a common
model of demand from the industrial organization literature (Berry 1994; Berry, Levinsohn, and
Pakes1995). Abankwithhigherdepositproductivityfacesaconsumerdepositdemandcurvethat
is shifted up, meaning it can raise more deposits, holding fixed the deposit services and interest
rates it offers. To estimate a bank’s asset productivity, we flexibly estimate its ability to produce
interest and fee income as a function of the size of its loan and securities portfolios. Higher asset
productivity allows a bank to produce more risk-adjusted income, holding fixed the size of its
portfolio. Thus, our estimation procedure allows us to construct two complementary measures of
bank productivity at the bank-quarter level that capture a bank’s skill at raising deposits and its
skill at using these funds to generate revenue.
Uncovering these primitive measures of productivity is important because metrics like interest
income and interest expenseare endogenous functions of productivity. For example, all else equal,
a bank that is better at raising deposits will rationally choose to become larger. In the presence of
diminishingreturns,thiswilldrivetheratethebankpaysondepositsclosertotheratespaidbyless
deposit-productive banks. Thus, variation in observables is likely to understate the true variation
inprimitivesacrossbanks. Webelievethatourabilitytoestimateprimitiveproductivitydifferences
across banks represents an important step forward in our ability to identify differences in banks’
business models.
We combine our asset and deposit productivity estimates with banks’ market-to-book ratios
(M/B) from 1994 to 2015 to identify the primary determinants of bank value. The benefit of
looking at M/B is that it provides us with a natural economic benchmark: under the frictionless
nullhypothesisthatbankscreatenovalue,allbanksshouldhaveM/Bequaltoone. Hence,theuse
of M/B allows us to better understand the relative quantitative contributions of deposit taking and
lending to bank value.
Our first main finding is that the liability side of the balance sheet drives the majority of cross-
sectional variation in bank value. We find that a one-standard deviation increase in deposit pro-
ductivity is associated with an increase in M/B of 0.2 to 0.8 points, consistent with there being
significant heterogeneity in banks’ abilities to capture value by manufacturing safe assets. In con-
trast, a one-standard deviation increase in asset productivity is associated with an increase in M/B
of0.1to0.2points. Hence,variationindepositproductivityaccountsformorethantwiceasmuch
variation in bank value as variation in asset productivity.
2