NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ALL THE PRESIDENT’S FRIENDS:
POLITICAL ACCESS AND FIRM VALUE
Jeffrey R. Brown
Jiekun Huang
Working Paper 23356
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23356
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2017
We are grateful for helpful comments from Heitor Almeida, James Brown, Mara Faccio, Ioannis
Floros, Itay Goldstein, Austan Goolsbee, Huseyin Gulen, Tim Johnson, Josh Pollet, Scott
Weisbenner, and seminar participants at University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and Iowa
State University. We thank Kun Chen, Zhongnan Xiang, and Yinchao Zhu for research
assistance. We are solely responsible for any remaining errors. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Jeffrey R. Brown and Jiekun Huang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

All the President’s Friends: Political Access and Firm Value
Jeffrey R. Brown and Jiekun Huang
NBER Working Paper No. 23356
April 2017
JEL No. G28,G3,H32
ABSTRACT
Using novel data on White House visitors from 2009 through 2015, we find that corporate
executives’ meetings with key policymakers are associated with positive abnormal stock returns.
We also find evidence suggesting that following meetings with federal government officials,
firms receive more government contracts and are more likely to receive regulatory relief (as
measured by the tone of regulatory news). The investment of these firms also becomes less
affected by political uncertainty after the meetings. Using the 2016 presidential election as a
shock to political access, we find that firms with access to the Obama administration experience
significantly lower stock returns following the release of the election result than otherwise similar
firms. Overall, our results provide evidence suggesting that political access is of significant value
to corporations.
Jeffrey R. Brown
Department of Finance
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
515 East Gregory Drive
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
brownjr@illinois.edu
Jiekun Huang
University of Illinois
1206 S 6th St
Champaign IL
61820
huangjk@illinois.edu

1. Introduction
Access to political decision-makers is a scarce resource because politicians have limited time and
can only interact with a limited set of people. Gaining political access can be of significant value
for corporations, particularly since governments play an increasingly prominent role in
influencing firms. Governments affect economic activities not only through regulations, but also
by playing the role of customers, financiers, and partners of firms in the private sector. There is
ample anecdotal evidence suggesting that firms benefit from gaining access to powerful
politicians.1 Therefore, gaining and maintaining access to influential policymakers can be an
important source of competitive advantage for companies. Yet despite the importance of political
access for firms, the allocation of political access across firms and its effects on firm value
remains underexplored.
In this paper, we investigate the characteristics of firms with political access as well as the
valuation effects of political access for corporations. Using a novel dataset of White House
visitor logs, we identify top corporate executives of S&P 1500 firms that have face-to-
face meetings with high-level federal government officials. We examine two fundamental
questions associated with political access. First, how prevalent is political access–in the literal
form of meetings with influential policymakers–and what are the characteristics of firms with
1 For example, a Wall Street Journal (2015) article claims that Google executives’ frequent visits to the White
House were instrumental in Federal Trade Commission’s decision to drop its antitrust investigation of the
company. As another example, commenting on the close ties between General Electric and the federal
government, a Washington Examiner (2010) article notes that “Obama wants cap-and-trade, GE wants cap-
and-trade. Obama subsidizes embryonic stem-cell research, GE launches an embryonic stem-cell business.
Obama calls for rail subsidies, GE hires Linda Daschle as a rail lobbyist.”
1

access to politicians? Second, does political access increase firm value, and if so, through what
channels?
Given the influences of governments on firms and the scarce nature of political access,
understanding the allocation of political access across firms has been a central question in
political economy. In order to make a case to a policymaker, one needs to secure the politician’s
attention and convey the messages through direct or indirect communication (Hall and Wayman
1990; Hasen 2012; Lewis et al. 1998; Wright 1990). The existing political economy literature
contends that politicians grant more access to interest groups that made more contributions to the
officials’ election campaigns (e.g., Herndon, 1982; Gopoian, 1984; Kalla and Broockman, 2016).
From a demand perspective, firms with more exposure to government policies should be more
likely to seek political access. Yet, due to a lack of data on firms’ access to politicians, it
remains largely unclear how political access is allocated across firms.
Corporations can benefit from direct interactions with elected officials in at least three ways.
First, political access may enable firms to secure contracts to provide goods or services to
government. Government procurement of goods and services accounts for over 10% of the GDP
in the U.S. Government officials may influence the allocation of lucrative government contracts
towards firms whose executives have interacted with them. Second, companies with direct access
to politicians can seek regulatory relief and influence political decision-making. Companies in
the U.S. are subject to oversight from various regulatory agencies, e.g., the Securities and
2