NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SOVEREIGN DEFAULT RISK AND FIRM HETEROGENEITY
Cristina Arellano
Yan Bai
Luigi Bocola
Working Paper 23314
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23314
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2017
First draft: March 2017. We thank Grey Gordon, Juan Carlos Hatchondo, Christian Hellwig,
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Alberto Martin, and Vivian Yue for useful comments, and participants at
several seminars and conferences for valuable insights. Gabriel Mihalache and Alexandra
Solovyeva provided excellent research assistance. We thank the National Science Foundation for
financial support under grants 1024581 and 2145007. Luigi Bocola thanks the Alfred P. Sloan
foundation for generous funding. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Cristina Arellano, Yan Bai, and Luigi Bocola. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Sovereign Default Risk and Firm Heterogeneity
Cristina Arellano, Yan Bai, and Luigi Bocola
NBER Working Paper No. 23314
April 2017
JEL No. E44,F34,G12,G15
ABSTRACT
This paper measures the output costs of sovereign risk by combining a sovereign debt model with
firm- and bank-level data. An increase in sovereign risk lowers the price of government debt and
has an adverse impact on banks’ balance sheets, disrupting their ability to finance firms. The
resulting fall in credit supply impacts firms directly, as they need to borrow at higher interest
rates, and indirectly through general equilibrium effects on the price of inputs and other goods.
Importantly, firms are not equally affected by these developments: those that have greater
financing needs and that borrow from banks that hold more government debt are mostly affected
by the change in borrowing rates, while firms that do not borrow are only impacted indirectly.
We show that these direct and indirect effects can be recovered using a firm-level regression,
which we estimate using Italian data. We calibrate our model to match the measured firm-level
elasticities and find that heightened sovereign risk was responsible for one-third of the observed
output decline during the Italian debt crisis.
Cristina Arellano Luigi Bocola
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Department of Economics
Research Department Landau 342
90 Hennepin Avenue Stanford University
Minneapolis, MN 55401 579 Jane Stanford Way
arellano.cristina@gmail.com Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
Yan Bai lbocola@stanford.edu
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
216 Harkness Hall
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
yanbai06@gmail.com

1 Introduction
During the European sovereign debt crisis, as in many emerging markets crises, many
countries experienced large declines in real economic activity. An active research agenda
has put forth various explanations for this negative association between sovereign risk
and output. Sovereign default models in the tradition of Arellano (2008) and Aguiar and
Gopinath (2006) predict that governments have greater temptation to default when the
economy is in a recession, potentially explaining why sovereign risk increases when eco-
nomic conditions deteriorate. Several other papers (Gennaioli, Martin, and Rossi, 2014;
Perez, 2015; Bocola, 2016), however, have emphasized that sovereign risk may also have
negative spillovers on the economy: because financial intermediaries hold large quantities
ofdomesticgovernmentdebt, afallinthevalueofthese securitiescandisrupttheirbalance
sheets and induce a tightening of credit supply to the private sector.
Quantifying the two-way feedback between sovereign risk and output is a challenging
openquestioninmacroeconomics,yetitisrelevantforpolicymakersdealingwithsovereign
debt crises. The challenge arises because debt crises and economic outcomes are jointly
determined, which makes it hard to disentangle to what extent sovereign risk rises in re-
sponsetodeterioratingeconomicconditionsandtowhatextentitcausesthem. Researchers
have tackled this challenge with two main methodologies. One approach consists of fitting
structural models to aggregate data and using them to measure the macroeconomic conse-
quences of sovereign risk. This approach suffers from the criticism that the identification
of the relevant effects relies partly on ancillary assumptions, as aggregate data alone pro-
vide little information about the direction of causality. A second approach uses firm-bank
datasets and various empirical methods to estimate the impact that sovereign risk has on
bank credit and on firms’ performance. While these methods offer a more transparent
identification of the firm-level responses to sovereign risk, they are not designed to capture
the aggregate effects.
The contribution of this paper is to combine these two approaches by building a model
of sovereign debt with heterogeneous firms to measure the feedback between sovereign
risk and output. We show that in our framework, the response of output to an increase
in sovereign risk depends on a set of firm-level elasticities. We estimate these elasticities
using Italian micro data, and use them as empirical targets to estimate the model structural
parameters. In our main counterfactual, we find that spillovers from the government to
the private sector were sizable and accounted for about one-third of the output decline
observed during the Italian debt crisis.
Our framework incorporates financial intermediaries and heterogeneous firms into an
1

otherwise canonical general equilibrium model of sovereign debt and default. The econ-
omy consists of islands populated by firms, financial intermediaries, and households, and
a central government. Firms differ in their productivity, and they borrow from interme-
diaries to finance payments of labor and capital services, factors that are used to produce
a differentiated good. These working capital needs are also heterogeneous: some firms
need to advance a greater fraction of their payments than other firms. Intermediaries bor-
row from households and use their own net worth to purchase long-term government debt
and extend loans to firms. These credit markets are local in that firms borrow exclusively
from intermediaries operating on their island, and intermediaries across islands are hetero-
geneous in their holdings of government debt. Financial intermediaries face occasionally
binding leverage constraints, as the amount they borrow cannot exceed a multiple of their
net worth. The governmentfunds publicconsumption by collectingtaxes andissuing long-
term bonds, and chooses whether to default on its debt.
The model is perturbed by two aggregate shocks: a shock that moves the productivity
process of firms and a shock to the value of default for the government. In response to
these shocks, our environment features a two-way feedback loop between the government
and the private sector. Importantly, different from standard sovereign default models,
our environment does not feature exogenous output costs from default, but instead the
outputlossesfromsovereignriskpotentiallyarisefromthebalancesheeteffectsoffinancial
intermediaries who hold sovereign debt.
The first side of this loop reflects the endogeneity of government default risk as changes
inaggregateproductivityandenforcementaffectthevaluesforthegovernmentofrepaying
versus defaulting, thereby inducing time variation in sovereign default probabilities and
hence interest rate spreads of government securities. The second side of this loop is that
fluctuations in government default risk affect production through their impact on financial
intermediation. Whensovereignriskincreases, themarketvalueofgovernmentdebtonthe
balance sheet of financial intermediaries falls, leading to a decline in their net worth. This
decline tightens the banks’ leverage constraint, which leads intermediaries to restrict credit
supply. The reduction in credit supply raises the interest rates at which firms finance their
working capital, and these higher costs induce firms to reduce their demand for inputs.
Alongside this direct effect that sovereign risk has on economic activity through its impact
on firms’ borrowing costs, the model features additional general equilibrium mechanisms:
as firms that are exposed to higher borrowing costs cut their production, the demand for
other intermediate goods and for labor falls, affecting in equilibrium the prices faced by all
other firms. We refer to these as the indirect effects of sovereign risk.
An important result in our paper is that, up to a first-order approximation, the direct
2