NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA
Kaiji Chen
Jue Ren
Tao Zha
Working Paper 23377
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23377
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2017, Revised May 2018
This research is supported in part by the National Science Foundation Grant SES 1558486
through the NBER and by the National Natural Science Foundation of China Project Numbers
71473168, 71473169, and 71633003. We thank Dean Corbae, Marty Eichenbaum, Sergio Rebelo,
Richard Rogerson, Wei Xiong, and seminar participants at Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond,
2016 NBER Chinese Economy Working Group Meeting, International Monetary Funds,
University of Virginia, 2016 Society of Economic Dynamics Meetings, North Carolina State
University, Tsinghua University, Bank of Canada, Princeton University, and Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco for helpful discussions. Karen Zhong provided outstanding research
assistance. The current version of this paper draws heavily from the two unpublished manuscripts
``What We Learn from China's Rising Shadow Banking: Exploring the Nexus of Monetary
Tightening and Banks' Role in Entrusted Lending'' and ``China Pro-Growth Monetary Policy and
Its Asymmetric Transmission.'' The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, the Federal Reserve System, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Kaiji Chen, Jue Ren, and Tao Zha. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Nexus of Monetary Policy and Shadow Banking in China
Kaiji Chen, Jue Ren, and Tao Zha
NBER Working Paper No. 23377
May 2017, Revised May 2018
JEL No. E02,E5,G11,G12,G28
ABSTRACT
We estimate the quantity-based monetary policy system in China. We argue that China's rising
shadow banking was inextricably linked to banks' balance-sheet risk and hampered the
effectiveness of monetary policy on the banking system during the 2009-2015 period of monetary
policy contractions. By constructing two micro datasets at the individual bank level, we
substantiate this argument with three empirical findings: (1) in response to monetary policy
tightening, nonstate banks actively engaged in intermediating shadow banking products; (2) these
banks, in sharp contrast to state banks, brought shadow banking products onto the balance sheet
via risky investments; (3) bank loans and risky investment assets in the banking system respond
in opposite directions to monetary policy tightening, which makes monetary policy less effective.
We build a theoretical framework to derive the above testable hypotheses and explore
implications of the interaction between monetary and regulatory policies.
Kaiji Chen Tao Zha
Department of Economics Emory University
Emory University 1602 Fishburne Drive
Atlanta, GA 30322 Atlanta, GA 30322-2240
chen.kaiji@gmail.com and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
and also NBER
Jue Ren tzha@emory.edu
Emory University
Department of Economics
1602 Fishburne Drive
Atlanta, GA 30322-2240
jue.ren@emory.edu

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA 1
I. Introduction
In the aftermath of an unprecedented stimulus of multitrillion RMBs injected by the
Chinese government to combat the 2008 financial crisis, the People’s Bank of China (PBC)
pursuedcontractionarymonetarypolicybytighteningtheM2supplybetween2009and2015.
The policy of persistent monetary tightening, which aimed to contract the credit supply that
had soared during the stimulus period, achieved the expected outcome of a simultaneous fall
of M2 supply and bank loans (top left panel of Figure 1). During the same period, however,
shadowbankingloansroserapidly(toprightpanelofFigure1). Theshareofshadowbanking
loans in the sum of shadow banking loans and bank loans increased steadily to around 20%
in 2013-2015 (bottom left panel of Figure 1).
In this paper, we establish empirical evidence that contractionary monetary policy dur-
ing 2009-2015 in China, although exerting an expected effect on traditional bank loans,
stimulated shadow banking and encouraged banks to bring shadow banking products onto
their balance sheets in the form of risky nonloan assets. We advance a theory to explain
why banks, in response to contractionary monetary policy, have an incentive to circumvent
banking regulations by increasing nonloan assets. Both empirical evidence and theoretical
analysis demonstrate that the effectiveness of monetary policy on the total credit in the
banking system was severely hampered by the rise of shadow banking.
Specifically, we make four distinctive contributions. First, we provide institutional details
of China’s quantity-based monetary system, its regulations on commercial banks, and the
relationship between shadow banking and traditional banking. One unique feature of mon-
etary policy in China is to use M2 growth as the intermediate target to support growth of
gross domestic product (GDP) beyond annually targeted GDP growth. In fact, M2 growth
has been the only intermediate target used on a quarterly basis by the central government
since 2000.
We find that China’s quantity-based monetary policy interacted with two major regula-
tionsspecifictoChina’sbankingsystemtoinfluencebanklending. Oneregulationisthelegal
ceiling on the ratio of bank loans to bank deposits imposed by the PBC on each commercial
bank, which we call the LDR regulation, where LDR stands for the loan-to-deposit ratio; the
other regulation, issued by the Chinese Banking Regulatory Commission (CBRC), prohibits
commercial banks from expanding bank loans to risky industries such as real estate, which
we call the safe-loan regulation. The LDR regulation controls the quantity of bank lending
and the safe-loan regulation controls the quality of bank lending.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA 2
We also find that one of the most unique characteristics in China’s banking system is an
institutional division of state and nonstate commercial banks. State banks are owned by
the central government and the remaining commercial banks are nonstate banks. Nonstate
banks as a whole represent almost half the size of the entire banking system. State banks,
directly controlled by the central government, are part of the government and thus adhere to
the government’s own policy against actively bringing shadow banking products onto their
balance sheets. This is not true of nonstate banks, however. Between 2009 and 2015, con-
tractionary monetary policy gave nonstate banks a strong incentive to take advantage of the
lax regulatory environment of shadow banking by first increasing shadow banking activities
off balance sheet and then bringing shadow banking products into a special investment cate-
gory on the asset side of their balance sheets. This special category, called account-receivable
investment (ARI), is not subject to the LDR and safe-loan regulations.
To test whether nonstate banks behave differently than state banks in their responses
of shadow banking activities to changes in monetary policy, it is essential to estimate the
existing quantity-based monetary policy rule and obtain an exogenous M2 growth series
usable for our subsequent empirical analysis. The estimated monetary policy rule is based
on China’s institutional facts. It is tractable in the spirit of Taylor (1993, p.197) “to preserve
theconceptofapolicyruleeveninanenvironmentwhereitispracticallyimpossibletofollow
mechanically the algebraic formulas economists write down to describe their preferred policy
rules.” The estimation of both endogenous and exogenous components of China’s monetary
policy constitutes a second contribution of this paper.
As a third contribution of the paper, we construct two micro datasets at the level of
individual banks and use these data to shed light on the disparate responses of shadow
banking activities conducted by state versus nonstate banks to changes in monetary policy.
The first dataset, named the entrusted loan dataset, covers new entrusted loans between
nonfinancial firms for the period 2009-2015 during which entrusted lending was the most
important part of shadow banking in China and grew rapidly relative to bank loans (bottom
rightpanelofFigure 1). Thedatasetidentifiesthenameofafinancialtrusteethatfacilitated
each entrusted loan, which is crucial for our subsequent panel regression analysis. We follow
Jim´enez, Ongena, Peydr´o, and Saurina (2014) and control for bank-specific attributes such
as LDR, size, liquidity, and profitability in our regressions. We find that entrusted lending
funneled by nonstate banks rose significantly in response to contractionary monetary policy,
while there is no such evidence for state banks.