NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RISK MANAGEMENT WITH SUPPLY CONTRACTS
Heitor Almeida
Kristine Watson Hankins
Ryan Williams
Working Paper 23331
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23331
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2017
This work was supported by the GARP Risk Management Research Award Program. We would
like to thank Sohnke M Bartram, Martijn Cremers, Andrea Gamba, Jose-Miguel Gaspar, Gerald
Gay, Michael Faulkender, Jayant Kale, Yelena Larkin, Omesh Kini, Harley (Chip) Ryan, Mark
Weinstein, and participants at Bristol University, University of Exeter, Florida State University,
HEC Paris, Ivey School of Business, Lehigh University, Michigan State University, the
University of Arizona, University of Florida, University of Iowa, New York University, the
University of Southern California Finance Organization and Markets Conference, UK/UT Jim
and Jack Conference, LUBRAFIN, 2016 Hannover Commodity Markets conference, 2016 EFMA
meetings, and 2017 AFA meetings for thoughtful comments. Send correspondence to Kristine
Watson Hankins, Gatton College of Business and Economics, University of Kentucky; telephone:
(859)257-7726. E-mail: kristine.hankins@uky.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Heitor Almeida, Kristine Watson Hankins, and Ryan Williams. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Risk Management with Supply Contracts
Heitor Almeida, Kristine Watson Hankins, and Ryan Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 23331
April 2017
JEL No. G32
ABSTRACT
Purchase obligations are forward contracts with suppliers and are used more broadly than traded
commodity derivatives. This paper is the first to document that these contracts are a risk
management tool and have a material impact on corporate hedging activity. Firms that expand
their risk management options following the introduction of steel futures contracts substitute
financial hedging for purchase obligations. Contracting frictions – such as bargaining power and
settlement risk – as well as potential hold-up issues associated with relationship-specific
investment affects the use of purchase obligations in the cross-section as well as how firms
respond to the introduction of steel futures.
Heitor Almeida Ryan Williams
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Eller College of Management
515 East Gregory Drive, 4037 BIF McClelland Hall
Champaign, IL, 61820 The University of Arizona
and NBER 1130 E. Helen Street
halmeida@illinois.edu Tucson, AZ 85721-0108
rwilliams@email.arizona.edu
Kristine Watson Hankins
University of Kentucky
Lexington, KY 40506
kristine.hankins@uky.edu

How do firms manage risk? Hedging is potentially beneficial in a world with capital
market frictions such as taxes and agency issues (Smith and Stulz, 1985; Froot, Scharfstein, and
Stein, 1993). But empiricists have struggled to map the rich theoretical predictions regarding risk
management to observed firm hedging behavior. One potential issue is that theory papers often
examine “hedging” without specifying how firms hedge (e.g., DeMarzo and Duffie, 1995) while
most empirical analysis focuses on traded derivatives usage (e.g., futures) as their proxy for
corporate hedging (e.g., Nance, Smith, and Smithson, 1993; Graham and Rogers, 2002;
Purnanandam, 2008).
In this paper, we focus on a common yet overlooked hedging tool – the purchase
obligation. Purchase obligations are non-cancelable contracts with suppliers for materials or
services, generally over one to three year horizons. The vast majority of these contracts use fixed
price provisions. Thus, purchase obligations also are a forward contract with properties similar to
a tradable derivative. They can minimize input price volatility like a future, but these contracts
are not restricted to exchange-traded products. Accounting regulations treat a purchase obligation
(PO) as an off-balance sheet liability and, starting in 2003, the downstream firm must disclose
upstream purchase obligations with other major contractual obligations such as long term debt,
capital leases, and operating leases.
We construct a comprehensive database of the use of purchase obligations and traded
derivatives by non-financial Compustat firms and document some key empirical regularities
regarding their usage. Of non-financial firms in Compustat during our sample period of 2003–
2010, 21.5% use purchase obligations and 15.8% use traded commodity derivatives. PO use
varies by industry as well as by firm; manufacturers can contract on raw material inputs whereas
retailers often contract on merchandise. Firms report up to 5 years of future purchase obligations
1

and the average (median) firm using contracts reports an average contract length of 2.49 years (3
years). Moreover, these purchase obligations are economically significant contracts, averaging
11.8% of total assets and 21.4% of COGS for firms that use them.
At least some firms appear to recognize that purchase obligations are a substitute for
futures contracts. For instance, Starbucks reports that 90% of its purchase obligations are green
coffee (unroasted coffee beans) purchase commitments and they report in the Commodity Price
Risk section of its 2014 10-K filing:
“We purchase commodity inputs, including coffee, dairy products and diesel that
are used in our operations and are subject to price fluctuations that impact our
financial results. We use a combination of pricing features embedded within
supply contracts and financial derivatives to manage our commodity price
risk exposure” (emphasis added)
Firms, however, may have additional motivations to use purchase obligations. Supply contracts
can help avoid hold-up problems between suppliers and customers (e.g., Williamson, 1985;
Joskow, 1987; Costello, 2013). Thus, documenting the broad usage of POs does not sufficiently
prove that they have an important risk management role.
To identify the risk management role of POs, we explore the introduction of steel futures
products on the London Metals Exchange and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange in mid-2008.
The availability of steel futures should have no impact on purchase obligation (PO) use if POs
are not used for risk management purposes. We find that firms with an exposure to steel
simultaneously increase their financial hedging and decrease their use of purchase obligations
when the new derivative is introduced, relative to a control group of similar firms that do not
benefit from the introduction of steel derivatives. To our knowledge, this represents the first
evidence that purchase obligations are used as a hedging tool.
2