NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IS POST-CRISIS BOND LIQUIDITY LOWER?
Mike Anderson
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 23317
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23317
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2017, Revised April 2017
We are grateful for discussions with Andrei Gonçalves, Kewei Hou, Sergey Chernenko, and
Ingrid Werner, and for comments from Hank Bessembinder, Darrell Duffie, Kairong Xiao, and
seminar participants at Carnegie-Mellon University and at The Ohio State University. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23317.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Mike Anderson and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Is Post-Crisis Bond Liquidity Lower?
Mike Anderson and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 23317
April 2017, Revised April 2017
JEL No. G12,G18,G28
ABSTRACT
Price-based liquidity metrics are better in 2013-2014 for small trades and large high-yield bond
trades, but not for large investment grade bond trades, relative to before the crisis, and are better
for all bond types and trade sizes relative to 2010-2012. This evidence contrasts with the widely-
held view among practitioners that liquidity has worsened. However, turnover falls sharply after
the crisis compared to before the crisis, which is consistent with investors having more difficulty
completing trades on acceptable terms and supports the practitioner view. A frequent concern is
that post-crisis liquidity could be low when markets are stressed. We consider three stress events:
extreme VIX increases, extreme bond yield increases, and downgrades to high yield. We find
evidence that liquidity is lower after the crisis for extreme VIX increases. However, we find no
evidence that liquidity is worse for idiosyncratic stress events after the crisis than before the
crisis. Our results emphasize the importance of considering how liquidity reacts to shocks which
can affect financial stability and of taking into account the information from non-price liquidity
metrics.
Mike Anderson
4400 University Drive
Enterprise Hall 237
Fairfax , VA 22030
mander19@gmu.edu
René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu

The global financial crisis was followed by many important changes in laws and regulations affecting the
financial system. The Basel capital requirements were changed for market risk through Basel 2.5 and then
through Basel 3. The Basel framework added liquidity requirements. U.S. banks were also affected by
Dodd-Frank. These changes impacted the return of market-making activities and, in the case of the Volcker
rule, potentially limited such activities. Further, investment banks also became subject to Basel capital
requirements through acquisitions or conversion to bank holding company status. As a result, it has become
more costly for them to hold risky securities. With such changes, we would expect the provision of market-
making services to have fallen and for banks to be especially reluctant to hold riskier bonds on their books.
A decrease in the provision of market-making services should lead to an increase in the cost of trading and
a decrease in liquidity.
Though lower participation in market-making activities by dealers should reduce liquidity, markets
have evolved since the crisis to make matching buyers and sellers more efficient and new sources of
liquidity have appeared and grown. Electronic trading for corporate bonds has become more important. For
instance, the percentage of trading volume of investment grade corporate bonds on electronic platforms
doubled between 2013 and 2016 and, in early 2016, more than 1,700 corporate bonds had two-way quotes
on electronic platforms almost every day.1 Pre-trade transparency has increased sharply. Buy-side firms
have become more active as liquidity providers. All-to-all platforms, which enable the buy-side to offer
liquidity, have become more important. Hence, it could be that, while traditional large dealers are not
providing as much liquidity as they used to, changes in the structure of markets and technological progress
have offset the change in their behavior to some extent.
In this paper, we investigate whether liquidity in the corporate bond market has fallen and whether it
has fallen more for bonds for which regulatory changes have made the provision of market-making services
especially more costly. We first consider traditional metrics of bond market liquidity, namely a price
pressure measure (the Amihud illiquidity measure), the effective bid-ask spread, the cost of a roundtrip
1See “Remarks at the North American Electronic Bond Trading Forum,” by Jonathan S. Sokobin, FINRA.
1

transaction, turnover, the number of trades per day, and the percentage of days without trades. If regulatory
changes decreased liquidity, we would expect our metrics to worsen as these changes took effect, but much
more so for the riskier bonds. The opposite seems to have taken place for price-based metrics. We find that,
while our metrics provide evidence that liquidity is worse using these metrics over the period 2010-2012
relative to before the crisis, these metrics are marginally better than before the crisis for the period 2013-
2014. In other words, liquidity measured using price-based metrics improved as the regulatory changes
were implemented. Further, the regulatory changes that were implemented since the crisis should have had
a more adverse impact on riskier bonds, as these changes, at least early on, increased capital requirements
more for riskier bonds. Yet, the evidence surprisingly shows that liquidity metrics have improved for such
bonds, but some metrics have worsened for investment grade bonds.2
A fundamental difficulty with measuring liquidity is that price-based measures only capture liquidity
for completed trades. When a bond’s liquidity is poor, an investor on average must offer a higher premium
to buy the bond or accept a larger discount to sell the bond. As a result, some investors will not trade in
order to avoid the higher trading cost resulting from lower liquidity. These trades that do not take place do
not show up in price-based liquidity metrics and hence do not worsen these metrics. However, when trades
are no longer executed because of a decrease in liquidity, turnover is lower, which we observe in the data.
Turnover is sharply lower after the crisis compared to its pre-crisis level and is lower in 2013-2014 than in
2010-2012. This evidence is surprising in light of the increase in the number of trades per day and the
decrease in the number of days without trading we document. We call this the turnover puzzle, in that more
trades and somewhat better price-based liquidity metrics would predict higher turnover, not lower. To
reconcile the increase in the number of trades with the decrease in turnover, trade size must have fallen.
2 Such a result could be understood if the marginal capital requirement for banks is the leverage ratio, as this ratio
makes it relatively more expensive to hold safe assets. A 3% supplementary leverage ratio was put in place in 2013
for the institutions with more than $250 billion in assets or more than $10 billion in on-balance sheet foreign
exposure. In 2014, an enhanced supplementary leverage ratio was finalized for the 8 US G-SIBs. The
implementation of this supplementary leverage ratio starts after the end of our sample period and does not become
fully effective until January 1, 2018. See “Why are big banks offering less liquidity to bond markets?” by Darrell
Duffie, Forbes, March 11, 2016, for the impact of the supplementary leverage ratio on dealers.
2