NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TURBULENCE, FIRM DECENTRALIZATION AND GROWTH IN BAD TIMES
Philippe Aghion
Nicholas Bloom
Brian Lucking
Raffaella Sadun
John Van Reenen
Working Paper 23354
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23354
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2017, Revised October 2017
We would like to thank Ufuk Akcigit, Laura Alfaro, Richard Blundell, Erik Brynjolfsson, Gabriel
Chodorow-Reich, Bob Gibbons, Rebecca Henderson, Bengt Holmstrom, Caroline Hoxby, Guy
Laroque, Eddie Lazear, Kristina McElheran, Antoinette Schoar, David Thesmar, Jean Tirole and
participants in seminars in the AEA, UC Berkeley, Columbia, Harvard, MIT, Northwestern,
Stanford and Toronto for helpful discussions. The Economic and Social Research Centre,
European Research Council, Kauffman Foundation, National Science Foundation and Sloan
Foundation have all provided generous funding. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau or
the National Bureau of Economic Research. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no
confidential information is disclosed.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Philippe Aghion, Nicholas Bloom, Brian Lucking, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van
Reenen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Turbulence, Firm Decentralization and Growth in Bad Times
Philippe Aghion, Nicholas Bloom, Brian Lucking, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen
NBER Working Paper No. 23354
April 2017, Revised October 2017
JEL No. E0
ABSTRACT
What is the optimal form of firm organization during “bad times”? We present a model of
delegation within the firm to show that the effect is ambiguous. The greater turbulence following
macro shocks may benefit decentralized firms because the value of local information increases
(the “localist” view). On the other hand, the need to make tough decisions may favor centralized
firms (the “centralist” view). Using two large micro datasets on firm decentralization from ten
OECD countries and US administrative data, we find that firms that delegated more power from
the Central Headquarters to local plant managers prior to the Great Recession out-performed their
centralized counterparts in sectors that were hardest hit by the subsequent crisis. Using direct
measures of turbulence based on product churn and stock market volatility, we show that the
localist mechanism dominates. This conclusion is robust to alternative explanations such as
managerial fears of bankruptcy and changing coordination costs. Although delegation is better
suited to some environments than others, countries with more decentralized firms (like the US)
weathered the 2008-09 Great Recession better: these organizational differences account for about
15% of international differences in post-crisis GDP growth.
Philippe Aghion Raffaella Sadun
College de France Harvard Business School
3 Rue D'Ulm Morgan Hall 233
75005 Paris Soldiers Field
FRANCE Boston, MA 02163
paghion@fas.harvard.edu and NBER
rsadun@hbs.edu
Nicholas Bloom
Stanford University John Van Reenen
Department of Economics Department of Economics, E62-518
579 Serra Mall MIT
Stanford, CA 94305-6072 77 Massachusetts Avenue
and NBER Cambridge, MA 02139
nbloom@stanford.edu and NBER
vanreene@mit.edu
Brian Lucking
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
blucking@stanford.edu

Turbulence, Firm Decentralization and Growth in Bad Times
Philippe Aghion∗, Nicholas Bloom†, Brian Lucking‡, Ra(cid:27)aella Sadun(cid:159)and John Van Reenen¶
October 25, 2017
Abstract
Whatistheoptimalformof(cid:28)rmorganizationduring(cid:16)badtimes(cid:17)? Wepresentamodelofdelegation
withinthe(cid:28)rmtoshowthatthee(cid:27)ectisambiguous. Thegreaterturbulencefollowingmacroshocksmay
bene(cid:28)t decentralized (cid:28)rms because the value of local information increases (the (cid:16)localist(cid:17) view). On the
other hand, the need to make tough decisions may favor centralized (cid:28)rms (the (cid:16)centralist(cid:17) view). Using
twolargemicrodatasetson(cid:28)rmdecentralizationfromtenOECDcountriesandUSadministrativedata,
we(cid:28)ndthat(cid:28)rmsthatdelegatedmorepowerfromtheCentralHeadquarterstolocalplantmanagersprior
totheGreatRecessionout-performedtheircentralizedcounterpartsinsectorsthatwerehardesthitbythe
subsequentcrisis. Usingdirectmeasuresofturbulencebasedonproductchurnandstockmarketvolatility,
weshowthatthelocalistmechanismdominates. Thisconclusionisrobusttoalternativeexplanationssuch
asmanagerialfearsofbankruptcyandchangingcoordinationcosts. Althoughdelegationisbettersuited
to some environments than others, countries with more decentralized (cid:28)rms (like the US) weathered the
2008-09 Great Recession better: these organizational di(cid:27)erences account for about 15% of international
di(cid:27)erences in post-crisis GDP growth.
JEL No. O31, O32, O33, F23
Keywords: decentralization, growth, turbulence, Great Recession
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank Ufuk Akcigit, Laura Alfaro, Richard Blundell, Erik
Brynjolfsson, Gabriel Chodorow-Reich, Bob Gibbons, Rebecca Henderson, Bengt Holmstrom, Caroline
Hoxby,GuyLaroque,EddieLazear,KristinaMcElheran,AntoinetteSchoar,DavidThesmar,JeanTirole
andparticipantsinseminarsintheAEA,UCBerkeley,Columbia,Harvard,MIT,Northwestern,Stanford
and Toronto for helpful discussions. The Economic and Social Research Centre, European Research
Council, Kau(cid:27)man Foundation, National Science Foundation and Sloan Foundation have all provided
generous funding.
Disclaimer: Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarilyrepresenttheviewsoftheU.S.CensusBureau. Allresultshavebeenreviewedtoensurethat
no con(cid:28)dential information is disclosed.
∗CollegedeFrance,LSEandCentreforEconomicPerformance,
†StanfordUniversity,CentreforEconomicPerformance,NBERandCEPR
‡StanfordUniversity.
(cid:159)HarvardUniversity,CentreforEconomicPerformance,NBERandCEPR
¶MIT,CentreforEconomicPerformance,NBERandCEPR
1

1 Introduction
What makes (cid:28)rms more resilient to large negative macro shocks? A recent literature has focused on (cid:28)rms’
technological, (cid:28)nancial and governance structures as possible factors a(cid:27)ecting their ability to cope with
1
sudden changes in external conditions , but much less is known about the role of (cid:28)rm organization. This
paper focuses on how a speci(cid:28)c organizational aspect of a (cid:28)rm: the extent to which decision-making is
decentralized down from headquarters to plant managers, a(cid:27)ects performance during an economic crisis.
This has particular relevance following the Great Recession of 2009-08, which generated a debate over
how best to organize for (cid:16)recovery and survival(cid:17). One common argument is that centralized (cid:28)rms were best
equippedtosurvivetherecessionbecauseoftheimportanceofcostcuttingwhich,duetocon(cid:29)ictinginterests
withinthe(cid:28)rm,isbestdirectedfromcorporateheadquarters(the(cid:16)centralist(cid:17) view). Analternative(cid:16)localist(cid:17)
viewisthatrecessionsareperiodsofrapidchange,andbeingdecentralizedprovides(cid:28)rmswiththenecessary
2
(cid:29)exibility to respond to turbulent business conditions.
To investigate these issues, we created two new panel datasets with explicit measures of decentralization
measured prior to the Great Recession. One dataset, the World Management Survey (WMS) has (cid:28)rm
level data across ten OECD countries (France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Japan, Poland, Portugal Sweden,
the UK and US). The other dataset, the Management and Organizational Practices Survey (MOPS), is an
3
establishment level dataset covering U.S. manufacturing plants. which we constructed in partnership with
the Census Bureau. We combine these datasets with (cid:28)rm and plant performance data before and after the
2009-08 crisis.
In order to guide the empirical analysis, we develop a model of (cid:28)rm decision-making building on the
Aghion and Tirole (1997) approach. The model illustrates two countervailing e(cid:27)ects of decentralization on
(cid:28)rm performance during a crisis. On the one hand, a crisis is more likely to reduce the level of congruence
between the CEO and the plant manager(cid:21)for example, tough decisions on closing down projects and laying
o(cid:27) sta(cid:27) will be resisted by local managers. At the same time, however, a crisis can also increase turbu-
lence/uncertainty, thus making local information more valuable. In this case, a crisis would actually make
decentralizationmoreattractive,sinceitenables(cid:28)rmstobetterunderstandandadapttotheturbulentbusi-
nessenvironment. Thisresultisakintothoseemergingfromawideclassofmodelswherehigherturbulence
and uncertainty increase the value of local knowledge and the bene(cid:28)ts of decentralization. The net e(cid:27)ect of
1Forexample,seeAghion,Askenazy,Berman,Cette,andEymard(2012)ontechnology;Chodorow-Reich(2014)on(cid:28)nancial
structureandAlfaroandChen(2012)orD’Aurizio,OlivieroandRomano(2015)ongovernance.
2Support for these starkly di(cid:27)erent views can be found, for example, in reports by the Economist Intelligence Unit. In
the depths of the Great Recession in June 2009 they wrote in favor of centralization during the crisis: (cid:16)Firms should be
centralizingtheirdecision-makingprocesses. [...] Inarecessioninvestmentsandotherdecisionsarescrutinizedmorecarefully
by senior management and a greater emphasis is placed on projects that provide bene(cid:28)ts across the enterprise rather than
individual units.(cid:17) Yet three months later in August the same publication supported decentralization: (cid:16)Companies have to
deal with dramatically more uncertainty, complexity and ambiguity in the current recession. Success does not come from
centralization. True (cid:29)exibility arises when those who are closest to customers are empowered to respond to constant shifts in
demand,preferencesandattitudes.(cid:17)
3Weusetheterms(cid:16)establishment(cid:17) and(cid:16)plant(cid:17) interchangeablythroughout.
2