NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MONETARY POLICY AND GLOBAL BANKING
Falk Brauning
Victoria Ivashina
Working Paper 23316
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23316
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2017, Revised April 2020
Bräuning is with the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and Ivashina is with Harvard Business
School, NBER and CEPR. We thank seminar participants at the AFA 2017, Bank of Canada,
Banque de France, Copenhagen Business School, Duke University, European Central Bank,
FRIC Annual Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago,
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Federal Reserve Board, Global Research Forum on
International Macroeconomics and Finance 2016, IBEFA Summer Meeting 2016, IMF Spillover
Workshop, NBER Summer Institute 2016, Nova School of Business and Economics, UIUC,
University of Miami, University of Porto, and WCWIF 2016, for helpful comments. We are
particularly grateful to François Gourio, Stefan Nagel (editor), Ali Ozdagli, Joe Peek, Jeremy
Stein, Jenny Tang, Christina Wang, the anonymous referees, and our discussants Morten Bech,
Nicola Cetorelli, Stijn Claessens, Ricardo Correa, Linda Goldberg, Michael Hutchison, Jose
Lopez, Teodora Paligorova, and Skander Van den Heuvel, for detailed feedback. Botao Wu,
Kovid Puria, and Sam Tugendhaft provided remarkable research assistance. The views expressed
in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. There was no external financial support provided for this paper. Neither author has a
conflict of interest related to this research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23316.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Falk Brauning and Victoria Ivashina. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Monetary Policy and Global Banking
Falk Brauning and Victoria Ivashina
NBER Working Paper No. 23316
April 2017, Revised April 2020
JEL No. E44,E52,F31,G21
ABSTRACT
When central banks adjust interest rates, the opportunity cost of lending in local currency
changes, but—in absence of frictions—there is no spillover effect to lending in other currencies.
However, when equity capital is limited, global banks must benchmark domestic and foreign
lending opportunities. We show that, in equilibrium, the marginal return on foreign lending is
affected by the interest rate differential, with lower domestic rates leading to an increase in local
lending, at the expense of a reduction in foreign lending. We test our prediction in the context of
changes in interest rates in six major currency areas.
Falk Brauning
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
600 Atlantic Avenue
Boston, MA 02210
Falk.Braeuning@bos.frb.org
Victoria Ivashina
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 233
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
vivashina@hbs.edu

Foreign (“global”) banks play an important role in many countries. According to the Bank for
International Settlements (BIS), as of June 2015, European and Japanese banks’ claims on U.S.
nonbank firms were USD 1.61 and 0.72 trillion, respectively. DealScan data indicate that foreign
banks help originate close to a quarter of all syndicated corporate loans in the United States.
Similarly, U.S. banks are important lenders abroad: as of June 2015, U.S. banks held the equivalent
of USD 0.74 and 0.11 trillion in claims on European and Japanese nonbank companies,
respectively. More generally, it is estimated that foreign banks account for about 10% of the assets
of the French and Italian banking sectors (World Bank 2008).
Given the economic significance of global banks, questions have been raised about their role
in the propagation of economic shocks from one country to another. This is the first paper that
provides a framework that shows how monetary policy in one country affects loan supply in
different currencies through the balance sheet of global banks. A standard effect of monetary
policy is that, by setting the interest rate on reserve assets, it affects the opportunity cost of lending:
a higher domestic policy rate raises the required marginal rate of return on domestic lending. We
show that, if a global bank is capital constrained—that is, it needs to consider the allocation of a
fixed amount of equity to back lending in multiple currencies—monetary policy in one country
affects its loan supply in all currencies. This happens because, in equilibrium, marginal returns
(expressed in the same currency) on domestic and foreign lending have to be equal. We present a
model that formalizes this point and derives testable predictions that guide the empirical analysis.
Overall, the central insight of the paper is that global banks’ lending decisions in different
currencies are interlinked and respond to monetary policy shocks, foreign and domestic.
In addition to lending, banks have a global approach to their liquidity management: they prefer
to hold liquidity in countries where reserve assets, such as central bank reserves or government

bonds, carry a higher risk adjusted yield. Using the U.S. Call Report and BIS data, we show a
strong positive relationship between foreign reserve holdings and the difference in the interest on
excess reserves (IOER) rate between foreign and bank’s domestic market. While global liquidity
management is not essential to derive cross-currency effects of monetary policy on lending, given
that these liquidity flows are sizable and respond to monetary policy, we incorporate global bank’s
liquidity management in our model.
Our empirical results can be divided into two parts: (i) aggregate macro evidence and (ii) firm-
and loan-level micro evidence. In line with the central mechanism of the model, we show that
foreign banks in the United States that are headquartered in countries where the interest rate has
been lowered, decrease their lending to firms in the United States by up to 10% per 25-basis-point
increase in the IOER rate differential. The results are robust to using U.S. monetary policy shocks
and alternative measures of interest rate differentials. Using BIS data, we show that similar patterns
emerge in a cross-country setting: there is a decrease in foreign-currency cross-border claims on
foreign firms of 1.2% per 25-basis-point increase in the IOER rate differential between the foreign
currency and the currency of the banks’ home country. We estimate this effect after controlling for
concurrent movements in the spot exchange rate, and, consistent with our model predictions and
our findings for the U.S., the reduction of foreign lending is stronger once we take into account
the appreciation of the foreign currency.
Our second set of results is based on loan-level data, which are crucial for a tight empirical
identification of the mechanism at play. For this purpose, we employ data on syndicated loan
originations by global banks in six major currencies from 2000 to 2016. At the bank level, we find
that, in a given quarter, there is a larger contraction in credit in currencies that carry a higher IOER
differential with respect to the bank’s home country. With regard to lending volume, a 25-basis-
2