NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ARE MUTUAL FUND MANAGERS PAID FOR INVESTMENT SKILL?
Markus Ibert
Ron Kaniel
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Roine Vestman
Working Paper 23373
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23373
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2017
First draft: February 10, 2017. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial assistance from
grants obtained from the NYU Stern Center for Global Business and the Economy (2013), Simon
School of Business (2013), and Stockholm University. The research leading to these results has
received funding from the European Research Council under the European Union’s Seventh
Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) / ERC Grant Agreement no. [312842]. We are grateful
to Mohsan Bilal, Vadim Elenev, Annja Karlsson, Louise Lorentzon, Mikael Nordin, and Anh
Tran for excellent research assistance. We thank Petter Lundberg at SCB for assistance with our
data files. We also benefited from several conversations with current and former Swedish mutual
fund managers and owners of mutual fund companies. We thank Xavier Gabaix, Ralph Koijen,
Lubos Pastor, Andrei Simonov, Robert Stambaugh, Paul Tetlock, Jules van Binsbergen, Mindy
Zhang, and seminar participants at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, the University
of Pennsylvania's Wharton School, and Washington University at St. Louis for comments and
suggestion. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Markus Ibert, Ron Kaniel, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Roine Vestman. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Are Mutual Fund Managers Paid For Investment Skill?
Markus Ibert, Ron Kaniel, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Roine Vestman
NBER Working Paper No. 23373
April 2017
JEL No. G00,G11,G2,G23,G24,J3,J31,J33,J44
ABSTRACT
Compensation of mutual fund managers is paramount to understanding agency frictions in asset
delegation. We collect a unique registry-based dataset on the compensation of Swedish mutual
fund managers. We find a concave relationship between pay and revenue, in contrast to how
investors compensate the fund company (firm). We also find a surprisingly weak sensitivity of
pay to performance, even after accounting for the indirect effects of performance on revenue.
Firm-level revenues and profits add substantial explanatory power for compensation to manager-
level revenue and performance, highlighting the importance of the mutual fund firm.
Markus Ibert Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Swedish House of Finance Stern School of Business
SE-111 60 Stockholm New York University
Sweden 44 W 4th Street, Suite 9-120
markus.ibert@phdstudent.hhs.se New York, NY 10012
and NBER
Ron Kaniel svnieuwe@stern.nyu.edu
University of Rochester
Simon School of Business Roine Vestman
500 Wilson BLVD Stockholm University
Carol Simon Hall Department of Economics
Box 270100 (Room CS3-312) SE-106 91 Stockholm
ron.kaniel@simon.rochester.edu SWEDEN
roine.vestman@ne.su.se

1 Introduction
Mutual fund research has long taken a prominent role in finance, not only because a large and
growing number of investors delegate their investments in risky asset to fund companies, but also
because they offer a unique laboratory in which to test theories of incentive provision, performance
evaluation, and information acquisition. Indeed, few areas of the financial sector have better quality
data on prices (fund returns) and quantities (portfolio holdings and investor fund flows) to test such
theories. Except, one major piece of evidence has been missing: data on manager compensation. In
its absence, empirical analysis has focused on the relationship between mutual fund investors and
funds. It has analyzed how investors pay for the services of the fund–the management fee is typically
a fraction of assets under management– and how sensitive investor flows are to fund performance. But
fund companies delegate the actual management of the funds to employees, fund managers.
Little isknown aboutthe natureofthe compensation contract between owners (firm) andmanagers
and even less is known about the actual compensation managers earn. The implicit assumption in the
literature has been that there are no frictions in this second layer of delegation. This paper collects a
unique data set on mutual fund manager compensation to shed light on the determinants of manager
compensation. The goal is a better understanding of the economic relationship between the firm and
the managers they employ. This relationship, in turn, is important for investors delegating their assets
to such funds.
We find a lower sensitivity of pay to manager-level assets under management, compared to the
fixed fraction of AUM typically charged by funds. Second, we find weak sensitivity of pay to perfor-
mance. Third, we show that firm-level characteristics, which typically are ignored in the literature,
add substantial explanatory power for manager compensation.
We start from Morningstar data on the universe of mutual funds sold in Sweden, an economy with
a highly developed mutual fund industry. We link the names and tenure of the individuals managing
funds to tax records. The tax records provide annual labor income (which includes bonus payments)
and other forms of compensation, but also gives access to their demographics, education, and financial
income. For each manager and year, we connect compensation to the assets under management and to
the return on that manager’s portfolio of funds. This novel data set provides a unique vantage point
from which to study the determinants of manager compensation and the interplay between the fund
manager and the firm that employs her.
In the mutual fund industry the predominant contract between investors and funds is one where
fees are proportional to asset under management. Our first result shows that, while there is a strong
1

relationship between the labor income of the manager and the size of the funds under management,
the relationship is concave. When measuring size as fee revenue, we find an elasticity of compensation
to revenues of 0.15. A one percent increase in revenues generated by this manager increases her com-
pensation by 0.15%, implying there is far from complete pass through of fund revenues to managerial
compensation. The 0.15 point estimate implies that a 1% increase in revenue lowers the manager’s
share of revenue by 0.85%.
Theory suggests that a component of a fund manager’s pay should be directly tied to return
performance, especially when there is uncertainty regarding managers’ ability. Our second result
indicates that the relationship between pay and performance is quite weak. We define the abnormal
return on a fund as the gross (before fees) return in excess of the benchmark as stated in the fund’s
prospectus. Aonestandarddeviation increaseinabnormal returnperformanceincreases compensation
by 2.9%, ten times less than a standard-deviation increase in revenue. This modest relation is mostly
driven by talented managers on average generating higher returns and earning higher labor income
rather than time series variation for a given manager. Considering longer evaluation periods increases
the strength of the link between performance and subsequent pay. However, the economic magnitudes
remain modest and below the values predicted by the standard model of delegation of Berk and
Green (2004). The pay-performance sensitivity (PPS) increases once the components of revenue that
are correlated with current and past abnormal returns, such as fund flows, are accounted for when
computing the PPS. However, it remains economically small. The component of revenue that is
unrelated to past fund performance remains the dominant driver of pay.
Mutual fund companies manage multiple funds. This raises the possibility that manager pay
depends not only on the revenue and performance of the funds she is responsible for but also on
the revenue and performance generated by other funds in the same fund family (firm). Our analysis
uncovers, first, thattherearesystematicpaydifferencesacrossfirms. Second, thesensitivityofmanager
compensation to firm revenue is comparable to that of manager revenue. Third, firms with higher
profits pay significantly more. At the same time, profitability lowers the sensitivity of compensation to
manager revenues and increases that to performance. This evidence is consistent with a compensation
package that contains one component that depends on manager-level revenues and another component
that comes out of a firm-wide bonus pool. This bonus pool only exists when the firm makes a profit.
Pay-for-performance is only present inprofitable firms, but even there plays a small role in determining
compensation.
Our results are robust across investment categories and hold for a variety of other measures of
performance employed in the literature such as value added, CAPM alphas, and multi-factor alphas.
2