NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF ENERGY TAXES
William A. Pizer
Steven Sexton
Working Paper 23318
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23318
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2017
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by William A. Pizer and Steven Sexton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Distributional Impacts of Energy Taxes
William A. Pizer and Steven Sexton
NBER Working Paper No. 23318
April 2017
JEL No. H22,Q41,Q48
ABSTRACT
Despite popularity among economists for their efficiency, energy pollution taxes enjoy less
political support than standards-based regulation because of common perceptions that they
burden the poor relative to the rich. However, the literature on pollution tax incidence and
consumption surveys in Mexico, the United Kingdom, and the United States, suggest energy
taxes need not be as regressive as often assumed. This paper demonstrates that the incidence of
such taxes varies according to the energy commodities that are taxed, the physical, social and
climatic characteristics of jurisdictions in which they are implemented, and how the revenue is
used. It is also shown that the variation in household energy expenditure within income groups is
greater than variation across income groups in many cases. These horizontal equity impacts are
reviewed, as are their implications for policy making.
William A. Pizer
Sanford School of Public Policy
Duke University
Box 90312
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
billy.pizer@duke.edu
Steven Sexton
Sanford School of Public Policy
201 Science Drive, 184 Rubinstein Hall
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
steven.sexton@duke.edu

INTRODUCTION
Economists have long-favored pollution taxes and pollution permit trading as mechanisms to
control harmful emissions from energy production and consumption. These market-based
mechanisms are preferred to more prescriptive instruments like technology, emissions, and fuel
economy standards because they yield emissions reductions at least cost.1 Evaluation of the
efficiency characteristics of these policies and alternatives has occupied much of the theoretical
and empirical economics literature on pollution control.
By imposing opportunity costs on pollution emissions, these pollution pricing policies tend to
raise the price of energy according to the pollution attributed to the marginal fuel unit. It is this
transmission of the pollution cost into commodity prices that guarantees least-cost pollution
control. But, as with other public interventions, energy price increases can undermine equity
objectives, posing an equity-efficiency tradeoff familiar to public economics. In particular,
common belief holds that the poor will be relatively more burdened by energy price increases
than the wealthy. Absolute incidence analysis that considers tax burdens without regard to the
use of proceeds engenders such perceptions.
When equity concerns arise, it is often assumed they can be ameliorated by redistribution of the
substantial resource rents associated with inframarginal emissions, e.g., government revenues
from pollution taxes or permit auctions. Differential incidence analysis accounts for the
distribution of rents associated with environmental policy, which often dwarf net costs to society,
indicating a substantial capacity for policy to create winners and losers. Murray et al (2015), for
instance, estimate that the rents from proposed regulations of the U.S. power sector approach
$200 billion per year, whereas costs of the regulation are $0.5 billion. A tax on carbon dioxide
emissions in the U.S. of $15 per ton raises $102 billion in government revenues (Mathur &
Morris, 2014). And the global value of carbon pricing instruments in 2015 was $50 billion,
though this value has been greater by factors of 2 or more in years when permits traded at higher
prices (Kossoy et al., 2015). How these rents are allocated has significant distributional
implications (Metcalf 2009b). Energy taxes may impose substantially heterogeneous impacts
across income groups, and tax incidence is central to the political economy of energy taxation.
Consider, for instance, that a broad-based energy tax in the United Kingdom would raise taxes
on 16% of the direct expenditures of the poorest ten percent of households, but would tax only
4% of the direct expenditures of households in the wealthiest income decile (ONS, 2013).
Less frequently addressed than the distribution of energy tax burdens across income groups, i.e.,
vertical equity impacts, is the distribution of energy tax burdens within income groups, i.e.
horizontal equity impacts. Horizontal inequities may arise from heterogeneity in transportation
and housing patterns among households with comparable incomes. For instance, a low-income
household may reside in a coastal, city-center apartment, relying exclusively on public
transportation and never engaging an air conditioner to cool the home. A similarly poor
household might live in a single family home in a less temperate climate and rely upon a long car
1 We adopt the shorthand of referring to policies that tax or impose tradable quotas on pollution or polluting
production as “energy taxes”. This captures our primary interest in the distributional effect of higher energy prices
alongside the considerable rent or government revenue associated with market-based policies.
2

commute to the city center for work. The former, consuming less energy in the home and in
transportation, would be considerably less impacted by an energy tax than would be the latter.
Only a few papers address the horizontal equity of energy taxes. A theoretical justification for
horizontal equity concerns requires amendments to conventional social welfare functions. But to
the extent such inequities are large and of concern, they are more difficult to ameliorate than
vertical inequities because the most obvious proxy for unequal effects is the level of energy
consumption itself. Subsidies for energy-intensive, energy-taxed commodities or energy-
consumption-based transfers would mitigate variation in tax treatment within income groups at
the cost of reducing the price signal necessary to efficiently reduce pollution levels.
Amid growing interest in market-based pollution control policy, this paper proceeds to (1)
present basic data on household energy expenditures in select countries in order to demonstrate
heterogeneity across countries in average fuel expenditures by income deciles, and,
consequently, heterogeneity in regressivity of energy taxation; (2) to synthesize the broader
literature that addresses under which circumstances and to what degrees are energy taxes
regressive; and (3) to demonstrate within-income-decile heterogeneity in energy expenditures
that bear on horizontal equity. A discussion of policy implications concludes. Though we refer to
energy taxes throughout, we intend that this discussion is directly relevant to proposals to tax
carbon. As Metcalf (2009a) and others have observed, “A carbon tax is in large measure an
energy tax.” Energy combustion is the predominant source of human-caused emissions, and non-
energy sources are often not subject to regulation under existing and proposed climate policies
(European Environment Agency 2011).
VERTICAL EQUITY OF ENERGY TAXES
Energy taxes are commonly assumed to be regressive (e.g., Metcalf, 2009a; Rausch, Metcalf,
and Reilly, 2011; Williams, Gordon, Burtraw, Carbone, and Morgenstern, 2015), burdening the
poor more than the rich. That is, raising the cost of fuels and energy-intensive goods implies a
larger percent loss of overall consumption for poorer households because those goods often
comprise relatively large shares of low-income household budgets. As Fullerton (2011)
observed, these direct effects of policy may also be compounded by indirect and general
equilibrium “source-side” effects that further harm the poor via costlier consumption and lower
earnings. In particular, earnings among the poor will decline amid pollution pricing to the extent
firms substitute clean capital for labor. Such fears figure centrally in the political economy of
pollution control, and in particular, climate change mitigation. Recasting a challenge posed by
Baumol and Oates (1988) two decades earlier, Fullerton (2011) urged research “to determine
whether these fears are valid, and whether anything can be done about them—other than to
forego environmental improvements.”
Heeding the challenge of Baumol, Oates, and Fullerton, and the growing policy imperative to
understand the distributional impacts of alternative pollution control policies, a relatively recent
literature has begun to demonstrate that emissions taxes and tradable permits are not universally
3