NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ACCOUNTING FOR GROWTH IN THE AGE OF THE INTERNET:
THE IMPORTANCE OF OUTPUT-SAVING TECHNICAL CHANGE
Charles Hulten
Leonard Nakamura
Working Paper 23315
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23315
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2017, Revised September 2018
The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and should not be attributed to
any organization with which they are affiliated, including the Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Earlier
versions of this paper were presented at the meeting of the Society for Economic Measurement,
July 2016, in Thessaloniki, Greece; the Federal Reserve Day-Ahead Meeting on Productivity,
September 2016, Cincinnati; the 2017 ASSA meetings in Chicago; and at the CRIW Workshop at
the NBER Summer Institute, July 18, 2017. We thank Roger Betancourt, John Fernald, Brent
Moulton, Dan Sichel, Chad Syverson, and the participants at the various presentations for their
comments and suggestions on earlier drafts. Remaining errors and interpretations are our
responsibility.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23315.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Charles Hulten and Leonard Nakamura. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Accounting for Growth in the Age of the Internet: The Importance of Output-Saving Technical
Change
Charles Hulten and Leonard Nakamura
NBER Working Paper No. 23315
April 2017, Revised September 2018
JEL No. E01,O3,O4
ABSTRACT
We extend the conventional neoclassical production and growth framework, with its emphasis on
total factor productivity as the primary macroeconomic mechanism of innovation, to allow for
technical change that affects consumer welfare directly. Our model is based on Lancaster’s “New
Approach to Consumer Theory,” in which there is a separate consumption technology that
transforms goods, measured at production cost, into utility. This technology can shift over time,
allowing consumers to make more efficient use of each dollar of income. This is an output-saving
technical change, in contrast to the resource-saving technical change of the TFP residual. The
output-saving formulation is a natural way to think about the free information goods available
over the Internet, which bypass GDP and go directly to the consumer. It also leads to the concept
of expanded GDP (EGDP), the sum of conventional supply-side GDP and a willingness-to-pay
metric of the value of output-saving innovation to consumers. This alternative concept of GDP is
linked to output-saving technical change and incorporates the value of those technology goods
that have eluded the traditional concept. It thus provides a potentially more accurate
representation of the economic progress occurring during the digital revolution. One implication
of our model is that living standards, as measured by EGDP, can rise at a faster rate than real
GDP growth, which may shed light on the question of how the latter can decline in an era of rapid
innovation.
Charles Hulten
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
Room 3114, Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
hulten@econ.umd.edu
Leonard Nakamura
Economic Research
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
10 Independence Mall
Philadelphia PA 19106-1574
USA
leonard.nakamura@phil.frb.org

I. Introduction
The digital revolution presents an interesting paradox. On the one hand, the revolution has
transformed the economic landscape and has had a powerful impact on daily lives. On the other,
real GDP growth has slowed in recent years, despite the evident boom in information
technology. Per capita GDP growth declined from its 1995–2006 rate of 2.3 percent to 1.5
percent from 2010 to 2015. Various explanations of this seeming paradox have been offered. The
sharp and prolonged decline is seen by some as pointing to a more serious problem than a
prolonged recession. Robert Gordon (2016) has also argued that the decline reflects the relatively
anemic character of the digital revolution compared with earlier technological revolutions.
The disconnect between macroeconomic estimates of GDP and microeconomic analyses
of innovation is reminiscent of the famous Solow (1987) paradox: “You can see the computer
age everywhere but in the productivity statistics.” Solow’s remark was interpreted by many as a
mild rebuke to those enthusiasts who overhyped the impact of computers on productivity growth.
It could also be interpreted as an observation about the failure of national statistics to capture the
true impact of the computer revolution, a position championed by Alan Greenspan around the
same time.2 We are now in a similar debate about the later stages of the digital revolution, again
raising the question of whether there is less than meets the eye because there really is less of an
impact on true GDP than enthusiasts imagine, or whether the impacts are concealed by the
mismeasurement of real GDP.
We suggest that both may be true to some extent and that the impact of the digital
revolution cannot be properly assessed by focusing exclusively on how innovation affects the
supply side of the economy. There is a growing conviction in the recent literature on growth
accounting that the current round of innovation is not adequately captured by conventional real
GDP, particularly that which is available without a direct cost, and there is also an emerging
view that it may bypass GDP entirely.3
2 Greenspan’s concerns were first expressed in remarks at an FOMC meeting in late 1996 in regard to a staff
analysis of sectoral productivity trends (Corrado and Slifman, 1999).
3 In her book on the history of GDP, Coyle (2014) concludes that “gross domestic product is a measure of the
economy best suited to an earlier era” (p. 125). Feldstein (2017) reaches a similar conclusion: “A great deal of effort
and talent has been applied over past decades to the measurement of real income and inflation. These problems are
extremely difficult. In my judgment, they are far from being resolved, and as a result, substantial errors of unknown
2

How might this happen? The Internet accelerates the flow of information, and the
increased flow can increase the utility that a consumer derives from a given amount of income.
The mechanisms at work here include an improved consumer awareness of alternative options,
more timely access to information, and superior matching of goods to wants. An important
implication is that a general increase in the availability of information can increase consumer
utility without an increase in GDP. Moreover, the growth in consumer welfare over time may
reflect both improvements in the efficiency of production and improvements in the efficiency of
consumption. If this is true, a declining rate of real GDP growth may be consistent with the
perception of a vibrant technological environment and the microeconomic analysis that supports
it.
In any event, Koopman’s 1947 warning about the perils of measurement without theory
suggests that a theoretical framework is needed that at least allows for an alternative non-GDP
channel through which innovation operates. In this paper, we propose an extension of the
conventional production-function approach to growth analysis that permits consumers to make
more efficient use of each dollar of income and allows for the possibility that living standards
can be rising at a greater rate than is signaled by the growth rate of real GDP.
Our model is based on Lancaster’s “New Approach to Consumer Theory” (1966a), which
we adapt to the growth accounting problem in a way consistent with the assumptions of the
conventional TFP residual model. In the Lancaster framework, there is a separate consumption
technology that transforms the goods acquired from their producers, measured at production cost,
into consumption activities or commodities that give utility based on their characteristics. We
draw from the Lancaster model the idea that the utility function can shift over time as the
technology of consumption becomes more efficient. Efficiency can increase through costless
improvements in product quality that allow better products to be purchased for the same amount
of money or through an increase in effective information that allows the consumer to get more
utility from a given amount of expenditure.4 An outward shift in the consumption technology
size remain in our ability to measure both real output and inflation” (p. 161). Others point to the need to look beyond
GDP (as, for example, Ahmad and Schreyer (2016), Brynjolfsson et al (2017), Nakamura (2014), Nakamura,
Samuels and Soloveichik (2016), Hulten (2015), and Varian (2009, 2016).
4 Search engines provide a concrete example of how the Internet makes consumer choice more efficient. A
consumer faced with a choice between different products can often find information about product specifications
3