NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GLOBALIZATION AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
Wolfgang Keller
William W. Olney
Working Paper 23384
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23384
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2017, Revised June 2018
We are grateful to David Atkin, Andrew Bernard, Nick Bloom, Matilde Bombardini, Brian
Cadena, Gordon Hanson, Keith Head, Peter Kuhn, Rod Ludema, Terra McKinnish, Ferdinando
Monte, Nina Pavcnik, Steve Redding, Jan Schymik, Daniel Tannenbaum, Karen Helene Ulltveit-
Moe, and numerous other colleagues, as well as participants at a variety of presentations for
helpful comments and suggestions. This research was supported by NSF grant 1360207 (Keller).
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Wolfgang Keller and William W. Olney. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Globalization and Executive Compensation
Wolfgang Keller and William W. Olney
NBER Working Paper No. 23384
May 2017, Revised June 2018
JEL No. F14,J3
ABSTRACT
This paper finds that globalization is contributing to the rapid increase in executive compensation
over the last few decades. Employing comprehensive data on top executives at major U.S.
companies, we show that their compensation is increasing with exports and foreign direct
investment, as well as firm size and technology. Exogenous export shocks unrelated to
managerial decisions also increase executive compensation, and there is little evidence that this is
due to increasing market returns to talent. We do find that export shocks primarily affect
discretionary forms of compensation of more powerful executives at firms with poor corporate
governance, as one would expect if globalization has enhanced rent-capture opportunities.
Overall, these results indicate that globalization has played a more central role in the rapid growth
of executive compensation and U.S. inequality than previously thought.
Wolfgang Keller
Department of Economics
University of Colorado, Boulder
Boulder, CO 80309-0256
and NBER
Wolfgang.Keller@colorado.edu
William W. Olney
Department of Economics
Williams College
Williamstown, MA 01267
william.olney@williams.edu

1 Introduction
“American policy has allowed the winners to keep most of the spoils of trade and has given the losers
crumbs. This has exacerbated income inequality by raising the profits of big corporations and the salaries of
executives and other white collar professionals while leaving blue-collar and lower-skilled workers poorer”
New York Times Editorial April 2, 2016
Globalization and income inequality are currently two of the most important economic issues, with
dissatisfaction about both shaping elections throughout the world. While there is a common perception
that these issues are related (as illustrated by the quote above), research has tended to focus on the impact
of globalization on blue-collar workers. However, it is high incomes, especially the top 1%, that appear to
drive U.S. inequality, as Figure 1 shows:1
FIGURE 1
U.S. Income Shares
Top 1%
50s Decile
10s Decile
Notes: Kernel-weighted local polynomial smoothed data from World Wealth and
Income Database (WID; website: wid.world).
puorG
hcaE
ot
gniurccA
emocnI
latoT
fo
%
02
51
01
5
0
1978 1984 1990 1996 2002 2008 2014
Year
This paper examines the relationship between globalization and growing inequality by focusing on the
incomes of top business executives. By 2013, the typical top business executive of a Standard and Poor 500
Indexed firm earned $3.7 million a year, while Chief Executive Officers (CEOs) made $7.5 million a year,
1We also show the evolution of all U.S. income deciles in Appendix A.1.
2

putting both safely within the top 1% of all income earners.2 Moreover, non-finance business executives
are by far the largest share of the top 1% and are representative of the top 1% more generally (Bakija,
Cole, and Heim 2012, Kaplan and Rauh 2013). Furthermore, executive compensation is rising relatively
quickly, with CEO pay increasing more than eight times as fast as average worker pay over the last three
and half decades (Edmans, Gabaix, and Jenter 2017). We study business executives, but compensation in
other fields like entertainment and sports may be even more susceptible to globalization.3
While the income trends of Figure 1 are well-documented and exist in most high-income countries,
the causes of this growth in inequality have remained controversial.4 A variety of explanations have been
proposed, but globalization has rarely been a focus (e.g. Bertrand 2009). Thus, our first goal is to examine
whether globalization is contributing to the rapid increase in top incomes. Figure 2 shows that over
the last seventy years there has been a rapid increase in both executive compensation and exports (we
will also analyze foreign direct investment and imports). While gross domestic product (GDP) is also
trending upwards, executive compensation is more closely associated with exports. This does not imply
causality, but it does suggest that the question of whether globalization has contributed to rising executive
compensation is potentially important.
2The threshold depends to some extent on whether measures of total income or labor income are employed; Guvenen
and Kaplan (2017) discuss a number of major issues. Piketty, Saez, and Zucman (2017) note that $1.3 million is the average
pre-tax income of the top 1% in 2014, with the cutoff lower than that. Guvenen, Kaplan, and Song (2014) show that the 1%
wage and salary threshold in 2012 was $291,000 based on a 10% sample of Social Security Administration data, with wages
and salaries accounting for about 60% of total income for the top 1% individuals.
3Entertainment and sports superstars have benefited from the ability to reach large global audiences (e.g. Gordon and
Dew-Becker 2008).
4Appendix A.2 shows that the share of income going to the top 1% is increasing in most OECD countries. Gordon and
Dew-Becker (2008) and Edmans, Gabaix, and Jenter (2017) examine why the trend is quantitatively stronger in the US.
3