NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RISK OF LIFE INSURERS:
RECENT TRENDS AND TRANSMISSION MECHANISMS
Ralph S.J. Koijen
Motohiro Yogo
Working Paper 23365
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23365
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2017
A.M. Best Company owns the copyright to Best’s Statement File and Best’s Schedule S, which
we use with permission through their license agreement with the Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis. Koijen acknowledges financial support from the European Research Council (grant
338082). For comments and discussions, we thank Anders Malmstrom, Anna Paulson, Richard
Rosen, and seminar participants at the 2015 Conference on the Economics, Regulation, and
Systemic Risk of Insurance Markets at London Business School; the 2015 Banque de France-
ACPR Conference on Financial Regulation—Stability versus Uniformity; the 2015 CEPR
Financial Regulation Initiative Conference; the European Systemic Risk Board; and SIFR. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Ralph S.J. Koijen and Motohiro Yogo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Risk of Life Insurers: Recent Trends and Transmission Mechanisms
Ralph S.J. Koijen and Motohiro Yogo
NBER Working Paper No. 23365
April 2017
JEL No. G12,G21,G22
ABSTRACT
We summarize recent trends in risk exposure for U.S. life insurers from variable annuities,
shadow insurance, securities lending, and derivatives. We discuss how these sources of risk could
be amplified and transmitted to the rest of the financial sector and the real economy. More
complete and transparent financial statements are necessary to accurately assess the overall risk
mismatch in the insurance industry. We suggest ways to disclose relevant information and discuss
some implications for insurance regulation.
Ralph S.J. Koijen
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
rkoijen@stern.nyu.edu
Motohiro Yogo
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
myogo@princeton.edu

1. Introduction
The traditional sources of risk for life insurers are uncertainty in interest rates, aggregate
longevity or mortality, and policyholder behavior. Life insurers manage interest-rate risk
by investing a significant share of their assets in long-term bonds. They manage longevity
or mortality risk by offsetting annuities with life insurance. Uncertainty in policyholder
behavior may be more difficult to hedge, but life insurers have decades of experience to
assess the policyholder risk of traditional annuities and life insurance. Finally, life insurers
diversify these risks through unaffiliated (i.e., third-party) reinsurance.
Although modern life insurers are exposed to the traditional sources of risk, their risk
profile has become increasingly complex and opaque over the last decade because of two
developments. First, variable annuities with minimum-return guarantees, which are more
difficult to value and hedge than traditional products, have grown to be a significant share of
liabilities. Second, life insurers are now using sophisticated capital management tools such
as shadow insurance, securities lending, and derivatives.1
Evidence from the 2008 financial crisis suggests that variable annuities and securities
lending could cause significant risk mismatch. For example, the failure of AIG was not
only due to their credit default swaps, but also due to securities lending in their insurance
subsidiaries (McDonald and Paulson 2014; Peirce 2014). Like AIG, Hartford also received
government support through the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) because of sig-
nificant losses on their variable annuity business. Other companies that were involved in
variable annuities or securities lending (e.g., Allstate, Genworth Financial, and Prudential
Financial) also applied for TARP but were ultimately rejected or withdrew their application.
These examples refute the conventional wisdom that the insurance industry is immune from
macroeconomic shocks.
Building on these examples, Section 2 of this chapter summarizes recent trends in risk
1Shadow insurance is affiliated reinsurance (within the same financial group) between an operating com-
pany (i.e., a regulated and rated company that sell policies) and a shadow reinsurer (i.e., a less regulated
and unrated off-balance-sheet entity).
2

exposure from variable annuities, shadow insurance, securities lending, and derivatives. Our
analysis is based on public financial statements for U.S. life insurers from 2002 to 2013
and captives domiciled in Iowa for 2014.2 We see our analysis as a first step in identifying
risks that are potentially important to guide the next generation of insurance regulation. A
common theme that emerges from our analysis is risk concentration. That is, the aggregate
size of a given activity (e.g., shadow insurance) is dominated by a few large players, although
the composition of these players varies somewhat across activities. Another theme is that
while it is possible to identify exposure to individual risks, it is difficult to assess how they
aggregate to overall risk mismatch because of insufficient data.
Shadow insurance has grown from $11 billion in 2002 to $370 billion in 2013 (Koijen
and Yogo 2016). Shadow reinsurers usually report their liabilities under more favorable
accounting standards than operating companies from which they assume reinsurance, and
moreover, they are not subject to risk-based capital regulation. Thus, shadow insurance
potentially allows life insurers to reduce risk-based capital and increase leverage, which
is an important amplification mechanism for any risk mismatch. In general, we cannot
quantify the capital reduction that may arise from shadow insurance because the financial
statements of captives are not publicly available. However, the Iowa Insurance Division
(2014) recently released financial statements for captives in their domicile, and we find that
they have significantly negative equity when valued under the same accounting standards as
the operating companies.
Life insurers use derivatives to hedge risk mismatch between their investment assets and
insurance liabilities, including that which arises from minimum-return guarantees in variable
annuities. However, the use of derivatives could expose life insurers to basis risk because of
imperfect hedging and counterparty risk. Overall, we find that derivatives have consistently
reduced the volatility of accounting equity over the last decade. However, additional data
are necessary to fully assess the economic effectiveness of the hedging programs.
2See Appendix A for a description of the data.
3