NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LONG RUN GROWTH OF FINANCIAL TECHNOLOGY
Maryam Farboodi
Laura Veldkamp
Working Paper 23457
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23457
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2017
We thank Marios Angeletos, Markus Brunnermeier, Martin Eichenbaum, Sergio Rebelo, Steven
Strongin and Xavier Vives, seminar and conference participants at Cornell, Fordham, Maryland,
NYU, Princeton, Stanford, Yale and the SED conference, the NASDAQ DRP research day and
the LAEF conference on information in finance for comments. We thank Goldman Sachs for their
financial support through the GMI Fellowship program. We thank John Barry, Chase Coleman,
Matias Covarrubias, Roxana Mihet and Arnav Sood for their capable research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23457.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Maryam Farboodi and Laura Veldkamp. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Long Run Growth of Financial Technology
Maryam Farboodi and Laura Veldkamp
NBER Working Paper No. 23457
May 2017
JEL No. E2,G14
ABSTRACT
In most sectors, technological progress boosts efficiency. But financial technology and the
associated data-intensive trading strategies have been blamed for market inefficiency. A key
cause for concern is that better technology might induce traders to extract other's information
from order flow data mining, rather than produce information themselves. Defenders of these new
trading strategies argue that they provide liquidity by identifying uninformed orders and taking
the other side of their trades. We adopt the lens of long-run growth to understand how
improvements in financial technology shape information choices, trading strategies and market
efficiency, as measured by price informativeness and market liquidity. We find that unbiased
technological change can explain a market-wide shift in data collection and trading strategies. But
our findings also cast doubt on common wisdom. First, although extracting information from
order flow does crowd out production of fundamental information, this does not compromise
price informativeness. Second, although taking the opposite side of uninformed trades is typically
called "providing liquidity," the rise of such trading strategies does not necessarily improve
liquidity in the market as a whole.
Maryam Farboodi
26 Prospect Ave
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
farboodi@princeton.edu
Laura Veldkamp
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 W Fourth Street,Suite 7-77
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
lveldkam@stern.nyu.edu

“[I]ts all about getting as much customer order flow as possible ... The more trades these
sophisticatedmachinesgettosee,thebettertheybecome[at]makingmoneyfortheircreators.”
(Reuters, August 14, 2009)
In most sectors, technological progress boosts efficiency. But in finance, information technology and
the new data-intensive trading strategies it has spawned have been blamed for market volatility, illiquidity
and inefficiency. One reason financial technology is suspect is that its rise has been accompanied by a shift
in the nature of financial analysis and trading. Instead of “kicking the tires” of a firm, investigating its
business model or forecasting its profitability, many traders today engage in statistical arbitrage: They
search for “dumb money,” or mine order flow data and develop algorithms to profit from patterns in
others’ trades. It appears that technology makes it easier to detect what others know. If so, does financial
technology deter information production and reduce market efficiency?
Teasing out the effect of technology with data alone is difficult. Many other concurrent trends may
mask the effects. Furthermore, it is not obvious which predictions to test when technological change affects
equilibrium prices and behavior of all market participants. Therefore, we build a model to explore whether
improvementsindataprocessingnaturallyfavoronetypeofinformationprocessingoveranother, andwhat
consequences this has for market efficiency.
Our contribution is to sort out what are and what are not logical consequences of long-run informa-
tion technology growth on financial markets. The model explains why, with poor technology, uncovering
fundamental data is more profitable than mining order flow data, even if the technology for doing both
activities is equally poor. As information technology improves, the model teaches us that the incentive to
mine order flow data grows, and can crowd out fundamental data gathering. Contrary to popular wisdom,
this shift in data processing and in trading strategies does not necessarily compromise financial market
efficiency. Efficiency, as measured by price informativeness, continues to rise, even if fundamental data
gathering falls. Efficiency, as measured by the price impact of an uninformed trade (liquidity), stagnates.
Even though order flow data allows investors to identify uninformed trades, and even though investors use
this information to take the opposite side of these trades, market-wide liquidity may not improve.
To explore these forces, our model of the financial economy (in Section 1) requires the following fea-
tures. First, investors choose between styles of financial analysis, observe the data produced from that
analysis, and then invest. Financial analysis here means processing some type of data. One analysis style
is fundamental analysis, which involves processing earnings reports, business model simulations, macro
announcement data etc., that help to predict the future value of a firm. The other style of analysis is
extracting information from the trades (order flow) of others. Modeling the trade-off between analyzing
fundamentalandorderflowdataisnewandallowsustoexplorethemarketinefficiencyargument. Second,
we incorporate long-lived assets. This feature is essential to understand the long-run balanced growth of
fundamental and order flow analysis. Long-lived assets also create the future information risk that com-
promises market liquidity. Third, the driving force behind the model is technological change in the total
flow of data the sector can analyze or process. Of course, other trends, such as a decline in fees, entry
of new investors or assets, digitization, changes in covariance or improvements in order flow execution are
operating during this period as well. We want to take one simple trend, unbiased technological progress in
data processing, and see how much that alone can explain. This simple driving force offers a foundation
for exploring financial technology growth, to which many other ingredients and trends might eventually
1

be added. Finally, we also explore biased technological change that only improves the efficiency of order
flow analysis. While the dynamic patterns of information choices change, the basic message does not. The
surge in order flow mining does not undermine price informativeness, nor does it substantially improve
liquidity.
Our theoretical results examine how investors choose to use their growing capacity to process data.
The main mechanism underlying the results is that an increase in total information creates an endogenous
change in the relative value of fundamental versus order-flow information (Section 2). When technology
is poor, information is scarce, and it is very valuable to know about the fundamental value of an asset.
The alternative strategy of processing data to identify uninformed trades is not valuable when so little
of trade is well-informed. When more investors are well-informed, it becomes more valuable to identify
and trade against the remaining non-informational trades. Order flow analysis allows investors to target
these more profitable trades. In fact, for a range of technology levels, the more order flow analysis and
trading is done, the more profitable it is for other investors to pile in with yet more order flow analysis and
trading. This complementarity in trading strategies allows order flow trading to not only catch up with
trading on fundamental information, but actually to surpass it and crowd out much of the fundamental
analysis that was previously done at lower technology levels. And yet, in the long run, as the capacity
for data processing becomes large, fundamental analysis cannot disappear. If it did, there would be no
information to extract from order flow. Instead, eventually, order flow analysis and fundamental analysis
grow together, in proportion to each other.
When we turn to discuss the consequences of this shift in data analysis and trading strategies, it is
useful to see time paths. To produce these, we need to put some plausible numbers to the model. Section
3 calibrates the model to financial market data so that we can explore the growth transition path and its
consequences for market efficiency numerically.
The results on market efficiency offer two surprises. First, even as order flow analysis crowds out
fundamental analysis and reduces the discovery of information about the future asset value, price informa-
tiveness continues to rise. The reason is that order flow information allows order flow traders to extract
fundamental information from prices. That makes the order flow traders, and thus the average trader,
better informed about future asset fundamentals. When the average trader is better informed, prices are
more informative. This might lead one to conclude that price informativeness doesn’t measure financial
efficiency in the way we thought it did. But according to this commonly-used measure, market efficiency
continues to improve as technology progresses.
Second, even though order flow traders systematically take the opposite side of uninformed trades,
the rise of order flow trading does not enhance market liquidity (Section 4). This is surprising because
taking the opposite side of uninformed trades is often referred to as “providing liquidity.” This is one of
the strongest arguments that proponents of activities such as high-frequency trading use to defend their
methods. But if by providing liquidity, we really mean reduce the price impact of uninformed trade, the
rise of order flow trading may not accomplish that. The problem is not order flow trading today, but
the expectation of informed trading of any kind – fundamental or order flow – tomorrow. The fact that
tomorrow’s investors will be well-informed gives rise to future information risk. This is the risk posed by
information that is unknown today, will be learned tomorrow, and will move tomorrow’s price. Because
assets are long-lived, tomorrow’s price uncertainty is today’s payoff risk. So future data processing raises
2