NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TAX ADVANTAGES AND IMPERFECT COMPETITION IN AUCTIONS FOR MUNICIPAL
BONDS
Daniel Garrett
Andrey Ordin
James W. Roberts
Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
Working Paper 23473
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23473
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2017
We are very grateful for comments from Manuel Adelino, Pat Bayer, Vivek Bhattacharya, Lysle
Boller, Javier Donna, Josh Gottlieb, Ali Hortaçsu, Kei Kawai, Lorenz Kueng, Tong Li, Matt
Panhans, Jim Poterba, Mar Reguant, Stephen Ryan, Xun Tang, Owen Zidar, and numerous
seminar participants. Suárez Serrato is grateful for funding from the Kauffman Foundation. All
errors remain our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Daniel Garrett, Andrey Ordin, James W. Roberts, and Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Tax Advantages and Imperfect Competition in Auctions for Municipal Bonds
Daniel Garrett, Andrey Ordin, James W. Roberts, and Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
NBER Working Paper No. 23473
June 2017, Revised in October 2020
JEL No. D44,H71,L13
ABSTRACT
We study the interaction between tax advantages for municipal bonds and the market structure of
auctions for these bonds. We show that this interaction can limit a bidder’s ability to extract
information rents and is a crucial determinant of state and local governments’ borrowing costs.
Reduced-form estimates show that increasing the tax advantage by 3 pp lowers mean borrowing
costs by 9-10%. We estimate a structural auction model to measure markups and to illustrate and
quantify how the interaction between tax policy and bidder strategic behavior determines the
impact of tax advantages on municipal borrowing costs. We use the estimated model to evaluate
the efficiency of Obama and Trump administration policies that limit the tax advantage for
municipal bonds. Because reductions in the tax advantage in ate bidder markups and depress
competition, the resulting increase in municipal borrowing costs more than o sets the tax savings
to the government. Finally, we use the model to analyze a recent non-tax regulation that affects
entry into municipal bond auctions.
Daniel Garrett James W. Roberts
Suite 2328 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall Duke University
3620 Locust Walk Department of Economics
Philadelphia, PA 19104 213 Social Sciences Building
Danielgg@wharton.upenn.edu Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
Andrey Ordin j.roberts@duke.edu
Duke University
213 Social Sciences Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
Durham, NC 27705 Department of Economics
andrey.ordin@duke.edu Duke University
213 Social Sciences Building
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
jc@jcsuarez.com

1 Introduction
Stateandlocalgovernmentsfinancemulti-yearexpendituresbyissuingmunicipalbonds. In2017,outstand-
ing municipal debt totaled $3.7 trillion, and annual interest payments of $122 billion surpassed municipal
expenditures in other categories such as unemployment insurance, policing, and workers’ compensation.1
To reduce the borrowing costs of state and local governments, municipal bond income is excluded from
federal and, in most cases, state taxation. This tax advantage creates a tax expenditure for the federal and
state governments, which is forecast to cost the federal government alone more than $500 billion over the
coming decade, has been rising over time, and is mainly enjoyed by top-income individuals. Not surpris-
ingly, the tax advantage of municipal bonds has been the subject of a controversial policy debate. However,
in spite of the more than 120 proposals made since 1918 to eliminate or limit this tax advantage, including
in every budget proposal released by the Obama administration from 2012-2016, this favorable treatment
within the U.S. tax code has remained largely unchanged.2
We contribute to this debate by showing that the interaction of the tax advantages with the structure of
the municipal bond issuance market plays a crucial role in determining the effect of these tax advantages on
borrowing rates as well as the efficiency of this subsidy. To do so, we analyze a novel dataset on over 14,000
new issuances of municipal bonds sold at auction between 2008 and 2015.3 In these auctions, underwriters
bid for municipal debt and the winning bid determines the issuer’s borrowing cost. We exploit within-state
changes in taxes over time to show that tax advantages have large effects on the borrowing costs of state
and local governments. We further find that auction participation decisions of potential underwriters are
also appreciably sensitive to changes in tax advantages.
Our empirical findings motivate us to develop an auction model that clarifies the economic mechanisms
in this market. The model allows us to understand the link between the level of competition in the auctions
and the effect of the tax advantage on both the strategic decisions of underwriters and the borrowing
rates faced by bond issuers. Given the role of imperfect competition in setting borrowing rates, a model
with these features is essential to understanding the workings of this market and the effects of relevant
government policies. The model quantifies equilibrium markups and yields the valuable insight that the
impact of tax policy changes on these markups is a key driver of the overall effect on municipal borrowing
costs. We put the model to use by evaluating recent proposals by the Obama and Trump administrations
thataffectthetaxadvantageofmunicipalbondsandbyexaminingtheeffectsofarecentlyenactedInternal
Revenue Service (IRS) regulation of bond auctions with few participants. By highlighting the interactions
between taxes and imperfect competition, our results suggest the need for a fundamental reassessment of
the mechanism through which tax subsidies reduce borrowing costs and provide new evidence that tax
subsidies may be more efficient at subsidizing local borrowing costs than previously thought.
1SeeSIFMA(2020)forreportsanddataonthestateofthemarketformunicipalbondsandU.S.CensusBureau(2020)for
state and local government expenditures.
2SeeU.S.Treasury(2016)forafiscalyear2017forecastofthecostoftaxexpenditures. SeeZweig(2011),TaxPolicyCenter
(2015), and Greenberg (2016) for a summary of the debate surrounding tax advantages of municipal bonds.
3Auctions make up an important part of the municipal bond issuance market. Roughly half the municipal bonds issued
in any year are sold to underwriters via auctions, in which underwriters submit bids in the form of the interest rate they are
willing to charge an issuer, with the low bidder winning and the issuer paying the winner’s bid (interest rate). The other half
are mainly sold through negotiations. See Section 2 for details. We concentrate on the auction side of the municipal bond
market as the well-defined nature of the auctions enables us to more cleanly analyze how market structure and tax policy
interface with one another to determine the borrowing costs of state and local governments.
1

We begin our analysis by providing reduced-form evidence that a 1 percentage-point (pp) increase in
the personal income tax subsidy, or what we term the effective rate, leads to a decrease in borrowing
costs of 6.5-7 basis points. Given the mean borrowing rate is 2.14%, a 3 pp increase in the effective rate
would reduce borrowing costs by 9-10%. Our results imply a passthrough elasticity of the borrowing rate
to the tax advantage of 1.7-1.9.4 We also find that changes in the effective rate have sizable effects on
the competitiveness of these auctions. Specifically, a 4 pp increase in the tax advantage adds 2 additional
underwriters to the set of potential bidders who can potentially participate in the auction.5
The causal interpretation of these results relies on the identifying assumption that changes in the
effective rate are not driven by other factors that may spuriously correlate with borrowing costs. This
assumption is supported by several facts. First, variation in the effective rate is driven by both federal and
state tax changes and the interaction of the two due to the federal state and local tax (SALT) deduction.
Second, the vast majority of the auctions are held by sub-state municipalities that have no influence
over the effective rate. Finally, this result is robust to controlling for a number of potential confounders
includingdeterminantsofborrowingratesandeconomicconditionsofthemunicipalbondmarket. Ourmost
demandingspecificationidentifiesthiseffectusingrepeatedbondauctionsbythesameissuer(municipality)
in time periods with different (federal and state) tax rates, which greatly limits concerns that our results
are driven by omitted factors that may be correlated with both tax changes and borrowing costs.6
To better understand the economic mechanisms behind this reduced-form result, we estimate an empir-
ical auction model in the spirit of Li and Zheng (2009) that accounts for the effect of the tax advantage on
the distribution of bidders’ values for the bonds, as well as on their decision to participate in an auction.7
Owing to the imperfectly competitive nature of the setting, auction participants in this model submit bids
largerthanthelowestinterestratetheywouldbewillingtoacceptforthebond. Thedifferencebetweenthe
lowest acceptable interest rate and the bid is called the markup. The model recovers the latent distribution
of bidders’ willingness to pay for bonds and quantifies the equilibrium markups enjoyed by bidders. Our
model implies that the average markup is 17 basis points, or about 21% of borrowing costs, and that state
issuers enjoy smaller markups than do cities, counties, or school districts.
The model helps us understand the relationship between bidder markups and the tax advantage. In
imperfectly competitive auctions, one way that changes in taxes can have large impacts on borrowing costs
is through their effect on equilibrium markups. An increase in the tax advantage leads bidders to decrease
their bid and further lowers the equilibrium borrowing rate as other participants respond to this incentive
by lowering their bids. We show that these forces affect equilibrium markups and are one reason that
we find greater-than-unity passthrough elasticities on borrowing costs.8 As foreshadowed by the reduced-
4A 3 pp increase in the effective tax rate is less than a 1 standard deviation increase, and is equivalent to moving from
the 50th percentile to the 75th percentile as shown in Table 1. The ratio between yields on a taxable and tax-exempt asset is
(1−τ), where τ is the effective rate. For this reason, we calculate elasticities with respect to the net-of-tax rate. Given an
averageτ of40.87%,a3ppincrease—whichleadstoa9%declineinborrowingcosts—impliesanincreaseinthetaxadvantage
of 5%. This calculation yields a passthrough elasticity at the mean of 1.8(≈ 9%). Appendix C.9 provides additional details,
5%
including tax and net-of-tax elasticities for each state.
5In Section 3.2, we show that this result is robust to using different definitions of potential bidders.
6We perform a wide variety of analyses to demonstrate the robustness of this result. We also use an event study approach
to show that the timing of tax changes coincides with changes in borrowing costs and that future taxes, as a placebo, do not
predict changes in borrowing costs.
7In Section 3.4, we demonstrate that there is no supply-side response to the change in the tax advantage. Based on this
evidence, our model focuses on the strategic behavior of underwriters in a given auction.
8In addition to exploring these effects through the lens of our model, we also provide non-parametric evidence that this
2