NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DISABILITY BENEFITS, CONSUMPTION INSURANCE, AND HOUSEHOLD LABOR
SUPPLY
David Autor
Andreas Ravndal Kostol
Magne Mogstad
Bradley Setzler
Working Paper 23466
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23466
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2017
This research was supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration through grant #1 DRC12000002-03
to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the SSA Disability Research Consortium.
The findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not represent the views
of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER. The project also received financial
support from the Norwegian Research Council. We are grateful to Richard Blundell, Raj Chetty, Amy
Finkelstein, Kai Liu, Nathan Hendren, Hamish Low, Luigi Pistaferri, Alessandra Voena, three anonymous
referees, and the editor of this journal for valuable input and guidance, and to Knut Brofoss, Espen
Vihle and Runar Narvland for their help in accessing the data and in understanding the institutional
details. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2017 by David Autor, Andreas Ravndal Kostol, Magne Mogstad, and Bradley Setzler. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Disability Benefits, Consumption Insurance, and Household Labor Supply
David Autor, Andreas Ravndal Kostol, Magne Mogstad, and Bradley Setzler
NBER Working Paper No. 23466
June 2017, Revised August 2018
JEL No. H53,H55,I38,J22
ABSTRACT
There is no evaluation of the consequences of Disability Insurance (DI) receipt that captures the effects
on households' net income and consumption expenditure, family labor supply, or benefits from other
programs. Combining detailed register data from Norway with an instrumental variables approach
based on random assignment to appellant judges, we comprehensively assess how DI receipt affects
these understudied outcomes. To consider the welfare implications of the findings from this instrumental
variables approach, we estimate a dynamic model of household behavior that translates employment,
reapplication and savings decisions into revealed preferences for leisure and consumption. The model-based
results suggest that on average, the willingness to pay for DI receipt is positive and sizable. Because
spousal labor supply strongly buffers the household income and consumption effects of DI allowances,
the estimated willingness to pay for DI receipt is smaller for married than single applicants.
David Autor Magne Mogstad
Department of Economics, E52-438 Department of Economics
MIT University of Chicago
77 Massachusetts Avenue 1126 East 59th Street
Cambridge, MA 02139 Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER and NBER
dautor@mit.edu magne.mogstad@gmail.com
Andreas Ravndal Kostol Bradley Setzler
Norges Bank Research Department of Economics
Bankplassen 2, Oslo University of Chicago
and Statistics Norway 1126 East 59th Street
andreas.kostol@norges-bank.no Chicago, IL 60637
bradley.setzler@gmail.com

1 Introduction
Over the past 50 years, disability insurance (DI) rolls have risen dramatically in many OECD
countries. In the U.S., SSDI benefits receipt has risen from less than 1 percent to 4.7 percent of
the non-elderly adult population between the program’s inception in 1956 and the present (U.S.
Social Security Administration, 2017). In many European countries, the increases are even more
striking, from 1 percent to 7 percent in the U.K and from 2 percent to almost 10 percent in Norway.
These increases have made DI one of the largest transfer programs in most OECD countries. In
the U.S., for example, outlays for DI exceed those for food stamps, traditional cash welfare, or
the Earned Income Tax Credit.1 For families without small children, DI is often the primary cash
benefit available after unemployment benefits expire, and it has become an increasingly important
component of the social safety net in numerous industrialized countries (OECD, 2010).
TopotentiallycurtailDIprogramgrowth,severalcountrieshavesignificantlytighteneddisability
screening criteria, and many others are considering similar policies.2 These enhanced gatekeeping
policiescanreducethefiscalburdenofdisabilityinsurance, bothbyloweringtheDIcaseloadandby
increasingtaxrevenueifrejectedapplicantsreturntowork. Atthesametime,stricterscreeningmay
result in net welfare losses if individuals and families value public disability insurance at more than
its fiscal cost.3 Assessing this tradeoff requires a comparison of the public costs and private benefits
of DI awards for applicants at the margin of allowance versus denial, since it is their outcomes
that would be changed by shifts in screening stringency. To implement this comparison, we need
data on two economic quantities that are rarely measured: the economic value that individuals and
families place on disability insurance; and the full cost of DI allowances to taxpayers, summing
over DI transfer payments, benefit substitution to or from other transfer programs, and induced
changes in tax receipts. Credibly estimating these quantities is typically hindered both by a lack of
comprehensive linked data measuring these many outcomes, and by the difficulty of distinguishing
the causal effects of DI receipts from the many unobserved factors that simultaneously determine
disability status, earnings, tax payments and transfer receipts, and consumption.
This paper addresses both the measurement and the identification challenge in the context
of Norway’s DI system, enabling us to offer empirical evidence on the fiscal costs, income and
consumption gains, and welfare consequences of DI receipt. Our work draws on two strengths of
1In 2016 the U.S. paid out $143 billion to 10.6 million disabled workers and their families, with an additional $49
billioninfederalSSIpaymentstoblindanddisabledworkers,andapproximately$107billiononMedicareexpenditures
fordisabledworkers(OASDITrusteesReport,2017,TableIII.A.5;SSIAnnualReport,2017,TableIV.C1;2017,Table
II.B1). In 2013, DI cash payments constituted 1.4 percent of GDP in the U.S. and 1.7 percent of GDP across the
European OECD-countries (OECD, 2015).
2Forexample,theU.S.tightenedthecriteriafornewdisabilityawardsinthelate1970sandintroducedanaggressive
program of continuing disability reviews in 1980; however, Congress responded by halting the reviews and, in 1984,
liberalizing the program’s screening criteria along several dimensions. Another example is the Netherlands: in 1994,
the eligibility criteria were tightened and the growth in DI rolls reversed.
3In the U.S., all private disability insurance is provided through employer-based group policies. These policies
’wrap-around’ the public SSDI system, so that most of the wage insurance risk and all of the medical cost risk is
ultimately borne by the public program (Autor et al. , 2014). There is not a strong standalone private market in
disability insurance, likely because of adverse selection. In the Norwegian setting that we study, private disability
insurance is rare.
1

the Norwegian environment. First, Norwegian register data allow us to characterize the household
impacts and fiscal costs of disability receipt by linking employment, taxation, benefits receipt, and
assets at the person and household level. Our measure of fiscal costs includes virtually all forms
of government cash transfers and revenues from (direct) taxes, and accounts for changes in labor
supply and substitution to other transfer programs. Our measures of household impacts of DI
receipt include net government transfer payments from all sources, employment and earnings of DI
applicants (both allowed and denied) and their spouses, as well as households’ total income and
measures of their consumption expenditure. Second, we obtain plausibly exogenous variation in DI
allowances by exploiting the random assignment of DI applicants to Norwegian judges who differ
systematically in their leniency. As a measure of judge leniency, we use the average allowance rate
in all other cases a judge has handled. This leniency measure is used as an instrumental variable for
DIreceipt, asitishighlypredictiveofjudicialrulingsinincumbentcasesbutuncorrelatedwithcase
characteristics. This instrumental variables approach recovers the causal effects of DI allowance on
individuals at the margin of program entry.
Ourfirstsetofanalyses,whichestimatethecausaleffectsofDIreceiptonearnings,totalincome,
consumption expenditure, and fiscal costs, yields four main findings. First, granting DI benefits
to applicants on the margin of program entry induces a fall in annual earnings of approximately
$5,200, which is about 45 percent of the annual DI transfer benefit awarded. Second, DI allowances
raise average household income and consumption expenditure by 16 and 18 percent, implying that
DI receipt provides partial consumption smoothing across states of nature for a given individual.
Third,theexternalcoststotaxpayersfromprovidingDIbenefits—stemmingfromtransferpayments
and reduced payroll tax revenues—substantially exceed the net increases in household incomes
accruing to DI beneficiaries. Fourth, the consequences of DI allowances differ substantially by
marital status. Among single and unmarried applicants, DI awards have large direct impacts on
household income and consumption expenditure—incrementing each by about 40 percent relative
to baseline. Conversely, DI allowances do not significantly increase the household incomes or the
consumption of married applicants on average; indeed, we can reject positive impacts of more than
nine percent of baseline income. The reason is that spousal labor supply adjustments and benefit
substitution are estimated to offset the effect of DI transfers on household incomes—though we
stress that this does not imply that household welfare is unaffected by these transfers.
These causal effects estimates provide key data points for a welfare analysis, but they do not
by themselves tell us how much DI allowances affect household welfare, since this also depends on
the preferences for leisure and consumption. To explore these welfare implications, we estimate a
dynamic model of household behavior with heterogeneous, forward-looking individuals. The model
translates employment, savings and reapplication decisions of applicants and their spouses into
revealed preferences for leisure and consumption. Brought to the data, the model matches well the
instrumental variables estimates of the impact of DI allowances, and moreover, provides plausible
parameterestimatesforlaborsupplyelasticities. Weusetheestimatedmodeltocomputethewelfare
benefitsofDIreceipt—bywhichwemeanthecashequivalentvalueofreceivingaDIallowance—and
2