NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PRICE RISK, PRODUCTION FLEXIBILITY, AND LIQUIDITY MANAGEMENT:
EVIDENCE FROM ELECTRICITY GENERATING FIRMS
Chen Lin
Thomas Schmid
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 23434
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23434
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2017, Revised August 2017
Previously circulated as "How Production Risk and Flexibility Affect Liquidity Management:
Evidence from Electricity Generating Firms." We are very grateful to Heitor Almeida, Igor
Cunha, Shan Ge, John Graham, Bernadette Minton, Weiling Song, René Stulz, Tracy Wang, and
seminar participants at Ohio State University and the University of Washington for helpful
suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Chen Lin, Thomas Schmid, and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Price Risk, Production Flexibility, and Liquidity Management: Evidence from Electricity
Generating Firms
Chen Lin, Thomas Schmid, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 23434
May 2017, Revised August 2017
JEL No. G3,G32,G35,L5
ABSTRACT
Production inflexibility together with product price uncertainty creates price risk, which is a
potentially important factor for firms’ liquidity management. One industry for which price risk
can be measured is the electricity producing industry. We use data on hourly electricity prices in
41 markets to measure fluctuations in output prices and information on over 60,000 power plants
to approximate firms’ flexibilty to vary output quantities. Our results suggest that higher
electricity price volatility leads to increased cash holdings, but only in firms using inflexible
production technologies. This effect is robust to a number of specification choices including
instrumenting for volatility in electricity prices using weather forecast data. After deregulation,
firms hold 20-25% more cash, suggesting that the process of deregulation increases the risk
firms’ face. Price risk affects cash holdings most in financially constrained firms, and in firms
that cannot easily hedge the electricity price through derivative markets. Capital market liquidity
and balance sheet liquidity appear to be substitutes for one another.
Chen Lin Michael S. Weisbach
Faculty of Business and Economics Department of Finance
The University of Hong Kong Fisher College of Business
Hong Kong Ohio State University
chenlin1@hku.hk 2100 Neil Ave.
Columbus, OH 43210
Thomas Schmid and NBER
Faculty of Business and Economics weisbach.2@osu.edu
University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong
schmid@hku.hk

Moody's Investors Service says that power prices are expected to remain volatile […]
Individual generators that can rapidly adjust their output in response to price swings will
likely benefit, but those that cannot could prove commercially unviable over time.
Moody’s Investor Service (2016)
1. Introduction
One source of risk facing many firms is price risk. Price risk occurs when firms with inflexible
production face uncertainty about the market price of their products. For instance, if firms must decide on
the production volume before knowing the exact demand for their product, they will face costs when they
have to alter production. The magnitude of these costs depends on the nature of the production process:
the more inflexible the production process is, the higher the ex post cost of altering production and hence
the higher the ex ante price risk.1 For this reason, price risk can potentially be an important factor in
firms’ liquidity management decisions.
An industry for which price risk is both relevant and empirically measurable is the electricity
generating industry. In many parts of the world, this industry has been deregulated. In deregulated
electricity markets, electricity producers sell their product on a wholesale market to electricity retail firms,
who then distribute it to the consumers. Because generation capacities are fixed in the short-run,
wholesale prices fluctuate considerably when demand for electricity changes, which often occurs because
of changes in weather or seasonal factors. Since storing electricity is prohibitively expensive, electricity
prices tend to fluctuate much more than prices in other commodity or financial markets. Consequently,
generating firms have to adjust production in response to demand changes, which often entails the
shutdown and later restart of plants. Depending on the method used to produce electricity, shutdowns and
restarts of plants can take considerable time, and such disruptions to production can be very costly for
producers. For this reason, price fluctuations and the associated uncertainty create risk for energy utilities,
especially those using inflexible production technologies such as coal-fired power plants.
1 Discussion of price risk dates to the classic paper by Sandmo (1971), and the idea that flexibility in production
affects its magnitude comes from Turnovsky (1973) and Epstein (1978).
1

This paper measures the extent to which price risk affects the liquidity management decisions of
electricity producing companies. It considers a sample of 481 electricity-generating firms between 1999
and 2014. These firms operate more than 60,000 individual plants, which use technologies ranging from
wind power to coal to nuclear power, and represent the vast majority of publicly traded electricity
generating firms in the world. In most of our empirical tests, we focus on the 253 firms that sell electricity
in organized markets in which retail firms purchase electricity from the wholesale market. In 41 regional
markets from 30 countries, we are able to obtain the hourly wholesale prices received by our sample firms
during our sample period.2
However, price uncertainty is unlikely to create the same price risk for all electricity producing
firms. Rather, their production technology is likely to play a key role. Using data on firms’ power plants
to approximate how easy the can adjust production to changing prices, we analyze whether firms’
liquidity choices vary systematically with the price risk they face. Firms which operate flexible plants
such as gas-fired plants can quickly shut down these plants as soon as the price falls below their variable
cost. For less flexible plants like coal this is more difficult as the shut-down and restart typically requires
several hours and involves considerable cost.3 To measure price uncertainty, we use data on hourly
electricity wholesale prices in a power market. These data allow us to estimate a firm’s price risk because
electricity producers sell most of the electricity in the market where the plant is located.4 Hourly prices
are used instead of daily or weekly prices because power plants are dispatched within a day. For instance,
gas-fired power plants would be turned on as soon as the price increases above their marginal cost. Daily
prices average all hourly prices of a day and are thus less precise.5 Based on these hourly prices, we
2 These are virtually all markets around the globe that operate a day-ahead market for electricity and have hourly
pricing. Section 2.1 provides an overview on the markets and the criteria for their inclusion.
3 Instead of shutting down a plant, the operator could also reduce its load. However, there are considerable technical
limitations to this approach. For instance, operators of gas combined cycle and coal-fired power plants typically
limit the minimum generation to about 40% to 50% of its capacity. Furthermore, the efficiency of thermal power
plants decreases significantly for low load levels.
4 Selling in electricity to other markets is possible, but there are substantial technical (e.g., losses due to
transmission) and legal (e.g., market regulations) limitations. Based on geographical segment data, we estimate that
our sample firms sell more than 90% of their production in the market where they are located.
5 For instance, consider a daily average electricity price of 50 USD/MWh and a gas-fired power plant with variable
cost of 75 USD/MWh. To know whether this plant was switched on or not, it is necessary to know the distribution of
2