NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IMPERFECT FINANCIAL MARKETS AND SHAREHOLDER INCENTIVES IN
PARTIAL AND GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM
Elias Albagli
Christian Hellwig
Aleh Tsyvinski
Working Paper 23419
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23419
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2017
We thank Effi Benmelech, Bruno Biais, John Campbell, V.V. Chari, Amil Dasgupta, Kinda
Hachem, Zhiguo He, Ulrich Hege, Peter Kondor, Guido Lorenzoni, Markus Brunnermeier,
Stephen Morris, Jeremy Stein, Jean Tirole, Michael Song, Vasiliki Skreta, and Pietro Veronesi
and numerous seminar and conference audiences for comments. Section 5.4 of this draft
subsumes results from our earlier paper titled “Information aggregation, investment and
managerial incentives” (Albagli, Hellwig and Tsyvinski, 2011a). Hellwig gratefully
acknowledges financial support from the European Research Council (starting grant agreement
263790). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23419.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Elias Albagli, Christian Hellwig, and Aleh Tsyvinski. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Imperfect Financial Markets and Shareholder Incentives in Partial and General Equilibrium
Elias Albagli, Christian Hellwig, and Aleh Tsyvinski
NBER Working Paper No. 23419
May 2017
JEL No. D21,E22,G1,G18
ABSTRACT
We analyze the firm-level and aggregate consequences of equity market imperfections in the
form of noisy information aggregation for corporate risk-taking and investment. Market
imperfections cause controlling shareholders to invest too much in upside risks and too little in
downside risks in an attempt to capture market rents. In partial equilibrium, these inefficiencies
are particularly severe if upside risks are coupled with near constant returns to scale. In general
equilibrium, the shareholders’ collective attempts to boost shareholder value of individual firms
leads to a novel pecuniary externality that amplifies investment distortions with downside risks
but offsets distortions with upside risks, thereby overturning the results from the partial
equilibrium analysis. We consider policy interventions to correct the distortions, and show that in
general equilibrium such interventions disrupt the financial market’s allocational role. We
analyze extensions of our model to excess leverage, agency conflicts between shareholders and
managers, negative welfare effects of transparency, excess sensitivity of investment to stock
prices, and dynamically inconsistent firm behavior.
Elias Albagli Aleh Tsyvinski
Central Bank of Chile Department of Economics
Research Department Yale University
ealbagli@gmail.com Box 208268
New Haven, CT 06520-8268
Christian Hellwig and NBER
Toulouse School of Economics a.tsyvinski@yale.edu
Manufacture de Tabacs,
21 Allées de Brienne,
31000 Toulouse
christian.hellwig@tse-fr.eu

1 Introduction
Over the last 30 years, shareholder value maximization has been the guiding principle for decision-
making in shareholder-owned companies. In a context of efficient financial markets, share prices
fully internalize the value of a firm’s activities. In the absence of externalities or market power,
maximizingshareholdervaluethusresultsinrational,time-consistentplanningbyfirmsandsocially
efficientrisk-takingandinvestmentwithoutanyneedformonitoringorregulation. Intheaggregate,
efficient markets then channel financial resources to their most productive uses with no need to
interfere with market allocations. A strong case for laissez-faire emerges, as policy interventions
are at best inconsequential, and at worst harmful to economic activity.
In practice, financial markets and firms are not quite as rational and efficient as their model
counterparts. Arbitrage is a risky and costly activity. Equity prices and returns feature anomalies
that seem difficult to reconcile with fundamental values. Firm decisions are often dictated more
by internal and external conflicts of interest or short-term biases than by the adherence to a time-
consistentoptimalplan. Andimperfectionsinfinancialmarketsandseeminglyirrationalinvestment
behavior can have important aggregate consequences.
In this paper, we analyze the consequences of financial market imperfections for corporate risk-
taking and investment. We argue that equity market imperfections cause shareholders to distort
investment decisions in an attempt to capture market rents. Their rational response to market
imperfections results in firm-level and aggregate outcomes that are socially inefficient and that
contradict the view of the firm as a rational, time-consistent planner. We show that even small
marketimperfectionscanhavesevereconsequenceforinvestmentandaggregatewelfare. Ourresults
suggest a new rationale for regulating financial risk-taking by firms that applies even without the
standard justification of externalities or market power.
In sections 2 and 3, we develop a partial equilibrium model of a single firm whose incumbent
shareholders make an investment decision prior to selling a fraction of their shares in a financial
market populated by informed and noise traders. The share price then emerges as a noisy signal
aggregating dispersed investor information about the firm’s value.
In our model, the market-clearing share price must partially absorb shocks to demand and
supply of securities, since informed traders are not willing or able to perfectly arbitrage perceived
gaps between prices and expected fundamental values. This amplifies price fluctuations relative
to the information about dividends that is aggregated through the market. The share price is
therefore not just a noisy but also a biased estimate of the firm’s dividends.
1

This bias has two important properties: (i) it inherits any asymmetries in underlying cash flow
risks, and (ii) it scales with the firm’s initial investment decision. Together these two properties
result in an endogenous rent-seeking motive for shareholders that distorts investment decisions.
Property (i) implies that expected share prices are generally not an unbiased estimate of ex-
pected dividends: if cash flow risks are concentrated on the upside, the excess price fluctuations are
primarily on the upside and lead to an upwards bias in average share prices relative to expected
dividends. If instead the cash flow risk is concentrated on the downside, the downside price fluctu-
ations dominate, resulting in a downwards bias of expected share prices. This wedge between the
expected market value and the expected dividend value of a firm’s equity is a transfer from final to
initial shareholders (or vice versa), in other terms, a rent accruing to incumbent shareholders.
Property (ii) then implies that incumbent shareholders can influence the magnitude of this rent
through their investment decision. As our main result in this section, we show that rent-seeking
incentives and investment distortions depend on two characteristics: risk asymmetries and returns
to scale of investments. Firms with upside risks over-invest, while firms with downside risk under-
invest. The returns to scale determine how flexibly a firm can adjust its investment to the gap
between expected fundamentals and market returns. With near constant returns, the surplus from
investing is small, but the scope for rent-seeking is particularly large. If near constant returns
are coupled with upside risk, even small market frictions can induce incumbent shareholders to
take excessively large risks purely to capture rents from selling their shares, while the firm in fact
generates negative expected surplus. With downside risks, there can be severe under-investment,
but surplus always remains positive.
These investment distortions offer a new rationale for corrective policy interventions. We char-
acterize how regulatory oversight, transaction taxes or direct market interventions can restore
efficiency either by directly controlling firm decisions or indirectly by altering the incumbent share-
holder’s perception of upside risk. The optimal intervention policy has the property of leaning
against return asymmetries as a counterweight to the market imperfections.
In section 4, we embed the single-firm, partial equilibrium model in an aggregate model with
a continuum of heterogeneous firms, each subject to idiosyncratic investment risk. The general
equilibrium formulation achieves several objectives.
First, we provide a micro-foundation for expected or aggregate dividends as our main welfare
criterion. The model adds an intertemporal substitution margin for representative incumbent and
final shareholders which as we show aligns their aggregate valuations while still allowing for firm-
level mispricing. Any increase in aggregate dividends is then passed onto incumbent shareholders
2