NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE CROSS-BORDER SPILLOVER EFFECTS OF RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA
LEGALIZATION
Zhuang Hao
Benjamin Cowan
Working Paper 23426
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23426
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2017, Revised October 2017
The authors would like to thank Mark Anderson, Benjamin Hansen, Bidisha Mandal, and Robert
Rosenman for helpful conversations on this paper. An earlier version of this paper is listed as an
NBER working paper (no. 23426). All errors are the authors' responsibility. The corresponding
author is Benjamin Cowan. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Zhuang Hao and Benjamin Cowan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Cross-Border Spillover Effects of Recreational Marijuana Legalization
Zhuang Hao and Benjamin Cowan
NBER Working Paper No. 23426
May 2017, Revised October 2017
JEL No. I12,I18,K14
ABSTRACT
We examine the spillover effects of recreational marijuana legalization (RML) in Colorado and
Washington on neighboring states. We find that RML causes a sharp increase in marijuana
possession arrests in border counties of neighboring states relative to non-border counties in these
states. RML has no impact on juvenile marijuana possession arrests but is rather fully
concentrated among adults. Using separate data on self-reported marijuana use, we show this is
accompanied by an increase in use in neighboring states relative to non-neighboring states. We do
not find conclusive evidence that marijuana sale/manufacture arrests, DUI arrests, or opium/
cocaine possession arrests in border states are affected by RML.
Zhuang Hao
School of Economic Sciences
Washington State University
Pullman, WA 99164-6210
zhuang.hao@wsu.edu
Benjamin Cowan
School of Economic Sciences
Washington State University
103E Hulbert Hall
Pullman, WA 99164
and NBER
ben.cowan@wsu.edu

1. Introduction
Since 2012, eight states and the District of Columbia have legalized personal recreational
marijuana use.1 One often-cited justification for recreational marijuana legalization (RML) in
these states concerns its expected positive fiscal impacts.2 For example, the state of Washington
collected $186 million in tax revenue from legal sales of recreational marijuana in fiscal year 2016,
just its second year with legal sales.3 Other potential impacts include savings to law enforcement
and the criminal justice system from no longer investigating and prosecuting certain marijuana-
related crimes (Miron, 2010).
Though the fiscal impacts of marijuana legalization may be positive in states that pass RML,
the effect on surrounding states is more likely to be detrimental. The nature of these laws is that
marijuana can be purchased and possessed legally in RML states by those of majority age (21 and
older) regardless of state of residency.4 This could lead to an increase in marijuana possession and
related crimes in areas that neighbor RML states, which would likely contribute to higher burdens
on law enforcement and the criminal justice system in those places. In line with this reasoning, in
2014, Nebraska and Oklahoma launched a federal lawsuit against Colorado, arguing that
1 Legalization of recreational marijuana took effect in Colorado and Washington in December 2012; in Oregon in July
2015; and in Alaska and Washington DC in February 2015. California, Maine, Massachusetts, and Nevada passed
recreational marijuana legalization in November 2016.
2 See, for example, https://taxfoundation.org/marijuana-tax-legalization-federal-revenue/. Most recent date of access:
May 9, 2017.
3 The fiscal year in Washington state runs from previous July 1 to current June 30. Source: Weekly Marijuana Report,
Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board (http://lcb.wa.gov/marj/dashboard). Most recent date of access:
February 20, 2017.
4 Article XVIII, Section 16: Personal Use and Regulation of Marijuana, Colorado
Constitution (https://www.colorado.gov/pacific/sites/default/files/Section%2016%20-%20%20Retail.pdf). Most
recent date of access: March 17, 2017. Washington Initiative Measure No. 502, Office of Washington Secretary of
State (https://sos.wa.gov/_assets/elections/initiatives/i502.pdf). Most recent date of access: March 17, 2017.
2

Colorado’s RML has led to an increase in marijuana-related law enforcement costs and other social
costs in their states. While the suit was denied by the Supreme Court, the question of how one
state’s recreational marijuana legalization affects neighboring states’ outcomes has not been
examined.5 This is the focus of our paper.
Intuitively, for customers living in neighboring non-RML states, the legal cost of acquiring
marijuana is reduced after RML because although possessing marijuana is still illegal in their home
states, one is now free from penalty for the acts of buying and possessing marijuana across the
border. In addition to this, RML most likely reduces the pecuniary cost of marijuana. Anderson,
Hansen, and Rees (2013) find that medical marijuana legalization (MML) is associated with sharp
decreases in the price of marijuana. Similarly, the average retail price of marijuana in Washington
has dropped substantially since the beginning of legalized retail in the state (July 2014) as shown
in Table 1. Though an individual can certainly consume the marijuana in the RML state, legal
restrictions on where this can occur, as well as simple matters of convenience, may increase
individuals’ propensity to smuggle marijuana back to their home (non-RML) state.6 We expect
this to occur most especially for individuals living near the border of RML states, since for these
individuals the reduction of the legal and pecuniary costs of buying and possessing marijuana is
5 Nebraska and Oklahoma v. Colorado, Supreme Court of the United States Blog (http://www.scotusblog.com/case-
files/cases/nebraska-and-oklahoma-v-colorado/). Most recent date of access: February 21, 2017. For more
information on this case, see: Lyle Denniston, U.S. opposes marijuana challenge by Colorado’s neighbors, Supreme
Court of the United States Blog (Dec. 17, 2015), (http://www.scotusblog.com/2015/12/u-s-opposes-marijuana-
challenge-by-colorados-neighbors/). Most recent date of access: March 17, 2017. See also Justice Clarence Thomas’
dissent in this case (https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/15pdf/144orig_6479.pdf). Most recent date of access:
March 17, 2017.
6 In Washington state, it is illegal to consume “in view of the general public” (Initiative 502), and in Colorado, a
person may not consume “openly and publicly or in a manner that endangers others” (Article XVIII, Colorado
Constitution).
3