NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF HOUSING AND MORTGAGE MARKETS WITH
STATE-CONTINGENT LENDING CONTRACTS
Tomasz Piskorski
Alexei Tchistyi
Working Paper 23452
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23452
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2017
First Draft: April 2016. Piskorski acknowledges financial support from the National Science
Foundation(cid:3)and the Paul Milstein Center for Real Estate at Columbia Business School. The views
expressed herein(cid:3)are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic(cid:3)Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official(cid:3)NBER publications.
© 2017 by Tomasz Piskorski and Alexei Tchistyi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to(cid:3)exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including(cid:3)© notice, is given to the source.

An Equilibrium Model of Housing and Mortgage Markets with State-Contingent Lending
Contracts
Tomasz Piskorski and Alexei Tchistyi
NBER Working Paper No. 23452
May 2017
JEL No. D1,D5,E44,G01,G21,G28
ABSTRACT
We develop a tractable general equilibrium framework of housing and mortgage markets with
aggregate(cid:3)and idiosyncratic risks, costly liquidity and strategic defaults, empirically relevant
informational asymmetries,(cid:3)and endogenous mortgage design. We show that adverse selection
plays an important role in shaping(cid:3) the form of an equilibrium contract. If borrowers'
homeownership values are known, aggregate wages(cid:3)and house prices determine the optimal state-
contingent mortgage payments, which efficiently reduces(cid:3)the costs of liquidity default. However,
when lenders are uncertain about homeownership values, the(cid:3)equilibrium contract only depends
on house prices and takes the form of a home equity insurance mortgage(cid:3)(HEIM) that eliminates
the strategic default option and insures the borrower's equity position. Interestingly,(cid:3)we show that
widespread adoption of such loans has ambiguous effects on the homeownership rate(cid:3) and
household welfare. In economies in which recessions are expected to be severe, the HEIM
equilibrium(cid:3)Pareto dominates the equilibrium with fixed-rate mortgages. However, if economic
downturns are(cid:3)not severe, HEIMs can lower the homeownership rate and make some marginal
home buyers worse-off.(cid:3)We also note that adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) may share some
benefits with HEIMs, which(cid:3)may help justify a high concentration of ARMs among riskier
borrowers. Finally, we find that unrestricted(cid:3)competition between lenders may lead to a non-
existence of equilibrium. This suggests that government-sponsored(cid:3) enterprises may stabilize
mortgage markets by subsidizing certain mortgage contracts.
Tomasz Piskorski
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway
Uris Hall 810
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
tp2252@columbia.edu
Alexei Tchistyi
College of Business
University of Illinois
340 Wohlers Hall
Champaign, 6182 IL
tchistyi@illinois.edu

1 Introduction
Residential mortgage contracts are of first-order importance for households, financial insti-
tutions, and for the broader economy. The Great Depression of 1929-1939 showed that forms
of mortgage lending are extremely important to how the economy responds to shocks. At that
time, mortgage contracts were predominantly short-term loans. The inability to roll them over
was a major contributor to the collapse of the financial and housing markets. In response to the
lessons learned from the Great Depression, federal regulators developed long-term fully amortizing
fixed rate mortgage contracts, also known as FRMs, which have become the most popular form of
mortgage lending in the United States.1
The recent Great Recession associated with millions of costly foreclosures has led to a revival
of the debate regarding the appropriate structure of residential lending contracts. A key lesson
from the Great Recession is that the rigidity of mortgage contract terms coupled with a variety of
frictions preventing effective renegotiation or refinancing of loans of vulnerable borrowers may have
exacerbated the foreclosure crisis and the severity of the economic downturn (e.g., Piskorski et al.
2010; Agarwal et al. 2012, 2015; Keys et al. 2013; Mayer et al. 2014; Scharfstein and Sunderam
2016).2 At the core of this debate are a variety of proposals concerning the redesign of mortgage
contracts so that they allow for more efficient sharing of aggregate risk between borrowers and
lenders to lower the incidence of costly foreclosures and the severity of future housing downturns
(e.g., Shiller 2008; Caplin et al. 2008; Piskorski and Tchistyi 2011; Campbell 2013; Keys et al.
2013; Mian and Sufi 2014; Eberly and Krishnamurty 2014).
Despite the fundamental importance of this question, there is little theoretical analysis inves-
tigating the effects of a widespread adoption of state-contingent lending contracts in a general
equilibrium setting with aggregate uncertainty. The life-cycle models of mortgage contract choice
(e.g., Campbell and Cocco 2003, 2015) and mortgage design studies of state-contingent contracts
employing dynamic contracting tools (e.g., Piskorski and Tchistyi 2010, 2011) commonly adopt a
partial equilibrium perspective that takes some key variables such as house prices as given. How-
1See Green and Wachter (2005) for more discussion of the historical evolution of mortgage contracts in the U.S.
2Thesefrictionsincludebarrierstoloanrenegotiationduetosecuritization(Piskorskietal. 2010),lenders’concerns
regarding borrowers’ strategic behavior that can limit ex-post loan work-outs (Mayer et al. 2014), and the limited
organizational ability of servicers to provide debt relief to a large number of borrowers in a crisis (Agarwal et al.
2012). In addition, borrowers with FRMs left with little housing equity can be ineligible for loan refinancing, and
limited competition in the refinancing market may adversely affect the effectiveness of polices aimed at facilitating
loan refinancing activity during economic downturns (Agarwal et al. 2015; Scharfstein and Sunderam 2016).
2

ever, developments in the mortgage lending market, due to its large size, can have pronounced
effects on house prices, construction, home ownership rates, and the allocation of credit in the
economy feeding back into mortgage market outcomes.
To study such effects, we develop a tractable general equilibrium framework of housing and
mortgage markets in a setting with aggregate and idiosyncratic risks, costly liquidity and strate-
gic defaults, empirically relevant informational asymmetries, endogenous housing supply and home
prices, and endogenous mortgage design.3 In this respect, our work is complementary with recent
quantitative dynamic equilibrium models of housing markets with heterogenous agents and ag-
gregate risk (e.g., Favilukis, Ludvingson, Van Nieuwerburgh 2016; Kaplan, Mitman, and Violante
2016) and contemporaneous research that studies the role of mortgage contracts in such settings
(e.g., Greenwald, Landvoigt, and Van Nieuwerburgh 2017; Guren, Krishnamurty, and McQuade
2017).4 Such models can provide many valuable insights including the quantitative assessment of
various effects. However, their complex settings usually require the use of numerical methods to
analyze equilibria. This makes it hard to derive results analytically and to study the impact of
factorssuchasinformationalasymmetriesandcompetitionamonglendersonendogenousmortgage
design and other equilibrium outcomes.5 In this regard, our objective is to develop a framework
that is rich enough to capture the complex interplay of various factors in a market equilibrium
while still being tractable enough to develop key qualitative insights transparently including a set
of closed form solutions. We hope that this framework could be used in future research on housing
and mortgage markets.
In our setting the economy is subject to aggregate productivity shocks that determine the
capital returns and aggregate wages. Households need financing from owners of capital to buy
homes. We incorporate two sources of informational asymmetries between borrowers and lenders
that were documented to be quantitatively important by empirical literature.6 First, we assume
3Our paper is related to a large literature on financing models with informational asymmetries (e.g., Stiglitz and
Weiss1981; Diamond 1984; Bolton and Scharfstein 1990; DeMarzo and Sannikov2006; DeMarzo and Fishman 2007,
Biaisetal. 2007;Farhi,Golosov,andTsyvinski2009)andtotheliteraturestudingtheroleofcollateral,leverage,and
defaultinvariousequilibriumsettings(e.g.,KiyotakiandMoore1997;Dubeyetal. 2005;RampiniandViswanathan
2010; Makarov and Plantin 2013; Brunnermeier and Sannikov 2014; He and Milbradt 2014; Bolton et al. 2016).
4In this regard, our paper is also related to Kung (2015) who explores a number of counterfactuals related to
credit availability and mortgage contract forms in a quantitative equilibrium model of the housing market.
5In dynamic quantitative equilibrium models with aggregate uncertainty and individual heterogeneity the fully
rationalequilibriumisusuallynotcomputableasalargenumberofagentstypicallyfaceaninfinitedimensionalstate
space (e.g., see Favilukis et al. 2016).
6The empirical literature has documented that informational asymmetries are a pervasive feature of the housing
finance market. For recent evidence see, among others, Keys et al. (2010), Jiang et al. (2014), Garmaise (2015),
3