NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RACIAL BIAS IN BAIL DECISIONS
David Arnold
Will Dobbie
Crystal S. Yang
Working Paper 23421
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23421
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2017
We thank Pedro Bordalo, Leah Platt Boustan, David Deming, Hanming Fang, Hank Farber,
Roland Fryer, Jonah Gelbach, Nicola Gennaioli, Edward Glaeser, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham,
Christine Jolls, Louis Kaplow, Larry Katz, Michal Kolesár, Ilyana Kuziemko, Magne Mogstad,
Nicola Persico, Steven Shavell, Andrei Shleifer, David Silver, Alex Torgovitsky, and numerous
seminar participants for helpful comments and suggestions. Molly Bunke, Kevin DeLuca, and
Amy Wickett provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by David Arnold, Will Dobbie, and Crystal S. Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Racial Bias in Bail Decisions
David Arnold, Will Dobbie, and Crystal S. Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 23421
May 2017
JEL No. J15,J71,K14
ABSTRACT
This paper develops a new test for identifying racial bias in the context of bail decisions – a high-
stakes setting with large disparities between white and black defendants. We motivate our
analysis using Becker's (1957) model of racial bias, which predicts that rates of pre-trial
misconduct will be identical for marginal white and marginal black defendants if bail judges are
racially unbiased. In contrast, marginal white defendants will have a higher probability of
misconduct than marginal black defendants if bail judges are racially biased against blacks. To
test the model, we develop a new estimator that uses the release tendencies of quasi-randomly
assigned bail judges to identify the relevant race-specific misconduct rates. Estimates from Miami
and Philadelphia show that bail judges are racially biased against black defendants, with
substantially more racial bias among both inexperienced and part-time judges. We also find that
both black and white judges are biased against black defendants. We argue that these results are
consistent with bail judges making racially biased prediction errors, rather than being racially
prejudiced per se.
David Arnold Crystal S. Yang
Industrial Relations Section Harvard Law School
Louis A. Simpson International Bldg. Griswold 301
Princeton University Cambridge, MA 02138
Princeton, NJ 08544-2098 and NBER
dharnold@princeton.edu cyang@law.harvard.edu
Will Dobbie
Industrial Relations Section
Louis A. Simpson International Bldg.
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-2098
and NBER
wdobbie@princeton.edu

Racial disparities exist at every stage of the criminal justice process. Compared to observably
similar whites, blacks are more likely to be searched for contraband (Antonovics and Knight 2009),
more likely to experience police force (Fryer 2016), more likely to be charged with a serious offense
(Rehavi and Starr 2014), more likely to be convicted (Anwar, Bayer, and Hjalmarrson 2012), and
more likely to be incarcerated (Abrams, Bertrand, and Mullainathan 2012). Racial disparities are
particularlyprominentinthesettingofbail: inourdata,blackdefendantsare11.2percentagepoints
more likely to be assigned monetary bail than white defendants and, conditional on being assigned
monetary bail, have bail amounts that are $14,376 greater.1 However, determining whether these
racial disparities are due to racial bias or statistical discrimination remains an empirical challenge.
To distinguish between racial bias and statistical discrimination, Becker (1957) proposed an
“outcome” test that uses the success or failure rates of decisions across groups at the margin. In
our setting, Becker’s test is based on the idea that rates of pre-trial misconduct will be identical for
marginal white and marginal black defendants if bail judges are racially unbiased and the observed
racial disparities in bail setting are solely due to statistical discrimination (e.g., Phelps 1972, Arrow
1973). In contrast, marginal white defendants will have a higher probability of pre-trial misconduct
than marginal black defendants if bail judges are racially biased against blacks and the observed
racial disparities in bail setting are driven at least in part by this racial bias. Thus, the key
implication of the Becker test is that racial bias among bail judges can be estimated using the
difference in pre-trial misconduct rates for white and black defendants at the margin of release.
Importantly, however, researchers usually cannot observe which defendants are and are not on
the margin of release and, thus, comparisons based on average defendant outcomes are biased if
defendants have different risk distributions (e.g., Ayres 2002).
In recent years, two seminal papers have developed outcome tests of racial bias that partially
circumvent this infra-marginality problem. In the first paper, Knowles, Persico, and Todd (2001)
show that if motorists respond to the race-specific probability of being searched, then all motorists
of a given race will carry contraband with equal probability. As a result, the marginal and average
success rates of police searches will be identical and there is not an infra-marginality problem.
Knowles et al. (2001) find no difference in the average success rate of police searches for white and
black drivers, leading them to conclude that there is no racial bias in police searches. In a second
importantpaper, AnwarandFang(2006)developatestofrelativeracialbiasbasedontheideathat
the ranking of search and success rates by white and black police officers should be unaffected by
the race of the motorist even when there are infra-marginality problems. Consistent with Knowles
et al. (2001), Anwar and Fang (2006) find no evidence of relative racial bias in police searches, but
note that their approach cannot be used to detect absolute racial bias.2
1Authors’calculationforMiami-DadeandPhiladelphiausingthedatadescribedinSectionII.Racialdisparities
in bail setting are also observed in other jurisdictions. For example, black felony defendants in state courts are nine
percentagepointsmorelikelytobedetainedpre-trialcomparedtootherwisesimilarwhitedefendants(McIntyreand
Baradaran 2013).
2We replicate the Knowles et al. (2001) and Anwar and Fang (2006) tests in our data, finding no evidence of
racialbiasineithercase. ThedifferencesbetweenourtestandtheKnowlesetal. (2001)andAnwarandFang(2006)
tests is that (1) we identify treatment effects for marginal defendants rather than the average defendant, and (2) we
1

In this paper, we propose a new outcome test for identifying absolute racial bias in the context
of bail decisions. Bail is an ideal setting to test for racial bias for a number of reasons. First,
the legal objective of bail judges is narrow, straightforward, and measurable: to set bail conditions
that allow most defendants to be released while minimizing the risk of pre-trial misconduct. In
contrast, the objectives of judges at other stages of the criminal justice process, such as sentencing,
are complicated by multiple hard-to-measure objectives, such as the balance between retribution
and mercy. Second, mostly untrained bail judges must make on-the-spot judgments with limited
information and little to no interaction with defendants. These institutional features may make
bail decisions particularly prone to the kind of stereotypes or categorical heuristics that exacerbate
racial bias (e.g., Fryer and Jackson 2008, Bordalo et al. 2016). Finally, bail decisions are extremely
consequential for both white and black defendants, with prior work suggesting that detained de-
fendants suffer about $40,000 in lost earnings and government benefits alone (Dobbie, Goldin, and
Yang 2016).3
To implement the Becker outcome test in our setting, we develop an instrumental variables (IV)
estimator for racial bias that identifies the difference in pre-trial misconduct rates for white and
black defendants at the margin of release. Though IV estimates are often criticized for the local
nature of the estimates, we exploit the fact that the Becker test relies on (the difference between)
exactly these kinds of local treatment effects for white and black defendants at the margin of release
to distinguish between racial bias and statistical discrimination. Specifically, we use the release
tendencies of quasi-randomly assigned judges to identify local average treatment effects (LATEs)
for white and black defendants near the margin of release. We then use the difference between these
race-specific LATEs to estimate a weighted average of the racial bias among bail judges in our data.
In the first part of the paper, we formally establish the conditions under which our IV-based
estimate of racial bias converges to the true level of racial bias. We show that two conditions must
holdforourempiricalstrategytoyieldconsistentestimatesofracialbias. Thefirstconditionisthat
our instrument for judge leniency is continuous so that each race-specific IV estimate approaches
a weighted average of treatment effects for defendants at the margin of release. With 177 bail
judges in our sample, we argue that this condition is approximately true in our data.4 The second
condition is that the judge IV weights are identical for white and black defendants near the margin
of release so that we can interpret the difference in the LATEs as racial bias and not differences in
how treatment effects from different parts of the distribution are weighted. This second condition
is satisfied if, as is suggested by our data, there is a linear first-stage relationship between pre-trial
identify absolute rather than relative bias. See Section III.D for additional details on why the Knowles et al. (2001)
and Anwar and Fang (2006) tests yield different results than our test.
3See also Gupta, Hansman, and Frenchman (2016), Leslie and Pope (2016), and Stevenson (2016).
4In the online appendix, we show that an additional functional form assumption on the distribution of marginal
treatment effects allows us to consistently estimate racial bias with a discrete instrument. We also characterize the
estimationbiasfromadiscreteinstrumentwhennoadditionalfunctionalformassumptionsaremade. Weshowthat,
underreasonableassumptions,ourinterpretationoftheIVestimatesremainsvalidandthatwecancalculatebounds
ontheestimationbiasfromusingadiscreteinstrument. Inpractice,wefindthatthemaximumestimationbiasfrom
using a discrete instrument in our setting is less than 0.5 percentage points, as the distance between any two judge
leniency measures in our data is relatively small.
2