NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STATUS GOODS: EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM PLATINUM CREDIT CARDS
Leonardo Bursztyn
Bruno Ferman
Stefano Fiorin
Martin Kanz
Gautam Rao
Working Paper 23414
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23414
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2017
We would like to thank Nava Ashraf, Abhijit Banerjee, Roland Bénabou, Stefano DellaVigna,
Benjamin Enke, Robert Frank, Matthew Gentzkow, Ori Heffetz, David Laibson, David
McKenzie, Markus Mobius, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, Christopher Roth, Andrei Shleifer, Kelly
Shue, Lise Vesterlund, David Yanagizawa-Drott, and numerous seminar participants for helpful
comments and suggestions. Support from the World Bank Strategic Research Program is
gratefully acknowledged. The opinions expressed do not necessarily represent the views of the
World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent. This study was approved by
the UCLA Institutional Review Board. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Leonardo Bursztyn, Bruno Ferman, Stefano Fiorin, Martin Kanz, and Gautam Rao.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Status Goods: Experimental Evidence from Platinum Credit Cards
Leonardo Bursztyn, Bruno Ferman, Stefano Fiorin, Martin Kanz, and Gautam Rao
NBER Working Paper No. 23414
May 2017
JEL No. C93,D03,D12,O12
ABSTRACT
This paper provides novel field-experimental evidence on status goods. We work with an
Indonesian bank that markets platinum credit cards to high-income customers. In a first
experiment, we show that demand for the platinum card greatly exceeds demand for a nondescript
control product with identical benefits, suggesting demand for the pure status aspect of the card.
Transaction data reveal that platinum cards are more likely to be used in social contexts, implying
social image motivations. Combining price variation with information on the use of the card
sheds light on the magnitude of the demand for social status. In a second experiment, we provide
evidence of positional externalities from the consumption of these status goods. The final
experiment shows that increasing self-esteem causally reduces demand for status goods. We infer
that part of the demand for status is psychological in nature, and that social image is a substitute
for self-image.
Leonardo Bursztyn Martin Kanz
Department of Economics The World Bank
University of Chicago 1818 H Street NW
1126 E. 59th Street Washington, DC 20433
Chicago, IL 60637 mkanz@worldbank.org
and NBER
bursztyn@uchicago.edu Gautam Rao
Department of Economics
Bruno Ferman Harvard University
Sao Paulo School of Economics, FGV Littauer M-30
Rua Itapeva n 474 Cambridge, MA 02138
Sao Paulo, Brazil, 01332-000 and NBER
bruno.ferman@fgv.br grao@fas.harvard.edu
Stefano Fiorin
Anderson School of Management
University of California, Los Angeles
110 Westwood Plaza C502
Los Angeles, CA 90095
stefanofiorin@ucla.edu

1 Introduction
Social image concerns affect many important behaviors, from donations to political behaviors to
student effort (Perez-Truglia and Cruces, Forthcoming; DellaVigna et al., 2012, 2017; Bursztyn and
Jensen, 2015; Enikolopov et al., 2017). A fundamental economic behavior – consumption – may
also be shaped by social image concerns. Specifically, a desire to signal high income or wealth
may cause consumers to purchase status goods.1 In theory, such conspicuous consumption can
impose negative positional externalities, and lead to wasteful spending in a consumption rat race.2
Empirical research has highlighted the potential role of conspicuous consumption in important
economic phenomena such as the wealth gap between Blacks and Whites in the United States
(Charles et al., 2009), bankruptcy decisions (Agarwal et al., 2016, 2017), and large expenditures on
weddings (Bloch et al., 2004) and festivals (Rao, 2001) among the poor in developing countries.3
However, directly testing for status concerns in consumption is challenging. With observational
consumption data, it is difficult to fully separate unobserved consumption utility from a desire to
signal high income. For example, a person who buys a Ferrari and an Armani suit could simply
have a particularly strong taste for nice cars or fashionable clothes. Moreover, such consumption
decisions could be driven by self-image and identity, rather than social image. That is, consuming
the types of goods associated with wealth might provide an individual with psychic utility, even if
that consumption was invisible to others (Akerlof and Kranton, 2000). More generally, self-image
or identity and the demand for status could be deeply connected, and it remains an open question
whether self and social image are substitutes or complements. Nor do we understand whether the
demand for social image is purely instrumental, or instead is also valued for hedonic reasons.
Inthispaper,we(i)providethefirstfield-experimentalevidenceoftheexistenceofstatusgoods,
and shed light on the magnitude of the demand for status; (ii) test for the associated positional
externalities;and(iii)showthatthedemandforstatusisinpartpsychological(asopposedtopurely
instrumental), withsocialimageactingasasubstituteforself-image. Weworkwithalargebankin
Indonesiatodesignthreerelatedexperimentsthatmarketthebank’spopularplatinumcreditcards.
Thecreditcardsinourexperimentarewidely-recognizedthroughoutIndonesia.4 Theyaretypically
restricted to high-income customers, and come with a number of instrumental benefits, such as a
higher credit limit and discounts on the purchase of luxury goods. Our sample consists largely
of urban, (upper) middle-class bank customers. We consider this an important context in which
to study conspicuous consumption. The developing world is experiencing rapid economic growth
1See Veblen 1899; Duesenberry 1949, and Bagwell and Bernheim 1996.
2See, for example, Frank 1985, Banerjee 1990 and Hopkins and Kornienko 2004.
3In fact, the role of income-signaling in consumption was already pointed out by Adam Smith in the Wealth of
Nations: “A linen shirt, for example, is strictly speaking, not a necessary of life. [...] But in the present times,
throughthegreaterpartofEurope,acreditableday-labourerwouldbeashamedtoappearinpublicwithoutalinen
shirt,thewantofwhichwouldbesupposedtodenotethatdisgracefuldegreeofpovertywhich,itispresumed,nobody
can well fall into without extreme bad conduct” (Smith, 1776).
4We confirm that the cards are viewed as prestigious, using survey evidence presented below.
1

and urbanization – precisely the conditions under which Veblen originally theorized conspicuous
consumption would be most important. Recent estimates suggest that approximately 130 million
of 330 million global luxury good consumers are located in emerging markets.5 In Indonesia, for
instance, there are an estimated 74 million middle-class consumers, and this number is expected to
double by 2020.6 Such individuals are obtaining access to credit cards and a broader set of visible
consumption and luxury goods.
Isolating the demand for status. The first experiment shows that a substantial part of the
demand for the platinum card is explained by the desire to own the prestigious card itself, beyond
the tangible benefits and services it comes with. The innovation of this experiment is to engineer a
controlproductwhichholdsconstantalltheinstrumentalbenefitsoftheplatinumcreditcard,while
stripping away the associated status component. Specifically, we offer paid credit card upgrades
to a population of bank customers. In a control group, customers are offered all the financial
services and instrumental benefits of the platinum card, made available as a benefits upgrade on
a nondescript credit card. In a treatment group, customers are instead offered an upgrade to
an actual platinum card. In both groups, customers are truthfully told that they were randomly
selected to receive the offer, to avoid providing information about their relative income and status.
We find that demand for the platinum card (21% take-up at market price) is substantially
higher than demand for the instrumental benefits it comes with (14% at the same price), providing
prima facie evidence of demand for the status aspect of the card.7 The difference in demand for
the two offers (7 percentage points) is economically meaningful: offering a 25% price discount on
the instrumental benefits package in the control group increases take-up by only 3.7 percentage
points. Surveys and interviews of customers assigned to the control group suggest that the benefits
package was fully credible. Despite believing that they would receive the exact same benefits and
services as platinum card-holders, control group customers were less likely to accept the offer.
Demandforthestatusaspectofthecarddecreases withincome. Itistherelativelylower-income
individuals in the sample who show the highest demand for the status aspect of the platinum
card. By contrast, the richest customers show no differential demand for the actual platinum card
comparedtotheinstrumentalbenefitsupgrade. Ourinterpretationisthatricherindividualsalready
have ways to signal their income, while the platinum credit cards are a more powerful (marginal)
signaling tool for those with comparatively lower incomes.
5See “Luxury Goods Worldwide Market Study” Bain & Company, 2014. See Banerjee and Duflo (2008) for
evidence on the consumption patterns of middle-class households around the world.
6See “Indonesia’s Rising Middle-Class and Affluent Consumers”. Boston Consulting Group, 2013.
7In a slightly modified variation of the platinum card script we instead truthfully informed customers that they
were selected as a result of being among the bank’s top customers. In principle, this might boost customers’ self-
image, yet it has little additional impact on take-up (23% compared to 21% for those informed they were selected
at random). Note also that both scripts are truthful. The sample for this first experiment consisted of existing
customerswhoarebothselectedtobehigherincomethanthetypicalbankcustomer,and drawnrandomlyfromthe
list of such customers, as well as randomly assigned to treatments. Thus, the customers are truly randomly selected
and also truly chosen based on their income.
2