NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ARE U.S. COMPANIES TOO SHORT-TERM ORIENTED? SOME THOUGHTS
Steven N. Kaplan
Working Paper 23464
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23464
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2017
Thanks to Josh Lerner, Yasin Ozcan and Scott Stern and participants at the NBER's Innovation
Policy and the Economy Conference for helpful comments. And thanks to the Fama-Miller
Center at Chicago Booth for financial support. Kaplan has sat on the boards of several U.S.
companies and one U.S. mutual fund. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Steven N. Kaplan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Are U.S. Companies Too Short-Term Oriented? Some Thoughts
Steven N. Kaplan
NBER Working Paper No. 23464
June 2017
JEL No. G3,L25
ABSTRACT
U.S. companies are often criticized for being overly short-term oriented. This paper documents
that those criticisms have a long history, going back at least thirty-five years. The paper then
considers the implications of sustained short-termism for corporate profits, venture capital
investments and returns, private equity investments and returns, and corporate valuations. The
paper finds little long-term evidence that is consistent with the predictions of the short-term
critics.
Steven N. Kaplan
Booth School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
steven.kaplan@chicagobooth.edu

“I have observed that not the man who hopes, when others despair, but the man who
despairs when others hope, is admired by a large class of persons as a sage.” John Stuart
Mill
U.S. companies are frequently criticized for focusing too much on the short run and not
enough on the long run. For example, Laurence Fink, the CEO of BlackRock, one of the largest
money managers, wrote that “the effects of the short-termist phenomenon are troubling . . . more
and more corporate leaders have responded with actions that can deliver immediate returns to
shareholders, such as buybacks or dividend increases, while underinvesting in innovation, skilled
workforces or essential capital expenditures necessary to sustain long-term growth.”1 The
Report of the Commission on Inclusive Prosperity (co-chaired by Larry Summers) similarly
weighed in, “An additional reason for the absence of inclusive prosperity is the changing nature
of corporate behavior. Business leaders, government officials and academics have pointed out
that corporations have shifted their traditional focus on long-term profit maximization to
maximizing short-term stock-market valuations. One reason that economists have advanced for
this transition to corporate short- termism is the overwhelming shift to stock-market-based
compensation for CEOs and other highly compensated executives at publicly traded
corporations.”2
In other words, these critics argue that US companies as a group destroy value by not
investing for the long run. More formally, the short-term argument can be summarized as
follows. U.S companies as a group underinvest in capital expenditures as well as research and
development. According to the argument, this benefits the companies in the short- term, but
harms the companies in the long run where the short-term is usually defined as the current
quarter or, perhaps, current year or two, while the long-term would be more than five years out.
1 Fink (2015).
2 See Summers and Ball (2015).
1

Poor corporate governance and overly generous pay plans for CEOs that reward short-term
behavior are often cited as accomplices to short-termism.3
The critics also point to empirical evidence to support their positions. For example,
Graham et al. (2005) survey 401 financial executives and find that 78 percent would sacrifice
long-term value to smooth earnings. Others point to corporate dividends and buybacks.
Lazonick (2014) shows that S&P 500 companies paid out over 90% of their net income in
dividends and share repurchases, leaving little available for investment in the long-term.
Lazonick and others contend that companies buy back their own stock to boost their share prices
in the short run, regardless of the long-term impact.
These criticisms, however, are not new. They have been raised, prominently, in some
form or another since the late 1970s. In this paper, I present those historical criticisms. I then
consider the implications of sustained short-termism for corporate profits, venture capital
investment and returns, private equity investment and returns, and corporate valuations. In fact,
there is very little long-term evidence that is consistent with the predictions of the short-term
critics.4
1. Some Short-termist History
The criticism that US companies are plagued by short-termism and poor governance has
a long history. In 1980, Harvard Business School’s Robert H. Hayes and William J. Abernathy
wrote an influential article criticizing American companies for being too short-term oriented:
“By their preference for servicing existing markets rather than creating new ones and by
their devotion to short-term returns and management by the numbers, many of them have
3 See also Martin (2015) and Center for American Progress (2016).
4 Also see Roe (2013) who presents some historical criticisms and empirical evidence, and reaches a similar
conclusion.
2