NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CREDIT MARKET FREEZES
Efraim Benmelech
Nittai K. Bergman
Working Paper 23512
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23512
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2017
We thank Bengt Holmstrom for numerous conversations. We also thank Marty Eichanbaum, Ravi
Jaganathan, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Jonathan Parker, Sergio Rebelo, Steve Strongin, our NBER
Macro Annual discussants V. V. Chari and Raghu Rajan, and seminar participants at the
Goldman Sachs Global Markets Institute Academic Fellowship Conference and the NBER's 32nd
Annual Conference on Macroeconomics for many comments that have improved the paper. We
are grateful to Jack Bao and Kewei Hou for sharing their bond liquidity data. Shoham
Benmelech, Zach Mikaya, Khizar Qureshi, Jeremy Trubnick and Yupeng Wang provided
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Efraim Benmelech and Nittai K. Bergman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Credit Market Freezes
Efraim Benmelech and Nittai K. Bergman
NBER Working Paper No. 23512
June 2017
JEL No. G01,G12,G21
ABSTRACT
Credit market freezes in which debt issuance declines dramatically and market liquidity
evaporates are typically observed during financial crises. In the financial crisis of 2008-09, the
structured credit market froze, issuance of corporate bonds declined, and secondary credit
markets became highly illiquid. In this paper we analyze liquidity in bond markets during
financial crises and compare two main theories of liquidity in markets: (1) asymmetric
information and adverse selection, and (2) heterogenous beliefs. Analyzing the 1873 financial
crisis as well as the 2008-09 crisis, we find that when bond value deteriorates, bond illiquidity
increases, consistent with an adverse selection model of the information sensitivity of debt
contracts. While we show that the adverse-selection model of debt liquidity explains a large
portion of the rise in illiquidity, we find little support for the hypothesis that opinion dispersion
explains illiquidity in financial crises.
Efraim Benmelech
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
e-benmelech@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Nittai K. Bergman
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-632
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
nbergman@mit.edu

Introduction
Financial market freezes – by which we mean large declines in the volume of transactions
in both the primary and the secondary markets that occur over a non-trivial period of
time – are typically observed during financial crises. For example, issuance of corporate,
mostly railroad, bonds collapsed during the financial crisis of 1873 and did not resume until
1879. Likewise, there was a considerable decline in bond issuances in the financial crises of
1884, 1893 and 1907. Similar patterns can be observed during the Great Depression when
issuance of bonds by industrial firms fell dramatically in 1931 and did not recover until
1935.1 In particular, issuance of real estate bonds, which accounted for 23% of the total
corporate bond issuance in the 1920s, came to a halt in 1929 when the market for such bonds
dried-up. Junk bond issuances that boomed in the first half of the 1980s collapsed in 1990
with the market remaining frozen until 1993. The IT revolution led to a boom in issuance
of bonds by telecommunication companies which were in-turn purchased and securitized
into Collateralized Bond Obligations (CBO). The massive defaults by telecom companies
in 2001 and 2002 led to a collapse of the bond securitization market and CBOs have since
disappeared. A more recent example of a market freeze took place during the financial crisis
of 2008-09 with the collapse of the structured finance market – the largest and fastest growing
financial market in the years leading to the crisis. In particular, not only did the market for
mortgage-backed securities such as RMBS and CDOs collapse, but also, other, non-housing
segments of the structured finance markets – ranging from commercial loans securitizations
to asset-backed securities – came to a halt, and even the issuance of corporate bonds declined
significantly.
Credit freezes and liquidity dry-ups during financial crises affect secondary markets as
well. During the financial crisis of 2008-09 illiquidity in the bond market rose dramatically.
For example, according to Bao, Pan and Wang (2011), aggregate illiquidity doubled from
its pre-crisis levels in August 2007, and tripled in March 2008, during the collapse of Bear
Stearns. By September 2008, during the Lehman Brothers default and the bailout of AIG,
bond illiquidity was five times its pre-crisis level. As we show in our analysis below, illiquidity
in the bond market also rose sharply in the panic of 1873 – one of the worst financial crises
during the National-Bank era. For example, bid-ask spreads doubled from their pre-crisis
levels in August 1873 and remained elevated for more than a year.
This paper analyzes liquidity in bond markets during financial crises with an emphasis on
the most recent crisis of 2008-09. In doing so, we compare two main theories of liquidity in
markets: (1) asymmetric information and adverse selection, and (2) heterogenous beliefs.
1See Benmelech, Frydman and Papanikolaou (2017).
2

The classic literature explaining liquidity and frictions in trade between economic agents
relies on fundamental insights developed in the information economics literature. As first
shown in Akerlof (1970) and Spence (1973), private information held by economic agents
generates adverse selection in which buyers demand discounts reflecting their concern about
the negative information held by sellers. Dang, Gorton and Holmstr¨om (2012, 2013) and
Holmstr¨om (2015) apply these insights to develop an asymmetric-information theory of
liquidity in bond markets. This is the first theory we test to understand the determinants of
liquidity in bond markets during financial crises.
The fundamental insight of Dang, Gorton and Holmstro¨m is that the payoff structure of
debt contracts generates two regions in which bonds will trade. When bond default risk is
relatively low, bond payoffs will be comparatively insensitive to underlying firm value. The
value of private information, and hence adverse selection between economic agents, will be
relatively low. As a result, when default risk is low, debt is informationally insensitive, and
liquidity will be high. In contrast, when default risk rises, the sensitivity of bond value to
underlying firm value increases as the firm is nearing its default boundary. Private information
in this region is valuable, adverse selection is therefore high, and debt liquidity will decline.
The main prediction of the Dang, Gorton and Holmstro¨m model is thus that bond illiquidity
will rise as bond value declines, with the bond moving from the informationally insensitive to
the informationally sensitive regions.
The second theory of bond liquidity we analyze stems from the literature on heterogeneous
beliefs (see, e.g., Harrison and Kreps (1978), Varian (1989), and Harris and Raviv (1993)).
By assuming that agents hold different fundamental opinions about underlying asset values –
someagentsareoptimisticwhileothersarepessimistic–theliteratureonheterogeneousbeliefs
evades the classic no-trade results in the information economics literature (e.g. Rubinstein
(1975), Hakansson et al. (1982), and Milgrom and Stokey (1982)). Adverse selection is
thus mitigated – indeed, dissipated – by agents’ high certainty in the correctness of their
own opinion of asset value: agents engage in trade for their own perceived mutual benefit.
Differences of opinion can thus promote trade and increase liquidity. Indeed, if agent A values
an asset more than agent B, and believes B’s valuation to be simply wrong, then agent A
does not fear adverse selection in purchasing the asset from B, nor will she require a discount
in doing so. Our empirical tests are aimed, therefore, at analyzing to what extent differences
of opinion are positively related to liquidity in debt markets during the financial crisis of
2008-09.
One caveat about the theoretical prediction that differences of opinion lead to higher
liquidity, is that the theory relies on assumptions regarding the joint distribution of beliefs and
3