NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REORGANIZATION OR LIQUIDATION:
BANKRUPTCY CHOICE AND FIRM DYNAMICS
Dean Corbae
Pablo D'Erasmo
Working Paper 23515
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23515
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2017
We thank Gian Luca Clementi, Hulya Eraslan, and Vincenzo Quadrini as well as seminar
participants at Carnegie Mellon, Rice University, University College London, Ohio State
University, BI Norwegian Business School, Bank of Canada, Konstanz University, Macro
Finance Society, Society for Economic Dynamics Meetings, and the Econometric Society
Summer Meetings for helpful comments. The views expressed in this paper are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the
Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Dean Corbae and Pablo D'Erasmo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Reorganization or Liquidation: Bankruptcy Choice and Firm Dynamics
Dean Corbae and Pablo D'Erasmo
NBER Working Paper No. 23515
June 2017
JEL No. E22,G32,G33
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we ask how bankruptcy law affects the financial decisions of corporations and its
implications for firm dynamics. According to current U.S. law, firms have two bankruptcy
options: Chapter 7 liquidation and Chapter 11 reorganization. Using Compustat data, we first
document capital structure and investment decisions of non-bankrupt, Chapter 11, and Chapter 7
firms. Using those data moments, we then estimate parameters of a firm dynamics model with
endogenous entry and exit to include both bankruptcy options in a general equilibrium
environment. Finally, we evaluate a bankruptcy policy change recommended by the American
Bankruptcy Institute that amounts to a “fresh start” for bankrupt firms. We find that changes to
the law can have sizable consequences for borrowing costs and capital structure which via
selection affects productivity (allocative efficiency rises by 2.58%) and welfare (rises by 0.54%).
Dean Corbae
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin, Madison
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
corbae@ssc.wisc.edu
Pablo D'Erasmo
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Research Department
Ten Independence Mall
Philadelphia PA 19106
pabloderasmo@gmail.com

1 Introduction
According to Aghion, Hart, and Moore [2] (p. 524), Western bankruptcy procedures “are
thoughteithertocausetheliquidationofhealthyfirms(asinChapter7oftheU.S.Bankruptcy
Code) or to be inefficient and biased toward reorganization under incumbent management (as
in Chapter 11 in the United States).” Aghion, et. al. [2] go on to propose a bankruptcy policy
similar to a recent proposal by the American Bankruptcy Institute that amounts to a “fresh
start” for the firm (existing debt is forgiven, and the new all-equity firm is allocated to former
claim holders using the priority rule).1 To evaluate the implications of bankruptcy procedures
for firm value, industry dynamics, and household welfare, we estimate a structural corporate
finance model with both Chapter 7 and Chapter 11 bankruptcy options using Compustat data
and then consider the above mentioned policy counterfactual.
We find that the reform results in a considerable reduction of the bankruptcy rate (by
51.1%) and a shift toward reorganization (away from inefficient liquidation) with a modest
contraction of the exit rate. There is a significant increase in the investment rate (+19.1%)
at the firm level due, in most part, to a large reduction in the fraction of firms that operate
in the “inaction” region (i.e., firms operating with investment rates close to 0%). Prior to
the reform, incentives to hold capital as collateral are stronger and induce firms to operate
at an inefficient scale. Better credit terms after the reform result in a change in the firm
size distribution (the average size of incumbent decreases, and the average size of the entrant
increases), reduce the fraction of firms with investment bursts (by more than 5%), improve
allocative efficiency, and increase output weighted productivity by close to 0.5% (measured
total factor productivity (TFP) increases by a similar percentage). The combination of these
effects results in a reduction in aggregate adjustment and bankruptcy costs that induce an
increase in aggregate consumption (+0.54%).2
Besides evaluating an important policy counterfactual, our paper makes two further con-
tributions to the literature. First, using Compustat data from 1980 to 2014, we document
capital structure and investment differences between non-bankrupt, Chapter 11 and Chapter
7 firms.3 Our paper thus complements several studies that document heterogeneity among
firms that choose Chapter 7 and Chapter 11 bankruptcy. One of the most recent papers is by
Bris, Welch, and Zhu [10] who provide a comprehensive study of the costs of Chapter 7 versus
Chapter 11 in a sample of 300 public and private firms in Arizona and New York from 1995
to 2001. Reorganization by Chapter 11 comprises 80% of their sample. Chapter 11 firms are
1A Chapter 7 bankruptcy policy that gives consumers a “fresh start” has been in practice since 1978. For an
analysis of the policy, see Livshits, MacGee and Tertilt [30] and Chatterjee, et. al. [12].
2The idea that policies that affect the cost of exit can have important implications for entry, the firm size
distribution, and welfare is not new. For instance, Hopenhayn and Rogerson [26] (see Table 3) find that firing costs
can have a significant impact on hiring, the firm size distribution, and welfare.
3We complement Compustat with information from the UCLA-LoPucki Bankruptcy Research Database.
2

substantially larger in terms of assets, have a larger fraction of secured debt, and have roughly
similar debt-to-asset ratios to Chapter 7 (see their Table 1). Importantly, their paper docu-
ments substantial differences in recovery rates. In particular, Table 13 documents the median
(mean) recovery rate (as a percentage of the initial claim) as 5.8% (27.4%) for Chapter 7,
while it is 79.2% (69.4%) for Chapter 11. Further, the fraction of firms that have 0% recovery
is 79% for Chapter 7 and 0% for Chapter 11. These means are similar to those by Acharya,
Barath, and Srinivasan [1], who document (Table 8) that the mean recovery rate for Chapter
7 is 26.38% and for Chapter 11 is 68.43%.4
AsBris,et. al. [10]pointout,whetheracorporationfilesforChapter7or11isendogenous,
and self-selection can contaminate the estimation of bankruptcy costs. In particular, if firms
self-select, then it could be misleading to compare the cost of procedures without controlling
for endogeneity of chapter choice. The authors carefully attempt to control for self-selection
into bankruptcy chapter (Chapter 7 or 11) in their regressions. Endogeneity issues lead us
to consider a structural framework. Our second contribution is to extend the basic structural
corporate finance models of Cooley and Quadrini [13], Gomes [20], and Hennessy and Whited
[23]toincorporateanon-trivialbankruptcychoice.5,6,7 Addinganon-trivialbankruptcychoice
toanenvironmentwherecashflowscanturnnegative(duetofixedcosts,asinHopenhayn[24])
has important implications beyond the selection issues raised above. For instance, it implies
that liquidation arises in equilibrium for a subset of firms in our model, while it does not in
Cooley and Quadrini [13] or Hennessy and Whited [23]. It even shows up methodologically
since, with liquidation costs that depend on the amount of collateral, here we must expand
the state space and cannot simply use net worth. Further, these papers only consider take-it-
or-leave-it bargaining in renegotiation.8
Our paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we document bankruptcy facts in the Compu-
stat dataset. In Section 3, we propose a general equilibrium environment with firm dynamics
where there are Chapter 7 and Chapter 11 bankruptcy choices. Section 4 defines an equi-
librium, and Section 5 estimates model parameters for that environment. Section 6 presents
equilibrium capital structure and investment decision rules in the presence of competitive debt
4These values are themselves averages between no industry distress and industry distress states.
5Inanimportantcorporatefinancepaper,Broadie,Chernov,andSundaresan[11]studyChapter7versusChapter
11 decision problem but in a much simpler model with exogenous cash flows and initial bond finance of fixed
investment. Also related are Peri [35], who in a model with fixed capital, focuses on labor contract renegotiations
duringChapter11reorganization, andTamayo[40], whostudiestheeffectsofeliminatingChapter11reorganization
in a partial equilibrium model with private information where default can lead to liquidation or reorganization but
debt is constant over the life of the firm.
6Other closely related papers that incorporate liquidation include Arellano, Bai and Zhang [6]; D’Erasmo and
Moscoso Boedo [16]; Khan, Senga, and Thomas [28]; Meh and Terajima [32]; and Cooper and Ejarque [14].
7Our paper also contributes to the literature on firm dynamics and misallocation pioneered by Restuccia and
Rogerson [36] and Hsieh and Klenow [27], with important contributions by Guner, Ventura, and Xu [21]; Midrigan
and Xu [31]; and Moll [33]. See Hopenhayn [25] for a recent review of the literature.
8Eraslan [18] studies Chapter 11 in a more general bargaining environment.
3