RISK PREFERENCES IN SMALL AND LARGE STAKES:
EVIDENCE FROM INSURANCE CONTRACT DECISIONS
Benjamin L. Collier
Daniel Schwartz
Howard C. Kunreuther
Erwann O. Michel-Kerjan
WORKING PAPER 23579

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RISK PREFERENCES IN SMALL AND LARGE STAKES:
EVIDENCE FROM INSURANCE CONTRACT DECISIONS
Benjamin L. Collier
Daniel Schwartz
Howard C. Kunreuther
Erwann O. Michel-Kerjan
Working Paper 23579
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23579
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2017, Revised March 2018
We thank Levon Barseghyan, Georges Dionne, Glenn Harrison, Johannes Jasperson, Dylan Small
and seminar participants in the National Bureau of Economic Research Insurance Workshop,
Risk Theory Society, American Risk and Insurance Association, and Society for Judgment and
Decision Making for their guidance and insightful comments. We thank Juan Zhang for her
research assistance. This work is partially supported by the Zurich Insurance Foundation, the
Center for Risk and Economic Analysis of Terrorism Events (CREATE) at the University of
Southern California (U.S. Department of Homeland Security’s Center of Excellence), the
Travelers-Wharton Partnership for Risk Management Fund, and the Wharton Risk Management
and Decision Processes Center. D. Schwartz was supported by the Complex Engineering Systems
Institute (CONICYT – PIA – FB0816; ICM P-05-004-F). The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Benjamin L. Collier, Daniel Schwartz, Howard C. Kunreuther, and Erwann O.
Michel-Kerjan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Risk Preferences in Small and Large Stakes: Evidence from Insurance Contract Decisions
Benjamin L. Collier, Daniel Schwartz, Howard C. Kunreuther, and Erwann O. Michel-Kerjan
NBER Working Paper No. 23579
July 2017, Revised March 2018
JEL No. D12,D81,H42,Q54
ABSTRACT
We examine risk preferences using the flood insurance decisions of over 100,000 households. In
each contract, households make a small stakes decision, the deductible, and a large stakes one, the
coverage limit. Over 94 percent of household choose one of the two lowest deductibles out of six
options, and 77 percent fully insure, select a coverage limit of at least their home’s replacement
cost. Households must be extremely risk averse to explain each of these choices with standard
expected utility models. Households’ deductible choices imply a median relative risk aversion of
108. Households’ coverage limit choices require a median relative risk aversion of at least 112.
Their substantial risk aversion over large stakes is due to households’ tendency to fully insure
despite paying premiums well above their contracts’ expected value. Allowing for probability
distortions improves our models and explains the small and large decisions of most households in
our data. Assessing rank dependent utility models, we find that households follow two tenets of
prospect theory: overestimation of small probabilities and diminishing sensitivity to losses.
Benjamin L. Collier Howard C. Kunreuther
Department of Risk, Insurance, Operations and Information Management
and Healthcare Management The Wharton School
Fox School of Business University of Pennsylvania
1801 Liacouras Walk 3730 Walnut Street, 500 JMHH
Philadelphia, PA 19122 Philadelphia, PA 19104-6366
collier@temple.edu and NBER
kunreuther@wharton.upenn.edu
Daniel Schwartz
Department of Industrial Engineering Erwann O. Michel-Kerjan
University of Chile The Wharton School
Republica 701 University of Pennsylvania
Santiago, Chile Center for Risk Management
daschwar@dii.uchile.cl 3730 Walnut Street, 556 JMHH
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6340
erwannmichelkerjan@hotmail.com

Small and Large Stakes Preferences
1 Introduction
We analyze the risk preferences implied by the flood insurance decisions of over 100,000
households in flood-prone areas of the United States. These households purchase insurance from
the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) to protect their homes. Households make two
choices along a continuum of potential losses when purchasing flood insurance: the deductible
represents a small stakes decision and the coverage limit (i.e., the maximum an insurance claim
would pay) a large stakes decision.
Several papers show that households’ small stakes decisions, including their deductible
choices, can be difficult to reconcile with expected utility models (e.g., Rabin, 2000; Sydnor, 2010;
Barseghyan, Prince, and Teitelbaum, 2011). Yet even its critics often concede that “expected utility
theory certainly captures some of the intuition for risk aversion over very large stakes” (Rabin and
Thaler, 2001, p. 224). Economists may justifiably embrace expected utility theory if it describes
households’ most economically important choices.
We start by assessing whether households’ small and large stakes insurance decisions align
with standard formulations of expected utility theory. We model households as constant relative
risk aversion (CRRA) expected utility maximizers, and we identify the coefficient of relative risk
aversion ! that best explains households’ deductible choices and the coefficient that best explains
their coverage limit choices.2 We also examine other expected utility models such as using
constant absolute risk aversion (CARA). We use three approaches in our analysis. First, we
estimate a structural random utility model (McFadden, 1974) assuming that risk preferences are
similar across households. This model assumes that differences in household’s premium loads (the
ratio of premiums to a contract’s expected value) explain differences in choices. Second, we
estimate a structural random utility model that allows preferences to vary across households,
modeling risk aversion as a function of variables that have been shown to influence individuals’
risky decisions (e.g., cultural differences across regions). This model assumes that differences in
households’ insurance choices may be due to a combination of preference heterogeneity and
premium loads. Finally, we conduct a non-econometric analysis in which we identify the range of
relative risk aversion values that could explain a household’s deductible choice and the range that
could explain its coverage limit, which we call a “boundary analysis.”
2 CRRA utility is “the most widely used parametric family for fitting utility functions to data” (Wakker, 2008, p.1329).
2