NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS AND INFORMATION ACQUISITION:
IMPLICATIONS FOR ASSET PRICES AND INFORMATIONAL EFFICIENCY
Matthijs Breugem
Adrian Buss
Working Paper 23561
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23561
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2017
For useful comments and suggestions to this paper and its previous versions, we thank Andrea
Buffa (discussant), Will Cong (discussant), Bernard Dumas, Marcin Kacperczyk, Ron Kaniel
(discussant), Stijn van Nieuwerburgh, Anna Pavlova (discussant), Joel Peress, Zacharias Sautner,
Larissa Schaefer, Guenter Strobl, Raman Uppal, Dimitri Vayanos, Laura Veldkamp, Grigory
Vilkov, Jing Zeng and seminar participants at Frankfurt School of Finance and Management,
INSEAD, the 2016 European Summer Symposium in Financial Markets, the 2017 Australasian
Finance & Banking Conference, the 2017 Annual Meeting of the American Finance Association,
the 2017 Adam Smith Workshops in Asset Pricing and Corporate Finance, the Geneva School of
Economics and Management, the CEPR Second Annual Spring Symposium in Financial
Economics and the 2017 NBER conference on New Developments in Long-Term Asset
Management Conference. This research benefited from the support of the Europlace Institute of
Finance and the Labex Louis Bachelier. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Matthijs Breugem and Adrian Buss. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Institutional Investors and Information Acquisition: Implications for Asset Prices and Informational
Efficiency
Matthijs Breugem and Adrian Buss
NBER Working Paper No. 23561
June 2017
JEL No. G11,G14,G23
ABSTRACT
We jointly model the information choice and portfolio allocation problem of institutional
investors who are concerned about their performance relative to a benchmark. Benchmarking
increases an investor's effective risk-aversion, which reduces his willingness to speculate and,
consequently, his desire to acquire information. In equilibrium, an increase in the fraction of
benchmarked institutional investors leads to a decline in price informativeness, which can cause a
decline in the prices of all risky assets and the market portfolio. The decline in price
informativeness also leads to a substantial increase in return volatilities and allows non-
benchmarked investors to substantially outperformed benchmarked investors.
Matthijs Breugem
Frankfurt School of Finance and Management
Sonnemannstrasse 9-11
60314 Frankfurt
m.breugem@fs.de
Adrian Buss
INSEAD
Boulevard de Constance
77305 Fontainebleau Cedex
FRANCE
adrian.buss@insead.edu

Over the last decades, the importance of institutional investors in financial markets
has grown steadily. For example, the fraction of U.S. equity owned by institutional in-
vestors has risen from about 7% in 1950 to 67% in 2010 (French (2008), U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission(2013), Stambaugh(2014)), and institutionalinvestorsnowadaysac-
count for a majority of the transactions and trading volume (Griffin, Harris, and Topaloglu
(2003)). Moreover, recently there has been a substantial shift toward benchmarked institu-
tional investors, that is, institutional investors whose performance is evaluated relative to
an “index,” or benchmark portfolio.
While there is now a growing body of literature studying the asset pricing implications
of benchmarking, or, formally, linear performance fees, this literature has concentrated on
the case of symmetrically informed investors.1 In contrast, the focus of this paper is on
the interaction between benchmarking and endogenous information choice. Our objective is
to demonstrate how the growth of assets under management by benchmarked institutions
affects informational efficiency and asset prices in equilibrium. This will also allow us to
emphasizehownon-benchmarkedinvestors’portfolioandinformationchoiceaswellastheir
performance is influenced by the size of benchmarked institutions.
For this purpose, we develop an equilibrium model with two classes of heterogeneous
institutional investors, endogenous information allocation, CRRA-preferences and multiple
risky assets to learn about. The model has two key features. First, a fraction of the institu-
tional investors—the benchmarked investors—care not only about their own performance,
but also about their performance relative to an index, or, formally, their marginal utility is
increasing and their utility is decreasing in the benchmark. This might be due to explicit
reasons, for example, performance fees or a fund’s “style,” or implicit incentives, for in-
stance, through the performance-flow relation. Second, we allow for the joint determination
of the institutional investors’ portfolio allocation and information choice. That is, the two
groups of institutions (benchmarked and non-benchmarked) optimally decide how much in-
formation to acquire. They can also extract information from the equilibrium stock prices
1See,forexample,Brennan(1993),CuocoandKaniel(2011),BasakandPavlova(2013),Buffa,Vayanos,
and Woolley (2014), Basak and Pavlova (2016), and Buffa and Hodor (2017).
1

that imperfectly reveal the other investors’ information. Otherwise, the framework is kept
as simple as possible to illustrate the implications of benchmarking, but also to provide the
economic mechanisms that generate them in the clearest possible way.
In the first step, we highlight a novel economic channel through which relative perfor-
mance concerns affect an investor’s investment and information choice. That is, bench-
marking leads to an increase in an investor’s effective risk-aversion, particular so, as his
“surplus performance” relative to the index declines.
Wethenshow, usingaclosed-form, butapproximate, solutionthattheoptimalportfolio
shares of a benchmarked institutional investor can be decomposed into three components.
Thefirstcomponentisthestandardmean-varianceportfolioofanon-benchmarkedinvestor.
The second component is a hedging portfolio that implies a positive hedging demand for
“index stocks” that are included in the benchmark portfolio. The size of this hedging
portfolio is increasing in the degree of benchmarking, but is information-insensitive. The
third component captures the change in the investor’s risk attitude resulting from relative
performance concerns and, in general, reduces his demand for risky assets, increasingly so
as benchmarking strengthens.
As a direct consequence of the hedging demand for index stocks, a benchmarked insti-
tutional investor, on average, over-weights index stocks in his portfolio and under-weights
non-indexstocks. Fortypicalcalibrations,thishedgingdemandmorethanoffsetsthereduc-
tionindemandresultingfromthelower,effectiverisktolerance. Accordingly,benchmarking
leads, on average, to an excess demand for index stocks. Most important for our analysis,
however, is that in the presence of benchmarking, the investor makes only smaller bets
based on private information, or, formally, the sensitivity of his optimal portfolio composi-
tion to private information declines. For example, he less aggressively acquires shares of a
stock following good news, and vice versa for bad news. This is due to the higher effective
risk-aversion and the fact that the hedging demand is information-insensitive.
These changes in a benchmarked investor’s portfolio decisions have a direct impact
on his information choice. Intuitively, because his trading is less sensitive to private in-
2