NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE FINANCING OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN CHINA:
STIMULUS LOAN WANES AND SHADOW BANKING WAXES
Zhuo Chen
Zhiguo He
Chun Liu
Working Paper 23598
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23598
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2017, Revised October 2018
We thank Chong-En Bai, Jennifer Carpenter, Will Cong, Haoyu Gao, Kinda Hachem, Chang-tai
Hsieh, Zheng Liu, Jacopo Ponticelli, Zheng Michael Song, Jun Qian, Nancy Qian, Hong Ru,
Rengming Xie, Zhishu Yang, and participants at the 2016 Nankai University School of Finance
Annual Conference, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Central University of
Finance and Economics School of Finance, Renmin University of China Hanqing Institute,
Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen), 2017 NBER Chinese Economy working group
(Boston meeting), the 2nd IMF-Atlanta Fed Research Workshop on China’s Economy, and 2017
Asian Bureau of Finance and Economic Research Conference, the 2nd China Financial Research
Conference, 2017 China International Conference in Finance, 2017 Summer Institute of Finance
Conference, and 2017 HKUST Finance Symposium for helpful comments. We thank Yunjun Yu
and Yilin Zhang for providing more recent issuance purpose data of municipal corporate bonds,
and Chen gratefully acknowledges the support from Minsheng Wealth Management Research
Center at Tsinghua University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Zhuo Chen, Zhiguo He, and Chun Liu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Financing of Local Government in China: Stimulus Loan Wanes and Shadow Banking
Waxes
Zhuo Chen, Zhiguo He, and Chun Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 23598
July 2017, Revised October 2018
JEL No. F62,F63,G23,O16,O17,O53
ABSTRACT
China’s four-trillion-yuan stimulus package fueled by bank loans in 2009 has led to the rapid
growth of shadow banking activities after 2012. Local governments financed the stimulus through
bank loans in 2009, and resorted to non-bank debt financing after 2012 given the rollover
pressure from bank debt coming due, a manifestation of the stimulus-loan-hangover effect. Cross-
sectionally, provinces with greater bank loan growth in 2009 experienced more Municipal
Corporate Bonds issuance during 2012-2015, together with more shadow banking activities
including Entrusted loans and Wealth Management Products. We highlight the market forces
behind the regulation changes on local government debt post 2012.
Zhuo Chen Chun Liu
Tsinghua University School of Economics and Management
43 Chengfu Road Tsinghua University
Beijing, 100083 liuch@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn
China
chenzh@pbcsf.tsinghua.edu.cn
Zhiguo He
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
zhiguo.he@chicagobooth.edu
A is available at https://drive.google.com/file/d/0Bxk_O0Tjcokja1hZdTV5NXFhWVU/view

1 Introduction
Right after the 2007/08 global financial crisis hit the export-driven Chinese economy
heavily, the State Council of China announced the four-trillion-yuan plan in November
2008 to stimulate China’s economy to maintain its “usual” above-9% annual growth rate.
Bai et al. (2016) document that most of the stimulus package was implemented through
China’s local governments that finance the infrastructure investment by bank loans via
the off-balance-sheet local government financing vehicles (LGFVs thereafter). Although
this aggressive plan helped bolster the slumping Chinese economy, the resulting swelling
local government debt in China caught the wide attention of scholars and practitioners
all over the world. About five years later, more and more studies had emerged on the
unintended consequences of the 2009 stimulus package on the growth of China’s economy
post 2009.
We argue that one of these unintended consequences is the unprecedented rapid
growth of shadow banking activities in China after 2012. The origination of shadow
banking in China around 2008 can be attributed to other reasons (e.g., Hachem and Song
(2017a,b)). However, China’s shadow banking activities have experienced unprecedented
accelerated growth after 2012; for instance, Wealth Management Products (WMPs), a
widely used tool to attract off-balance-sheet deposits by commercial banks in China,
grew by a total of RMB 3.5 trillion during the three-year period from 2008 to 2011 but
increased by RMB 2.5 (3.1) trillion in a single year in 2012 (2013).
By focusing on the composition shift of the liability side of China’s local governments
since 2009, this paper shows the stimulus-loan-hangover effect pushed them toward non-
bank debt financing after 2012. The stimulus-loan-hangover effects include the financing
demand to continue the long-term infrastructure projects started in 2009, as well as the
rollover pressure of maturing bank loans that were taken on by LGFVs at that time.
These forces fostered the rapid growth of shadow banking activities after 2012, and most
of these non-bank debt financing sources are related to Trust loans and/or WMPs, two
off-balance-sheet items that are often regarded as the barometers of the shadow banking
activities in China.
We started by explaining the background of the 2009 four-trillion-yuan stimulus
package and its connections to local governments in China. Due to the public-goods
nature of the infrastructure-centric stimulus package, local governments carried out the
four-trillion-yuan expansion in 2009. However, according to the 1994 budget law, local
governments are not allowed to borrow. To facilitate and expedite the stimulus plan,
Beijing explicitly encouraged municipals to borrow from banks through their LGFVs, an
1

important group of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) in China. As planned, bank loans
and investment soared in 2009, but municipals were left with mounting bank debt.
Facing the rising warnings of local government debt, starting in the second half of
2010, Beijing reverted its ultra-expansive credit policy back to its normal level, and the
National Audit Office (NAO) conducted two comprehensive surveys on local government
debt. These two official reports, dated December 2010 and June 2013, are the most
authoritative documents that shape all discussions on this topic. Based on the mid-2013
report, we focus on four different categories of debt that are sitting on the liability side
of local governments: Bank loans, Munibonds, Municipal Corporate Bonds, and Trust
loans, with the latter three types being non-bank debts.
Our paper focuses on the third type of debt, namely, Municipal Corporate Bonds
(MCBs hereafter).1 These bonds are issued by LGFVs, and hence are corporate bonds
legally; but of course they have implicit guarantees from corresponding local govern-
ments, and hence enjoy the extra safety of municipal bonds. These bail-out expectations,
especially for LGFVs that are both SOEs and backed by local governments, are widely
spread and particularly relevant in China.2
We highlight that our study treats the corporate bonds sector as an integrated part
of the shadow banking system in China.3 Although corporate bonds, which include
MCBs issued by LGFVs, are commonly viewed as standard and transparent financial
marketinstrumentsinChina, theywereheavilypurchasedbyWMPs, whicharethemost
important component of Chinese shadow banking activities. Put simply, a majority of
the Chinese corproate bond sector is funded by shadow banking. According to recent
studies based on regulatory data (Ehlers et al. (2018); Lei et al. (2018)), around 40% of
1It is “Cheng-Tou-Zhai” in Chinese, or “city investment bonds” by a literal word-for-word transla-
tion. We adopt “Municipal Corporate Bond” from the English translation the “Cheng-Tou-Zhai” index
provided by the China Securities Index Company Limited (CSI), which is the leading index provider
in China (e.g., CSI300 index) and is jointly owned by the Shenzhen Stock Exchange and the Shanghai
Stock Exchange. In the literature, papers have been using different translations; for instance, local gov-
ernment bonds by Huang et al. (2016) , Chengtou bonds by Ang et al. (2017), and urban construction
and investment bonds by Gao et al. (2018). Some practitioners’ articles also use the term LGFV bond.
2Up to August 2017, no single case of MCB default has occurred yet. On the other hand, Chinese
investors have started to embrace the default risk on corporate bonds. Because of the slowdown of
the Chinese economy in the last five years, firms–whether privately owned or state owned–started to
default sporadically in 2014, and in 2016 34 firms defaulted on their bonds in China’s corporate bond
market. However, local governments are still heavily involved in bankruptcy resolutions, because many
defaulting enterprises have strong ties to local governments.
3Theliteraturetypicallyclassifiestrustloans(Allenetal.(2017)),entrustedloans(Allenetal.(2018);
Chen et al. (2018b); He et al. (2018)), and undiscounted bank acceptance bills (An and Yu (2018)) as
shadow banking actitivies as surveyed by Hachem (2018). WMPs are widely referred to as shadow
banking activities, but they are not the ultimate users of funds (e.g., WMPs can be invested in trust
loans).
2