NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCE, FARMS, AND THE FED'S EARLY YEARS
Bruce Carlin
William Mann
Working Paper 23511
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23511
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2017
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Bruce Carlin and William Mann. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Finance, farms, and the Fed's early years
Bruce Carlin and William Mann
NBER Working Paper No. 23511
June 2017
JEL No. B26,G21,G28
ABSTRACT
We provide causal evidence that discount rate changes by the Federal Reserve affected economic
output in the 1920s. Our identification strategy exploits county-level variation in access to the
Fed's discount window, and we implement this strategy with hand-collected data on banking and
agriculture in Illinois in the early 20th century. The mechanism for the Fed's effect on agriculture
was a bank credit channel, operating independently of any deflationary effect on money supply.
Our findings suggest that the Fed deliberately managed transitory shocks during 1920-1921,
mitigating debt burdens with which farms would struggle in the years leading to the Great
Depression.
Bruce Carlin
Anderson Graduate School of Management
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C413
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
bruce.carlin@anderson.ucla.edu
William Mann
School of Management
UCLA Anderson
william.mann@anderson.ucla.edu

1 Introduction
Understanding the real effects of monetary policy is an issue of central importance in
economics and finance. However, measuring those effects empirically, or assessing their
mechanisms, poses an identification problem that is often insurmountable. The source of
this problem is simultaneity: Most analysis focuses on aggregate series of prices and output
during episodes of monetary policy change, but policy change is just as much a reaction to
as a catalyst for the fluctuations in these outcomes. This always makes it challenging to
disentangle the effects of policy changes from the circumstances surrounding them.
One important example of these challenges is the historical debate surrounding the de-
flationary depression of 1920-1921. This episode has long attracted attention as the first
episode in which the Fed attempted to influence the economy, through aggressive discount
rates increases during 1920. However, the depression was primarily precipitated by plum-
meting demand for American products following the end of World War I. Scholars have
debated, inconclusively, the relative importance of demand shocks, supply frictions, and the
Fed’s policy – either through the money supply or through credit markets – to the depression
and subsequent recovery.1
Inthispaper, weprovidecausalevidencethattheFed’sdiscountratechangesinthe1920s
did affect the local economy. We focus our analysis on the agricultural sector in Illinois and
find that county-level agricultural output would have been significantly higher in 1920 if not
for the aggressive rate increases of that year. The channel we identify for this effect is a
contraction in the supply of bank lending in rural areas, which operates separately from the
1 Friedman and Schwartz (1963) argue that rate increases worsened things by restricting the money
supply. Kuehn (2012) argues that the rate increases decreased aggregate demand via government spending,
not the money supply, while Soule (1947) and Romer (1988) emphasize supply instead of demand shifts as
themainculprit. Sage(1983)emphasizestheremovalofcreditfromhighly-indebtedfarmers. Meltzer(2000)
echoes all of these mechanisms. Frederico (2005) compares the “real” and “monetary” views of the episode.
1

deflationary channel that was the focus of Friedman and Schwartz (1963).
We further show that, when the Fed decreased the discount rate in the years following
the depression, output rebounded while debt levels did not. Conventional wisdom suggests
that a monetary authority should manage a credit bubble by sacrificing short-term output
to achieve a lower long-term debt burden. This appears to describe our findings. Therefore,
we provide an alternative view of the Fed’s actions during this episode, which are typically
portrayed as being naive.
To document these findings, and to address the simultaneity problem highlighted above,
weintroduceanidentificationstrategybasedonlocalvariationinaccesstotheFed’sdiscount
window, the primary lever of monetary policy at the time. National banks were required
to join the Federal Reserve upon its founding in 1913, thus gaining access to the discount
window. In contrast, state banks were given the choice whether to join. Virtually none
did, due to the offsetting costs of membership such as minimum reserve ratios and required
ownership of Fed stock.
This gave rise to regional variation in exposure to the Fed’s subsequent discount rate
changes based on whether local banks had been chartered as state or national banks in the
pre-Fed era. Importantly, exposure to discount rate fluctuations also affected local credit
availability: While the discount window was intended only as a liquidity facility for times
of stress, during its early years member banks used it much more liberally, with aggregate
borrowing from the discount window exceeding $2 billion by 1920.2 Managing this credit
bubble was one of the goals of the rate increases in 1920, and of later efforts to attach
“stigma” to discount-window borrowing.
To implement our strategy, we introduce hand-collected, county-level data on banking
2 See Gorton and Metrick (2013), Figure 1, which was originally produced by Eric Tallman.
2