NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHICH BANKS RECOVER FROM LARGE ADVERSE SHOCKS?
Emilia Bonaccorsi di Patti
Anil Kashyap
Working Paper 23654
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23654
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017
We thank Raghuram Rajan, Emre Ergunor, Greg Udell, and participants at seminars at the
University of Chicago, University of California at San Diego, the University of Texas Austin, the
University of Ancona and the BIS, for helpful comments and suggestions. We thank Roberto
Felici for outstanding research assistance. Kashyap thanks the Stigler Center, the Center for
Research on Securities Prices and the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago
Booth School of Business as well as the National Science Foundation for a grant administered by
the National Bureau of Economic Research for research support. The views expressed here are
those of the authors only and not necessarily of the institutions with which they are affiliated, nor
of the National Bureau of Economic Research. All errors are our own. In order to insure
confidentiality of the microeconomic data, the analysis and estimation was done at the Bank of
Italy.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23654.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Emilia Bonaccorsi di Patti and Anil Kashyap. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Which Banks Recover From Large Adverse Shocks?
Emilia Bonaccorsi di Patti and Anil Kashyap
NBER Working Paper No. 23654
August 2017
JEL No. G21,G28
ABSTRACT
We analyze the fate of 110 Italian banks that experienced abrupt drops in profitability, from
which about 1/3 recover. Recovery depends primarily on post-shock adjustments made by the
banks, particularly to their loan portfolios. Matched bank-borrower data shows that recovering
banks are significantly more aggressive in managing their riskiest clients. The risk management
differences are consistent with some banks cutting credit to very riskiest clients while others
appear to be gambling for reclamation by continuing to extend credit to high risk borrowers.
Emilia Bonaccorsi di Patti
Bank of Italy
Via Nazionale 91
00184 Roma,
Italy
emilia.bonaccorsidipatti@bancaditalia.it
Anil Kashyap
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
anil.kashyap@chicagobooth.edu

Introduction
Since the eruption of the global financial crisis, a large number of banks have faced sharp
drops in profitability. When a bank becomes distressed, the problems need to be addressed in a
timely fashion to minimize cost and to avoid disorderly resolution. The famous dictum by
Bagehot, paraphrased by Tucker (2009), holds “to avert panic, central banks should lend early
and freely (i.e. without limit), to solvent firms, against good collateral, and at ‘high rates’.” If a
bank is no longer viable, it might need to be resolved. Often, however, determining solvency is
very difficult, which complicates the usefulness of the dictum.
In the recent crisis authorities have in some cases nationalized the banks or they have
provided capital injections;1 in other cases banks have been allowed to operate without any public
support, although under increased scrutiny by supervisors.
The consequences for the taxpayers of the different alternatives can be substantial. A key
challenge is, therefore, to assess which banks can regain profitability and under which conditions.
If banks can recover without support, then allowing them to do so is clearly the best option for all
parties. But, delaying action can add to the eventual costs if later interventions are required. Even
in the case when the decision to offer state financial support has been taken, the assistance may
prove ineffective if no other actions that address the source of the problem are undertaken (Garcia
and Nieto (2005)).
There are differences of opinion on how to prioritize these other potential actions.
Qualitative evidence typically suggests that cleaning the portfolio and increasing the earning
capability of banks is a key to rehabilitation (OCC (1988)). Another view is that limiting asset
growth and increasing capital (the so-called “prompt corrective action” doctrine) is the most
effective strategy for dealing with impaired banks.2 While there is substantial evidence on the
determinants of bank distress (e.g. Wheelock and Wilson (2000), King et al. (2005)) there is
much less on the determinants of recovery and on how best to proceed once banks are seriously
distressed.
1 For example, in the United Kingdom recently banks were nationalized and operated for an extended period while
under government ownership. In other cases, such as Sweden in the early 1990s, Spain and Ireland during the recent
crisis, non-performing assets were moved into separate asset management companies that were distinct from the
banks. In the U.S. in 2009 the banks were recapitalized using private funds under the threat of a public capital
injection.
2 This doctrine was reflected in the U.S. legislation passed in response to the savings and loans crisis.
1

In this paper, we study how banks perform following sudden collapses in profitability,
distinguishing between banks that recover within three years from the negative shock and those
that do not. Looking over two or three years after the shock provides information on what
adjustments have been undertaken and whether they have facilitated recovery. Our analysis
covers all sharp profitability collapses that occurred in Italy from the early 1990s through the
mid- 2000s, before the global financial crisis. This period, therefore, includes both the downturn
and the subsequent economic recovery, allowing us to study banks all the way through a full
cycle.
The Italian experience is interesting in several respects. On the one hand, the sample
period includes the episode in the early 1990s when Italy suffered a major recession that led to
spike defaults and an acute collapse in bank profits, the typical pattern observed during the post-
2008 period in many advanced economies. We are able to follow the affected banks for enough
time afterwards to see which ones recovered and which did not, as well to compare the timing of
the recoveries to overall macroeconomic recovery. On the other hand, we also observe many
idiosyncratic bank problems in subsequent years, where individual banks (including some large
ones) get into trouble but the aggregate economy is not depressed. This allows us to contrast the
fate of these banks to that of the banks which became distressed when the macro conditions were
an important contributing factor.
Our empirical strategy is twofold. The first part of the analysis is descriptive. Here we
attempt to offer a comprehensive picture of what happens to banks starting once profits collapse.
We use some bank-level data to document observable differences between banks that do and do
not regain profitability. We also establish some new facts about when the recovery depends on
macro or regional conditions that are out of the hands of the individual banks.
The second part of the paper uses bank-firm relationship data to analyze banks’ risk
management policies. We show how the borrowers with different risk levels are treated by
different banks. More specifically, we compare the lending practices of banks that regain
profitability to those that do not, to isolate which factors that banks’ can control matter.
The main finding from the descriptive analysis is that recovery depends on the adjustments
made by banks in the wake of the shock of the level of risk contained in their loan portfolios.
Banks that recover are able to reduce what we define as idiosyncratic risk of their portfolio, i.e.
the component of credit risk that depends on their choices of who they to lend to.
2