NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CONTAGION DURING THE INITIAL BANKING PANIC OF THE GREAT DEPRESSION
Erik Heitfield
Gary Richardson
Shirley Wang
Working Paper 23629
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23629
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2017
The paper does reflects the opinions of the authors and does not necessarily represent the views
of the Board of Governors or the Federal Reserve System or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Erik Heitfield, Gary Richardson, and Shirley Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Contagion During the Initial Banking Panic of the Great Depression
Erik Heitfield, Gary Richardson, and Shirley Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 23629
July 2017
JEL No. C11,C23,C41,E02,N1,N12,N2,N22
ABSTRACT
The initial banking crisis of the Great Depression has been the subject of debate. Some scholars
believe a contagious panic spread among financial institutions. Others argue that suspensions
surged because fundamentals, such as losses on loans, drove banks out of business. This paper
nests those hypotheses in a single econometric framework, a Bayesian hazard rate model with
spatial and network effects. New data on correspondent networks and bank locations enables us
to determine which hypothesis fits the data best. The best fitting models are ones incorporating
network and geographic effects. The results are consistent with the description of events by
depression-era bankers, regulators, and newspapers. Contagion - both interbank and spatial -
propelled a panic which healthy banks survived but which forced illiquid and insolvent banks out
of operations.
Erik Heitfield Shirley Wang
Risk Analysis Section Cornell University
Division of Research and Statistics Graduate School of Business
Federal Reserve Board of Governors scw79@cornell.edu
20th Street and Constitution Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20551
erik.a.heitfield@frb.gov
Gary Richardson
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3155 Social Sciences Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
garyr@uci.edu

Contagion During the Initial Banking Panic of the Great
Depression: November and December, 1930
Erik Heitfield, Gary Richardson, and Shirley Wang
November 1, 2010
Abstract
The initial banking crisis of the Great Depression has been the subject of debate. Some
scholars believe a contagious panic spread among financial institutions. Others argue that
suspensions surged because fundamentals, such as losses on loans, drove banks out of business.
This paper nests those hypotheses in a single econometric framework, a Bayesian hazard rate
modelwithspatialandnetworkeffects. Newdataoncorrespondentnetworksandbanklocations
enables us to determine which hypothesis fits the data best. The best fitting models are ones
incorporting network and geographic effects. The results are consistent with the description of
events by depression-era bankers, regulators, and newspapers. Contagion - both interbank and
spatial-propelledapanicwhichhealthybankssurvivedbutwhichforcedilliquidandinsolvent
banks out of operations.
1 Introduction
During financial crises, optimal policies depend upon the nature of events. If contagion transmits
illiquidityfromoneinstitutiontothenext,theninjectingresourcesintothesystemcanyieldbenefits
far in excess of costs (Bernanke (1983), Diamond and Dybvig (1983), Diamond and Rajan (2005),
Diamond and Rajan (2006)). In contrast, if falling asset values force institutions into insolvency,
pumpingfundsintothefinancialsystemmaysustainzombiebanksandamplifyproblems. Determin-
ingwhethercontagionoccursis,therefore,akeyfordeterminingoptimalpoliciesandunderstanding
historical events.
Economists studying financial crises, however, disagree about the existence and nature of con-
tagion, even for events that have been observed by experts and studied extensively, such as the
financial crisis of 2008 and the banking turmoil of the Great Depression. The Depression’s initial
crisis occurred during the fall of 1930, when the United States economy appeared to be recovering
from a short, sharp contraction following the stock market crash. The initial crisis marked the
point when macroeconomic time series, such as the money stock, price level, industrial production,
and retail sales, began plunging toward the nadir reached two years later (Friedman and Schwartz
(1963)).
Conclusions concerning the banking crisis in the fall of 1930 fall into three schools of thought.
One, the crisis occurred because the real economy contracted. Asset prices fell. Loan default rates
rose. Insolvency forced banks out of business. Contagion played little or no role in event (Temin
(1976), White (1984)). Two, the crisis occurred because depositors panicked, perhaps as an over-
reaction to the failure of the Bank of United States, one of the largest commercial banks in New
York. Heavy withdrawals forced banks into receivership. The Federal Reserve could have eased the
crisis by acting as a lender of last resort (Friedman and Schwartz (1963), Richardson and Troost
(2010)). Three, the crisis began with the failure of Caldwell and Company, the largest bank holding
companyintheSouth,locatedinNashville,Tennessee,butwithsubsidiariesinseveralnearbystates.
The crisis initially spread through interbank networks extending from the Caldwell conglomerate.
Later, runs on banks radiated geographically from the vicinity of counterparty cascades (McFerrin
(1939), Richardson (2007), Wicker (1980)).
The debate remains unresolved for several reasons. Scholars lack data about paths of contagion,
such as interbank relationships and proximity to panics, and data from the balance sheets of most
1

of the banks caught up in the crisis. Scholars have yet to employ methods that nest the various
hypothesesinasingleempiricalframework,whichcanbeusedtoseewhichbestfitsthedata. Given
current data and techniques, predictions of pertinent theories appear observationally equivalent,
preventing scholars from distinguishing fact from fiction.
Thisessayrelaxesthoseconstraints. Newdatadescribethebalancesheetsofbanksinstatesnear
thecenterofthecrisis. Thedataindicatewhereeachbankoperatedandcorrespondentrelationships
among banks (i.e. ongoing financial interactions facilitated by deposits of funds). Documents from
the archives of the Federal Reserve describe what happened to each bank during the crisis (liquida-
tion,temporarysuspension,runbydepositors,etcetera)andallotherchangesofstatus(e.g. merger,
voluntary liquidation) that the banks experienced during the depression. A Bayesian hazard model
of bank suspensions incorporating that information enables the estimation of network and spatial
effects. Network effects illuminate contagion via interbank relationships. Spatial effects illuminate
contagion when depositors panic in the vicinity of banks that failed. Data on bank balance sheets
and the environments in which banks operated enables us to distinguish, as far as possible, between
liquidity and asset shocks.
Our econometric results indicate that contagion occurred during the initial banking crisis of the
GreatDepression. Contagionflowedthroughinterbankchannels, butquicklybecamegeographic, as
depositorspanickedinthevicinityofinstitutionsthatfailed. Theseshocks,onaverage,forcedweaker
banks out of business, generating a correlation between outcomes and balance-sheet characteristics
such as leverage, liquidity, and net worth. Contagion explains some, but not necessarily all, of the
tight clustering of failures in time and space.
Our results suggest that simple dichotomies that attribute bank failures primarily to either
liquidity shocks or asset shocks are insufficiently nuanced to explain why banks failed, and why
failures tended to be clustered in time and space. Banks that were less well capitalized and/or held
lessliquidassetspriortothecrisisdidfailinlargernumbers,butsodidbanksthathadcounterparty
relationships with or loacted near failed banks . Liquidity and asset shocks interacted. Panics force
banks to convert assets to cash quickly and at some loss. Runs targeted banks that depositors
believe have lost or anticipate will lose resources due to declining asset values. Depositors also act
strategically,andwithdrewfundsfrominstitutionswhenitappearedthatotherdepositorsaredoing
so. Statistical analysis rules out some, but not all, possible scenarios. In sum, statistical evidence
indicatescontagionplayedaprominentroleduringtheinitialbankingpanicoftheGreatDepression,
but given current capabilities, interpretation of the event still depends, in part, on the prior beliefs
of researchers.
2 Background
2.1 Data Sources
The data examined in this analysis come from several sources. Rand McNally Bankers’ Directory
describesbankbalancesheets,correspondentrelationships,andcharacteristics. Observationsdrawn
from the July issue provide a panel of annual observations on state and national banks at their
spring calls. The United States censuses of agriculture, manufacturing, and population describe the
characteristics of counties. This data can be downloaded from the Inter-university Consortium for
PoliticalandSocialResearch(ICPSR)StudyNumber3. Dun’sReview,theFederalReserveBulletin,
and Banking and Monetary Statistics provide time-series data on the aggregate economy.
Documents from the archives of the Federal Reserve Board describe changes in bank status.
Form St. 6386b from the Division of Bank Operations reports the incidence and cause of each bank
suspension. The reports distinguish between temporary and permanent suspensions. A temporary
suspension occurred when a bank closed its doors to depositors for at least one business day and
laterresumedoperations. Permanentsuspensions, whichwerefertoasliquidations, werethesubset
of suspensions in which banks ceased operations, surrendered charters, and repaid creditors under
theauspicesof acourt-appointed receiver. FormSt. 6386a reportschanges inbank statusincluding
voluntary liquidations and reopenings of suspended banks. Form St. 6386c reports consolidations
of banks.1
1TheserecordsresideinRecordGroup82,“CentralSubjectFileoftheFederalReserveBoardofGovernors,1913-
1954,”NationalArchivesandRecordsAdministration,CollegePark,Maryland. Fordetaileddescriptionsofthisdata,
seeRichardson(2006,2007a,2007b,and2008).
2