NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECTS OF U.S. MONETARY POLICY ON EMERGING MARKET ECONOMIES'
SOVEREIGN AND CORPORATE BOND MARKETS
John D. Burger
Francis E. Warnock
Veronica Cacdac Warnock
Working Paper 23628
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23628
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2017
This paper, funded by the Central Bank of Chile, was prepared for the Central Bank of Chile’s
Twentieth Annual Conference. The authors thank Anderson Silva of the World Bank, for
GEMLOC investability data; Branimir Grui of the BIS, for data on the size of local currency and
USD-denominated bond markets; McKinsey Global Institute, for data on the size of global
financial assets; and John Rogers, Chiara Scotti and Jonathan Wright, for their unconventional
monetary policy shocks data. We also thank John Ammer, Eric Swanson, Carlos Viana de
Carvalho (the discussant) and participants at the Twentieth Annual Conference of the Central
Bank of Chile for their helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by John D. Burger, Francis E. Warnock, and Veronica Cacdac Warnock. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effects of U.S. Monetary Policy on Emerging Market Economies' Sovereign and Corporate
Bond Markets
John D. Burger, Francis E. Warnock, and Veronica Cacdac Warnock
NBER Working Paper No. 23628
July 2017
JEL No. F21,F3,G15
ABSTRACT
We analyze the effect of the US Federal Reserve’s monetary policy on EME sovereign and
corporate bond markets by focusing on two dimensions: the evolution of the structure (size and
currency composition) of the bond markets and their allocations within the bond portfolios of US
investors. Global factors, particularly the level of long-term US Treasury yields, matter. Across
all specifications, when US long-term interest rates were low (i) EMEs issued more sovereign and
private-sector local currency bonds and more private-sector foreign currency bonds and (ii) US
investment in EME sovereign bonds (both local currency and USD-denominated) increased. In
contrast, after controlling for the level of US long-term interest rates, measures that attempt to
isolate the effects of US unconventional monetary policy are often statistically insignificant in our
analysis. Local factors matter too: The local currency government bond markets in countries with
stronger regulatory quality/creditor rights are larger and attract relatively more US investment.
Finally, consistent with Burger et al. (2017), we find that the well-known home bias phenomenon
is at least in part a home currency bias: US investors exhibit no home bias against some
countries’ USD-denominated bonds, whereas for local currency bonds the familiar home bias is
very present.
John D. Burger Veronica Cacdac Warnock
Loyola University Maryland Darden Business School
4501 N. Charles Street University of Virginia
Baltimore MD 21210-2699 Box 6550
jburger@loyola.edu Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
vwarnock@virginia.edu
Francis E. Warnock
Darden Business School
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
and NBER
warnockf@darden.virginia.edu

The global environment for emerging market economy (EME) bond markets has changed
dramatically over the past few decades. Local currency bond markets (LCBMs) have developed,
especially in EMEs with low inflation, stronger institutions and well defined creditor rights (see Burger
and Warnock 2003, 2006; Eichengreen and Luengnaruemitchai 2006, Claessens, Klingebiel and
Schmukler, 2007). Some EMEs have been able to borrow globally in their local currency, which enhances
financial stability by ameliorating the currency mismatches that were at the core of past crises (Goldstein
and Turner, 2004). However, large inflows of foreign investment can be problematic, as most extreme
capital flow episodes are driven by debt flows (Forbes and Warnock, 2013), credit booms lead to crises
(Mendoza and Terrones, 2008; Gourinchas and Obstfeld, 2012; Schularick and Taylor, 2012) and large
foreign investment flows into LCBMs can complicate the tasks of EME policymakers by appreciating real
exchange rates, fanning asset price bubbles and intensifying lending booms. Indeed, unconventional
monetary policy (UMP) by many advanced economies (AEs) may have propelled a global search-for-
yield strategy and contributed to a period of large and volatile inflows to EMEs. Many EME policymakers
who were worried about excessive upward pressure on local currencies and indiscriminate flows enabling
increasingly risky borrowing are now concerned about the possibility of an external shock (such as US
monetary policy tightening) prompting a stampede for the exits.
This paper is the latest in a series of ours on EME bond markets. Our early work was primarily
concerned with whether EME bond markets could ever develop and whether foreign investors would hold
EME local currency bonds as opposed to only holding EMEs’ foreign currency denominated bonds.
Burger and Warnock (2006, 2007) found that, counter to the “original sin” literature, policies and laws
indeed matter, as EMEs with stable inflation rates and strong creditor rights have more developed local
bond markets, rely less on foreign currency-denominated bonds and can attract US investors. Our
subsequent work focused in part on whether the global financial crisis put an end to EMEs’ bond market
1

development and foreigners’ interest in EME local currency bonds. Burger, Warnock and Warnock
(2012), focusing on the period from 2001 to the end of 2008—when the crisis had already begun—find
that policies and laws that helped improve macroeconomic stability and creditor rights enabled EME local
currency bond markets to grow substantially and also provided US investors with attractive returns. US
investors responded by sharply increasing their holdings of EME local currency bonds, especially in EMEs
with investor-friendly institutions and policies. Burger, Sengupta, Warnock and Warnock (2015) extend
that analysis in a panel dataset from 2006 through 2011, focusing on US investors’ reallocations within
their international bond portfolios. They note that the steady increase in US investors’ allocations towards
EME local currency bonds, which was unabated by the global financial crisis and even accelerated after
the crisis, was due in part to global ‘push’ factors, such as low US long-term interest rates and subdued
risk aversion or expected volatility. But also evident was investor differentiation among EMEs, with the
largest reallocations going to those EMEs with strong macroeconomic fundamentals, such as less volatile
inflation and more positive current account balances. Finally, Burger, Warnock and Warnock (2017),
using a panel dataset from 2006 to 2015, find a home currency bias: Not only do factors associated with
greater (or less) cross-border investment in bonds differ by currency denomination, but also the ever-
present home bias actually disappears in some cases when bonds are denominated in the investor’s
currency.
In this paper, we analyze bond markets using a panel dataset similar to that in Burger, Warnock
and Warnock (2017), spanning the period 2007 to 2015. Currency denomination, as in all of our bond
market papers, is an important aspect of our analysis, but unlike in our earlier work, the focus here is
squarely on sectoral aspects of EME bond markets. In particular, we assess the development of EME
sovereign and corporate bond markets, both local currency and foreign currency and attempt to understand
what drives US investors’ portfolios in those markets.
2