NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PRIVATE EQUITY AND FINANCIAL FRAGILITY DURING THE CRISIS
Shai Bernstein
Josh Lerner
Filippo Mezzanotti
Working Paper 23626
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23626
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2017
*Stanford University and National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER); Harvard University
and NBER; Northwestern University. We thank the Harvard Business School’s Division of
Research for financial support. We also thank seminar participants at Columbia, Duke, LBS,
MIT, and Northwestern for helpful comments, especially Sabrina Howell, David Robinson, and
Morten Sorensen. One of the authors has advised institutional investors in private equity funds,
private equity groups, and governments designing policies relevant to private equity. All errors
and omissions are our own. Emails: shaib@stanford.edu, josh@hbs.edu, and
filippo.mezzanotti@northwestern.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Shai Bernstein, Josh Lerner, and Filippo Mezzanotti. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Private Equity and Financial Fragility during the Crisis
Shai Bernstein, Josh Lerner, and Filippo Mezzanotti
NBER Working Paper No. 23626
July 2017
JEL No. E32,G24
ABSTRACT
Do private equity firms contribute to financial fragility during economic crises? We find that
during the 2008 financial crisis, PE-backed companies increased investments relative to their
peers, while also experiencing greater equity and debt inflows. The effects are stronger among
financially constrained companies and those whose private equity investors had more resources at
the onset of the crisis. PE-backed companies consequentially experienced higher asset growth and
increased market share during the crisis.
Shai Bernstein Filippo Mezzanotti
Stanford Graduate School of Business Kellogg School of Management
655 Knight Way 4389 Global Hub
Stanford, CA 94305 2211 Campus Drive
and NBER Evanston, IL 60201
shaib@stanford.edu filippo.mezzanotti@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Josh Lerner
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 214
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jlerner@hbs.edu

1 Introduction
The recent global financial crisis increased the attention paid by policy makers, regulators,
and academics to financial stability. While much attention has been devoted to deficiencies in the
banking system in this and earlier crises (Bernanke and Gertler, 1990; Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009;
and Fahlenbrach, Prilmeier, and Stulz, 2012), high levels of corporate debt have also triggered
concerns. Highly leveraged firms may enter financial distress during a crisis, exacerbating
cutbacks in investment and employment and contributing to the persistence of the downturn
(Bernanke, et al., 1988; and Bernanke, 1983).
The practices of the private equity (PE) industry in particular have raised concerns. In the
three years leading up to the crisis (between 2006 and 2008), global PE groups raised almost $2
trillion in equity1, with each dollar typically leveraged with more than two dollars of debt (Kaplan
and Stromberg, 2009). This phenomenon was not confined to the recent crisis. Private equity
markets are prone to distortions introduced by credit cycles. As documented by Axelson, et al.
(2013), periods characterized by booming financial markets also experienced greater private equity
fundraising, higher transaction valuations, and critically more leverage.
The impact of PE investment patterns on the economy during periods of financial turmoil,
however, remains poorly understood. On the one hand, the cyclicality of private equity activity,
combined with the leveraging of their portfolio companies, may exacerbate the negative effects of
shocks to the financial sector, aggravating the boom and bust dynamic of the economy. In line
with this idea, the Bank of England suggests that buyouts should be monitored for macro-
prudential reasons, because “the increased indebtedness of such companies poses risk to the
1 http://www.preqin.com
2

stability of the financial system.”2 Moreover, the pressure to complete deals during boom times
may lead to the financing of lower-quality firms (Kaplan and Stein, 1993), leaving PE-backed
companies more exposed to changes in underlying economic conditions. Finally, the increased
fundraising and investment during boom periods may reduce the ability of private equity groups
to effectively monitor and fund their portfolio companies once economic conditions deteriorate.
These concerns have led to efforts to cap the amount of leverage used in PE transactions by the
U.S. Federal Reserve Bank and the European Central Bank.
Alternatively, PE-backed companies may be resilient to downturns, and therefore play a
stabilizing role during bad times. In particular, these companies may be better positioned to obtain
external funding when financial markets are dysfunctional. First, PE groups have strong ties with
the banking industry (Ivashina and Kovner, 2011) and may be able to use these relationships to
access credit for their firms during periods of crisis. Second, because PE groups raise funds that
are drawn down and invested over multiple years—commitments that are very rarely abrogated—
they may have “deep pockets” during downturns. These capital commitments may allow them to
make equity investments in their firms when accessing other sources of equity is challenging.
Motivated by these alternative hypotheses, this paper seeks to understand whether private
equity contributed to the fragility of the economy in the United Kingdom (UK) during the recent
financial crisis. The UK is a perfect environment to study this question. First, the UK had the
largest private equity market as a share of GDP before the crisis (Blundell-Wignall, 2007)— with
PE assets at about 11% of GDP3 — and one of the largest in absolute value. In line with these
numbers, the Bank of England estimated that before the crisis, PE-backed companies had issued
2 Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 2013Q1
3 This number is obtained by dividing the total fundraising between 2004 and 2008, as estimated by the European
Venture Capital Association and PEREP Analytics, by GDP in 2008 (as reported by the World Bank).
3