NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MONETARY POLICY IN THE CAPITALS OF CAPITAL
Elena Gerko
Hélène Rey
Working Paper 23651
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23651
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017
This paper is based on Rey’s BBVA lecture delivered at the 2016 Annual AEA Meeting held in
San Francisco and at the Foundation BBVA in Madrid. We are grateful to the BBVA foundation.
We thank a referee and an editor for excellent suggestions. We also thank seminar participants at
the 2016 ASSA Meetings in San Francisco and at the BBVA Foundation in Madrid, Silvia
Miranda-Agrippino and Paolo Surico for comments as well as Thomas Ryland, James Cloyne,
Peter Karadi and Refet Gurkaynack for help with the data. All errors are ours. Hélène Rey thanks
the ERC for financial support (ERC Advanced Grant 695722). The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Elena Gerko and Hélène Rey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital
Elena Gerko and Hélène Rey
NBER Working Paper No. 23651
August 2017
JEL No. E4,E52,E58,F41,F6,G15
ABSTRACT
The importance of financial markets and international capital flows have increased greatly since
the 1990s. How does this affect the effectiveness of monetary policy? We analyse the
transmission of monetary policy in two important financial centres, the United States and the
United Kingdom. Studying the responses of mortgage and corporate spreads we find evidence in
favour of an important financial channel in both countries. Our identification strategy allows us to
study movements in the policy rates and the effect of forward guidance, broadly defined. We also
analyse international financial spillovers, which we find to be asymmetric.
Elena Gerko
London Business School
Regents Park
London NW1 4SA UK
egerko@london.edu
Hélène Rey
London Business School
Regents Park
London NW1 4SA
UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER
hrey@london.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23651

Gerko and Rey Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital 2
1. Introduction
How does monetary policy work in the “capitals of capital”1? Monetary policy
affects the real economy via different channels. Do these channels depend on
financialdevelopmentandinternationalfinanciallinkages?Onbeingahegemon
or not in the international monetary system? In a keynesian or neo-keynesian
world featuring nominal stickiness, output is demand determined in the short
run and monetary policy stimulates aggregate consumption and investment.
Thereisnofirstorderresponsesofspreadsorriskpremia(seeWoodford(2003)
and Gali (2008) for classic discussions). But when there are frictions in capital
markets, they amplify shocks and affect monetary policy transmission. In such
models, (for example Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010)), expansionary monetary
policy leads to an increase in the net worth of borrowers, whether they be
financial intermediaries or firms. This leads to an increase in lending and an
increase in aggregate demand. This is the credit channel of monetary policy
(BernankeandGertler(1995)).Anotherstreamofresearchhasemphasizedthe
risk-taking channel ofmonetary policy (BorioandZhu (2012),BrunoandShin
(2015) and Coimbra and Rey (2017)) where financial intermediation plays a
key role and a monetary policy loosening relaxes leverage constraints. These
views of the transmission channel are complementary to one another.
Inthispaperwestartfromtheobservationthattheimportanceoffinancial
markets and international capital flows have increased greatly since the 1990s
(seeLaneandMilesi-Ferretti(2007)andGourinchasandRey(2014)).Wefocus
on the transmission channels of monetary policy that occur through financial
intermediation and asset prices (credit channel or risk-taking channel) that
we subsume in a broadly defined financial channel of monetary policy. We
also note that the recent financial crisis underlines the importance of capital
market frictions in macroeconomic modelling. We analyse the effectiveness of
monetary policy in two important financial centres, the United States and
the United Kingdom, the “capitals of capital”. Our aim is not only to study
the transmission of US and UK monetary policies via the financial channel
domestically but also to look at potential international spillovers of these
monetary policies2.
1. CassisandCollier(2010)inabookentitled“CapitalsofCapital”provideadescription
oftheriseand fallofinternationalfinancial centresbetween1780and2009.
2. See alsoPassariand Rey(2015)andRey(2016).

Gerko and Rey Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital 3
The United States has been at the centre of the International Monetary
SystematleastsinceBrettonWoods,playingmajorrolesingoodsandfinancial
markets.TheDollaristhemaincurrencyinbankingandalargeshareofforeign
exchange turnover is in Dollars: according to the April 2016 BIS survey 87.6 %
of the share of currency turnover (out of 200% since a transaction involves two
currencies) was in Dollars. Approximately 60% of disclosed official reserves are
held in US Dollars. The United Kingdom was the previous currency hegemon.
The internationalization of the pound began early in the 1800s and continued
for more than a century. The industrial revolution transformed Britain into
the world’s richest economy and leading trading nation. The years after the
First World War saw the decline of Britain as an international power, but
sterling kept a lot of its functions. Only after the Second World War did
the decline of sterling accelerate, with a sharp rise in the use of the dollar
as an international currency (see Rey (2001)). Chi¸tu et al. (2014) finds that
the share of international reserves held in Sterling went from about 80% in
1950 to less than 10% in 2013. London is still however a major financial centre
receivingandsendinglargeamountsoffinancialflows.Bothcountriesarehome
to deep and sophisticated financial markets and have important international
linkages. They are the “capitals of capital”. Recent work has drawn attention
totheimportanceoftheUSFederalReserveinsettingthetoneininternational
financialmarketsworldwidewithimportanteffectsoncapitalflows,risk-taking
of financial intermediaries and on risky asset prices. Comovements in those
variables across the planet is what Rey (2013) called the global financial
cycle (see also Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2015), Bernanke (2016)). But just
how sensitive is a country like the United Kingdom to the global financial
cycle? As the former centre country of the international monetary system how
independentisitsmonetarypolicyfromthecurrenthegemon?Andhowpotent
is UK domestic monetary policy in the current environment of large capital
mobility across borders?
The empirical analysis of monetary policy effectiveness has a long and
distinguishedtraditionmakingitoneofthemoststudiedempiricalquestionsin
macroeconomics (for a recent excellent survey see Ramey (2016)). We identify
monetary policy shocks using high frequency asset price movements around
monetary policy events (such as FOMC announcements) following Bagliano
and Favero (1999), Kuttner (2001), Gu¨rkaynak et al. (2005), Gertler and
Karadi (2015), Nakamura and Steinsson (2013) and others. The idea behind