NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FUND TRADEOFFS
Lubos Pastor
Robert F. Stambaugh
Lucian A. Taylor
Working Paper 23670
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23670
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017, Revised October 2019
This paper previously circulated under the title “Portfolio Liquidity and Diversification: Theory and
Evidence.” The views in this paper are the responsibility of the authors, not the institutions they are
affiliated with, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research. We are grateful for comments from
our conference discussants Daniel Andrei, James Choi, Wayne Ferson, Mark Grinblatt, Paul Irvine,
Marcin Kacperczyk, Clemens Sialm, Ashish Tiwari, and Mungo Wilson. We are also grateful for comments
from Jonathan Berk, Gene Fama, Laszlo Jakab, Don Keim, Rob Vishny, Jeff Wurgler, and Yao Zeng,
conference participants at the AIM Investment Conference, AQR Insight Award Finalists Competition,
Conference on Professional Asset Management (Erasmus), Duke/UNC Asset Pricing Conference,
ESSFM Gerzensee, European Finance Association, FARFE (MIT), Five-Star Conference on Research
in Finance (NYU Stern), GSU-CEAR Finance Conference, NBER Conference on New Developments
in Long-Term Asset Management, Q Group, Western Finance Association, and seminar participants
at Boston University, Tulane University, University of Chicago, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
University of Pennsylvania, University of Utah, and WU Vienna. We are also grateful to Will Cassidy,
Yeguang Chi, and Pierre Jaffard for superb research assistance. This research was funded in part by
the Fama-Miller Center for Research in Finance and the Center for Research in Security Prices at Chicago
Booth.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23670.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2017 by Lubos Pastor, Robert F. Stambaugh, and Lucian A. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Fund Tradeoffs
Lubos Pastor, Robert F. Stambaugh, and Lucian A. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 23670
August 2017, Revised October 2019
JEL No. G11,G23
ABSTRACT
We study tradeoffs among active mutual funds' characteristics. In both our equilibrium model and
the data, funds with larger size, lower expense ratio, and higher turnover hold more-liquid
portfolios. Portfolio liquidity, a concept introduced here, depends not only on the liquidity of the
portfolio's holdings but also on the portfolio's diversification. We also confirm other model-
predicted tradeoffs: Larger funds are cheaper. Larger and cheaper funds are less active, based on
our new measure of activeness. Better-diversified funds hold less-liquid stocks; they are also
larger, cheaper, and trade more. These tradeoffs provide novel evidence of diseconomies of scale
in active management.
Lubos Pastor Lucian A. Taylor
University of Chicago Finance Department
Booth School of Business The Wharton School
5807 South Woodlawn Ave University of Pennsylvania
Chicago, IL 60637 2300 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
and NBER 3620 Locust Walk
lubos.pastor@chicagobooth.edu Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
luket@wharton.upenn.edu
Robert F. Stambaugh
Finance Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
stambaugh@wharton.upenn.edu

1. Introduction
Mutual funds manage tens of trillions of dollars. Through their investment decisions, these
funds play a major role in allocating capital in the economy. Myriad studies investigate fund
performance, but few address fund characteristics. We show that fund characteristics, par-
ticularly the tradeoffs among them, provide new insights into the economics of mutual funds.
Chief among these insights are novel perspectives on diseconomies of scale in active asset
management. Assuming such diseconomies, Berk and Green (2004) argue that investors allo-
cate money across funds such that, in equilibrium, each fund has zero expected performance
relative to a passive benchmark. If expected performance is always zero, then investigating
scale diseconomies by empirically linking fund size with performance faces an inherent chal-
lenge. While multiple studies report a negative size-performance relation, the evidence is
fairly sensitive to the methodological approach.1 In contrast, we argue that relations among
fund characteristics offer strong evidence of scale diseconomies in active management. For
example, we show that larger funds tend to trade less and hold more-liquid portfolios, a clear
indication of decreasing returns to scale.
We derive equilibrium relations among four key fund characteristics: fund size, expense
ratio, turnover, and portfolio liquidity. This last characteristic is novel. While the literature
presents a variety of liquidity measures for individual securities, it offers little guidance for
assessing liquidity at the portfolio level. We introduce the concept of portfolio liquidity,
and we show that diseconomies of scale lead funds to trade off this characteristic against
others in important ways. Our measure of portfolio liquidity is derived theoretically based
on the simple idea that a portfolio is more liquid if it has lower trading costs. Specifically, if
one trades equal dollar amounts of two portfolios, the portfolio with lower trading costs has
greater liquidity.
Ourequilibriummodelrelatesportfolioliquiditytofundsize, expenseratio, andturnover.
When choosing its characteristics, a fund recognizes that lower liquidity and higher turnover
raise expected gross profits but also raise transaction costs. Those costs increase in the
fund’s size as well. This role of fund size is recognized by investors when they decide how
much capital to allocate to the fund, as in Berk and Green (2004).
The model implies a novel link between the four key mutual fund characteristics. Funds
withlargersize, lowerexpenseratios, andhigherturnovershouldhavemore-liquidportfolios.
We investigate these implications in a sample of 2,789 active U.S. equity mutual funds from
1See, for example, P´astor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2015), Reuter and Zitzewitz (2015), and Zhu (2018).
Foradditionalevidenceonreturnstoscaleinmutualfunds, seeChenetal. (2004), Brisetal. (2007), Pollet
and Wilson (2008), Yan (2008), and Harvey and Liu (2017), among others.
1

1979 through 2014. When we estimate the cross-sectional regression of portfolio liquidity
on fund size, expense ratio, and turnover in our panel dataset, we find strong support for
the model. All three slopes have their predicted signs and are highly significant, both
economically and statistically. Funds that are larger, less expensive, and trade more tend to
hold more-liquid portfolios, as the model predicts. According to our model, these tradeoffs
are induced by diseconomies of scale. Intuitively, a large fund optimally reduces its trading
costs by trading less and holding a more-liquid portfolio.
A fund’s size trades off negatively with its expense ratio in our model. As in Berk and
Green(2004),afund’sfeerevenueisdeterminedbyitsskill,sochargingahigherexpenseratio
simply dictates a smaller fund. We find strong evidence of this tradeoff—a large negative
correlation between fund size and expense ratio—in the data.
With decreasing returns to scale, a fund also faces a tradeoff between its size and how
actively it pursues profit opportunities. Our model delivers a novel measure of a fund’s
activeness that combines the fund’s turnover with its portfolio liquidity. The latter charac-
teristic depends on the portfolio’s weights versus the benchmark, with a less-liquid portfolio
being more active. In that respect our measure of activeness resembles the popular active
share measure of Cremers and Petajisto (2009). Portfolio holdings are only part of the story,
though. In our model, a fund is also more active if it trades more. The model implies that
smaller funds as well as more expensive funds should be more active, and we find evidence
of both tradeoffs in the data. Similar properties for the turnover component of activeness
also emerge strongly in the data: funds that trade less are larger and cheaper, both across
funds and over time.
A fund’s scale is typically equated to its size, measured as assets under management
(AUM). Our study implies a new concept of scale, which depends not only on the fund’s
size but also on its activeness. In our model, funds face decreasing returns to scale, but the
implied measure of scale is size times activeness, not simply size. This idea makes sense.
If two funds manage equal amounts of money, but one of them deploys its money more
actively, it seems reasonable to view that fund as operating at a larger scale, essentially
leaving a bigger footprint in the market.
In deriving our measure of portfolio liquidity, we apply a familiar concept: less-liquid
assets are costlier to trade. We extend this concept to portfolios, viewing a portfolio as an
asset and thereby considering the cost of trading the portfolio as a given basket of securities.
When assessing portfolio liquidity, it seems natural to consider the average liquidity of the
portfolio’s constituents. For example, portfolios of small-cap stocks tend to be less liquid
than portfolios of large-cap stocks. While this assessment is a useful starting point, it is
2