NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
REGULATION OF CHARLATANS IN HIGH-SKILL PROFESSIONS
Jonathan B. Berk
Jules H. van Binsbergen
Working Paper 23696
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23696
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017
We thank Svetlana Bryzgalova, Peter DeMarzo, Vincent Glode, Peter Kondor, Christian Opp,
Paul Pfleiderer, Amit Seru, Gregor Matvos and seminar participants at LBS (Academic
Symposium), UCLA and Rice University for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Jonathan B. Berk and Jules H. van Binsbergen. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Regulation of Charlatans in High-Skill Professions
Jonathan B. Berk and Jules H. van Binsbergen
NBER Working Paper No. 23696
August 2017
JEL No. D11,D18,G18,K2,K22,K23,L51
ABSTRACT
We model a market for a skill that is in short supply and high demand, where the presence of
charlatans (professionals who sell a service that they do not deliver on) is an equilibrium
outcome. We use this model to evaluate the standards and disclosure requirements that exist in
these markets. We show that reducing the number of charlatans through regulation decreases
consumer surplus. Although both standards and disclosure drive charlatans out of the market,
consumers are worse off because of the resulting reduction in competition amongst producers.
Producers, on the other hand, strictly benefit from the regulation, implying that the regulation we
observe in these markets likely derives from producer interests. Using these insights, we study
the factors that drive the cross-sectional variation in charlatans across professions. Professions
with weak trade groups, skills in larger supply, shorter training periods and less informative
signals regarding the professional's skill, are more likely to feature charlatans.
Jonathan B. Berk
Stanford University
Graduate School of Business
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94306
and NBER
jonathan.b.berk@gmail.com
Jules H. van Binsbergen
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
julesv@wharton.upenn.edu

“We write today to ask what specific steps FINRA will take to address the pervasive
misconduct among its financial advisers and to protect families looking to invest their
hard-earned savings.” U.S. Senators E. Warren and T. Cotton, Letter to FINRA May
11th 2016.
An important role for government in the modern economy concerns the regulation of
standards and information disclosure for goods and services. As the introductory quote
from Senators Warren and Cotton illustrates, the justification legislators use for this role
is generally the protection of consumers. Indeed, the idea that regulation is in consumers’
interests is often taken for granted. Consequently, when Egan, Matvos and Seru (2016)
documented that in the financial services sector 7% of active financial advisors have a
misconduct conviction or settlement on their record, the results stirred enough interest to
spur the congressional hearing that resulted in the letter to FINRA quoted from above.
In this paper we question the conventional wisdom that the regulation of information
disclosure and standards benefits consumers. We show that for professions that require
a skill in short supply that is in great demand, government regulation through disclosure
requirements or standards reduces consumer surplus. Instead, the primary effect of reg-
ulation is to make producers better off, providing an explanation for why trade groups
often lobby for and are in favor of high standards.
We study the role of regulation in a parsimonious equilibrium model that features
charlatans — agents that know that they do not possess the skill to offer a particular
service but nevertheless may optimally choose to enter that profession and offer the ser-
vice. In the model, skilled agents are in short supply and consumers learn about the
skillfulness of the professional through a signal. The main intuition for why regulation
reduces consumer surplus is that, in expectation, consumers get what they pay for. That
is, beforeanygovernmentintervention, theprobabilitythattheconsumercouldbedealing
with a charlatan is reflected in a lower price for the service. If the government imposes a
standard by requiring a lower bound on the providers’ signal (a license), the price of the
service or good increases to reflect the lower probability of consumers having to deal with
a charlatan. If this were the only effect, consumers would be left indifferent: the increase
in their expected benefit is perfectly offset by the higher price that has to be paid for the
service. However, there is an additional effect. The minimum standard reduces the num-
ber of providers, thereby reducing competition in the market. This reduced competition
increases prices further, and thus lowers consumer surplus.
Perhaps most surprisingly, our results extend to information disclosure requirements.
1

It is often argued that informing consumers better about the products they buy, leaves
them better off, because they can make better choices.1 However, this logic ignores
the equilibrium effect on prices that such information revelation has. Consider the case
where the government is perfectly informed about who the charlatans are, and instead of
setting standards, simply communicates this information to consumers. It is tempting to
conclude that by providing this information, the government will make consumers better
off. We prove the opposite. Even though the information fully drives charlatans out of the
market, consumers are left worse off. The reason is that once again, there are two price
adjustments that follow from such information revelation. First, prices of the remaining
professionals will go up to reflect that consumers now have a zero probability of dealing
with a charlatan. This leaves consumers indifferent, they pay more, but they get better
service. But second, because competition amongst providers is reduced, prices will go up
further, and this second effect reduces consumer surplus.
Although overall welfare within a sector (that is the total welfare of all producers and
consumers within the sector) is rarely cited by policy makers as the reason to regulate,
one might argue that maximizing overall welfare within the sector should be the policy
objective. However, even under this objective, it is difficult to justify regulation. Informa-
tion disclosure, because it allows consumers to better discriminate, increases the supply
of skilled workers and thus increases overall welfare. But as we have already pointed out,
disclosure also increases producer welfare through higher wages. Thus producer interest
are aligned with overall welfare, so one would not expect there to be much need to require
information disclosure. Producers should disclose themselves. Standards, however, have
the opposite effect. Introducing a minimum standard into a market that does not have
a minimum standard reduces overall welfare because it reduces the supply of skill. So
regulation in this case is undesirable. Thus, in both cases, if the objective is to maximize
overall welfare within the sector, there appears little need to regulate.
These insights also have important implications for the debate in the economics lit-
erature on certification and licensing.2 The difference between these two regulations is
that a professional cannot practice without a license, but can practice without being cer-
tified. Consequently, we can interpret a licensing requirement as a minimum standard
and certification as requiring information disclosure. The existing literature comes down
in favor of certification because it provides consumers with information they otherwise do
not have access to. It can thus help them disentangle charlatans from skilled professionals
1Examples that comes to mind are the regulation of accounting standards and derivatives markets.
2See Kleiner and Krueger (2013) and Kleiner (2000) and the references therein.
2