NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO PEOPLE RESPOND TO THE MORTAGE INTEREST DEDUCTION? QUASI-EXPERIMENTAL
EVIDENCE FROM DENMARK
Jonathan Gruber
Amalie Jensen
Henrik Kleven
Working Paper 23600
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23600
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2017
We thank Jim Poterba for helpful conversations. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Jonathan Gruber, Amalie Jensen, and Henrik Kleven. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do People Respond to the Mortage Interest Deduction? Quasi-Experimental Evidence from
Denmark
Jonathan Gruber, Amalie Jensen, and Henrik Kleven
NBER Working Paper No. 23600
July 2017
JEL No. H24,H31
ABSTRACT
Using linked housing and tax records from Denmark combined with a major reform of the
mortgage interest deduction in the late 1980s, we carry out the first comprehensive long-term
study of how tax subsidies affect housing decisions. The reform introduced a large and sharp
reduction in the mortgage deduction for top-rate taxpayers, while reducing it much less or not at
all for lower-rate taxpayers. We present three main findings. First, the mortgage deduction has a
precisely estimated zero effect on homeownership. This holds even in the very long run. Second,
the mortgage deduction has a sizeable impact on housing demand at the intensive margin,
inducing homeowners to buy larger and more expensive houses. Third, the largest effect of the
mortgage deduction is on household financial decisions, inducing them to increase indebtedness.
These findings suggest that the mortgage interest deduction distorts the behavior of homeowners
at the intensive margin, but is ineffective at promoting homeownership at the extensive margin
and any externalities that may be associated with it.
Jonathan Gruber Henrik Kleven
Department of Economics, E52-434 Department of Economics and
MIT Woodrow Wilson School
77 Massachusetts Avenue Princeton University
Cambridge, MA 02139 238 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
and NBER Princeton NJ 08540
gruberj@mit.edu kleven@princeton.edu
Amalie Jensen
Department of Economics
University of Copenhagen
Oester Farimagsgade 5
DK-1353, Copenhagen K
Denmark
asj@econ.ku.dk

1 Introduction
Governments around the world have a common and expensive feature of their tax codes: tax
subsidiestohomeownership. Inmanycountries,thedeductibilityofmortgageinterestprovidesa
significant subsidy to ownership. In the United States, this tax subsidy amounted to $101 billion
in2014,whichismorethan20%aslargeastheentirefederaldeficitinthatyear(Gruber2015).
Thesesubsidiesaregenerallymotivatedbytheperceivedexternalitiesofhomeownership. As
Glaeser & Shapiro (2003) write: “To its supporters, the home mortgage interest deduction is the
cornerstone of American society. Homeownership gives people a stake in society and induces
them to care about their neighborhoods and towns. By subsidizing property ownership, the de-
duction induces people to invest and then to have a stake in our democracy. Ownership makes
peoplevoteforlong-runinvestmentsinsteadofshort-runtransfers.”Glaeser&Shapiro(2003)re-
viewalargebodyofempiricalevidencethatsupportstheexistenceofthesepositiveexternalities:
homeownershipispositivelycorrelatedwithpoliticalactivismandsocialconnection,andhomeo-
wnerstakebettercareoftheirproperties,leadingtohighervaluesforsurroundinghouses. While
suchcorrelationsaresuggestive,thereislittlecausalevidencefortheexistenceofexternalitiesdue
toowningratherthanrenting.1
Any externality-related argument for the mortgage interest deduction requires that the policy
is able to increase homeownership. Yet, we have relatively little evidence on how these tax sub-
sidies impact housing decisions. There is a sizeable literature, reviewed below, on the effects of
taxsubsidiesonfinancialdecisionssuchasindebtedness. Butthereislittleevidenceonhowthese
expensivesubsidiesimpactthedecisiontopurchaseahouseandthecharacteristicsofthathouse.
The lack of evidence on real housing responses is likely due to the fact that a convincing em-
pirical estimate must meet three requirements. The first is exogenous variation in the mortgage
interest deduction that is sufficiently large to be able to detect any effects. The second is micro
data that matches tax records to real information on housing decisions. And the third is a suffi-
ciently long time period to capture the long-run effect on homeownership, which tends to be a
slow-movingoutcome.
1ThemostconvincingevidenceisinEngelhardtetal.(2010), whouserandomizedaccesstosavingsaccountsthat
canbeusedforhomedownpaymentsasaninstrumentforhomeownership.Theyfindnoevidenceonawidevarietyof
measuresofsocialcapital,althoughtherewassomeeffectonhomemaintenanceexpenditures.
1

In this paper, we focus on a setting and natural experiment that meet these three criteria. The
experiment is a major tax reform in Denmark in the late 1980s. This reform significantly reduced
thesubsidytonegativecapitalincome(frommortgagesandotherborrowing)fortaxpayersinthe
top bracket, while reducing it much less for taxpayers in a middle bracket and raising it slightly
for taxpayers in a bottom bracket. The scaling back of the mortgage deduction raised the net-
of-tax interest rate by about 80% for the top group, by about 30% for the middle group, and left
it roughly unchanged for the bottom group.2 These large and discrete changes provide an ideal
setting for a difference-in-differences approach. Furthermore, we have for Denmark a unique set
ofdatathatmatchincometaxrecordstohousingrecordsfortheentirepopulationovermorethan
three decades. This allows us to carry out the first comprehensive long-term study of how tax
policyaffectshousingdecisions.
We use the matched panel data on taxes and housing to document the effects of tax subsidies
on the extensive margin of homeownership, the intensive margin of housing demand (home size
and home value), and finally the intensive margin of homeowner indebtedness. In each case,
we present clear graphical evidence of the effects of the tax reform, and then follow that with
regression-basedestimatesofelasticitieswithrespecttothenet-of-taxinterestrate.
We draw three main conclusions. First, there is a tightly estimated and robust zero effect of
taxsubsidiesonhomeownership. Overmultipletimeperiods,andconsideringmultipleempirical
strategies,wefindnoeffectofthetaxpolicychangeonwhetherhouseholdsownorrent. Second,
thereisacleareffectoftaxsubsidiesonthesizeandvalueofhomes. Thescalingbackofthesubsidy
leadtosizeablereductionsinbothsquarefootageandappraisedvalues,drivenbyhouseholdswho
movetodifferenthomesafterthereform. Theelasticityofhomesizewithrespecttothenet-of-tax
interest rate is about 0.1 in absolute value, while the elasticity of home value is about 0.2. Third,
thelargesteffectoftaxsubsidiesisonhouseholdfinancialdecisions. Thereductioninthesubsidy
induced homeowners to reduce total interest expenses by up to 20%, with an implied elasticity
withrespecttothenet-of-taxinterestrateequalto0.4.
Theseresultshaveimportantimplicationsforthedebateabouttaxsubsidiestoowner-occupied
housing. In particular, they strongly dispute the notion that the tax subsidy is justified by the
promotionofexternalitiesthroughownership. Therearesignificanteffectsonhomesizeandhome
2Atthetimeofthereform,thetopbracketincludedabout10%ofthepopulation,themiddlebracketincludedabout
35%ofthepopulation,thebottombracketincludedabout45%ofthepopulation,withtheremaining10%beingbelow
theexemptionthreshold.
2