NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INVESTMENT-HORIZON SPILLOVERS
Alexander M. Chinco
Mao Ye
Working Paper 23650
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23650
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017
We thank John Campbell, Bruce Carlin, Ian Dew-Becker, Andrew Ellul, Fangjian Fu, Xavier
Gabaix, Joel Hasbrouck, Ohad Kadan, Andrew Karolyi, Robert Korajczyk, Pete Kyle, Lubos
Pastor, Ronnie Sadka, Allan Timmermann, Jeff Wurgler, Amir Yaron, and Haoxiang Zhu as well
as seminar participants at Illinois, the NFA conference, the FRA conference, Washington
University of St. Louis, Northwestern, and Michigan State for extremely helpful comments and
suggestions. Tao Feng, Rukai Lou, Xin Wang, Robbie Xu, Fan Yang, Miles Zheng, and Chao Zi
provided excellent research assistance. This research is supported by National Science
Foundation grant 1352936 (joint with the Office of Financial Research at the U.S. Treasury
Department). This work also uses the Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment
(XSEDE), which is supported by National Science Foundation grant number OCI-1053575. We
thank David O’Neal of the Pittsburgh Supercomputer Center for his assistance with
supercomputing, which was made possible through the XSEDE Extended Collaborative Support
Service (ECSS) program. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Alexander M. Chinco and Mao Ye. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Investment-Horizon Spillovers
Alexander M. Chinco and Mao Ye
NBER Working Paper No. 23650
August 2017
JEL No. C55,C58,G12,G14
ABSTRACT
This paper uses wavelets to decompose each stock’s trading-volume variance into frequency-
specific components. We find that stocks dominated by short-run fluctuations in trading volume
have abnormal returns that are 1% per month higher than otherwise similar stocks where short-
run fluctuations in volume are less important—i.e., stocks with less of a short-run tilt. And, we
document that a stock’s short-run tilt can change rapidly from month to month, suggesting that
these abnormal returns are not due to some persistent firm characteristic that’s simultaneously
adding both short-run fluctuations and long-term risk.
Alexander M. Chinco
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
1206 S 6th St, Rm 343J
Champaign, IL 61820
AlexChinco@gmail.com
Mao Ye
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
343K Wohlers Hall
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
maoye@illinois.edu

1 Introduction
Long-term fundamentals get revealed in quarterly earnings reports and annual product re-
leases, but short-run traders can turn over “half their net holdings in 137 seconds (Kirilenko
et al., 2011).” These two frequencies differ by 5 orders of magnitude:
1 trade 60 sec 60 min 24 hr 365 days 1 year
2.3 105
137 sec × 1 min × 1 hr × 1 day × 1 year × 1 ancmt ≈ ×
Toputthisdifferenceinperspective,therehaveonlybeenaround2 105 generationssincethe
×
human/chimpanzee divergence (MacKay, 2003). So, long-term fundamentals quite literally
evolve at the speed of speciation from short-run traders’ point of view. And, because these
frequencies are so different, some people now believe that short-run trading activity “doesn’t
affect [long-term] investors very much.”1 But, is this correct? Can investors at the 1-month
horizon really ignore trading activity at the 1-minute horizon?
Motivated by this question, we study how short-run trading activity affects long-term
returns by decomposing each stock’s trading-volume variance into frequency-specific com-
ponents using the wavelet-variance estimator (Percival, 1995). After introducing this new
statistical tool, we present two main results. First, we show that stocks dominated by short-
run fluctuations in trading volume have abnormal returns that are 1% per month higher
than otherwise similar stocks where short-run fluctuations in volume are less important—
i.e., stocks with less of a “short-run tilt”. Second, we show that a stock’s short-run tilt can
change rapidly from month to month, suggesting these abnormal returns are not due to some
persistent firm characteristic that’s adding both short-run fluctuations and long-term risk.
New Estimator. What share of a stock’s trading-volume variance comes from changes in
volume from one minute to the next? What about from one hour to the next? Or, from
one day to the next? We begin our analysis by introducing the wavelet-variance estimator
to answer these questions. We use wavelets rather than sine and cosine waves to perform
this frequency decomposition because Fourier methods require trading-volume variance to be
constant, but modern equity markets are dominated by sporadic clusters of intense trading
activity followed by long quiet periods (Easley et al., 2012). And, wavelets are the natural
way to accommodate non-stationary trading-volume data.
This non-stationarity in trading volume is not just an empirical phenomenon, either.
It is present in any model where informed traders receive “private information only at the
beginningofthetradingsession(Vayanos, 2001, pg.133)”—i.e., inanymodelwhereinformed
traders have a well-defined investment horizon, where there is a beginning and an end to the
time interval when traders can exploit a piece of information. And, this fact motivates the
1Asness, C. and Mendelson, M. High-Frequency Hyperbole. Wall Street Journal. Apr 1, 2014.
2

link between frequency-specific fluctuations in volume and investment horizon.
For example, in Kyle (1985) an informed trader will choose his demand each period so
that the marginal benefit of acquiring an additional share is exactly offset by the expected
cost of the resulting price impact summed over all future trading periods. So, when there
are fewer future trading periods to bear the costs of any price impact, the informed trader
will submit more aggressive market orders, making extreme trading-volume realization more
likely during the second half of his investment horizon. Thus, if a large fraction of trading-
volume variance comes from changes in volume from one minute to the next, then there is
likely a large fraction of informed traders with a 2-minute investment horizon. Whereas, if
a larger fraction of variance comes from hour-to-hour or day-to-day changes in volume, then
there’s likely a larger fraction of informed traders with a 2-hour or 2-day investment horizon.
Descriptive Statistics. After introducing the wavelet-variance estimator, we next sum-
marize how the distribution of investment horizons varies over the entire cross-section of
stocks. These descriptive statistics about the distribution of investment horizons for the en-
tire cross-section are new and interesting because learning about the distribution of traders’
investment horizons used to mean finding data on their portfolio holdings, and this data is
hard to come by. So, earlier pioneering work was confined to studying either a small collec-
tion of stocks or a narrow range of horizons. For example, Brogaard et al. (2014) studies the
fraction of volume coming from high-frequency traders but for only 60 stocks. Alternatively,
Lan et al. (2015) studies institutional-investor turnover but only at the quarterly horizon.
For each NYSE-listed stock from January 2002 to December 2010, we use the wavelet-
variance estimator to compute the share of trading-volume variance in month m due to
fluctuations at each frequency ranging from a minute to a day. Then, for each stock-month,
we summarize the information in this distribution with a single slope coefficient, which we
refer to as a stock’s “short-run tilt”. Stocks with a larger short-run tilt in month m have
more of their trading-volume variance concentrated at higher frequencies. And, when we
sort stocks into quintiles based on their short-run tilt, we find that the typical stock in
the highest quintile is traded 5-times faster than the typical stock in the lowest quintile.
This difference is well outside the 95% confidence interval for what we should expect due
to measurement error, and it persists when we control for firm characteristics, liquidity, and
news announcements.
Horizon Spillover. Finally, we present our two main results. First, we show that the
quintile of stocks with the largest short-run tilt has abnormal returns that are 1% per month
higherthanthequintileofstockswiththesmallestshort-runtilt. Theseabnormalreturnsare
not explained by firm characteristics, news announcements, or standard liquidity measures.
3