NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MISPRICED INDEX OPTION PORTFOLIOS
George M. Constantinides
Michal Czerwonko
Stylianos Perrakis
Working Paper 23708
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23708
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017
We thank Giovanni Barone-Adesi, Brendan Beare, Jens Jackwerth, Carlo Sala, conference
participants, and our colleagues for their constructive feedback. Constantinides acknowledges
financial support from the Center for Research in Security prices, the University of Chicago and
as trustee/director of the DFA group of funds, SW7 Holdings, Cook County Illinois Investment
Policy Committee, and as member of the advisory board of FTSE Russell. Czerwonko and
Perrakis acknowledge financial support from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research
Council of Canada. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by George M. Constantinides, Michal Czerwonko, and Stylianos Perrakis. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Mispriced Index Option Portfolios
George M. Constantinides, Michal Czerwonko, and Stylianos Perrakis
NBER Working Paper No. 23708
August 2017
JEL No. G10,G11,G13,G23
ABSTRACT
The optimal portfolio of a utility-maximizing investor trading in the S&P 500 index and cash,
subject to proportional transaction costs, becomes stochastically dominated when overlaid with a
zero-net-cost portfolio of S&P 500 options bought at their ask and written at their bid price in
most months over 1990-2013. Dominance is prevalent when the ATM-IV is high, right skew is
low, and option maturity is short. The portfolios include mostly calls and positions are
overwhelmingly short. Similar results obtain with options on the CAC and DAX indices. The
results are explained neither by priced factors nor a non-monotonic stochastic discount factor.
George M. Constantinides Stylianos Perrakis
The University of Chicago Department of Finance
Booth School of Business Concordia University
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue 1455 de Maisonneuve Bvd. West.
Chicago, IL 60637 Quebec, Canada H3G 1M8
and NBER SPerrakis@jmsb.concordia.ca
gmc@ChicagoBooth.edu
Michal Czerwonko
McGill University
michalc04@gmail.com

1 Introduction
We consider an investor who trades at 28-, 14-, or seven-day intervals in the S&P 500 index and
a risk free bond, subject to proportional transaction costs. The investor maximizes the expectation
of her increasing and concave utility function of cash wealth at the end of the trading interval. We
then consider overlaying on this portfolio a zero-net-cost portfolio, the Option Trading or OT
portfolio, consisting of long and short positions in any number of European-style call and put
options on the index and borrowing or lending at the risk free rate. We account for transaction
costs in the trading of options by buying the options at their ask price and selling them at their bid
price.
We apply standard results of stochastic dominance and state sufficient conditions under
which the investor’s portfolio, overlaid with the zero-net-cost portfolio, stochastically dominates
the investor’s original portfolio. These conditions apply irrespective of the investor’s initial wealth
and utility function. An intuitive interpretation of stochastic dominance is that the investor
increases her expected utility by shifting income from states where the index level is high to states
where the index level is low at zero net cost while maintaining the same or higher expected
portfolio return.
In almost every month from 1990 to 2013 we identify zero-net-cost portfolios that
potentially imply stochastic dominance, using only information available at the time that the
portfolio is formed. For each date the set of admissible portfolios is derived by a numerical
algorithm presented in the appendix for which the total payoff is non-negative at low values of the
index support, intersects the support at a single value, becomes non-positive at high values, and
has a positive expectation. The optimal portfolio is selected from the set by maximizing a given
criterion. The resulting portfolios are of variable composition and contain both call and put options
with either 28 days, or 14 days, or seven days to maturity. Using realized returns we then verify
by out-of-sample tests that do not depend on the selection criteria that the identified portfolios
would have increased, on average, the utility of any risk-averse investor holding the underlying
index and the risk free asset. The results are stronger for shorter maturity options than for their
longer term counterparts both in terms of profitability and the significance of the stochastic
dominance tests. As a robustness check we repeat our tests using options on the CAC and DAX
indices and obtain similar results.
1

It is important to note that the out-of-sample stochastic dominance tests do not depend on
the portfolio selection criteria that establish in-sample stochastic dominance. The stochastic
dominance test compares two time series drawn from two different distributions and examines the
null of non-dominance. The only requirement is that the observations be serially uncorrelated, a
requirement that is verified for all the series used in our tests.
Stochastic dominance is prevalent when the at-the-money (ATM) implied volatility (IV) is
high and/or the right skew is low. Although most options in the portfolios are out-of-the money
(OTM), more than 37% of the cross-sections contain in-the-money (ITM) calls and more than 32%
ITM puts. The portfolios include more than double the number of calls than puts and the call
positions are overwhelmingly short positions, consistent with the practice of writing covered calls.
This contradicts the common belief that puts but not calls are overvalued, which was established
in a frictionless context and is discussed further on in this section.1
During the 2008 to 2009 financial crisis the majority of portfolio positions are net short put
positions. We interpret this finding as investor overreaction to the crisis in the form of inflated put
prices. Furthermore we find that the option portfolio composition depends on characteristics of the
projected index distribution. We also refute the conjecture that the OT portfolios primarily consist
of long positions in options with IV below the IV smile and short positions in options with IV
above the IV smile: such options constitute a small component of the OT portfolio. We conclude
that at least some S&P 500 call and put options may be significantly mispriced relative to the
index. This potential mispricing is qualitatively different from other anomalous results such as
overpriced straddles in earlier studies, all of which were studied in a frictionless economy.2 In our
case the mispriced portfolios correspond to a tradable anomaly insofar as an investor holding an
index-tracking tradable fund such as a SPDR can costlessly increase her returns without incurring
additional risk.
Stochastic dominance tests are subject to the criticism that they are based on the maintained
hypothesis that the index return is the only priced factor and the stochastic discount factor is
monotone decreasing in the index return. Without relying on this maintained hypothesis we test
whether the excess returns of the OT portfolios are rewards for risks other than market risk. To
1 See Bondarenko (2014) and Driessen and Maenhout (2007).
2 See Broadie, Chernov, and Johannes (2007, 2009).
2