NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STRUCTURAL TRANSFORMATION, DEEP DOWNTURNS, AND GOVERNMENT
POLICY
Joseph E. Stiglitz
Working Paper 23794
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23794
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Joseph E. Stiglitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Structural Transformation, Deep Downturns, and Government Policy
Joseph E. Stiglitz
NBER Working Paper No. 23794
September 2017
JEL No. G01,L52,N12,O14,O25
ABSTRACT
Most recessions are a result of some shock to the economic system, typically amplified by
financial accelerators, and leading to large balance sheet effects of households and firms, which
result in the effects persisting. But, over time, the balance sheets get restored. Even banks
recover.
But episodically, the “shock” is deeper. It is structural. Among advanced countries, the
movement from agricultural to manufacturing in the last century, and the more recent movement
from manufacturing to the service sector reflect such a large economic transformation. The
associated downturns are longer lasting. The usual responses, in particular, monetary policy, are
only of limited efficacy. Policies have to be designed to facilitate such transformations: markets
on their own typically do not do well.
This paper explains why such transformations are associated with persistently high
unemployment, and describes the effects of particular government policies. It looks at the lessons
of the Great Depression both for the advanced countries and the developing countries as they go
through their structural transformations.
Joseph E. Stiglitz
Uris Hall, Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Room 212
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jes322@columbia.edu

Structural Transformation, Deep Downturns, and Government Policy
J. E. Stiglitz1
Abstract
Most recessions are a result of some shock to the economic system, typically
amplified by financial accelerators, and leading to large balance sheet effects of
households and firms, which result in the effects persisting. But, over time, the
balance sheets get restored. Even banks recover.
But episodically, the “shock” is deeper. It is structural. Among advanced
countries, the movement from agricultural to manufacturing in the last century,
and the more recent movement from manufacturing to the service sector reflect
such a large economic transformation. The associated downturns are longer
lasting. The usual responses, in particular, monetary policy, are only of limited
efficacy. Policies have to be designed to facilitate such transformations: markets
on their own typically do not do well.
This paper explains why such transformations are associated with persistently
high unemployment, and describes the effects of particular government policies.
It looks at the lessons of the Great Depression both for the advanced countries
and the developing countries as they go through their structural transformations.
1 University Professor, Columbia University. Paper prepared for the Oxford Handbook of Structural
Transformation, edited by Celestin Monga and Justin Yifu Lin. This paper is part of a larger research
project with Bruce Greenwald. I wish to acknowledge the financial support of INET, research assistance
of Matthieu Teachout and editorial assistance of Debarati Ghosh.
1

Structural Transformation, Deep Downturns, and Government Policy
J. E. Stiglitz2
Economies are always changing, and one of the virtues of the market economy is
its ability to adapt to these changes. Primitive agriculture economies face
weather variability. Manufacturing economies are marked by new products.
Rivals have to constantly adapt to the changing competitive landscape.
But beyond these changes, there are a few major structural changes, large
changes that occur very infrequently. The movement from feudalism to the post-
feudal era was such a change. The industrial revolution was another—but even
after the onset of the industrial revolution, the economy remained largely
agrarian. It was not until one hundred to one hundred and fifty years later that
the structural change—the move from a rural agrarian economy to an urban
manufacturing society occurred. That was a traumatic event. 3
Markets don’t handle such changes well, nor typically do the political processes
governing markets. The purpose of this paper is (a) to explain why it is that
markets on their own manage these transitions so poorly; (b) to show that when
the structural transformation is not well managed, there may be a prolonged
economic downturn (recessions and depressions), arguing that this is at least part
of the explanation for the Great Depression and the Great Recession; (c) to
analyze the effects of government actions that might help manage these
structural transformations, and in particular, the role of industrial policy in
facilitating these transitions; and (d) to set these industrial policies as a critical
part of Keynesian counter-cyclical policies. We set much of our discussion in the
context of the last major structural transformation confronting the advanced
countries, the transition from being an agrarian economy to manufacturing,
because we can see the principles better from the perspective of 80 years. But in
2 University Professor, Columbia University. Paper prepared for the Oxford Handbook of Structural
Transformation, edited by Celestin Monga and Justin Yifu Lin. This paper is part of a larger research project with
Bruce Greenwald. I wish to acknowledge the financial support of INET, research assistance of Matthieu Teachout
and editorial assistance of Debarati Ghosh.
3 Described so forcefully by K. Polanyi, The Great Transformation, 1944, Farrar & Rinehart.
2