NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MONETARY-FISCAL INTERACTIONS AND THE EURO AREA'S MALAISE
Marek Jarociński
Bartosz Maćkowiak
Working Paper 23746
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23746
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017
We thank for helpful comments Francesco Bianchi, Giancarlo Corsetti, Jean-Pierre Danthine,
Luca Dedola, Jordi Gali, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Christophe Kamps, Robert Kollmann, Eric
Leeper, Karel Mertens, Helene Rey, Sebastian Schmidt, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe, Harald Uhlig,
Xuan Zhou, and conference and seminar participants at the ADEMU conference at the Bank of
Spain, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, University of Chicago, Annual Research Conference
of the ECB, European Summer Symposium in International Macroeconomics, London Business
School, Annual Research Conference of the National Bank of Ukraine, NBER International
Seminar on Macroeconomics, Symposium of the Society for Nonlinear Dynamics and
Econometrics, and Tsinghua University. The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the European Central Bank or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Marek Jarociński and Bartosz Maćkowiak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Monetary-Fiscal Interactions and the Euro Area's Malaise
Marek Jarociński and Bartosz Maćkowiak
NBER Working Paper No. 23746
August 2017
JEL No. E31,E32,E63
ABSTRACT
When monetary and fiscal policy are conducted as in the euro area, output, inflation, and
government bond default premia are indeterminate according to a standard general equilibrium
model with sticky prices extended to include defaultable public debt. With sunspots, the model
mimics the recent euro area data. We specify an alternative configuration of monetary and fiscal
policy, with a non-defaultable eurobond. If this policy arrangement had been in place since the
onset of the Great Recession, output could have been much higher than in the data with inflation
in line with the ECB's objective.
Marek Jarociński
European Central Bank
Sonnemannstrasse 22
60314 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
marek.jarocinski@ecb.int
Bartosz Maćkowiak
European Central Bank
Sonnemannstrasse 22
60314 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
bartosz.mackowiak@ecb.int

1 Introduction
The euro area recently experienced a period of malaise, with weak economic activity, infla-
tion persistently short of the European Central Bank’s objective of “below, but close to 2
percent,” monetary policy interest rates close to zero, and a sovereign debt crisis. In this
paper, we propose a simple model that speaks to all these phenomena jointly.
Figure 1 summarizes the euro area’s malaise using annual data from the period 2008-
2015. RealGrossDomesticProductpercapitadeclinedby5percentintheGreatRecession
of 2009. Output decreased again in 2012 and in 2013. In 2015, real GDP per capita was
1.6 percent lower than in 2008. Inflation, measured in terms of the Harmonized Index of
Consumer Prices or in terms of the core HICP (excluding energy and food), decreased in
the Great Recession, rose briefly, and declined again. The rate of inflation based on the
core HICP has not exceeded 1.5 percent per annum since 2008. The Eonia, an interest rate
effectively controlled by the ECB, has remained close to zero since 2009 tracing a similar
non-monotonic path as inflation (down, up, and down again). Finally, default premia on
public debt also followed a non-monotonic trajectory. Figure 1 shows weighted averages of
one-year government bond yields for Germany, France, and the Netherlands and for Italy
and Spain. The spread between the two weighted averages, which we interpret as a default
premium, used to be practically zero between the launch of the euro in 1999 and 2008,
spiked in 2011-2012 during the sovereign debt crisis, and fell subsequently.
Public debt typically rises following a recessionary disturbance. The debt-to-GDP ratio
computed for the euro area as a whole increased in 2008 and in 2009. As weak economic
activity persists, fiscal policy faces a trade-off between business cycle stabilization and debt
sustainability. This trade-off can be especially consequential if monetary policy has become
constrainedbythelowerboundonnominalinterestrates. Withanationalfiatcurrency, the
monetaryauthorityandthefiscalauthoritycancoordinate,explicitlyorimplicitly,toensure
that public debt denominated in that currency will not default, i.e., maturing government
bonds will be convertible into currency at par, just as maturing reserve deposits at the
central bank are convertible into currency at par. With this arrangement in place, fiscal
policycanfocusonbusinesscyclestabilizationuntilarecoveryhasbeenachieved. However,
although the euro is a fiat currency, the fiscal authorities of the member states of the euro
have given up the ability to issue non-defaultable debt. Rather than support economic
activity, the primary budget balance in the euro area increased as a fraction of GDP in
1

2012 and in 2013, two years in which euro area output contracted.
Our model formalizes the idea that the way monetary and fiscal policy interact in the
euro area was important for the outcomes depicted in Figure 1. If monetary and fiscal
policy had interacted differently, the outcomes could have been very different. We begin
withaspecificationofmonetaryandfiscalpolicythataimstocapturehowpolicyisactually
conducted in the euro area. With this policy configuration, our model reproduces the main
features of the recent data. We then study a version of the model in which monetary
and fiscal policy interact differently, around a non-defaultable public debt instrument (a
“eurobond”). This version of the model implies that output could have been much higher
than in the data with inflation in line with the ECB’s objective.
The model is based on the standard three-equation general equilibrium model with
sticky prices. As usual, there are price-setting firms, households who consume and supply
labor, and a single monetary authority. We add to this familiar setting N fiscal authorities,
corresponding to N imaginary member states of a monetary union (for simplicity N = 2,
“North” and “South”). Each fiscal authority imposes lump-sum taxes, or makes lump-sum
transfers, and issues bonds that can default. Each household is a “European” household
that consumes a union-wide basket of goods, supplies labor to firms throughout the union,
and pays taxes to the fiscal authority in North and to the fiscal authority in South.
We suppose that the monetary authority pursues a Taylor rule subject to a lower bound
on the policy rate. Each “national” fiscal authority adjusts its primary budget balance in
response to the business cycle and the debt-to-GDP ratio, via a standard reaction function,
but can default in adverse circumstances, when the debt-to-GDP ratio reaches an upper
bound (a “fiscal limit”). We believe that this simple specification captures the essential
features of how monetary and fiscal policy are actually conducted in the euro area. Note
that default in the model has no effect on households’ wealth. Default imposes a loss
on households as bondholders, but default also produces a gain of the same magnitude for
householdsastaxpayers. Thus,fluctuationsintheprimarysurplusdonotaffecthouseholds’
wealth. Any decrease in the primary surplus is offset by a rise in future primary surpluses
or an increase in the probability of default.
In the full nonlinear model, we consider the effects of a disturbance to the households’
discount factor. The discount factor disturbance temporarily increases the value of future
consumption relative to current consumption. The response of output, inflation, and the
2