NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW WAS THE QUANTITATIVE EASING PROGRAM OF THE 1930S UNWOUND?
Matthew Jaremski
Gabriel Mathy
Working Paper 23788
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23788
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017
The authors would like to thank to David Wheelock, Jonathan Rose, Mark Carlson, Andrew Jalil,
Christopher Hanes, Roger Sandilands, Mary Hansen, and seminar audiences at the Social Science
History Association, the Cato Monetary Workshop, and the Southern Economic Association
Meetings for valuable comments, as well as to Daniel Kirwin for invaluable research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.¸˛
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Matthew Jaremski and Gabriel Mathy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

How was the Quantitative Easing Program of the 1930s Unwound?
Matthew Jaremski and Gabriel Mathy
NBER Working Paper No. 23788
September 2017
JEL No. E32,E58,N12
ABSTRACT
Outside of the recent past, excess reserves have only concerned policymakers in one other period:
the Great Depression. The data show that excess reserves in the 1930s were never actively
unwound through a reduction in the monetary base. Nominal economic growth swelled required
reserves while an exogenous reduction in monetary gold inflows due to war embargoes in Europe
allowed excess reserves to naturally decline towards zero. Excess reserves fell rapidly in early
1941 and would have unwound fully even without the entry of the United States into World War
II. As such, policy tightening was at no point necessary and could have contributed to the
1937-1938 Recession.
Matthew Jaremski
Colgate University
Department of Economics
13 Oak Drive
Hamilton, NY 13346
and NBER
mjaremski@colgate.edu
Gabriel Mathy
Department of Economics
American University
126 Kreeger Hall
4400 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20016
mathy@american.edu

1. Introduction
The search to understand the recent recession and its aftermath has led many economists
to look back at the Great Depression (Almunia et al. 2010; Eichengreen and O’Rourke 2009;
Crafts and Fearon 2010). However, while most studies have focused on the actions of the Federal
Reserve (Fed) during the downturn, the Great Depression also offers insight on how to unwind
the substantial excess reserves that built up as a result of Quantitative Easing (QE). Just as in the
late 2000s, short-term interest rates quickly hit the zero lower bound in the early 1930s and
central banks considered non-traditional monetary policies to stimulate the economy. These
policies led to a massive expansion of the Fed’s balance sheet. And while we have not yet seen
the unwinding of the current QE program, we can study the unwinding of a similar monetary
expansion during the Great Depression.1
Even though the Fed did not provide interest on reserves, the depreciation of the dollar in
1934 and large inflows of foreign gold before the Second World War (WWII) resulted in a
massive buildup of excess reserve balances.2 Over $14.5 billion of unsterilized gold flowed into
the United States on net between May 1934 and December 1941, more than in any other period.
While gold inflows were not directly controlled by the Federal Reserve, the decision not to
sterilize gold inflows and to immediately convert them into currency was effectively a
Quantitative Easing program as they engendered an enormous increase in the monetary base
when short-term rates were close to zero. Many authors have considered these large scale asset
purchases to be essentially QE programs. Bernanke, Reinhart, and Sack (2004, p. 18) have
characterized these as a “successful application of quantitative easing” whereas authors such as
Anderson (2010) and Hanes (2014) use the period to study the effects of QE policies.
Additionally, Bordo and Sinha (2016) argue that the 1932 open market operations were an
effective QE program that would have mitigated the Depression had they continued.
The literature on excess reserves during the 1930s is extensive. Economists have
examined the determinants of the rise in excess reserves (Friedman and Schwartz 1963; Wilcox
1982; Bernanke 1983) as well as the effect of reserve requirements changes (Calomiris, Mason,
1 We study the decline of excess reserves to near zero rather than the return to a “normal” monetary policy
environment. As described by Mitchener and Mason (2010), the Treasury’s control over the Exchange Stabilization
Fund and the pegging of interest rates during WWII delayed normal monetary policy until the 1950s.
2 The current Fed policy of paying positive interest on excess reserves allows the Fed to influence financial markets
despite the huge expansion in its balance sheet. Therefore, while lowering IOER might reduce excess reserves, it is
not the primary tool the Fed intends to use for this purpose.
1

and Wheelock 2011; Park and Van Horn 2015). However, to our knowledge, no study has
studied the determinants of the fall of excess reserves in the early 1940s.
Our analysis indicates that the cessation of the largely exogenous gold flows is the only
factor that can explain the sudden decline in excess reserves in early 1941. Between the trough of
the Great Depression in 1933 and the end of WWII, excess reserves fell in only two periods. As
gold inflows were slowing after the gold bloc countries had devalued in 1936, excess reserves
declined and had almost reached zero before the Recession of 1937-1938 increased them again.
The cessation of gold flows from Europe during the war correspond to the more permanent
decline in excess reserves started in early 1941. Excess reserves were on track to have unwound
fully even without the issuance of war bonds or increase in reserve requirements in late 1941.3
As such, policy tightening was unnecessary and may have been counterproductive. We take this
as evidence that gold inflows were too large and the returns to alternative investments too low
for banks to fully invest their excess reserves in other available assets.
We use three approaches to test this theory. First, we construct a residual model that is
able to accurately predict changes in excess reserves from 1934 to 1941 using only gold flows,
income, reserve requirements, and money in circulation. Second, we empirically show that gold
inflows are the only variable robustly correlated with changes in excess reserves. Finally, we
show that new excess reserves were disproportionately concentrated in New York City where
gold flows entered the country, and that the effect of gold was several times larger for New York
City banks than other banks around the country.
2. The Recovery from the Great Depression
While prices, income, and production declined steadily after the stock market crash in
October of 1929 (Figure 1), the banking system remained relatively unaffected until November
of 1930 when the failure of Caldwell and Company (a key southern financial institution) set off a
chain reaction across the banking system.4 Banking panics continued intermittently until March
of 1933. Fears that the newly elected Roosevelt administration would depreciate the dollar after
taking office led to a drain of gold out of the system. By March, the New York Federal Reserve
3 A full counterfactual without United States entry into World War II is beyond the scope of this paper, but the
downward trend of excess reserves appears unaffected by Pearl Harbor and does not appear to accelerate in 1942
either. If anything, the large gold inflows fleeing Nazi advances delayed the unwinding of excess reserves.
4 Friedman and Schwartz (1963) provide an excellent overview of the period for the interested reader.
2