NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CREDIT GROWTH AND THE FINANCIAL CRISIS:
A NEW NARRATIVE
Stefania Albanesi
Giacomo De Giorgi
Jaromir Nosal
Working Paper 23740
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23740
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017
We are grateful to Christopher Carroll, Gauti Eggertsson, Nicola Gennaioli, Marianna Kudlyak,
Virgiliu Midrigan, Giuseppe Moscarini, Joe Tracy, Eric Swanson, Paul Willen and many seminar
and conference participants for useful comments and suggestions. We also thank Matt Ploenzke,
Harry Wheeler and Richard Svoboda for excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Stefania Albanesi, Giacomo De Giorgi, and Jaromir Nosal. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Credit Growth and the Financial Crisis: A New Narrative
Stefania Albanesi, Giacomo De Giorgi, and Jaromir Nosal
NBER Working Paper No. 23740
August 2017
JEL No. D14,E01,E21,E40,G01,G1,G18,G20,G21
ABSTRACT
A broadly accepted view contends that the 2007-09 financial crisis in the U.S. was caused by an
expansion in the supply of credit to subprime borrowers during the 2001- 2006 credit boom,
leading to the spike in defaults and foreclosures that sparked the crisis. We use a large
administrative panel of credit file data to examine the evolution of household debt and defaults
between 1999 and 2013. Our findings suggest an alternative narrative that challenges the large
role of subprime credit in the crisis. We show that credit growth between 2001 and 2007 was
concentrated in the prime segment, and debt to high risk borrowers was virtually constant for all
debt categories during this period. The rise in mortgage defaults during the crisis was
concentrated in the middle of the credit score distribution, and mostly attributable to real estate
investors. We argue that previous analyses confounded life cycle debt demand of borrowers who
were young at the start of the boom with an expansion in credit supply over that period.
Stefania Albanesi Jaromir Nosal
Department of Economics Boston College
University of Pittsburgh 140 Commonwealth Avenue
4901 Wesley W. Posvar Hall 322 Maloney Hall, Economics
Pittsburgh, PA 15260 Chestnut Hill, MA 02567
and NBER nosalj@bc.edu
stefania.albanesi@gmail.com
Giacomo De Giorgi
Geneva School of Economics and Management
Institute of Economics and Econometrics
University of Geneva
Uni-Mail, 40 Bd. du Pont d'Arve
CH-1211 Geneva 4 – Switzerland
giacomo.degiorgi@gmail.com

1 Introduction
The broadly accepted narrative about the financial crisis is based on the findings in Mian
and Sufi (2009) suggesting that most of the growth in credit during the 2001-2006 boom was
concentrated in the subprime segment, despite the fact that income did not rise over the
same period for this group of borrowers. The expansion of subprime credit then led to a rise
in mortgage delinquencies and foreclosures, which caused the housing crisis and subsequent
the 2007-2009 recession (see Mian and Sufi (2010), Mian and Sufi (2011), Mian, Rao, and
Sufi (2013) and Mian, Sufi, and Trebbi (2015)).
This paper studies the evolution of household borrowing and default between 1999 and
2013, leading up and following the 2007-09 great recession. Our analysis is based on the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Consumer Credit Panel/Equifax data, a large adminis-
trative panel of anonymous credit files from the Equifax credit reporting bureau. The data
contains information on individual debt holdings, delinquencies, public records and credit
scores. We examine the evolution of mortgage debt and defaults during the credit boom and
throughout the financial crisis and its aftermath. Our findings suggest an alternative narra-
tive that challenges the view that the expansion of the supply of mortgage credit to subprime
borrowers played a large role in the credit boom in 2001-2007 and the subsequent financial
crisis. Specifically, we show that credit growth between 2001 and 2007 is concentrated in
the middle and and at the top of the credit score distribution. Borrowing by individuals
with low credit score is virtually constant during the boom. We also find that the rise in
defaults during the financial crisis is concentrated in the middle of the credit score distribu-
tion. While low credit score individuals typically have higher default rates than individuals
with higher credit scores, during the financial crisis the fraction of mortgage delinquencies
to the lowest quartile of of the credit score distribution dropped from 40% to 30%, and the
fraction of foreclosures from 70% to 35%.
Mian and Sufi (2009) and Mian and Sufi (2016) identify subprime individuals based
on their credit score in 1996 and 1997, respectively. We show that, since low credit score
individuals at any time are disproportionally young, this approach confounds an expansion
of the supply of credit with the life cycle demand for credit of borrowers who were young at
the start of the boom. To avoid this pitfall, our approach is based on ranking individuals
by a recent lagged credit score, following industry practices. This prevents joint endogeneity
of credit scores with borrowing and delinquency behavior but ensures that the ranking best
reflects the borrower’s likely ability to repay debt at the time of borrowing. Our analysis
shows that income growth and debt growth are positively related during the credit boom
1

for individual borrowers. Using payroll data for 2009, we show that the cross sectional
dispersion of credit scores is mostly explained by the cross sectional dispersion of labor
income, conditional on age. Moreover, the lifecycle pattern of borrowing and credit scores is
tightly related to the lifecycle evolution of income.
Our finding that borrowers in middle and at the top of the credit score distribution
disproportionally default during the crisis is puzzling, as these borrowers historically exhibit
very low default rates on any type of debt, as well as very low foreclosure rates. To gain
insight on what may have driven defaults by borrowers with relatively high credit scores, we
explore the role of real estate investors. Using our data, we can identify real estate investors
as borrowers who hold 2 or more first mortgages, following Haughwout et al. (2011). There
are four main reasons that may lead real estate investors to display higher default rates than
other borrowers with similar credit scores. First, only mortgages contracted for a borrower’s
primary residence are eligible for GSE insurance. Thus, real estate investors would need
to contract non-standard mortgages, such as Alt-A, Adjustable Rate Mortgages (ARMs),
which charge higher interest rates and are intrinsically more risky.1 Second, if investors are
motivated by the prospect of capital gains,2 they have an incentive to maximize leverage,
as this strategy increases the potential gains from holding a property, while the potential
losses are limited, especially in states in which foreclosure is non recourse.3 Third, only
the primary residence is protected in personal bankruptcy, via the homestead exemption
(see Li (2009)). Thus, a financially distressed borrower could potentially file for Chapter 7
bankruptcyanddischargeunsecureddebtusingnonexemptassetstoavoidmissingpayments
on the mortgage for their primary residence.4 Finally, the financial and psychological costs of
default for mortgage borrowers who reside in the home are typically quite substantial, as the
resulting relocation would generate moving and storage costs, and possibly cause difficulties
for household members in reaching their workplace or their school.
We find that real estate investors play a critical role in the rise in mortgage debt only for
the middle and the top of the credit score distribution. The share of mortgage balances of
real estate investors rose from 20% to 35% between 2004 and 2007 for quartiles 2 and 3 of the
1 Agarwal et al. (2016) document clear patterns of product steering by mortgage brokers, who directed
borrowers eligible for conventional fixed interest rate mortgages to riskier products with higher margins,
increasing default risk for standard borrowers.
2This is highly likely given the decline in the rent to price ratio for residential housing over this time
period, as discussed in Kaplan, Mitman, and Violante (2015).
3Ghent and Kudlyak (2011) show that foreclosure rates are 30% higher in non-recourse state during the
crisis.
4 Albanesi and Nosal (2015) provide empirical evidence on the relation between consumer bankruptcy,
delinquencyandforeclosure,whileMitman(2016)developsaquantitativemodelofbankruptcywheredefault
on unsecured debt prioritized over mortgage default.
2