NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNDERSTANDING THE RISE IN CORPORATE CASH:
PRECAUTIONARY SAVINGS OR FOREIGN TAXES
Michael W. Faulkender
Kristine W. Hankins
Mitchell A. Petersen
Working Paper 23799
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23799
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017, Revised August 2018
Previously circulated as "Understanding Precautionary Cash at Home and Abroad." The statistical
analysis of firm-level data on U.S. multinational companies was conducted at the Bureau of
Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce, under arrangements that maintain legal
confidentiality requirements. The views expressed in the paper are those of the authors and do not
reflect official positions of the U.S. Department of Commerce. We appreciate the suggestions and
advice of Chris Anderson, Alice Bonaimé, Sergey Chernenko, Beverly Clingan, Laurent Fresard,
Craig Furfine, Gustavo Grullon, Kathleen Kahle, Stephen Karolyi, Chris Parsons, Rene Stulz,
Rohan Williamson, William Zeile, the referee, and the editor (David Denis) as well as seminar
and conference participants at the American Finance Association, Dartmouth University, Federal
Reserve Board of Governors, Florida State University, Georgetown University, Georgia Institute
of Technology, Louisiana State University, Midwest Finance Association, Northeastern
University, Northwestern University, Ohio State, Rice University, the Securities and Exchange
Commission, the Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance, the Swiss Finance Institute, and the
Universities of Alberta, Cincinnati, Illinois-Chicago, Illinois-UC, Iowa, Kansas, Miami,
Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Pittsburgh, Oregon, San Diego, Southern California and South
Carolina. The research assistances of Austin Magee, Sang Kim and Mark Scovic is greatly
appreciated. Kristine Hankins also thanks the Institute for the Study of Free Enterprise for
financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Michael W. Faulkender, Kristine W. Hankins, and Mitchell A. Petersen. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Understanding the Rise in Corporate Cash: Precautionary Savings or Foreign Taxes
Michael W. Faulkender, Kristine W. Hankins, and Mitchell A. Petersen
NBER Working Paper No. 23799
September 2017, Revised August 2018
JEL No. G31,G32,G35
ABSTRACT
What has driven the dramatic rise in U.S. corporate cash? Using non-public data, we show that the
run-up is not uniform across firms but is concentrated in the foreign subsidiaries of multinational firms.
Standard precautionary motives explain only domestic cash holdings, not these burgeoning foreign
cash balances. Falling foreign tax rates, coupled with relaxed restrictions on income shifting, are the
root of the changing foreign cash patterns. Firms with intellectual property have the greatest ability
to shift income to low tax jurisdictions, and their foreign subsidiaries are where we observe the largest
accumulations of cash.
Michael W. Faulkender Mitchell A. Petersen
University of Maryland Kellogg School of Management
RH Smith School of Business Northwestern University
4417 Van Munching Hall 2001 Sheridan Road
College Park, MD 20742 Evanston, IL 60208
mfaulken@rhsmith.umd.edu and NBER
mpetersen@northwestern.edu
Kristine W. Hankins
University of Kentucky
Lexington, KY 40506
kristine.hankins@uky.edu

According to recent Flow of Funds estimates, U.S. non-financial corporations are sitting
on an aggregate cash and marketable securities position of close to $4 trillion (see Figure 1). This
staggering amount has led policy makers and commentators to express concern as to why firms
are building such large stockpiles. To explain the dramatic rise in cash, it is first necessary to
understand the factors that cause firms to hold cash.
In a world of capital market frictions and uncertain investment opportunities, holding cash
enables firms to invest in value creating projects without delay. This precautionary savings story
has been the primary focus of the academic literature. Earlier work focused on measuring firms’
access to the capital markets (Opler et al., 1999), while more recent work has focused on the role
of increasing investment uncertainty (Martin and Santomero, 1997; Boyle and Guthrie, 2003;
Bates, Kahle, and Stulz, 2009; and Harford, Klasa, and Maxwell, 2014).
Not all cash is held for precautionary savings. Thus, uncertainty and financing frictions
alone may not explain the huge run-up in corporate cash. Foley et al. (2007) and Graham and Leary
(2017) explore foreign taxes as an alternative explanation for why firms hold cash. The United
States taxes the income of foreign subsidiaries, but only when the income is repatriated.1 Thus,
when the foreign tax rate is less than the U.S. rate, there has been an incentive to delay repatriation
(Faulkender and Petersen, 2012 and Graham, Hanlon, and Shevlin, 2010). Firms’ objective to
minimize the present value of taxes may result in a buildup of cash in foreign subsidiaries – often
called “trapped cash.” Foley et al. (2007) show in a cross-sectional time-series regression that
lower foreign tax rates are associated with higher total and higher foreign cash.
Our research bridges these two distinct explanations. The literature has characterized
investments in intellectual property (R&D) as being more opaque and therefore contributing to the
1 Following the passage of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, this is no longer true. Our sample predates the passage
of this law. We discuss the potential implications of the tax reform given our results in Section V.
1

demand for holding cash to fund future investments. Observing that the cash run-up is most acute
at high R&D firms has given rise to the precautionary savings interpretation. Alternatively, the
opacity of intangible assets may better facilitate income shifting to low tax countries. If so, the tax
explanation would be more accurate.
To explore the immense growth in corporate cash, and to differentiate between the
alternative explanations of that growth, we focus on where the cash is located. Theoretically,
location matters. Foreign and domestic cash are perfect substitutes when the tax rates are equal
and there is no incentive to delay repatriation. However, as foreign tax rates fell below U.S. rates,
there has been an incentive not only to delay the repatriation of foreign income, but also to shift
income into lower tax jurisdictions.
The empirical challenge is that observing domestic and foreign cash historically has not
been possible using publicly available data sources. While some firms recently have voluntarily
disclosed their foreign cash position (Harford et al. 2017), this selectively released data is limited
in both scope and length. The Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) conducts a mandatory survey
of U.S. multinational companies that generates the data that is needed to address this shortcoming.
From this survey, we are able to measure the amount of cash and marketable securities that firms
are holding in each foreign subsidiary. Combining this with the disclosure of their total cash and
marketable securities position (from Compustat), we are able to calculate how much cash is held
domestically.
We unpack the distinct channels that could be driving the rise in cash: growing
international business activity, changing precautionary cash needs, declining foreign corporate tax
rates, and lastly, active tax minimization behavior by U.S. corporations. The run-up in corporate
cash has roots in each of these channels, but the last two are the dominant causes. We first show
2