NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE COMPLEXITY OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES:
A TOPOLOGICAL APPROACH
Mark D. Flood
Dror Y. Kenett
Robin L. Lumsdaine
Jonathan K. Simon
Working Paper 23755
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23755
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017
The authors thank Hashim Hamandi, Stathis Tompaidis, and participants in the 2017 Vienna -
Copenhagen Conference on Financial Econometrics, the 2017 RiskLab / BoF / ESRB Conference
on Systemic Risk Analytics in Helsinki, the 10th Annual Society for Financial Econometrics
Conference in New York, and research seminars hosted by the Office of Financial Research, the
University of Ljubljana, and the Center for Nonlinear Dynamics in Economics and Finance
(CeNDEF) at the University of Amsterdam for helpful discussions and suggestions. Any
remaining errors are the responsibility of the authors alone. View and opinions expressed are
those of the authors and do not necessarily represent official positions or policy of the Office of
Financial Research, the US Treasury, the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23755.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Mark D. Flood, Dror Y. Kenett, Robin L. Lumsdaine, and Jonathan K. Simon. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies: A Topological Approach
Mark D. Flood, Dror Y. Kenett, Robin L. Lumsdaine, and Jonathan K. Simon
NBER Working Paper No. 23755
August 2017
JEL No. C02,C81,D85,G21,G28,G3,L22
ABSTRACT
Large bank holding companies (BHCs) are structured into intricate ownership hierarchies
involving hundreds or even thousands of legal entities. Each subsidiary in these hierarchies has its
own legal form, assets, liabilities, managerial goals, and supervisory authorities. In the event of
BHC default or insolvency, regulators may need to resolve the BHC and its constituent entities.
Each entity individually will require some mix of cash infusion, outside purchase, consolidation
with other subsidiaries, legal guarantees, and outright dissolution. The subsidiaries are not
resolved in isolation, of course, but in the context of resolving the consolidated BHC at the top of
the hierarchy. The number, diversity, and distribution of subsidiaries within the hierarchy can
therefore significantly ease or complicate the resolution process. We propose a set of related
metrics intended to assess the complexity of the BHC ownership graph. These proposed metrics
focus on the graph quotient relative to certain well identified partitions on the set of subsidiaries,
such as charter type and regulatory jurisdiction. The intended measures are mathematically
grounded, intuitively sensible, and easy to implement. We illustrate the process with a case study
of one large U.S. BHC.
Mark D. Flood Robin L. Lumsdaine
Department of the Treasury Kogod School of Business
Office of Financial Research American University
290 Broadway 4400 Massachusetts Avenue NW
New York, NY 10007 Washington, DC 20016
Mark.Flood@ofr.treasury.gov and NBER
robin.lumsdaine@american.edu
Dror Y. Kenett
Johns Hopkins University Jonathan K. Simon
Zanvyl Krieger School of Arts and Sciences Department of Mathematics
Advanced Academics Programs 14 MacLean Hall
1717 Massachusetts Avenue, NY University of Iowa
Washington, DC 20036 Iowa City, IA 52242
dkenett1@jhu.edu jonathan-simon@uiowa.edu

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies
1 Introduction
In the wake of the Great Depression and the failure of more than 9,000 banks, the
Banking Act of 1933 created the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC).1
Sincethen, theFDIChasactedasreceiverforseveralthousandfailedbanks, including
520 since 2008. As Figure 1 indicates, these failures tend to come in waves defined
by broader episodes of financial instability.2 This means that resolution is not a
routine activity that proceeds at a predictable pace, but more typically an urgent
and extraordinary supervisory task undertaken in exigent circumstances.
Figure 1: Number of failed U.S. banks, 1935–2016. Three (post-FDIC) failure waves:
Great Depression (1935-43), Savings and Loan Crisis (1980-1994) and Global Finan-
cial Crisis (2009-2015).
Source: FDIC
Historically, most of these failed banks were relatively small community banks
whose resolution posed little risk to the financial system. Notably, all were consid-
erably smaller and less complex than the most systemically important firms active
today. Until the 2008 financial crisis, the largest bank failure in U.S. history was that
of Continental Illinois National Bank and Trust Company. At the time of its failure
in 1984, it was the seventh largest bank in the U.S., with approximately $40 billion
in assets (approximately $96 billion in 2016 dollars).3 By comparison, Bank of New
1See Flood (1992). The Banking Act of 1933 is also known as the Glass-Steagall Act.
2Data in Figure 1 are from FDIC (2016b); the majority of Depression-era bank failures preceded
start of the FDIC’s sample in 1934. For the more recent period, the FDIC (2016a) provides an
up-to-date list of bank failures since 2000.
3Haltom (2013) describes the failure of Continental Illinois.
page2

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies
York Mellon, the seventh largest bank in the U.S. today, has nearly $300 billion in
consolidated assets and the largest bank, JPMorgan Chase, has over $2 trillion in
consolidated assets. Rapid resolution of the largest institutions, if they should fail,
is critical to ensure the provision of liquidity to counterparties that are relying on
incoming payments from the failing firm and to avoid a cascade of events that can
quickly snowball into a systemic panic.
The danger of a disorderly resolution that snowballs into a crisis is a channel of
systemic risk that is unlikely to correlate with other common measures of systemic
risk,especiallythosethataremarket-based. Thisisbecausesuchaneventinvolvesthe
intersection of two (ex ante) low-probability events: a large-firm failure and a fumbled
resolution implementation. This does not imply, however, that resolution complexity
cannot be measured, or that authorities cannot plan for orderly resolution.
In the aftermath of these challenges, Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act of 2010
expanded the FDIC’s receivership authority to large, complex financial companies,
including bank holding companies (BHCs) with $50 billion or more in assets and non-
banks whose failure regulators have determined could pose a threat to U.S. financial
stability.4 In addition, to assist with orderly resolution should it become necessary, a
regulated firm is now required to submit a plan for supervisory approval, known as a
“living will,” describing how it should be resolved. As part of this requirement, the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (BoG) and the FDIC (hereafter,
BoG-FDIC) have issued a series of documents that provide guidance regarding the
submission and assessment of firms’ resolution plans; see BoG-FDIC (2016).5 These
4FDIC (2011) envisions a counterfactual case study of how the Lehman resolution might have
proceeded under the new Dodd-Frank Authority. For insurance companies, resolution occurs under
applicablestatelawandisconductedbythestateregulator;onlyinthecasethatthestateregulator
doesnotactwithin60daysdoestheFDIChaveresolutionauthority. Forasummaryoftheexpanded
receivership authority, see FDIC (2010).
5Eight domestic bank holding companies participated in the initial wave of submissions. They
were: Bank of America Corporation; Bank of New York Mellon Corporation, PLC; Citigroup, Inc.;
Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.; JPMorgan Chase & Co.; Morgan Stanley; State Street Corporation;
and Wells Fargo & Company.
page3