NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LEARNING TO LIVE IN A LIQUIDITY TRAP
Jasmina Arifovic
Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé
Martín Uribe
Working Paper 23725
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23725
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017
We thank for comments seminar participants at the July 2017 Stony Brook Workshop on
Theoretical and Experimental Macroeconomics. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Jasmina Arifovic, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, and Martín Uribe. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Learning to Live in a Liquidity Trap
Jasmina Arifovic, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, and Martín Uribe
NBER Working Paper No. 23725
August 2017
JEL No. E03,E52
ABSTRACT
The Taylor rule in combination with the zero lower bound on nominal rates has been shown to
create an unintended liquidity-trap equilibrium. The relevance of this equilibrium has been
challenged on the basis that it is not stable under least-square learning. In this paper, we show
that the liquidity-trap equilibrium is stable under social learning. The learning mechanism we
employ includes three realistic elements: mutation, crossover, and tournaments. We show that
agents can learn to have pessimistic sentiments about the central bank's ability to generate price
growth, giving rise to a stochastically stable environment characterized by deflation and
stagnation.
Jasmina Arifovic Martín Uribe
Simon Fraser University Department of Economics
1590 Tunstall Blvd Columbia University
Bowen Island International Affairs Building
BC V0N 1G2 New York, NY 10027
arifovic@sfu.ca and NBER
martin.uribe@columbia.edu
Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, MC 3308
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
stephanie.schmittgrohe@columbia.edu

1 Introduction
The Taylor rule incombination with the zero lowerbound on nominal interestrates has been
shown to open the door to unintended equilibria in which the economy is stuck in a liquidity
trap with zero nominal rates and inflation and output below target. In this equilibrium,
rational agents wake up each period with a pessimistic economic outlook. Guided by this
sentiment,their demand for goods and servicesis weak. The central bank tries to counteract
the weakness in aggregate demand by loweringinterestrates. However,the zero lower bound
prevents the monetary authority from fully offsetting the public’s lack of confidence. As a
result, the economy ends up with depressed levels of aggregate activity and prices and zero
nominal rates. The next period, agents continue to hold pessimistic sentiments, which are
now validated by the past experience. Thus, by the same mechanism at play in the first
period, the economy ends again in a slump in the second period. Continuing with this logic
yields a stationary environment with all the characteristics of a liquidity trap. This type of
dynamics are sometimes invoked to explain aspects of the prolonged periods of below-target
inflation observed in Japan since the 1990s and in the Eurozone since the onset of the Great
Contraction.
The relevance of the Taylor-rule induced self-fulfilling liquidity trap has been challenged
on the basis that it is not least-square learnable. In this branch of the literaturethe assump-
tion of rational expectations is replaced by the assumption that agents form expectations by
running regressions of observations of key macroeconomic indicators, such as inflation and
output, onto economic fundamentals such as the natural of interest, productivity, or mon-
etary policy shocks. Agents are assumed to update the regression coefficients recursively
incorporating the new data generated as time goes on. Thus, the previous-period regression
coefficient is a relevant endogenous state of the economy. The central result of this litera-
ture is that under least-square learning the liquidity-trap equilibrium exists, but fails to be
stable. Specifically, it has been shown, that a small deviation of the regression coefficient
from the value consistent with rational expectations triggers expectations dynamics (i.e., a
sequence of regression coefficients) that diverge from the liquidity-traprational expectations
equilibrium.
In this paper we study the stabilityof the liquidity-trapequilibriumunder an alternative
learning hypothesis. We assume that expectations evolve through social learning. Social
learning includes three realistic elements: tournaments, mutation, and crossover, which are
standard features in genetic algorithms. In the context of an economic environment, these
three elements are meant to describe plausible ways in which individuals change their per-
ceivedlaw of motion of theeconomythrough social interactions. Tournaments reward agents
1

with superior forecasting abilities,by allowing themto pass their viewsto other agents. This
channel captures, for example,the influenceexertedby professional economists and forecast-
ers with proven economic models. Mutation allows for agents to have arbitrary revisions of
expectations or new ideas, guaranteeing a variety of views in the population across time.
And crossover incorporates the role of imitation, by permitting agents to adopt parts of
somebody else’s model of the economy. We embed the social learning algorithm in a canoni-
cal new Keynesian model driven by natural-rate shocks. Monetary policy is described by an
active Taylor-type interest-rate feedback rule that respects the zero lower bound on nominal
rates.
Our main finding is that the liquidity-trapequilibriumis stable undersocial learning. We
show that agents can learn to have pessimistic sentiments about the central bank’s ability
to generate price growth, giving rise to a stochastically stable environment characterized
by deflation and stagnation. Specifically, we show that, starting in the liquidity-trap equi-
librium, after a large perturbation of individual perceived laws of motion, through social
learning the economy returns to a dynamic path that is stable around the liquidity trap.
This result obtains for fairly large initial disturbances to the individual perceived laws of
motion. For example, in one experiment we replace agents’ perceived laws of motion with
the one associated with the intended rational expectations equilibrium (an equilibrium in
which the economy fluctuates around the target levels of output and inflation), and show
that the social learning algorithm leads the economy back to the liquidity trap.
Key in producing stability of the liquidity trap under social learning is the role of tour-
naments. The fittest individuals in the economy are those whose current perceived laws of
motion can best explain historical data. As a result, if the historical data contains observa-
tions generated by the liquidity trap equilibrium, individuals who, for any reason (including
pure luck), have perceived laws of motion close to the one associate with the liquidity-trap
equilibrium will prevail in passing their views to others, causing the economy to gravitate
towards the liquidity trap.
This paper is related to macroeconomic studies of the liquidity trap under rational and
boundedly rational expectations. Benhabib, Schmitt-Groh´e, and Uribe (2001) show that the
combination of a Taylor-type interest-rate feedback rule and the zero lower bound constraint
on nominal interest rates gives rise to multiple rational expectations equilibria, including
one in which the economy is perpetually in a liquidity trap. The stability of the ratio-
nal expectations equilibrium in monetary economies with a Taylor rule under least-square
learninghas beenstudiedusing thestochasticapproximationresultsintroducedto macroeco-
nomics by Marcet and Sargent (1989) and the E-stability principle introduced by Evans and
Honkapohja (2001). Bullard and Mitra (2002) and Evans and McGough (2017) show that
2