NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE TIME-VARYING PRICE OF FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION IN THE MORTGAGE
MARKET
Andreas Fuster
Stephanie H. Lo
Paul S. Willen
Working Paper 23706
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23706
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017
We thank John Campbell, Andy Davidson, Fernando Ferreira, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Sam
Hanson, Sean Hundtofte, Dwight Jaffee, Michael Reher, Adi Sunderam, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh,
Alex Zevelev, and seminar audiences at Brandeis, the Homer Hoyt Institute, FRB St. Louis, FRB
New York, the Board of Governors, the NBER Summer Institute, the NYC Real Estate
conference at Baruch, and the Universities of Zurich and St. Gallen for helpful comments and
suggestions. The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston or New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Andreas Fuster, Stephanie H. Lo, and Paul S. Willen. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Time-Varying Price of Financial Intermediation in the Mortgage Market
Andreas Fuster, Stephanie H. Lo, and Paul S. Willen
NBER Working Paper No. 23706
August 2017
JEL No. E44,E52,G21
ABSTRACT
The U.S. mortgage market links homeowners with savers all over the world. In this paper, we ask
how much of the flow of money from savers to borrowers goes to the intermediaries that facilitate
these transactions. Based on a new methodology and a new administrative dataset, we find that
the price of intermediation, measured as a fraction of the loan amount at origination, is large—
142 basis points on average over the 2008–2014 period. At daily frequencies, intermediaries pass
on price changes in the secondary market to borrowers in the primary market almost completely.
At monthly frequencies, the price of intermediation fluctuates significantly and is highly sensitive
to volume, likely reflecting capacity constraints: a one standard deviation increase in applications
for new mortgages leads to a 30–35 basis point increase in the price of intermediation.
Additionally, over 2008–2014, the price of intermediation increased about 30 basis points per
year, potentially reflecting higher mortgage servicing costs and an increased legal and regulatory
burden. Taken together, the sensitivity to volume and the positive trend led to an implicit total
cost to borrowers of about $135 billion over this period. Finally, increases in application volume
associated with “quantitative easing” (QE) led to substantial increases in the price of
intermediation, which attenuated the benefits of QE to borrowers.
Andreas Fuster Paul S. Willen
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
Research Group Research Department
33 Liberty St 600 Atlantic Avenue
New York, NY 10045 Boston, MA 02210-2204
andreas.fuster@ny.frb.org and NBER
paul.willen@bos.frb.org
Stephanie H. Lo
Harvard University
shlo@post.harvard.edu

1 Introduction
Mortgage lending is one of the main activities of the U.S. financial sector and a principal
driver of its growth in recent decades (Greenwood and Scharfstein, 2013). For most U.S.
mortgage transactions, intermediaries directly connect borrowers with capital market in-
vestors through the market for mortgage-backed securities (MBS), rather than funding loans
from deposits or other sources.1 One might expect that the price of this service should
be fairly low and stable. Instead, we show that over the 2008–2014 period, the price of
intermediation was high and volatile. We explore the drivers of this variation and study
its implications for the pass-through of monetary policy, specifically the Federal Reserve’s
large-scale asset purchase programs, colloquially known as “quantitative easing” (QE).
Our first contribution is to develop a new methodology to measure the price of interme-
diation in the mortgage market, which we define as the payment made to the intermediary
for linking the borrower with the ultimate supplier of funds for the loan. This payment
covers costs associated with originating, underwriting, and servicing the loan and also may
include a component representing profits. A way to think about the role of the intermediary
is as a dealer who buys a loan from the borrower (meaning the right to a stream of prin-
cipal and interest payments), and sells it to investors in the form of an MBS. The price of
intermediation is then the the intermediary’s dollar margin. The payment to the borrower
includes not only the loan’s principal balance but also a “rebate,” an upfront payment made
by the intermediary to the borrower.2 The rebate depends on the loan’s interest rate and
for a given interest rate typically fluctuates on a daily basis.
For our analysis, the two central inputs thus are the value of a mortgage in the secondary
market and the rebate the intermediary pays to the borrower. Measuring the price of a loan
in the MBS market is relatively straightforward. It is much more challenging to measure
the rebates, since in general, the “rate sheets” on which the rebates are quoted are not
publicly disclosed. A key innovation in our analysis is that we use a new administrative
dataset that documents these rebates on a daily basis as a function of the interest rate and
the characteristics of the borrower and the loan. The data come from Optimal Blue, an
industry-leading provider of real-time data to loan officers.
We use our new methodology for measuring the price of intermediation for several com-
plementary analyses. First, we study the high-frequency (daily) pass-through of MBS price
1Over our sample period (2008–2014), about 80 percent of new mortgage loans are securitized through
the “agency” MBS market, where the government-backed agencies Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie
Mae insure the timely payment of principal and interest payments to investors.
2Rebates are typically positive but can also be negative (i.e. the payment is from the borrower to the
intermediary) in which case they are known as “discount points.”
1

changes to rebates over the 2008–2014 period, initially focusing on six major monetary pol-
icy announcements (mostly QE-related) and then looking across all the days in our sample
period. Next, we document how the price of intermediation evolved at a lower (monthly)
frequency, explore the potential drivers of the variation, and study the implied costs to
borrowers. Finally, we clarify the relationship between our price of intermediation and a
commonly used measure that compares mortgage rates to yields in the MBS market.
Ourmainfindingsareasfollows: Thepass-throughofMBSpricechangestotheconsumer
mortgage market following QE announcements was generally large, though it varied with the
level of demand for mortgages (measured by daily applications for new loans) at the time of
the announcement. When demand was strong, such as around the expansion of “QE1” in
March 2009, intermediaries passed on a smaller share of the secondary market price increases
to borrowers. More generally, we find that at the daily frequency, rebates move very closely
with prices in the MBS market. We estimate that, on average, a one dollar change in the
MBS price leads to a 92 cent change in the rebate paid to the borrower. Pass-through, while
high, is not symmetric: a one dollar decrease in the MBS price translates into a one dollar
reduction in the rebate, but a one dollar increase only leads to an 80 cent rebate increase.
Importantly, high levels of demand substantially aggravate this asymmetry in pass-through.
Our findings of strong high-frequency pass-through are in stark contrast to other con-
sumer credit markets. Ausubel (1991) showed that over 1983–1988, credit card interest rates
did not respond at all to changes in banks’ cost of funds, and other work has confirmed this
finding in more recent data (e.g., Calem, Gordy, and Mester, 2006). Evidence from interest
rates on deposits paints a similar picture. For example, Driscoll and Judson (2013) show
that depository institutions change interest rates on short-term certificates of deposit (CDs)
roughly every six to seven weeks and that the coefficient on the fed funds rate in a regression
of changes in CD rates is only 0.4 at weekly frequencies.3 In contrast, we find that in the
mortgage market lenders change rates at least once a day and a comparable regression gener-
ates a coefficient of 0.92. Thus, mortgage pricing appears much more tightly linked to capital
markets than other consumer credit; this could be due to the particular market structure
that features brokers and loan officers comparing offers across multiple intermediaries.
Despite the strong daily pass-through, the price of intermediation is highly variable over
time. In particular, it strongly increases with the volume of new mortgage applications: at
a monthly frequency, a one standard deviation increase in application volume is associated
with a 30–35 basis point increase in the price of intermediation (relative to an average of 142
3See also Hannan and Berger (1991), Neumark and Sharpe (1992), Yankov (2014) and Drechsler, Savov,
and Schnabl (2015) for related evidence on CDs/deposit rates. Mora (2014) documents similarly low pass-
through in auto loan rates.
2