NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE U.S. TREASURY PREMIUM
Wenxin Du
Joanne Im
Jesse Schreger
Working Paper 23759
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23759
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017
We thank Carlo Favero, Jeffery Frankel, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Victoria Ivashina, Ruth
Judson, Annette Vissing-Jorgenson, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and conference participants at the
NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics (Vilnius, Lithuania) for helpful comments and
suggestions. We thank Kimberly Hagan for editorial assistance. The views in this paper are solely
the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, any other person associated with the Federal
Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All remaining errors are our
own.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Wenxin Du, Joanne Im, and Jesse Schreger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The U.S. Treasury Premium
Wenxin Du, Joanne Im, and Jesse Schreger
NBER Working Paper No. 23759
August 2017
JEL No. E4,F30,G12,G15
ABSTRACT
We quantify the difference in the convenience yield of U.S. Treasuries and the bonds of near
default-free sovereigns by measuring the gap between the FX swap-implied dollar yield paid by
foreign governments and the U.S. Treasury dollar yield. We call this wedge the “U.S. Treasury
Premium.” We find that this premium was approximately 21 basis points for five-year bonds
prior to the Global Financial Crisis, increased up to 90 basis points during the crisis, and has
disappeared since the crisis with the post-crisis mean at -8 basis points. We show the decline in
the premium cannot be explained away by credit risk or FX swap market mispricings. In addition,
we present evidence that the relative supply of government bonds in the United States and foreign
countries affects the premium.
Wenxin Du Jesse Schreger
Federal Reserve Board Columbia Business School
Division of International Finance 3022 Broadway
20th Street and Constitution Avenue NW Uris Hall 821
Washington, DC 20551 New York, NY 10027
wenxin.du@frb.gov and NBER
jesse.schreger@columbia.edu
Joanne Im
Federal Reserve Board
joanne.im@frb.gov

1 Introduction
Investors value the liquidity and safety of Treasury securities and are willing to forego the
so-called convenience yield to hold them over privately-issued papers (for example, see Kr-
ishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012)). In this paper, we quantify the convenience yield
differential between U.S. Treasuries and foreign government bonds by taking the difference
between the FX swap market implied dollar yield paid by foreign governments and the U.S.
Treasury yield. Henceforth, we call this differential the “U.S. Treasury Premium.” A positive
premium implies the U.S. sovereign is paying less to borrow in real terms. The novelty and
advantage of this measure is that it captures how special the U.S. government is as a debt
issuer vis-a-vis comparably safe governments, not vis-a-vis large U.S. agencies or corporates.
WemeasuretheU.S.TreasuryPremiumvis-à-visgovernmentbondsinAustralia,Canada,
Denmark, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and United King-
dom, referred to as the “G10 countries.” Except for Japan, all sample countries have a AAA
ornear-AAAsovereigncreditratingandisperceivedasneardefault-freebyglobalinvestors.1
From 2000-2016, we find the average premium on U.S. Treasuries was 10 basis points at the
five-year horizon and 25 basis points at the three-month horizon. The premia also differ
significantly across countries, with means ranging between -26 and 61 basis points.
Furthermore, we document a steady decline in the U.S. Treasury Premium at medium-
and long-term maturities since the Global Financial Crisis (GFC). The average five-year
premium is 21 basis points pre-GFC, increases up to 90 basis points during the GFC, and
declinesto-8basispointspost-GFC.Incontrast, thethree-monthpremiumaverages20basis
points before the GFC, increases up to 280 basis points during the GFC, but remains at 20
1The long-term local currency bonds in seven of 11 countries are AAA-rated throughout the sample
(Australia,Canada,Denmark,Germany,Norway,SwedenandSwitzerland). Theotherfourcountries(Japan,
New Zealand, United States and United Kingdom) do not have a perfect credit rating. The United States
wasdowngradedtoAA+in2011andNewZealandwasdownloadedtoAAin2011andtheUnitedKingdom
lost its AAA rating after the Brexit in 2016. Japan was downgraded several times in our sample, currently
rated A+, several notches lower than all the other sovereigns and the lowest in our sample.
1

basis points after the GFC. The decline in the medium- and long-term U.S. Treasury Premia
after the GFC is accompanied by a sharp inversion of the term structure of the premia.
To investigate the drivers of the convenience yield differential, we decompose our U.S.
Treasury Premium into three components: (1) sovereign credit risk differential between the
foreign country and the United States; (2) swap market mispricing given by deviations from
covered interest rate parity (CIP) for interbank funding instruments (Du et al. (Forthcom-
ing)); and (3) a residual term, which we attribute to differences in broadly-defined liquidity,
which can include market liquidity, collateral value, near-money features of Treasuries, and
so forth.
We show that in the pre-GFC period, measured credit spread differentials and CIP de-
viations were both negligible; thus the positive U.S. Treasury Premium is almost entirely
driven by the liquidity component. In the post-GFC period, both the CIP deviations for
interbank rates and sovereign CDS spread differentials tend to increase the U.S. Treasury
Premium because the U.S. has lower sovereign CDS spreads than the average G10 country
and swap market mispricing on average makes the swap-implied dollar yield higher than the
direct dollar yield. Therefore, the secular decline in the medium- to long-term U.S. Treasury
Premium is mostly driven by the decline in the residual liquidity component.
We then examine the behavior of our U.S. Treasury Premium measure against other
measures of the liquidity and safety value of U.S. Treasury yields. At the short horizon, the
general collateral (GC) repo-Treasury bill (repo-Tbill) spread is considered a measure of the
liquidity premium in Treasury bill yields, as the GC repo is secured by Treasury collateral
and has very little credit risk, but is not as liquid as Treasury bills (Nagel (2016)). We find
that variations in the average 3-month premium of U.S. Treasury bills are strongly correlated
with the U.S. repo-Tbill spread. When the repo-Tbill spread is high, our average 3-month
U.S. Treasury Premium is also high. Furthermore, we find that a higher repo-Tbill spread in
foreign countries is correlated with a reduction in the U.S. Treasury Premium at the 3-month
2