NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW CREDIT CYCLES ACROSS A FINANCIAL CRISIS
Arvind Krishnamurthy
Tyler Muir
Working Paper 23850
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23850
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017, Revised January 2024
We thank Michael Bordo, Gary Gorton, Robin Greenwood, Angus Lewis, Francis Longstaff,
Emil Siriwardane, Jeremy Stein, David Romer, Chris Telmer, Alan Taylor, Chenzi Xu, Egon
Zakrajsek, and seminar/conference participants at Arizona State University, AFA 2015 and 2017,
Chicago Booth Financial Regulation conference, NBER Monetary Economics meeting, NBER
Corporate Finance meeting, FRIC at Copenhagen Business School, Riksbank Macro-Prudential
Conference, SITE 2015, Stanford University, University of Amsterdam, University of California-
Berkeley, University of California-Davis, UCLA, USC, Utah Winter Finance Conference, and
Chicago Booth Empirical Asset Pricing Conference. We thank the International Center for
Finance for help with bond data, and many researchers for leads on other bond data. We thank
Jonathan Wallen and David Yang for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Arvind Krishnamurthy and Tyler Muir. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

How Credit Cycles across a Financial Crisis
Arvind Krishnamurthy and Tyler Muir
NBER Working Paper No. 23850
September 2017, Revised January 2024
JEL No. E0,G01
ABSTRACT
We study the behavior of credit and output across a financial crisis cycle using information from
credit spreads and credit growth. We show the transition into a crisis occurs with a large increase
in credit spreads, indicating that crises involve a dramatic shift in expectations and are a surprise.
The severity of the subsequent crisis can be forecast by the size of credit losses (change in
spreads) coupled with the fragility of the financial sector (as measured by pre-crisis credit
growth), and we document that this interaction is an important feature of crises. We also find that
recessions in the aftermath of financial crises are severe and protracted. Finally, we find that
spreads fall pre-crisis and appear too low, even as credit grows ahead of a crisis. This behavior of
both prices and quantities suggests that credit supply expansions are a precursor to crises. The
2008 financial crisis cycle is in keeping with these historical patterns surrounding financial crises.
Arvind Krishnamurthy
Stanford Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
akris@stanford.edu
Tyler Muir
University of California at Los Angeles
Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90024
and NBER
tyler.muir@anderson.ucla.edu

1. Introduction
We characterize the dynamics of credit markets and output across a financial crisis cy-
cle, contributing to a literature that examines the empirical links between credit and the
macroeconomy. Thisliteraturehassoughtanswerstotwomainquestions: (1)Whatisthe
aftermath of a financial crisis, and in particular, what factors lead to a more protracted
post-crisis recession? See papers by Bordo et al. (2001); Cerra and Saxena (2008); Rein-
hart and Rogoff (2009); Claessens et al. (2010); Bordo and Haubrich (2012); Laeven and
Valencia(2013);Jorda` etal.(2011);SchularickandTaylor(2012);RomerandRomer(2014).
(2) What does the run-up to a crisis look like, and what credit variables help to predict
a crisis? See papers by Schularick and Taylor (2012); Jorda` et al. (2011); Baron and Xiong
(2017); Lo´pez-Salido et al. (2017); Mian et al. (2017); Sufi and Taylor (2022); Mu¨ller and
Verner(2023);FrydmanandXu(2023).
We revisit these questions with new data. In particular, our research brings in in-
formation from credit spreads, i.e., the spreads between higher and lower grade bonds
within a country, while much of the research cited above has focused on quantity data
such as credit-to-GDP. In US data, credit spreads are known to contain information on
the credit cycle and recessions (see Mishkin (1990), Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012), Bordo
and Haubrich (2010), and Lo´pez-Salido et al. (2017)). However, the US has only expe-
rienced two significant financial crises over the last century. We collect information on
credit spreads internationally dating back 150 years and across 19 countries, and thus
morecomprehensivelyexaminetherelationbetweencreditandfinancialcrises.
Wesummarizeourfindingsasfollows:
• A large increase in credit spreads presages the economy’s transition into a financial
crisis. Crises involve a sudden shift in investors’ expectations and, therefore, are a
surprise.
2

• Theseverityofafinancialcrisis,intermsofthedeclineinoutput,isinformedbythe
sizeoftheincreaseincreditspreadscoupledwiththeextentofthepre-crisisgrowth
incredit.
• Crises are preceded by unusually high credit growth and unusually narrow credit
spreads;thatis,frothycredit-marketconditions.
• Frothycreditmarketconditionshelptoforecasttheincidenceofcrises.
The first two findings describe what happens in a crisis and what factors are associ-
atedwithworsecrises,whichisquestion(1)thatpriorresearchhasaddressed. Thiswork,
in particular Schularick and Taylor (2012), demonstrates that growth in credit-to-GDP in
the years before a crisis presages a worse crisis. We complement this result by showing
that the extent of the rise in credit spreads at the start of a crisis – loosely, the size of the
shock – coupled with pre-crisis credit growth better describes the aftermath of a crisis
than either the shock or the credit-growth run up, separately. As we discuss below, this
interactionresultconformswelltoexistingtheoreticalmodelsoffinancialcrises.
The second two findings describe the preconditions for a financial crisis, which is
question (2) of prior research. Our answer is froth, consistent with Baron and Xiong
(2017); Schularick and Taylor (2012). Relative to this work, we show that low credit
spreads and high credit growth offer the sharpest signal of a coming crisis. Prior work
hasshownthateachofthesesignalsseparatelycontainsinformationforpredictingcrises.
We replicate this finding in our data, adding the new result that a combined signal has
themostinformationforpredictingcries. Wealsoshowthatthesesignalsdonotforecast
recessions. The information is special to crises. Finally, we run out-of-sample regressions
whereweconstructoursignalsusingdataonlyuptotime t andusethesignaltoforecast
a crisis after date t. While the statistical significance of our results are weakened in this
exercise, our basic finding continue to hold. Our results support narratives where credit
supplyexpansionsplayanimportantroleintherun-uptoacrisis.
3