NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE LOAN COVENANT CHANNEL:
HOW BANK HEALTH TRANSMITS TO THE REAL ECONOMY
Gabriel Chodorow-Reich
Antonio Falato
Working Paper 23879
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23879
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017
We thank Dan Andrews (discussant), Indraneel Chakraborty (discussant), Arpit Gupta
(discussant), Marcel Jansen (discussant), Justin Murfin (discussant), Michael Roberts
(discussant), David Scharfstein, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, Amir Sufi, participants at the 2017
St. Louis Fed STLAR conference, 2017 Bank Of Spain Conference on Financial Stability, the
2017 NBER ME summer meeting, the 2017 Advances in Macro Finance Tepper-Laef
Conference, the 2017 NBER CF fall meeting, the 2018 IMF Annual Macro-Financial Research
Conference, the 2018 NYU/Stern Conference on Financial Intermediation, the 2019 AEA
meetings, and seminar participants at Columbia University, Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco, London Business School, MIT, NOVA School of Business and Economics, Ohio
State, Stanford, UCLA Anderson, U. of Chicago, and UT Austin for helpful comments and Ivan
Ivanov for sharing snow cover data with us. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2017 by Gabriel Chodorow-Reich and Antonio Falato. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Loan Covenant Channel: How Bank Health Transmits to the Real Economy
Gabriel Chodorow-Reich and Antonio Falato
NBER Working Paper No. 23879
September 2017, Revised June 2020
JEL No. E44,G21,G32
ABSTRACT
We document the importance of covenant violations in transmitting bank health to non-financial
firms using a new supervisory data set of bank loans. Roughly one-third of loans in our data
breach a covenant during the 2008-09 period, providing lenders the opportunity to force a
renegotiation of loan terms or to accelerate repayment of otherwise long-term credit. Lenders in
worse health are more likely to force a reduction in the loan commitment following a violation.
The reduction in credit to borrowers who violate a covenant accounts for the majority of the
cross-sectional variation in credit supply during the 2008-09 crisis.
Gabriel Chodorow-Reich
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
chodorowreich@fas.harvard.edu
Antonio Falato
Federal Reserve Board
Mail Stop #89
20th Street & Constitution Ave. NW
Washington DC 20551
antonio.falato@frb.gov

1. Introduction
Alargeliteraturedocumentstheimportanceofthehealthofthebankingsectorfornonfinancial
firm outcomes such as investment and employment.1 Most recently, the 2008-09 period contained
both a financial crisis and the deepest recession in the United States in 60 years. Yet, at the start
of the financial panic in 2008 only 10% of bank loans had remaining maturity of less than one
year and the typical firm did not face the prospect of a maturing bank loan until 2011. This fact
reveals an important gap in our understanding of the transmission of bank health: why do shocks
to lenders affect their existing corporate borrowers despite the prevalence of long-term credit?
Wedocumentthecentralroleofloancovenantviolationsinthistransmissionmechanism. Loan
covenants appear in nearly all commercial loan contracts. They circumscribe the set of actions a
borrower may take (nonfinancial covenants) or specify minimum or maximum thresholds for cash
flow or balance sheet variables (financial covenants). Breaching of a covenant puts a borrower into
technical default and gives the lender the right to accelerate repayment of the loan. Thus, loan
covenant violations increase lenders’ bargaining power and provide them broad opportunity to
renegotiate contract terms when their internal cost of funds rises. As a result, covenant violations
allow lenders to reduce the existing stock of credit, potentially affecting many more borrowers
than just those with expiring credit or seeking new originations. We refer to the transmission of
lender health to existing borrowers through the forced renegotiation of contract terms as the loan
covenant channel.
We assess the covenant channel in the context of the 2008-09 financial crisis using a new
supervisory data set of covenant compliance in syndicated loans. We observe the identities of
borrowers and lenders and follow individual loans over time, including through amendments.
Following the violation of a covenant, a lender may accelerate repayment, force a renegotiation of
the loan contract, or simply waive or reset the covenant with no further impact on the loan. Our
data track each of these potential outcomes.
We document two key facts using these data: most bank loans have long stated maturity, but
many loans breach covenants. Our full data set covers $2 trillion of loan commitments at the start
of2008. Ofthese, 91%haveatleastoneyearmaturityremainingandthemeanmaturityremaining
1See e.g. Peek and Rosengren (2000), Lin and Paravisini (2012), Chodorow-Reich (2014), and Benmelech,
Bergman, and Seru (2015) for evidence from the United States and Gan (2007), Amiti and Weinstein (2018), and
Bentolila, Jansen, and Jim´enez (2017) for evidence in other countries.
1

within this group is 3.3 years. Roughly one-quarter of loans in the data breach a covenant during
a typical year before the 2008-09 financial crisis and one-third of loans breach a covenant each
year during the financial crisis. Together, long stated maturity but high violation frequency make
the loan covenant channel a potentially important transmission mechanism.
For a causal assessment of the covenant channel we turn to variation in the cross-section of
lendersduringthe2008-09financialcrisis. Thewrite-downsonassetslinkedtorealestateloansled
to an enormous decline in the market equity of the U.S. financial sector and coincided with a sharp
increaseinbankfundingcosts. Bothfactorsincreasedtheinternalcostoffundsatlenders. Abody
of evidence documents the transmission from the reduction in credit supply at lenders to outcomes
at nonfinancial firms during the crisis (Campello, Graham, and Harvey, 2010; Duchin, Ozbas, and
Sensoy, 2010; Campello, Giambona, et al., 2011; Chodorow-Reich, 2014; Duygan-Bump, Levkov,
and Montoriol-Garriga, 2015; Siemer, 2016). However, banks varied greatly in their exposure to
the crisis. We assign lender health by combining three measures used in Chodorow-Reich (2014)
that capture a bank’s exposure to the crisis through counterparty risk and mortgage-related losses.
Our empirical exercises ask whether the outcome of a covenant violation during the 2008-09
crisisdependedontheleadlender’sfinancialhealth. Asimplecomparisonofoutcomesofviolations
based on lender health raises two main concerns. First, firms that violate covenants and have
unhealthy lenders may differ along other dimensions from firms that violate covenants and have
healthier lenders. We attempt to assuage this concern by presenting evidence that borrowers of
healthier and less healthy lenders appear similar along numerous observable dimensions including
pre-crisisleverage,riskrating, andex ante covenanttightness,havesimilarpropensitiestoviolatea
covenant during the crisis, and that the balancing of observable characteristics holds even within
the subset of firms that violate covenants. The second concern is that violation of a covenant
correlates with other firm characteristics and loan outcomes may also depend on the interplay of
lender health and these other characteristics. We address this concern by including as covariates
in our main specification measures of borrower quality interacted with lender health, which isolate
the impact of lender health× violation from the impact of lender health×borrower quality.
We also offer two additional causal identification strategies. The first follows an influential
literature using regression discontinuity methods to study the impact of covenant violations on
firms (Chava and Roberts, 2008; Roberts and Sufi, 2009a; Nini, Smith, and Sufi, 2012; Falato and
Liang, 2016). We provide conditions under which this analysis causally identifies the treatment
2