NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CENTRAL BANKS: EVOLUTION AND INNOVATION IN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Michael D. Bordo
Pierre L. Siklos
Working Paper 23847
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23847
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017
The authors are grateful to Maria Sole Pagliari for research assistance in collecting the data for
this study. Comments on earlier drafts by the late Allan Meltzer, our discussant, Jan-Egbert
Sturm, the Editors, and participants at the April 2017 Riksbank Conference, are gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23847.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Michael D. Bordo and Pierre L. Siklos. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Central Banks: Evolution and Innovation in Historical Perspective
Michael D. Bordo and Pierre L. Siklos
NBER Working Paper No. 23847
September 2017
JEL No. E02,E31,E32,E42,E58
ABSTRACT
Central banks have evolved for close to four centuries. This paper argues that for two centuries
central banks caught up to the strategies followed by the leading central banks of the era; the
Bank of England in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries and the Federal Reserve in the
twentieth century. It also argues that, by the late 20th century, small open economies were more
prone to adopt a new policy regime when the old one no longer served its purpose whereas large,
less open, and systemically important economies were more reluctant to embrace new approaches
to monetary policy. Our study blends the quantitative with narrative explanations of the
evolution of central banks. We begin by providing an overview of the evolution of monetary
policy regimes taking note of the changing role of financial stability over time. We then provide
some background to an analysis that aims, via econometric means, to quantify the similarities and
idiosyncrasies of the ten central banks and the extent to which they represent a network of sorts
where, in effect, some central banks learn from others.
Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu
Pierre L. Siklos
Wilfrid Laurier University
75 University Ave
Waterloo, ON, CANADA, N2L 3C5
psiklos@wlu.ca
An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23847

1. Introduction
Central banks have evolved for close to four centuries. Their evolution was initially
tied up with meeting the fiscal needs of nascent states to finance government
expenditures in wars and to market the government’s debt. This was certainly true
of the Riksbank, originally named the Bank of the Estates of the Realm and created in
1668 and often referred to as the first central bank1, and even the Bank of England
created in 1694, in the midst of King William III’s war with France.2
They were not initially called central banks but rather banks of issue. The term central
bank only came into use in the late nineteenth century. Henry Thornton (1802) was
arguably one of the first to lay down concepts of central banking, including the role of
autonomy.3 Later in the nineteenth century central banks played a key role in
managing the gold standard (i.e. following the “rules of the game”).
The era of the Gold Standard, which in one form or another was to last until the 1920s,
also saw the publication of Bagehot’s Lombard Street (1873) which suggested that a
central bank should be seen as a guarantor of financial stability by being a lender of
last resort.4
The definition of financial stability has changed significantly over time. In the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries it meant avoiding or managing banking panics,
that is, serving as a lender of last resort to the banking system and the payments
1 The Riksbank was formed as a successor to its predecessor Stockholm Banco. It didn’t immediately
fund the government but did so later. See ( Fregert (2017).
2 As Bagehot (1873) famously remarked: “It was founded by a Whig government because it was in
desperate need of money, …”.
3 “To suffer the solicitations of merchants or the wishes of government to determine the measure of
bank issues is unquestionably to adopt a very false principle of conduct.” (Thornton 1802).
4 Perhaps best captured by Bagehot’s view that “money would not manage itself”.
1

system. This changed in the twentieth century with the adoption of the real bills
doctrine, followed by the Federal Reserve in its early years. The real bills doctrine
urged a central bank to head off an asset price boom because it would lead to inflation,
then depression and deflation (Meltzer 2003, chapter 1). More recently, financial
stability encompasses both being a lender of last resort and preventing imbalances
that will lead to asset price booms and busts. Also the role of lender of last resort has
expanded to include the entire financial system not just the banking system.
The pace of central bank creation intensified in the nineteenth century reflecting a
number of forces including the fiscal motive, the maintenance of specie convertibility
and managing financial crises, especially towards the end of the century. The Banks
founded included the Banque de France (1800), the Norges Bank (1816)5, the First
and Second Banks of the United States (1791 and 1816), the Bank of Japan (1882),
the Banca d’Italia (1893), and eventually the US Federal Reserve (1913). A few other
central banks (e.g., the Reichsbank (1873), and the Swiss National Bank (1907))
reflected attempts to centralize the currency issue and facilitate financial
transactions.
Central banks, because of their special status of having government charters and
because of their size, evolved into bankers’ banks and later into lenders of last resort.
The Bank of England is generally viewed as the first central bank to successfully
develop as a lender of last resort as is discussed in the Narrative Appendix in the
NBER Working Paper version of this chapter. However, other early central banks such
5 A political element played a role here as well because of the failed finances of Denmark which at the
time had jurisdiction over Norway. See, for example, Qvigstad (2016).
2