NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEFAULT RISK, SECTORAL REALLOCATION, AND PERSISTENT RECESSIONS
Cristina Arellano
Yan Bai
Gabriel Mihalache
Working Paper 23835
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23835
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017
We thank Alexandra Solovyeva for excellent research assistance. We also thank our discussants
Nuno Coimbra and Alessandro Dovis for insightful comments and suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Cristina Arellano, Yan Bai, and Gabriel Mihalache. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Default Risk, Sectoral Reallocation, and Persistent Recessions
Cristina Arellano, Yan Bai, and Gabriel Mihalache
NBER Working Paper No. 23835
September 2017
JEL No. E3,F3
ABSTRACT
Sovereign debt crises are associated with large and persistent declines in economic activity,
disproportionately so for nontradable sectors. This paper documents this pattern using Spanish
data and builds a two-sector dynamic quantitative model of sovereign default with capital
accumulation. Recessions are very persistent in the model and more pronounced for nontraded
sectors because of default risk. An adverse domestic shock increases the likelihood of default,
limits capital inflows, and thus restricts the ability of the economy to exploit investment
opportunities. The economy responds by reducing investment and reallocating capital toward the
traded sector to support debt service payments. The real exchange rate depreciates, a reflection of
the scarcity of traded goods. We find that these mechanisms are quantitatively important for
rationalizing the experience of Spain during the recent debt crisis.
Cristina Arellano Gabriel Mihalache
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Department of Economics
Research Department Stony Brook University
90 Hennepin Avenue http://www.gmihalache.com/
Minneapolis, MN 55401 Stony Brook, NY 11790
and NBER gabriel.mihalache@stonybrook.edu
arellano.cristina@gmail.com
Yan Bai
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
216 Harkness Hall
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
yanbai06@gmail.com

1 Introduction
During the recent sovereign debt crisis in Europe, many countries experienced a large and
persistent decline in output. As previously documented for emerging markets crises, the
decline in production was more pronounced in less traded sectors. Using industry-level data
from Spain, we document large differential output performance across sectors, with less
traded sectors experiencing much larger declines in output. We build a dynamic model
of sovereign default risk, capital accumulation, and two sectors that rationalizes both the
large and persistent decline in aggregate output as well as the relatively sharper drop for
nontradables during a sovereign debt crisis.
The main mechanism in our model that replicates the dynamics of sectoral and aggregate
outputduringthecrisisistheriseinsovereigndefaultrisk. Defaultriskamplifiesandprolongs
the recession, especially for the nontraded sector. Low aggregate shocks increase default risk
and make international financial conditions tight by increasing bond spreads. In response
to these shocks, investment is greatly reduced, not only because of the low productivity but
also to smooth the decline in tradable consumption. Tradable production, however, decreases
less than nontradable production because the economy reallocates inputs toward the traded
sector to support external debt repayment at higher bond spreads. The decline in investment
has persistent adverse effects on financial conditions, slowing down the recovery. The real
exchange rates depreciates as a reflection of the scarcity of traded goods.
Using two-digit sectoral data for Spain, we document sizable and robust differential per-
formanceacrosssectorsduringthedebtcrisis, correlatedwithtradedness. Usinginput-output
tables, we define a continuous measure for tradedness as the ratio of exports to total out-
put. The variation in tradedness across sectors is large, ranging from 0% to 50%, that is,
anything from no exports to over half of the production being exported. We find that the
output decline from the peak of 2007 to the trough of 2013 is larger for sectors that are less
traded. Within manufacturing, the peak-to-trough decline is about 30% for sectors with zero
tradedness and about 0% for those with 50% tradedness. We also find that the comovement
of annual growth rates with the sovereign bond spread, a measure of the severity of the debt
crisis, varies with tradedness. We find that a 1% increase in the bond spread is associated
with an average decline of 3% in the annual growth rate for sectors with zero tradedness and
actually an increase in annual growth of about 1.5% for sectors with 50% tradedness.
Webuildadynamic,smallopeneconomymodelwithcapitalaccumulationandtwosectors
producing tradable and nontradable goods. International debt is unenforceable, and the
economy can default on its debt. The interest rate on debt carries a spread that compensates
for endogenous default risk. Consumption and investment are produced with a bundle of
2

traded and nontraded goods, and the international debt is denominated in tradable goods.
Aggregate capital accumulates over time as a result of investment decisions and is allocated
across sectors such that the marginal product of capital is equalized. The economy is subject
to aggregate productivity shocks that affect both sectors symmetrically.
In this framework, default risk restricts capital inflows and limits the ability of the econ-
omy to smooth consumption and effectively exploit productive domestic investment opportu-
nities. The degree to which the country is indebted matters for investment and consumption
as well as for the allocation of inputs across sectors. High indebtedness leads to declines in in-
vestment since tight financial conditions arising from default risk, more binding in high-debt
states, lead the economy to shift resources away from investment and toward consumption.
Consumption also falls despite this shift simply because more output is needed to service a
larger debt level. In high debt states the allocation of inputs is also tilted towards the traded
sector to support debt repayment.
We analyze the impulse response functions to declines in aggregate productivity that af-
fect both sectors equally. A decline in aggregate productivity of 0.5% results in an increase
in bond spreads of about 0.3% and a decline in aggregate output of about 0.7%. The decline
in aggregate output is very persistent. By period 15 after impact, the shock has largely
recovered, yet aggregate output continues to be about 0.4% below trend. The responses are
markedly different across sectors. Nontraded production falls by more than 1% on impact,
whereas traded production is almost unchanged. The decline in tradable consumption, how-
ever, is more than twice the decline in nontradable consumption, leading to a real exchange
rate depreciation.
To tease out how default risk shapes these impulse responses, we compare them against
a standard two-sector reference model without default risk. The impulse responses in this
reference model are quite different from those in the benchmark default model. The decline
in aggregate output is more muted, and output recovers rapidly after the shock. The sectoral
decline across sectors is similar, with traded production actually declining a bit more than
nontraded production. The reason is that with enforcement and thus no default risk, the
economy can borrow more when it experiences low shocks and smooth consumption. Well-
functioning financial markets in the reference model prevent the large and persistent decline
in investment as well as the real exchange rate depreciation present in the benchmark default
model.
We conduct an event analysis and compare our model implications directly to Spanish
data. We focus on the peak-to-trough performance from 2007 to 2013. We feed in the
sequence of shocks such that the model replicates the 9.6% decline in aggregate output
3