NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHAT GOES UP MAY NOT COME DOWN:
ASYMMETRIC INCIDENCE OF VALUE-ADDED TAXES
Youssef Benzarti
Dorian Carloni
Jarkko Harju
Tuomas Kosonen
Working Paper 23849
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23849
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017, Revised November 2018
Previously circulated as “Do Prices Respond Differently to Increases and Decreases in
Consumption Taxes?” The views expressed in this paper are the authors' and should not be
interpreted as those of CBO, LIER, VATT, or National Bureau of Economic Research. We are
thankful to five anonymous referees, Alan Auerbach, Raj Chetty, Stefano DellaVigna, Itzik
Fadlon, Naomi Feldman, Xavier Gabaix, Al Harberger, Jim Hines, Hilary Hoynes, Henrik
Kleven, Wojciech Kopczuk, Peter Kuhn, Camille Landais, Maurizio Mazzocco, Pascal
Michaillat, Magne Mogstad, Ryan Oprea, Emmanuel Saez, Joel Slemrod and Alisa Tazhitdinova
for their helpful suggestions and comments. Tero Hokkanen, Jen Kades and Carolina Kansikas
provided outstanding research assistance. Harju gratefully acknowledges financial support from
the Foundation for Economic Education.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Youssef Benzarti, Dorian Carloni, Jarkko Harju, and Tuomas Kosonen. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What Goes Up May Not Come Down: Asymmetric Incidence of Value-Added Taxes
Youssef Benzarti, Dorian Carloni, Jarkko Harju, and Tuomas Kosonen
NBER Working Paper No. 23849
September 2017, Revised November 2018
JEL No. H20,H22,H23
ABSTRACT
This paper shows that prices respond more to increases than to decreases in Value-Added Taxes
(VATs). First, using two plausibly exogenous VAT changes, we show that prices respond twice
as much to VAT increases than to VAT decreases. Second, we show that this asymmetry results
in higher equilibrium profits and markups. Third, we find that firms operating with low profit
margins are more likely to respond asymmetrically to the VAT changes than firms operating with
high profit margins. Fourth, this asymmetry persists several years after the VAT changes take
place. Fifth, using all VAT changes in the European Union from 1996 to 2015, we find similar
levels of asymmetry.
Youssef Benzarti Jarkko Harju
Department of Economics VATT
University of California Arkadiankatu 7
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 P.O.Box 1279
and NBER 00101, Helsinki
youssef.benzarti@gmail.com Finland
jarkko.harju@vatt.fi
Dorian Carloni
Congressional Budget Office Tuomas Kosonen
Dorian.Carloni@cbo.gov VATT
Arkadiankatu 7
P.O.Box 1279
00101, Helsinki
Finland
tuomas.kosonen@labour.fi

1 Introduction
Value-Added Taxes (VATs) affect a large share of the world’s economies: all
member countries of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
ment (OECD), except for the United States, have adopted some form of VAT.
In the European Union (EU), VATs raise 30% of total tax revenue or 12% of
GDP, which amounts to the largest source of government revenue. U.S. politi-
cians and think tanks have often mentioned using the VAT as a national sales
tax or as a replacement for the corporate tax.1 For these reasons, understand-
ing the mechanisms underlying the incidence of VATs is both economically and
policy-relevant.
In a standard incidence model, the direction of a tax change does not matter
for incidence, as supply and demand elasticities are sufficient to determine the
proportion of the tax borne by each agent. In this paper, we question the premise
that prices respond symmetrically to variation in VATs by empirically showing
that there is a consistently higher pass-through to prices for tax increases than
for tax decreases.
We perform the analysis at two different levels. First, we focus on two re-
forms that are plausibly exogenous to underlying economic conditions. We use a
14 percentage point decrease in the VAT rate applied to Finnish hairdressing ser-
vices in January 2007 and a subsequent 14 percentage point increase in the same
sector in January 2012.2 We document – using European Commission Council
Directives – that the two reforms were part of a VAT experimentation program,
and therefore the timing of the reforms and the choice of sector are plausibly
exogenous. Using micro price and corporate tax data, we compare hairdressing
services to a control group consisting of beauty salons – which were unaffected
by the VAT changes – and find five main results.
First, we find that prices respond twice as much to the 14 p.p. VAT increase
1During the 2016 US presidential election, two Republican candidates (Senators Ted Cruz
andRandPaul)proposedadoptingaVAT.ItwasalsoconsideredbytheObamaadministration
as a possible source of funding for health care costs (Reported in Washington Post, May 27,
2009).
2Kosonen(2015)analyzestheeffectoftheJanuary2007VATcutonprofits,costsandprices
as well as other firm level outcomes. We reproduce some of these results and highlight them in
more detail in Section 2.2.
1

than to the 14 p.p. VAT decrease. Second, we find that this asymmetry persists
several years after the VAT cut is repealed, suggesting that equilibrium prices
depend on the history of tax changes. Third, we find that the asymmetric pass-
through is reflected in both markups and profits: both respond asymmetrically
to VAT changes and end up at a higher equilibrium level once the VAT cut is re-
pealed. Firm profits and markups increase following the VAT decrease. However,
they decrease by half as much following the VAT increase and remain higher than
their pre-reform level relative to the control group. Fourth, we uncover an addi-
tional layer of asymmetry: the underlying distribution of price changes following
the VAT increase is substantially different from that of the VAT decrease. Fol-
lowing the VAT decrease, 60% of the population of hairdressers keep their prices
unchanged, while 40% decrease their prices with no specific target. Following
the VAT increase, the distribution is bi-modal, with approximately 50% of hair-
dressers targeting 100% pass-through, 25% keeping their prices unchanged, and
the remaining 25% passing through between 0% and 80% of the VAT increase
with no specific pass-through target. Fifth, we find that the asymmetric pass-
through can be explained, in part, by firm profit margins. Firms operating with
low profit margins are more likely than firms operating with high profit margins
to respond asymmetrically to VAT changes.
The second level of analysis broadens the scope of our findings by considering
every VAT change that occurred in the Member States of the EU from 1996 to
2015. Using these reforms, we are able to perform several tests of the asymme-
try. Because the VAT reforms we consider cover all sectors of the economy, we
show that the asymmetry is not specific to small labor-intensive sectors (such as
hairdressers) but exist in most other industries regardless of their size. Second,
we find asymmetric pass-through both for sector-specific VAT changes and for
changes in the main VAT rate, which affects most commodities in the economy,
further generalizing our findings.
The Finnish hairdressing reforms were part of a VAT experimentation pro-
gram and are, therefore, plausibly exogenous to economic conditions. The re-
forms that we use in the second level of analysis, however, were initiated by
Member States. We address the concern that these reforms might be endogenous
to economic conditions in several ways. First, we find no significant pre-trends in
2