NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE DECLINE OF BIG-BANK LENDING TO SMALL BUSINESS:
DYNAMIC IMPACTS ON LOCAL CREDIT AND LABOR MARKETS
Brian S. Chen
Samuel G. Hanson
Jeremy C. Stein
Working Paper 23843
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23843
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017
We are especially grateful to Bill Phelan, Mark Zoff and others at PayNet Inc. for helpful
comments and for providing access to data. We thank Jack Brand, Peter Carroll, Victoria
Ivashina, James Kirby, Karen Mills, Larry Nath, Raghuram Rajan, Rick Ruback, Peter Sands,
David Scharfstein, Til Schuermann, Adi Sunderam, Chuck Withee, Royce Yudkoff, and seminar
participants at BYU, Duke, Harvard, the NBER Summer Institute, and NYU for helpful
comments. Hanson gratefully acknowledges funding from the Harvard Business School Division
of Research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23843.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Brian S. Chen, Samuel G. Hanson, and Jeremy C. Stein. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Decline of Big-Bank Lending to Small Business: Dynamic Impacts on Local Credit and
Labor Markets
Brian S. Chen, Samuel G. Hanson, and Jeremy C. Stein
NBER Working Paper No. 23843
September 2017
JEL No. G01,G21,G23
ABSTRACT
Small business lending by the four largest banks fell sharply relative to others in 2008 and
remained depressed through 2014. We explore the dynamic adjustment process following this
credit supply shock. In counties where the largest banks had a high market share, the aggregate
flow of small business credit fell, interest rates rose, fewer businesses expanded, unemployment
rose, and wages fell from 2006 to 2010. While the flow of credit recovered after 2010 as other
lenders slowly filled the void, interest rates remain elevated. Although unemployment returns to
normal by 2014, the effect on wages persists in these areas.
Brian S. Chen Jeremy C. Stein
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Harvard University Harvard University
1805 Cambridge Street Littauer 209
Cambridge, MA 02138 Cambridge, MA 02138
bchen@fas.harvard.edu and NBER
jeremy_stein@harvard.edu
Samuel G. Hanson
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 361
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
shanson@hbs.edu

“Small business owners feel that despite being creditworthy today, banks remain
either wary or entirely unwilling to lend to them.”
Mills and McCarthy (2014).
I. Introduction
The above quote from Karen Mills, the former head of the U.S. Small Business
Administration, captures a concern expressed by many observers during the slow recovery from
the 2007–2009 financial crisis and Great Recession: the possible existence of a small business
“credit gap”—i.e., a reduction in the supply of credit to small firms.
In this paper, we ask whether such a credit gap did in fact open up in the post-crisis period,
and what its economic implications may have been. Our point of departure, and the basis for our
empirical strategy, is shown in Figure 1, which plots Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) data
on small business loan originations by U.S. banks. While small business lending declined at all
banks beginning in 2008, the four largest banks—those owned by Bank of America, Citigroup,
JPMorgan Chase, and Wells Fargo—cut back significantly relative to the rest of the banking
sector. By the trough in 2010, the annual flow of originations from the Top 4 banks stood at just
41% of its 2006 level, whereas the comparable figure for all other banks was 66%. Moreover,
originations at the Top 4 banks remained depressed after 2010, hovering at roughly 50% of their
pre-crisis level through 2014. By contrast, lending at other banks slowly recovered, approaching
80% of its pre-crisis level by 2014.
We begin by arguing that this differential decline in small business lending at the Top 4
banks reflects a differential contraction in credit supply. A natural alternative is that there was a
differential shift in credit demand, perhaps because the Top 4 were disproportionately located in
areas that were hardest hit by the Great Recession. Using CRA data at the bank-county level, we
compare the small business loan growth of the Top 4 banks in a given county to other banks
operating in the same county, thus sweeping away any local variation in loan demand. If anything,
these within-county differences are slightly larger in absolute magnitude than the raw across-bank
differences depicted in Figure 1, which is consistent with a supply-side rather than demand-side
explanation for the differential decline in lending at the Top 4 banks.
A harder question is why the Top 4 banks cut their supply of small business loans more
than other banks. Although we cannot answer this question definitively, we offer some hypotheses,
1

which we flesh out in Section II. In brief, we think of the Top 4 loan supply shift as evolving in
two distinct phases. First, the Top 4 pulled backed aggressively from small business lending in
2008 during the midst of the financial crisis. At this time, they were experiencing high charge-off
rates on their small business portfolios, reinforcing their historical underperformance in a segment
that they viewed as being peripheral to their overall business strategies. They also had to contend
with large credit losses across a range of other products, threatening their solvency and leading to
unprecedented wholesale funding pressures. Facing these challenges, managers at large banks
chose to pull back from their non-core small business lending operations in order to focus on the
task of managing through the crisis.
In the second phase, from 2010 to 2014, the Top 4 banks were slow to return to small
business lending once the crisis had subsided, even as smaller banks, non-bank finance companies,
and new online lenders began expanding in this market. This reluctance to re-enter seems to reflect
a reassessment by the Top 4 banks of their comparative advantage in the small-business segment.
And these concerns may have been amplified by several post-crisis changes in financial regulation
that weighed most heavily on the largest banks, including new capital surcharges for systemically
important institutions, the Federal Reserve’s annual bank stress-testing regime, and the enhanced
enforcement of anti-money-laundering rules.
To be clear, we do not attempt to estimate the causal impact of these individual channels,
much less try to distinguish between them. Nevertheless, we believe that the above narrative makes
it all the more plausible that the decline in Top 4 lending to small business that we document can
be thought of as reflecting a systematic and sustained supply-side shift, rather than some sort of
noise in the data.1 With this observation in hand, the remainder of the paper then focuses on
assessing the economic consequences of this shift in credit supply, using a difference-in-
1In this regard, it is interesting to contrast our empirical strategy with that of Greenstone, Mas, and Nguyen (2015).
They take a more atheoretic approach, inferring that a bank has experienced an inward shift in loan supply if it has a
negative bank fixed effect in a regression of bank-county level loan growth on bank and county fixed effects. By
contrast, we are effectively requiring that the negative bank fixed effect also be accompanied by some economically-
grounded priors—i.e., by a plausible story for why the bank may have cut its supply. This is why we spend a good
deal of effort trying to understand the forces underlying the Top 4 cutback in lending. The advantage of our approach
is that we are less likely to pick up bank fixed effects that amount to measurement error from the standpoint of loan
supply.
2