NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW DO CREDIT SUPPLY SHOCKS AFFECT THE REAL ECONOMY? EVIDENCE FROM
THE UNITED STATES IN THE 1980S
Atif Mian
Amir Sufi
Emil Verner
Working Paper 23802
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23802
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017, Revised October 2017
This research was supported by funding from the Washington Center for Equitable Growth, the
Julis Rabinowitz Center for Public Policy and Finance at Princeton, and the Initiative on Global
Markets at Chicago Booth. Hongbum Lee, Oliver Giesecke, and Seongjin Park provided excellent
research assistance. We thank Alan Blinder, Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde, Itay Goldstein, Philip
Strahan, and seminar participants at Georgetown University, Columbia University, University
College London, Imperial College, Princeton University, the University of Chicago, and the
NBER Summer Institute for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Atif Mian, Amir Sufi, and Emil Verner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

How do Credit Supply Shocks Affect the Real Economy? Evidence from the United States
in the 1980s
Atif Mian, Amir Sufi, and Emil Verner
NBER Working Paper No. 23802
September 2017, Revised October 2017
JEL No. E3,E32,E44,E51
ABSTRACT
We study the business cycle consequences of credit supply expansion in the U.S. The 1980's
credit boom resulted in stronger credit expansion in more deregulated states, and these states
experience a more amplified business cycle. A new test shows that amplification is primarily
driven by the local demand rather than the production capacity channel. States with greater
exposure to credit expansion experience larger increases in household debt, the relative price of
non-tradable goods, nominal wages, and non-tradable employment. Yet there is no change in
tradable sector employment. Eventually states with greater exposure to credit expansion
experience a significantly deeper recession.
Atif Mian Emil Verner
Princeton University Princeton University
Bendheim Center For Finance Bendheim Center For Finance
26 Prospect Avenue 26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540 Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER verner@princeton.edu
atif@princeton.edu
Amir Sufi
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
amir.sufi@chicagobooth.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23802

1 Introduction
There is increasing recognition that credit supply expansions and business cycles are closely con-
nected.1 While establishing a causal connection between credit and business cycles is typically
difficult, evenlessisknownabouthow creditaffectsthebusinesscycle. Therearetwowaysthrough
which credit can influence the macroeconomy. First, credit expansion may allow constrained firms
to borrow and invest more, increasing the economy’s production capacity. Second, credit expansion
mayallowhouseholdstoborrowandconsumemore, increasingoveralllocal demand. Thetwochan-
nels are fundamentally different since the production capacity channel shifts out aggregate supply
while the local demand channel shifts out aggregate demand.
The two channels are not mutually exclusive. However, understanding which one dominates in
practice is important since they have different implications for prices and real allocations. Bahadir
and Gumus (2016) show that credit expansion operating through the local demand channel is
inflationary in nature, expands the non-tradable sector relative to tradable sector and leads to real
exchangerateappreciation. Incontrast,creditexpansionoperatingthroughtheproduction capacity
channel is deflationary in nature and increases labor productivity and employment in sectors that
were financially constrained.
Separating these two channels is also important since they have different implications for busi-
ness cycle amplification and macroprudential policy. A number of recent theoretical papers, e.g.
Schmitt-Groh´e and Uribe (2016), Korinek and Simsek (2016) and Farhi and Werning (2015), show
thatthelocaldemandchannelofcreditexpansionamplifiesbusinesscyclesbygeneratingshortterm
gain at the expense of an eventual bust. A natural macroprudential implication is that household
leverage growth may need to be regulated.
This paper studies the business cycle consequences of credit supply expansion with a particular
emphasis on understanding whether credit expansion works through the local demand channel or
the production capacity channel. We focus on state level business cycle in the United States during
the 1980s, which provides an appealing natural experiment for two reasons. First, there was rapid
1For example, Jorda` et al. (2013), Krishnamurthy and Muir (2016), Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), Mian et al. (2017),
Baron and Xiong (2016) and Lo´pez-Salido et al. (2016). Credit supply expansion refers to a greater willingness
to lend, all else equal. It may be driven by factors such as deregulation, liberalization, global savings glut, or
behavioralfactors(asexamples,seeFavilukisetal.(2015),Justinianoetal.(2015),Gennaiolietal.(2012),Bordalo
et al. (2015), Landvoigt (2016), and Greenwood et al. (2016))
1

expansion in credit supply during this period. Second, the strength of this expansion varied across
states depending on how deregulated a state’s banking sector was.
ThetoppanelinFigure1showsthatcredittoGDPexpandedby21.8percentagepointsbetween
1982 and 1988, the highest growth in credit during an expansionary cycle until 2001. Moreover, as
creditquantityexpanded,creditspread,i.e. thepriceofrisk, fellbyoverahundredbasispoints. At
the same time, the share of high-yield corporate debt issuance increased from 14.6% to 56.1%. The
fall in credit spread and the rise in the high yield share during an era of rapid overall credit growth
are considered tell-tale signs of credit supply expansion (see Greenwood and Hanson (2013)).
Equally important from an identification perspective, the expansion in credit supply in a given
state depended critically on the extent of banking deregulation in that state. The bottom panel
in Figure 1 shows that growth in total bank credit between 1982 and 1988 was on average 42
percentage points stronger in states that had started deregulating their banking sector before 1983
compared to states that did not deregulate until after 1983. Credit growth in early deregulating
states was broad-based as well, including a sharp rise in household debt to income, consumer credit
and mortgage applications.
We use the natural experiment described in Figure 1 to estimate the effect of credit supply
expansion on the local business cycle. We also develop a new test to understand whether the effect
ofcreditexpansiononthebusinesscycleisprimarilydrivenbythelocaldemandchannelorthrough
production capacity. The basic idea is that credit operating through the local demand channel
should be inflationary in nature, with real expansion concentrated in the non-tradable sector. On
the other hand, credit operating through increased production capacity should be deflationary in
nature for the sectors that experience real expansion (Section 2 provides full details).
We find that states exposed to stronger credit supply expansion experience a much more am-
plified business cycle. The amplification is driven by higher loading on aggregate factors, and not
higher state-level idiosyncratic volatility. A one standard deviation increase in our banking dereg-
ulation measure leads to 21.3 percentage points stronger credit growth and a much more amplified
overall business cycle. In particular, a one s.d. increase in banking deregulation leads to a 72.6%
larger “beta” or loading for GDP, 61.0% for employment and 111.1% for house prices.
What is the mechanism through which credit supply expansion amplifies the business cycle?
We find that local demand channel is the primary mechanism responsible for the amplification on
2