NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEPOSIT INSURANCE AND DEPOSITOR MONITORING:
QUASI-EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM THE CREATION OF
THE FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION
Haelim Park Anderson
Gary Richardson
Brian S. Yang
Working Paper 23828
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23828
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017
The authors thank colleagues for comments and advice. The views expressed in this paper are
solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Office of Financial
Research, the United States Treasury, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Haelim Park Anderson, Gary Richardson, and Brian S. Yang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Deposit Insurance and Depositor Monitoring: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from the Creation
of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
Haelim Park Anderson, Gary Richardson, and Brian S. Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 23828
September 2017
JEL No. E42,E65,G21,G28,N22,P34
ABSTRACT
In the Banking Acts of 1933 and 1935, the United States created the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation, which ensured deposits in commercial banks up to $5,000. Congress capped the size
of insured deposits so that small depositors would not run on banks, but large and informed
depositors – such as firms and investors – would continue to monitor banks’ behavior. This essay
asks how that insurance scheme influenced depositors’ reactions to news about the health of the
economy and information on bank’s balance sheets. An answer arises from our treatment-and-
control estimation strategy. When deposit insurance was created, banks with New York state
charters accepted regular and preferred deposits. Preferred depositors received low, fixed interest
rates, but when banks failed, received priority in repayment. Deposit-insurance legislation
diminished differences between preferred and regular deposits by capping interest rates and
protecting regular depositors from losses. We find that before deposit insurance, regular
depositors reacted more to news about banks’ balance sheets and economic aggregates; while
preferred depositors reacted less. After deposit insurance, this difference diminished, but did not
disappear. The change in the behavior of one group relative to the other indicates that deposit
insurance reduced depositor monitoring, although the continued reaction of depositors to some
information suggests that, as intended, the legislation did not entirely eliminate depositor
monitoring.
Haelim Park Anderson Brian S. Yang
Office of Financial Research University of Minnesota Duluth
U. S. Department of the Treasury 360 LSBE
717 14th Street, NW 1318 Kirby Drive
Washington, D.C. 20220 Duluth, MN 55812
haelim.anderson@ofr.treasury.gov bsyang@d.umn.edu
Gary Richardson
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3155 Social Sciences Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
garyr@uci.edu

1. Introduction
Deposit insurance is a pillar of financial architecture in modern economies, yet the policy
remains controversial. Advocates assert that deposit insurance fosters financial stability and
forestalls financial panics (Demirguc-Kunt and Kane, 2002; Folkerts-Landau and Lindgren,
1998; Garcia, 1999). Critics claim that deposit insurance distorts incentives of savers and
financiers, encourages moral hazard and excessive risk-taking, and spawns systemic financial
crises. The controversy revolves around different perceptions about whether depositors monitor
banks’ performance in the absence of insurance; how monitoring influences banks’ behavior;
how, when, and to what extent insurance distorts monitoring; and whether it is possible to design
a deposit insurance system that preserves (at least to some extent) depositor monitoring
(Calomiris, 1999; Gorton, 2007). Empirical studies examining the effect of deposit insurance on
depositor monitoring have produced mixed results. Some studies detect monitoring, even in
nations with explicit and extensive insurance (e.g. Park and Peristiani (1998) and Martinez-Peria
and Schmukler (2001)). Other studies find little monitoring (Demirguc-Kunt and Huizinga 2004,
Calomiris and Jaremski, 2016).
These empirical inconsistencies arise for several reasons. Scholars study different nations
with different insurance systems which may, in fact, function differently. Scholars often lack
direct data on the phenomenon of interest; and scholars often study data from periods that lack
clearly defined control and treatment groups. So, in many cases, scholars may not be able to
precisely determine the ways in which depositors behaved. Recent studies overcome these
identification issues by using more granular data. Some studies overcome these constraints by
using a quasi-experimental research design, where they observe changes in the behavior of a
newly insured group relative to an uninsured control group (Karas, Pyle, and Schoors, 2013;
1

Calomiris and Jaremski, 2016). Others use the depositor-level data and observe the responses of
individual depositors to shocks (Kelly and O'Grada, 2008; Iyer and Puri, 2012; Iyer, Puri, and
Ryan, 2016; Brown, Guin, and Morkoetter, 2017). In particular, Iyer, Jensen, Johannesen, and
Sheridan (2017) use the depositor level data and document the reactions of individual depositors
when the deposit insurance limit changed. Our essay examines a similar policy experiment: the
creation of a national deposit insurance system in the United States during the 1930s.
The structure of New York’s commercial banking system provides a unique analytic
opportunity. New York’s commercial banks accepted preferred and regular deposits. Preferred
depositors received interest fixed by law, and when a bank failed, received repayment before
regular depositors. Regular depositors received interest set by the market, which usually
exceeded that paid to preferred depositors, but when a bank failed, received repayment after
preferred depositors. During the 1930s, a series of federal laws (particularly the Banking Acts of
1933 and 1935) limited interest that banks could pay upon demand deposits and established the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). The FDIC insured deposits in commercial banks
up to $5,000. Before these reforms, the incentives of preferred and regular depositors differed
sharply. For preferred depositors, regulations fixed the risks and returns at a low level; while for
regular depositors, the market set the risks and returns at a higher level. After these reforms,
regulations dictated risks and returns for both groups, setting the risk of loss for all depositors
near zero and capping interest on deposits at a low rate (zero for demand deposits). This change
in the incentives of one group relative to another facilitates our treatment-and-control estimation
of the impact of deposit insurance.1
1 Our dataset focuses on the period between 1929 and 1938. The period from 1929 to 1932 is characterized by the
Great Depression and banking panics. In comparison, the period from 1934, when deposit insurance was enacted,
until the current crisis, is known as the “Quiet Period” in U.S. banking (Gorton, 2010). A banking panic occurs
when information-insensitive debt becomes information-sensitive. In other words, depositors intensify monitoring
2