NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERNATIONAL CREDIT SUPPLY SHOCKS
Ambrogio Cesa-Bianchi
Andrea Ferrero
Alessandro Rebucci
Working Paper 23841
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23841
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017
Prepared for the 2017 NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics (ISOM). We would like
to thank our discussants at the conference, Julian di Giovanni and Alan Taylor, as well as our
discussants at other conferences, Anil Ari, Luca Dedola, Aitor Erce, Alice Fabre, Gurnain
Pasricha, John Rogers, Tim Schmidt-Eisenlohr, Michael Stein, and Jing Zhou for comments and
useful suggestions. We have also benefited from comments by participants at the CEBRA 2017
Annual Meeting, 2017 NBER ISOM, CEBRA Boston Policy Workshop, 2017 WFC, 2017 BGSE
Summer Forum, 2017 ESSIM, XIX BCB Annual Inflation Targeting Seminar, Sils Macro
Workshop, Korea-Keio-HKUST 2nd International Macro & Finance Conference, EMG-ECB
Workshop on Global Liquidity, 2016 EEA Meetings, HKCU-HKMA Conference on Real Estate
and Financial Stability, 4th Workshop in Macro Banking and Finance, SF Fed-HKCU
Conference on International Finance, 2015 NYU Alumni Conference, and at seminars at the Bank
of England, BIS Asia Office, University of Durham, Fed Board, the University of York, New
York Fed, and San Francisco Fed, University of Oxford, University of St. Andrews. Alessandro
Rebucci thanks the Black & Decker Research Fund for partial financial support for this paper.
The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and should not be taken to
represent those of the Bank of England or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23841.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Ambrogio Cesa-Bianchi, Andrea Ferrero, and Alessandro Rebucci. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

International Credit Supply Shocks
Ambrogio Cesa-Bianchi, Andrea Ferrero, and Alessandro Rebucci
NBER Working Paper No. 23841
September 2017
JEL No. C33,E44,F3,F44,R0
ABSTRACT
House prices and exchange rates can potentially amplify the expansionary effect of capital
inflows by inflating the value of collateral. We first set up a model of collateralized borrowing in
domestic and foreign currency with international financial intermediation in which a change in
leverage of global intermediaries leads to an international credit supply increase. In this
environment, we illustrate how house price increases and exchange rates appreciations contribute
to fueling the boom by inflating the value of collateral. We then document empirically, in a Panel
VAR model for 50 advanced and emerging countries estimated with quarterly data from 1985 to
2012, that an increase in the leverage of US Broker-Dealers also leads to an increase in cross-
border credit flows, a house price and consumption boom, a real exchange rate appreciation and a
current account deterioration consistent with the transmission in the model. Finally, we study the
sensitivity of the consumption and asset price response to such a shock and show that country
differences are associated with the level of the maximum loan-to-value ratio and the share of
foreign currency denominated credit.
Ambrogio Cesa-Bianchi Alessandro Rebucci
Bank of England Johns Hopkins Carey Business School
Threadneedle Street 100 International Drive
London Baltimore, MD 21202
EC2R 8AH and NBER
ambrogio.cesa-bianchi@bankofengland.co.uk arebucci@jhu.edu
Andrea Ferrero
University of Oxford
Office 241
Manor Road Building
Manor Road
Oxford OX1 3UQ
United Kingdom
andrea.ferrero@economics.ox.ac.uk

1 Introduction
Capital inflows are expansionary and pose difficult challenges for policy makers—see,
for instance, Rey (2013, 2016).1 Historically, however, some economies have been more
sensitivethanotherstothevolatilityofcapitalinflows, withemergingmarketeconomies
standing out as particularly vulnerable (e.g. Chari et al., 2017).
What are the mechanisms through which capital inflows lead to macroeconomic
booms? And what are the characteristics that account for the differences in sensitivity
across countries? In this paper, we explore the role of asset price inflation and credit
market characteristics. Our main finding is that the currency denomination of credit
flows and loan-to-value ratios are associated with the strength of the consumption
response to international credit supply shocks.
Figure 1 shows that capital inflows are expansionary and associated with large
swings in asset prices.2 The figure shows that, during a boom, cross-border banking
claims and equity prices grow more than 10 percent per year in real terms. GDP,
consumption, and house prices grow about 4-5 percent per year. The current account
balance deteriorates significantly before reverting during the last year of the expansion.
The real exchange rate appreciates during the last two years of the boom phase (both
in real effective terms and vis-a-vis the US dollar), while the economy starts to slow.
Short term real interest rates are hight throughout the boom phase and increase further
during the last year.
During the bust phase, these dynamics partially revert. Cross-border claims and
house prices fall as fast as they grew during the boom phase for three years in a row.
Equity prices drop very sharply for two consecutive years and, once they rebound, grow
about half as fast as during the boom. GDP growth declines sharply and then resumes,
but only at about a third the pace during the boom years. Consumption slows and
then remains depressed. The current account deficit closes quickly and remains in a
small surplus position. The real exchange rate depreciates sharply, and short term real
interest rates decline, remaining elevated.
Not all countries behave alike though. For instance, Figure 1 shows that emerging
1This observation provides a challenge for some theories. See, for example, Blanchard et al. (2015)
on the Mundell-Fleming model and Chari et al. (2005) on sudden stops in the neoclassical growth
model.
2See Appendix A and B for details on this event study and the underlying data.
2

Figure 1. Boom-Bust Episodes in Capital Flows.
Cross-border Credit House Price Equity Price
5 10
10
0
0
0 -10
-5 -20
-10
-10 -30
-3 -2 -1 0 +1 +2 +3 -3 -2 -1 0 +1 +2 +3 -3 -2 -1 0 +1 +2 +3
Real Eff. Exch. Rate Real Exch. Rate (USD) Current Account / GDP
5 0
2
-2
0 0
-4
-2
-5
-3 -2 -1 0 +1 +2 +3 -3 -2 -1 0 +1 +2 +3 -3 -2 -1 0 +1 +2 +3
GDP Consumption Real Short-term Int. Rate
6 6
4 4 5
2
2
0
0 0
-3 -2 -1 0 +1 +2 +3 -3 -2 -1 0 +1 +2 +3 -3 -2 -1 0 +1 +2 +3
All Economies Advanced Economies Emerging Economies
Note. The solid line plots the median pattern in whole cross section of countries
in our sample, together with the median for advanced and emerging markets (dotted
and dashed lines, respectively) across a set of boom-bust episodes in BIS cross-border
claims, using a 6-year window, from three year before the peak to three years after
the peak. In each panel, time 0 is the peak of the boom-bust cycle in cross-border
bank claims (i.e., the last period of a boom in which cross-border bank claims display
a positive growth rate), which is also depicted with a vertical line. All variables are
expressed in percent. See Appendix A and B for more details of the identification of
the episodes, including summary statistics, and the definition and data sources of the
variables considered.
economies experience much larger and more persistent boom-bust cycles than advanced
ones (dashed and dotted lines, respectively). But this characterization of heterogeneity
is an over-simplification as countries differ in ways that cannot always be reduced to the
emerging market and advanced economies divide. For example, Figure 2 focuses on a
few selected characteristics of credit markets. While emerging markets (lighter, yellow
bars) tend to have shallower mortgage markets and higher shares of foreign currency
debt than advanced economies (darker, blue bars), maximum LTV limits and home
ownerships are distributed much more evenly. More generally, countries that are now
member of the OECD, like South Korea and Mexico, in the past experienced some
of the wildest capital flow gyrations. At the same time, more advanced economies
like Ireland and other South European countries experienced deeper and longer-lasting
financial crises than most emerging market economies during the global financial crisis.
3