NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SPARSE SIGNALS IN THE CROSS-SECTION OF RETURNS
Alexander M. Chinco
Adam D. Clark-Joseph
Mao Ye
Working Paper 23933
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23933
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2017
We have received many helpful comments and suggestions from John Campbell, Victor
DeMiguel, Xavier Gabaix, Andrew Karolyi, Bryan Kelly, Maureen O’Hara, Vassilis
Papavassiliou, Ioanid Rosu, Thomas Ruchti, Gideon Saar, Allan Timmermann, Heather Tookes,
Sunil Wahal, and Brian Weller as well as from seminar participants at the University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, the 11th Annual Central Bank Conference on the Microstructure of Financial
Markets, the 2016 AFA Annual Meetings, and the NBER EFFE SI. Hao Xu, Ruixuan Zhou, and
Rukai Lou provided excellent research assistance. This research is supported by National Science
Foundation grant #1352936, which is joint with the Office of Financial Research at the U.S.
Department of the Treasury. This work also uses the Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery
Environment (XSEDE), which is supported by National Science Foundation grant
#OCI-1053575. We thank David O’Neal of the Pittsburgh Supercomputer Center for his
assistance with supercomputing, which was made possible through the XSEDE Extended
Collaborative Support Service (ECSS) program. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Alexander M. Chinco, Adam D. Clark-Joseph, and Mao Ye. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Sparse Signals in the Cross-Section of Returns
Alexander M. Chinco, Adam D. Clark-Joseph, and Mao Ye
NBER Working Paper No. 23933
October 2017
JEL No. C55,C58,G12,G14
ABSTRACT
This paper applies the Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO) to make
rolling 1-minute-ahead return forecasts using the entire cross section of lagged returns as
candidate predictors. The LASSO increases both out-of-sample fit and forecast-implied Sharpe
ratios. And, this out-of-sample success comes from identifying predictors that are unexpected,
short-lived, and sparse. Although the LASSO uses a statistical rule rather than economic intuition
to identify predictors, the predictors it identifies are nevertheless associated with economically
meaningful events: the LASSO tends to identify as predictors stocks with news about
fundamentals.
Alexander M. Chinco Mao Ye
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
1206 S 6th St, Rm 343J 343K Wohlers Hall
Champaign, IL 61820 1206 South Sixth Street
AlexChinco@gmail.com Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
Adam D. Clark-Joseph maoye@illinois.edu
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Champaign, IL
adcj@illinois.edu

1 Introduction
Financial economists have been looking for variables that predict future stock returns
for as long as there have been financial economists. For example, Banz (1981) used
market cap to predict future returns, Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) used lagged re-
turns, and Cohen and Frazzini (2008) used customer earnings surprises. To find these
sorts of variables, researchers have to solve two distinct problems: identification and
estimation. First, they have to identify a subset of candidate predictors; then, they
have to estimate the quality of these predictors.
In the past, researchers typically reached for a different set of tools when working
on each of these problems, using their intuition to identify predictors and statistics to
estimatequality. Thistwo-prongedapproachworkswellwhenyouareonlylookingfor
steady long-lived predictors. For example, Cabot Oil & Gas’s lagged return predicted
its future return at the 1-minute horizon throughout October 2010. Because it formed
such a steady long-lived predictive relationship, a researcher could intuit this variable
and then estimate its quality with an ordinary least-squares (OLS) regression:
r = αˆ +βˆ x +ε (cid:96) 0, ...,L 1 (1)
t−(cid:96) t−((cid:96)+1) t−(cid:96)
· ∈ { − }
Above, r is Cabot’s minute-t return, αˆ is its mean return, L is the length of the
t
estimation window, x is Cabot’s lagged return standardized to have mean zero and
t−1
unit variance during the estimation window, and βˆ is the associated OLS coefficient.
But, modern financial markets are big, fast, and complex. Predictability now
exists at scales that are not easy for a researcher to intuit. For instance, the lagged
returns of Family Dollar Corp. were a significant predictor for 20% of the oil-and-gas
industry—including Cabot Oil & Gas—during a 50-minute stretch on October 6th,
2010. Can a researcher really fish this particular variable out of the sea of spurious
predictors using only his intuition? Of course not.
And, without a clear idea of which candidate predictors to test, a researcher
cannot use the OLS regression in Equation (1) to estimate the amount of cross-stock
predictability. There were 2,191 NYSE-listed stocks in October 2010. So, using an
OLS regression to estimate the relationship between Cabot’s current return and the
lagged returns of every one of these candidate predictors would require at least 2,191
observations—or, nearly 6 trading days! A researcher cannot wait 6 days to identify
a signal that lasts less than an hour.
Motivated by this problem, we apply the Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection
2

Operator(LASSO)ratherthanintuitiontoidentifyunexpectedshort-livedpredictors,
such as the lagged returns of Family Dollar Corp. We find that using the LASSO
increases both out-of-sample fit and forecast-implied Sharpe ratios, and we show that
this out-of-sample success comes from identifying predictors that are unexpected,
short-lived, and sparse. Finally, we document that these predictors are often the
lagged returns of stocks with news about fundamentals. In other words, although the
unexpected short-lived predictors that the LASSO identifies are not easy to intuit,
they are still economically meaningful.
The LASSO. We begin our analysis by describing both how the LASSO works and
why we use it. We are motivated by a simple observation. As researchers, we cannot
use our intuition to identify predictors that are sufficiently unexpected and short-
lived—at some point, our brains just do not work fast enough. So, to incorporate
these sorts of signals into our return forecasts, we need some other way to solve the
identification problem described above.
One popular approach is to assume that there are only a handful of important
predictors at any one point in time—that is, to bet on sparsity. Morally speaking,
if only S 2,191 predictors are important for forecasting Cabot’s returns, then you
(cid:28)
should only need a few more than S observations to identify and estimate this sparse
set of predictors. Under this assumption, a researcher trying to forecast the returns of
Cabot Oil & Gas can use the LASSO to incorporate unexpected short-lived signals,
such as the lagged return of Family Dollar Corp.
Using the LASSO means solving the following optimization problem:
(cid:40) (cid:41)
L−1(cid:18) 2,191 (cid:19)2 2,191
1 (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88)
α˜,β˜ = argmin r α β x +λ β (2)
t−(cid:96) n(cid:48) n(cid:48),t−((cid:96)+1) n(cid:48)
L · − − · · | |
α,β∈R2,192
(cid:96)=0 n(cid:48)=1 n(cid:48)=1
Just like in Equation (1), L is still the length of the estimation window, r is still
t
Cabot’s minute-t return, and α˜ is still its mean return. But, there are two differences.
Now, the optimization problem includes the lagged returns of all N > 1 NYSE-listed
stocks instead of just Cabot’s lagged return. And, there is a new penalty function,
(cid:80) (cid:93)
λ
·
n(cid:48)
|
β
n(cid:48)
|
. Note that we will use tildes rather than h(cid:100)ats to distinguish LASSO
coefficient estimates from the corresponding OLS coefficient estimates.
Although this equationlooks complicated atfirst, it is not. Itis a simpleextension
of the OLS regression in Equation (1). In fact, if you were to ignore the right-most
(cid:80)
term—the penalty function, λ β —then it would simply be an OLS regression.
·
n(cid:48)
|
n(cid:48)
|
3