NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SHADOW BANKING AND THE FOUR PILLARS OF
TRADITIONAL FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION
Emmanuel Farhi
Jean Tirole
Working Paper 23930
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23930
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2017, Revised February 2020
The authors are grateful to Aimé Bierdel, Mathias Dewatripont, Veronica Guerrieri, Frédéric
Malherbe, Paul-Henri Moisson, John Moore, Francisco Nadal de Simone, Guillermo Ordonez,
Guillaume Plantin, Jeremy Stein, Joseph Stiglitz, John Vickers, four referees, and participants at
the Shanghai Frontiers of Macroeconomics conference, LACEA-LAMES Buenos Aires
conference, 2019 ASSA meetings, Bocconi, Central Banks of England, France, Luxembourg and
Uruguay, Harvard, NY Fed, and ULB for helpful comments. This project has received funding
from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme (grant agreement n°669217 - ERC MARKLIM). The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Emmanuel Farhi and Jean Tirole. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Shadow Banking and the Four Pillars of Traditional Financial Intermediation
Emmanuel Farhi and Jean Tirole
NBER Working Paper No. 23930
October 2017, Revised February 2020
JEL No. E0,G0
ABSTRACT
Traditional banking is built on four pillars: SME lending, insured deposit taking, access to lender
of last resort, and prudential supervision. This paper unveils the logic of the quadrilogy by
showing that it emerges naturally as an equilibrium outcome in a game between banks and the
government. A key insight is that regulation and public insurance services (LOLR, deposit
insurance) are complementary. The model also shows how prudential regulation must adjust to
the emergence of shadow banking, and rationalizes structural remedies to counter financial
contagion: ring-fencing between regulated and shadow banking and the sharing of liquidity in
centralized platforms.
Emmanuel Farhi
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
emmanuel.farhi@gmail.com
Jean Tirole
Toulouse School of Economics
1 Esplanade de l'Universite
31080 Toulouse Cedex 6
FRANCE
jean.tirole@tse-fr.eu

1 Introduction
Traditional banking is built on four pillars: the commercial or retail bank is prudentially
supervised and in exchange gets access to lender of last resort and to deposit insurance.
Itcatersto“specialdepositors”,whowantaliquidandsafevehiclefortheirsavings,and
to “special borrowers”, the small and medium enterprises that need close oversight to
secure financing. These two activities are the “core functions”, the successful delivery
of which governments attach great social value to. Other investors and borrowers have
accessandresorttofinancialmarkets. Otherfinancialinstitutionstraditionallyhavebeen
leftunregulatedandcouldnotclaimaccesstodepositinsuranceandpublicliquidity.
Thisinstitutionalframeworkisnotamatterofcourse. Theaccesstothe“publicinsur-
ance services”- the discount window and other liquidity facilities on the one hand and
cheap deposits on the other - could be priced and offered to the financial system as a
whole. Besides, this conventional definition of retail banking is called into question by
recent developments. Many shadow financial institutions (money market mutual funds
and investment banks) gained access to public liquidity facilities during the 2008 crisis.
Another challenge to the conventional wisdom is the observation that in recent years
shadow banks have gained much market share in retail banks’ classical territories, the
core functions. This seems in the West to be due to a migration of activities in reaction
to tighter prudential standards. But they also have grown in importance in India and
other emerging markets. Shadow banks in China lend to small and medium enterprises
and cater to retail depositors through wealth management funds. Should we reconsider
the conventional SME lending/insured deposit taking/regulation/lender of last resort
quadrilogy?
To start answering this question, we unveil the logic of the conventional wisdom.
While our work is normative, we build on the usual hazards facing financial systems:
over-leverage and bailouts, threat of migration to shadow banking, cross exposures be-
tween retail and shadow banking sectors. These modeling ingredients are there for good
reason. Moral hazard in the form of over-leverage (or more broadly risk taking), com-
bined with the possibility of bailouts, creates an externality of unregulated banking on
public finances. This externality may vindicate costly supervision. Cross-exposures (mo-
tivatedbyimperfectriskcorrelationandmutualinsuranceonourmodel)raisethepossi-
bilityoffinancialcontagion,whichallowsustoinvestigatethedesirabilityofring-fencing
andofcentralcounterpartyclearinghouses(CCPs). Mechanismdesigncallsforoptimally
devisinginstitutionsthatbestmitigatethecombinedhazards.
This paper’s central insight is that there are basic complementarities between regu-
2

lation and the other components of the quadrilogy. Through its monopoly privilege on
taxation -i.e. its access to future earnings-, the government has a special ability to cre-
ate liquidity and therefore to insure banks and/or individuals when private markets are
unable or unwilling to do so. However, deposit insurance (DI) and lender of last resort
(LOLR)servicesarecostlyfortheofficials(politicalopprobrium)orforsociety(astheyre-
quirethegovernmenttoraisefundseveninfinancialstraits). Bankingsupervisionlowers
thecostoftheseputoptionsontaxpayermoneytotheextentthatitmonitorsleverage(in
ourmodel)ormoregenerallyreducesbankingmoralhazard. SMElendingmagnifiesthe
benefit of regulation, as the fear of industrial disruption may trigger ex-ante-unwanted
bankingbailouts.1
Overall,thebroadnormativepictureisoneinwhichcorebankingclients-smalldepos-
itors and SMEs-, who are most affected by a banking failure and therefore are politically
sensitive, are served by a regulated entity and benefit (directly for depositors and indi-
rectlyforSMEs)fromextendedinsurancefromthegovernment. Theattractivepricingof
this insurance in turn incentivizes banks to remain in the regulated sector instead of mi-
gratingtotheshadowbankingsector. ThispicturechimeswiththeUKlegislation,which
iscastintermsofthecontinuityofprovisionof“coreservices”–tohouseholdsandSMEs
thatlacknon-bankalternatives.
Our model, described in Section 2, has two dates. At date 0, the representative bank
chooses its leverage, freely so if in the shadow banking sector and in a constrained way
if part of the regulated sector. At date 1, the bank receives a random revenue (which
in practice reflects fee earnings, asset values or the availability of cheap deposits), and
honors (or not) its unsecured debt obligations. It then invests if it can: The bank, which
has a specific expertise in lending to the industry (to the SMEs) may be illiquid/unable
to finance it at date 1, and furthermore such an event is more likely if the bank is highly
levered. Furthermore, if the bank has issued insured deposits at date 0, the government
hastomakegoodonthesedepositswhenthebankcannotpaythedepositors.
Animportantdistinctionhereisbetweenbailoutsandinsurance.2 Bailoutsarisewhen
thegovernmentwouldliketocommitnottorescuethebankoritsdepositors,butcannot
refrain from doing so ex post when the bank is illiquid. By contrast, “public insurance
1ThekeyfeatureofbankloanstoSMEsisthatthegovernmentattachessocialvaluetothem. Inpractice
SMElendingfigureprominentlyaspartofabank’s“corefunctions”. Themodelappliesmorebroadlyto
systemicallyimportantfunctionssuchaspaymentsystems,marketmaking,etc.
2LOLR is often described as following Bagehot’s dictum: To avert panics, central banks should lend
earlyandfreely(i.e. withoutlimit), tosolventfirms, againstgoodcollateral, andat“highrates”. Inprac-
tice, itisverydifficulttodistinguishilliquidityfrominsolvency, andLOLRendsupsubsidizingfinancial
institutions. WefocusonthisdimensionandmodelLOLRasacommitmentatdate0tobailoutbanksat
date1.
3