NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ECB POLICIES INVOLVING GOVERNMENT BOND PURCHASES:
IMPACT AND CHANNELS
Arvind Krishnamurthy
Stefan Nagel
Annette Vissing-Jorgensen
Working Paper 23985
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23985
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017
We are grateful for comments from Alex Edmans, Jacob Goldfield, Bob Hall, Ricardo Reis,
Massimo Rostagno, Bernd Schwaab, Paul Soderlind, Frank Smets, an anonymous referee and
seminar and conference participants at the Copenhagen Business School, University of Michigan,
Goldman Sachs, the European Finance Association Meeting, and the American Finance
Association Meeting. This research was supported by a grant from the Global Markets Institute at
Goldman Sachs. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this
paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of Goldman Sachs or the
Global Markets Institute. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23985.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Arvind Krishnamurthy, Stefan Nagel, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

ECB Policies Involving Government Bond Purchases: Impact and Channels
Arvind Krishnamurthy, Stefan Nagel, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen
NBER Working Paper No. 23985
November 2017
JEL No. E4,F45,G01,G18
ABSTRACT
We evaluate the effects of three ECB policies (the Securities Markets Programme, the Outright
Monetary Transactions, and the Long-Term Refinancing Operations) on government bond yields.
We use a novel Kalman-filter augmented event-study approach and yields on euro-denominated
sovereign bonds, dollar-denominated sovereign bonds, corporate bonds, and corporate CDS rates
to understand the channels through which policies reduced sovereign bond yields. On average
across Italy, Spain and Portugal, considering both the Securities Markets Programme and the
Outright Monetary Transactions, yields fall considerably. Decomposing this fall, default risk
accounts for 37% of the reduction in yields, reduced redenomination risk for 13%, and reduced
market segmentation effects for 50%. Stock price increases in distressed and core countries
suggest that these policies also had beneficial macro-spillovers.
Arvind Krishnamurthy Annette Vissing-Jorgensen
Stanford Graduate School of Business Haas School of Business
Stanford University University of California, Berkeley
655 Knight Way 545 Student Services Building, #1900
Stanford, CA 94305 Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER and NBER
akris@stanford.edu vissing@haas.berkeley.edu
Stefan Nagel
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
stefan.nagel@chicagobooth.edu

I. Introduction
During the most intense periods of the European financial crisis, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal
and Spain (the “GIIPS” countries) saw large increases in their government bond yields. Figure 1
graphs 2-year yields for GIIPS government bonds from 2010 onward. Italian and Spanish yields
peak around 7% in the fall of 2011, while Portuguese and Irish bonds peak around 20%. Greek
2-year yields rise above 200% prior to the Greek default in early 2012. In response, the ECB
introduced programs aimed at lowering government bond yields on the presumption that such
a reduction would have beneficial macroeconomic spillovers. The ECB programs included direct
purchases of government debt (the Securities Markets Programme, SMP), conditional
commitments to purchase government debt (the Outright Monetary Transactions, OMT), and 3-
year loans to banks which banks partly used to buy government debt (the Long-Term
Refinancing Operations, LTROs). The objective of our paper is to assess these programs and
shed light on the economic mechanisms through which the programs may have worked. Did
they succeed in lowering government bond yields and improving the macroeconomic outlook?
What are the channels through which ECB policies worked to reduce bond yields?
As with many unconventional central bank operations in recent years, little is known about the
effects of these policies. The ECB has publicly stated that these policies reduce redenomination
risk, i.e., the risk that the Eurozone might break up and countries redenominate domestic debt
into new domestic currencies, and financial market “dysfunctionality,” i.e., segmentation- and
illiquidity-induced pricing anomalies.1 However, the relative importance of these channels is
unknown and there are likely to be additional channels. Most importantly, the ECB’s policies
may have reduced the default risk component of GIIPS sovereign yields. A reduction in the
default risk component could arise from the perception that the ECB might step in as a lender
of last resort, or from the effects that conditions attached to these programs might have on
GIIPS fiscal policies. If a policy is counter-productive, it could even result in a rise in the default
risk component. Furthermore, traditional monetary policy channels through the default-free
yield curve may play a role, too. In this paper, we provide quantitative estimates of five
components of sovereign bond yields: an expectations hypothesis component, a euro-rate term
premium, a default risk premium, a redenomination risk premium and sovereign bond market
segmentation. We uncover the effects of ECB policies by asking how they impact each of these
components.
1 As examples, see the speeches of ECB’s Executive Board Members Benoît Cœuré (September 3, 2013,
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2013/html/sp130902.en.html ) who emphasizes redenomination risk
when discussing the OMT, and José Manuel González-Páramo (November 4, 2011
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2011/html/sp111104_1.en.html ) who emphasizes financial market
dysfunctionality when discussing the SMP.
2

Disentangling these channels is valuable both for policy-making and academic research. For
assessing policy, our empirical tests are informative about the joint hypothesis that a particular
problem (e.g., redenomination risk concerns) exists, and that a given ECB program had an effect
on this problem. Furthermore, understanding the channels can help to guide better policy. For
example, if the main concern is redenomination risk, then actions to strengthen the Eurozone’s
commitment to the euro as opposed to purchases of sovereign bonds or liquidity injections to
banks are likely to more directly address the risk. Such actions may involve both the monetary
and fiscal authorities. On the other hand, if the main problem is market segmentation and
illiquidity, then bond purchases as well as actions to improve the plumbing of the asset
markets, such as enhancing trading platforms and repo market infrastructure can help address
the problem. Finally, our channel decomposition is valuable for the theoretical literature in
international finance on the determinants of sovereign bond yields (see Aguiar and Amador,
2014). This literature understands sovereign bonds yields almost exclusively through the lens
of the default risk channel. The Euro crisis has brought to fore concerns regarding
redenomination risk. Redenomination has similarities and differences with sovereign default.
Lenders suffer losses in both a default as well redenomination event. But, relative to outright
default, redenomination has a direct impact on private borrowers in the defaulting country, as
it reduces these borrowers’ Euro debt obligations. We provide estimates of redenomination
risk which may be helpful in guiding theory. We also highlight that market segmentation can be
an important factor in sovereign bond yields. While the finance literature has understood that
segmentation can play an important role in many asset markets (see Darrell Duffie’s (2010)
presidential address to the American Finance Association), models of sovereign debt largely set
aside such frictions.
We first document via a standard event-study that the SMP and OMT led to large reductions in
GIIPS sovereign bond yield. The effects are biggest at the 2-year maturity with reductions
around 200 basis points (bp) for Italy and Spain, 500bp for Portugal and Ireland, and more than
1,000bp for Greece. The LTROs had generally small effects on sovereign yields, with the largest
(but still modest) effects of around 50bp seen for Spain. It is important to note that these event
study estimates of yield changes are likely to capture only part of the overall effect of policies
on yields given that the probability of policies being put in place was unlikely to be zero even
before our first event date and may have increased between event dates.
The main contribution of our analysis is then to tease out the channels through which ECB
policies affected interest rates. For data reasons this part of the analysis focuses on Italy, Spain
and Portugal, although we also present some results for Greece around the SMP. We
decompose euro-denominated government bond yields into two components that are common
across all countries using the euro (an expectations hypothesis component and a euro-rate
3