NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GENTRIFICATION AND THE AMENITY VALUE OF CRIME REDUCTIONS: EVIDENCE
FROM RENT DEREGULATION
David H. Autor
Christopher J. Palmer
Parag A. Pathak
Working Paper 23914
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23914
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2017
We thank seminar participants at NBER Summer Institute (Crime and Real Estate Sessions),
Berkeley-Haas, UBC-Sauder, and the Urban Economics Association, as well as our discussants
Ingrid Gould Ellen, Kevin Lang, and Jacob Macdonald for helpful comments and suggestions.
Anthony Braga and Sara Heller provided terrific comments. We acknowledge generous financial
support from the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy (TDA051711), the National Science
Foundation (SES-962572), and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation (B2009-47). Palmer thanks the
National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship (grant 0645960) and the Fisher
Center for Real Estate and Urban Economics. We are grateful to Sookyo Jeong, Andrew Garin,
Sam Hughes, Karen Scott, Yuqi Song, and Daniel Sullivan for their extraordinary research
assistance, and to Rich Sevieri and Lt. Daniel Wagner of the Cambridge Police Department for
facilitating extensive access to Cambridge Police archives. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by David H. Autor, Christopher J. Palmer, and Parag A. Pathak. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Gentrification and the Amenity Value of Crime Reductions: Evidence from Rent Deregulation
David H. Autor, Christopher J. Palmer, and Parag A. Pathak
NBER Working Paper No. 23914
October 2017
JEL No. D61,R21,R23,R28
ABSTRACT
Gentrification involves large-scale neighborhood change whereby new residents and improved
amenities increase property values. In this paper, we study whether and how much public safety
improvements are capitalized by the housing market after an exogenous shock to the
gentrification process. We use variation induced by the sudden end of rent control in Cambridge,
Massachusetts in 1995 to examine within-Cambridge variation in reported crime across
neighborhoods with different rent-control levels, abstracting from the prevailing city-wide decline
in criminal activity. Using detailed location-specific incident-level criminal activity data
assembled from Cambridge Police Department archives for the years 1992 through 2005, we find
robust evidence that rent decontrol caused overall crime to fall by 16 percent—approximately
1,200 reported crimes annually—with the majority of the effect accruing through reduced
property crime. By applying external estimates of criminal victimization’s economic costs, we
calculate that the crime reduction due to rent deregulation generated approximately $10 million
(in 2008 dollars) of annual direct benefit to potential victims. Capitalizing this benefit into
property values, this crime reduction accounts for 15 percent of the contemporaneous growth in
the Cambridge residential property values that is attributable to rent decontrol. Our findings
establish that reductions in crime are an important part of gentrification and generate substantial
economic value. They also show that standard cost-of-crime estimates are within the bounds
imposed by the aggregate price appreciation due to rent decontrol.
David H. Autor Parag A. Pathak
Department of Economics, E52-438 Department of Economics, E52-426
MIT MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue 77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139 Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER and NBER
dautor@mit.edu ppathak@mit.edu
Christopher J. Palmer
Sloan School of Management, E62-539
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
cjpalmer@mit.edu

1 Introduction
Neighborhoodprosperityandsafetytypicallytrendinoppositedirections: affluenthouseholdsenter;
criminal activity falls; other amenities improve; low-income residents vacate; additional affluent res-
idents enter; and so on.1 These changes in neighborhood characteristics are ultimately equilibrated
by price responses in the housing market. In fact, the premise of the popular hedonic method to
valuing non-priced neighborhood amenities rests on the existence of such price effects. In a pio-
neering contribution, Thaler (1978) estimates that a one-standard deviation increase in property
crime reduces property values by 3 percent.2 However, the feedback between neighborhood ameni-
ties and prices makes it difficult to isolate the contribution of any particular part of the cycle of
neighborhood change on prices, absent a large exogenous shock.3 In this paper, we use the largely
unanticipated elimination of rent control regulations in Cambridge Massachusetts in 1995 to study
how rent-control induced gentrification affects criminal activity and is capitalized by the housing
market.4
Gentrification, which we define as the inflow of households with higher socioeconomic status to
urban neighborhoods, can increase or decrease crime.5 On one hand, crime may increase with the
influxofrelativelyaffluentresidents, whomaketargetsmorelucrative. The“collectivesocialization”
viewofneighborhoods(see,e.g.,Wilson,1987;Sampson,RaudenbushandEarls,1997)suggeststhat
gentrification-induced turnover may reduce social cohesion and also increase crime. By contrast,
severalotherforceswouldcausegentrificationtoreducecrime. Wealthierresidentsaremorelikelyto
investinprivatesecuritymeasures,suchasalarmsystems,whichdetercrime(Farrell,Tilley,Tseloni
and Mailley, 2011). Increases in the local property tax base and wealthier residents’ influence on
municipalprioritiesmayincreaseresourcesdevotingtocrime-fighting. The“brokenwindows” theory
holds that upgrading properties, which generally accompanies gentrification, may deter criminal
activity (Wilson and Kelling, 1982). Furthermore, increasing rents may force local residents who
commit crimes to relocate. Finally, if gentrification supports increased local economic opportunity,
incumbent criminals move away from criminal activity. Mirroring these ambiguous theoretical
1See Guerrieri, Hartley and Hurst (2013) for theory and evidence on the self-reinforcing cycle of gentrification
and property value appreciation.
2In more recent studies, Gibbons (2004) finds a 10 percent decrease in property values for a one standard
deviation increase in property crime. Bishop and Murphy (2011) employ a dynamic hedonic model to estimate
a$472willingness-to-paytoavoida10%increaseinnearbyviolentcrime. PopeandPope(2012)exploitstimeseries
variation across zip codes to estimate the elasticity of property value with respect to crime between -0.15 to -0.35.
3Several papers describe issues with the hedonic method and assumptions needed to consistently estimate the
willingness to pay (e.g., Bartik (1987), Epple (1987), Bajari and Benkard (2005)). Recent papers have focused on
challenges related to omitted variables bias by exploiting comparisons across fine geographic areas such as Black’s
(1999) study of school quality, and the Linden and Rockoff (2008) and Pope (2008) studies on the housing market
impacts of registered sex offenders. Several papers in environment economics exploit quasi-experimental variation
stemming from policies such as the Clean Air Act to construct market-driven estimates of the costs of pollution
fromthehousingmarket(see,e.g.,ChayandGreenstone(2005),Sullivan(2017),andIsen,Rossin-SlaterandWalker
(2017)). See Hilber (2017) for a survey of capitalization effects.
4There is no consensus definition of gentrification (see, e.g., Vigdor (2002)). Guerrieri et al. (2013), for instance,
define it as an expansion of the footprint of wealthy residents.
5A parallel literature examines the reverse channel; for example, Cullen and Levitt (1999) and Ellen, Horn and
Reed (2017) document changes in neighborhood composition resulting from changes in local crime.
1

predictions, the existing empirical evidence on the relationship between crime and neighborhood
change is mixed (McDonald, 1986; Van Wilsem, Wittebrood and De Graaf, 2006; Covington and
Taylor, 1989; Taylor and Covington, 1988; Lee, 2010; Papachristos, Smith, Scherer and Fugiero,
2011; Aliprantis and Hartley, 2015).
In this paper, we exploit a unique policy change which generates quasi-experimental variation in
gentrificationtoestimatecausaleffectsoncrimeandvalidatemeasuresofthepotentialvictimization
costs of crime using housing market price reactions. Like many urban areas in the U.S., Cambridge
saw sharply rising house prices and falling crime rates during the 1990s. Prior to 1995, Cambridge
hadwidespreadstringentrentregulationsthatdepressedhousingvalues,asshownbyAutor,Palmer
and Pathak (2014). A referendum eliminated rent control in 1995 and generated cross-sectional
differences among neighborhoods with varied exposure to rent decontrol. Using data assembled
from the archives of the Cambridge Police Department from 1992-2005, we relate these differences
across neighborhoods to the spatial distribution of criminal activity over time. We then relate these
effects to widely-used external estimates on the victimization costs of crime by Cohen and Piquero
(2009) and examine whether they are reasonable since they should not be greater than the overall
amount of price appreciation due to rent decontrol.6
SeveraldistinctivefeaturesofCambridge’srentcontrolregimemakeitparticularlywell-suitedto
the analysis of neighborhood-level effects. The rent-control ordinance only applied to a fixed, non-
expandingsetofresidentialunits—specifically,non-owneroccupiedrentalhouses,condominiums,or
apartments built prior to 1969. While only about one third of residential units were subject to rent
controls prior to 1995, this fraction frequently exceeded sixty percent in neighborhoods that had
olderhousingstocksandsubstantialnumbersofrenterswhenrentcontrolwasenactedin1970. This
neighborhood-level variation allows us to assess the impact of rent decontrol on criminal activity
by comparing pre- and post-decontrol changes in the incidence of crime among neighborhoods with
different exposures to rent control. Using unique location-specific data on every verified crime in
Cambridge between 1992 and 2005, we track the evolution of criminal activity by drawing tight
geographic comparisons across narrow slices of the city, while also accounting for aggregate city-
level trends in criminal activity and detailed neighborhood-specific trends at the level of Census
tracts. We find robust evidence that rent decontrol caused overall crime to fall by 16 percent—
approximately 1,200 reported crimes annually—with the majority of the effect accruing through
reduced property crime and public disturbances.
We then quantify the relative importance of neighborhood change’s impact on public safety
by asking how our estimates on crime and its external costs compare to changes in Cambridge
property values due to rent deregulation. Rent decontrol improved housing values through many
channels, including upgrading of properties, turnover of tenants and improvements in public safety.
The total market valuation of the reduction in crime due to rent control is bounded above by
6Cohen and Piquero (2009) is an updated version of the Miller, Cohen and Wiersema (1996) report, and has
been widely used in cost-benefit calculations and other economic applications. Some examples include Lochner and
Moretti (2004), Kling, Ludwig and Katz (2005), Heckman and Masterov (2007), Linden and Rockoff (2008), Dahl
and DellaVigna (2009), Deming (2011), and Carpenter and Dobkin (2011).
2