NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COCO ISSUANCE AND BANK FRAGILITY
Stefan Avdjiev
Bilyana Bogdanova
Patrick Bolton
Wei Jiang
Anastasia Kartasheva
Working Paper 23999
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23999
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017
The study has benefited from discussions by Felipe Cortes, Mark Flannery, Florian Heider,
George Pennacchi, Klaus Schaeck, Theo Vermaelen, and comments from Ruth Doubleday,
Louise Eggett, Ingo Fender, Ulf Lewrick, Noel Reynolds, and Kostas Tsatsaronis, as well as
seminar participants at the American Economic Association, Bank for International Settlements,
Deutsche Bundesbank, the Committee on the Global Financial System workshop on contingent
capital instruments, Conference on Financial Regulation at the University of Chicago, De
Nederlandsche Bank, European Finance Association, European Winter Finance Conference,
Imperial College of London, NBER Risks of Financial Institutions, Research Task Force of the
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Western Finance Association, University of Geneva,
and University of St. Gallen. We thank Minchen Zheng (Columbia) for excellent research
assistance. The views expressed in the paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the Bank for International Settlements or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Stefan Avdjiev, Bilyana Bogdanova, Patrick Bolton, Wei Jiang, and Anastasia
Kartasheva. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

CoCo Issuance and Bank Fragility
Stefan Avdjiev, Bilyana Bogdanova, Patrick Bolton, Wei Jiang, and Anastasia Kartasheva
NBER Working Paper No. 23999
November 2017
JEL No. G01,G21,G28,G32
ABSTRACT
The promise of contingent convertible capital securities (CoCos) as a “bail-in” solution has been
the subject of considerable theoretical analysis and debate, but little is known about their effects
in practice. In this paper, we undertake the first comprehensive empirical analysis of bank CoCo
issues, a market segment that comprises over 730 instruments totaling $521 billion. Four main
findings emerge: 1) The propensity to issue a CoCo is higher for larger and better-capitalized
banks; 2) CoCo issues result in statistically significant declines in issuers’ CDS spreads,
indicating that they generate risk-reduction benefits and lower costs of debt. This is especially
true for CoCos that: i) convert into equity, ii) have mechanical triggers, iii) are classified as
Additional Tier 1 instruments; 3) CoCos with only discretionary triggers do not have a significant
impact on CDS spreads; 4) CoCo issues have no statistically significant impact on stock prices,
except for principal write-down CoCos with a high trigger level, which have a positive effect.
Stefan Avdjiev Wei Jiang
Bank for International Settlements Graduate School of Business
Centralbahnplatz 2 Columbia University
Basel 4002, Switzerland 3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 803
stefan.avdjiev@bis.org New York, NY 10027
and NBER
Bilyana Bogdanova wj2006@columbia.edu
Bank for International Settlements
Centralbahnplatz 2 Anastasia Kartasheva
4002 Basel Bank for International Settlements
Switzerland Centralbahnplatz 2
bilyana.bogdanova@bis.org 4002 Basel
Switzerland
Patrick Bolton Anastasia.Kartasheva@bis.org
Columbia Business School
804 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
pb2208@columbia.edu

1 Introduction
If there is one term that epitomizes the infamy of the Global Financial Crisis of 2007-09 it
is “too big to fail”. Even when they sought to impose …nancial discipline on banks that had
assumed excessive levels of leverage, …nancial regulators were more often than not forced to
acceptbailoutsastheonlypossiblestabilizinginterventionbecausethealternativeofputting
thefailedbanksthroughsomeformofresolutionandimposinglossesondepositorsandother
bank creditors was seen to be too dangerous in the middle of the crisis. It is not surprising,
therefore, that a major priority of regulators following the crisis, on top of signi…cantly
tightened bank capital and liquidity regulations, was to create new instruments to facilitate
the write-down of the debt of distressed institutions. In short, the priority became to make
sure that, in the event of another crisis, bail-ins would be a credible alternative to bailouts.
One way of bringing about a swift and seamless bail-in is through the conversion of
contingent convertible capital securities (CoCos) previously issued by the bank. The auto-
matic loss absorption by CoCos when a pre-speci…ed trigger has been breached was the main
appeal of these securities according to the early proponents, in particular, Flannery (2005,
2016); Raviv (2004); Du¢ e (2009); McDonald (2013); Co¤ee (2011); Pennacchi, Vermaelen
and Wol¤ (2014); and the Squam Lake Working Group (2010). These advocates of CoCos
disagreed on the design of CoCos, in particular on whether the trigger should be a stock
price ‡oor or a minimum equity-capital ratio, and their proposals were criticized by other
commentators, most notably Admati, DeMarzo, Hellwig and P‡eiderer (2013) and Sundare-
san and Wang (2015), who argued that CoCos were excessively complex and their conversion
2

could have destabilizing e¤ects.
In the immediate aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis, these debates among acad-
emics were mirrored by di¤erences in opinions and preferences among national bank reg-
ulators. Nevertheless, the introduction of the Basel III framework, which allows banks to
meet part of their regulatory capital requirements with CoCo instruments, created strong
incentives for banks to seriously explore the possibilities for issuing CoCos. Furthermore,
the inclusion of speci…c contingent capital elements in the Basel III framework brought some
homogeneity in CoCo design across jurisdictions. As the number of jurisdictions implement-
ing Basel III grew, banks responded by raising a substantial amount of capital in the form
of CoCo issues. Between January 2009 and December 2015, banks around the world issued
a total of $521 billion in CoCos through 731 di¤erent issues.
The market for bank CoCos is now large enough to undertake a systematic empirical
analysis of bank CoCo issuance. We do this by assembling the …rst comprehensive data set
of all CoCo issues by banks between 2009 and 2015. Beyond providing an overview of the
main characteristics of CoCos and their issuers, our study seeks to address two fundamental
questions: What drives bank CoCo issuance decisions? And how do CoCo issues a¤ect
issuers’balance sheets?
To determine the factors driving CoCo issuance, we perform a duration analysis and
estimate which bank characteristics are associated with a higher propensity to issue a CoCo.
Our …rst main broad …nding is that larger banks and banks with relatively strong balance
sheets, were among the …rst wave of CoCo issuers. But banks with impaired balance sheets
3