NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DIGITAL INNOVATION AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF INCOME
Dominique Guellec
Caroline Paunov
Working Paper 23987
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23987
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017
Stefano Baruffaldi and Akira Tachibana provided valuable research support. The authors would
like to thank Jonathan Haskel and participants of the NBER CRIW conference on Measuring and
Accounting for Innovation in the 21st Century, the Innovation and Inclusive Growth in Germany
and Disruptive Innovations, Disruptive Times? Technological Innovation, Inequality and
Inclusive Growth workshops of the Bertelsmann Foundation, the Symposium on Technology,
Innovation and Inclusive Growth: Future Perspectives, the Conference on the Economics of
Digital Change, Vienna, Austria (2016), 13th World Conference on Intellectual Capital for
Communities and seminars at the Internet Policy Research Initiative, MIT (2017), the Inter-
American Development Bank (2017), the Washington Centre for Equitable Growth (2017). The
support of the advisory group of the Innovation for Inclusive Growth Project is also gratefully
acknowledged. The findings expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the views of the OECD, its member countries, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Dominique Guellec and Caroline Paunov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Digital Innovation and the Distribution of Income
Dominique Guellec and Caroline Paunov
NBER Working Paper No. 23987
November 2017
JEL No. D24,D31,D40,L10,O30
ABSTRACT
Income inequalities have increased in most OECD countries over the past decades; particularly
the income share of the top 1%. In this paper we argue that the growing importance of digital
innovation – new products and processes based on software code and data – has increased market
rents, which benefit disproportionately the top income groups. In line with Schumpeter’s vision,
digital innovation gives rise to ”winner-take-all” market structures, characterized by higher
market power and risk than was the case in the previous economy of tangible products. The cause
for these new market structures is digital non-rivalry, which allows for massive economies of
scale and reduces costs of innovation. The latter stimulates higher rates of creative destruction,
leading to higher risk as only marginally superior products can take over the entire market, hence
rendering market shares unstable. Instability commands risk premia for investors. Market rents
accrue mainly to investors and top managers and less to the average workers, hence increasing
income inequality. Market rents are needed to incentivize innovation and compensate for its
costs, but beyond a certain level they become detrimental. Public policy may stimulate innovation
by reducing ex ante the market conditions which favor rent extraction from anti-competitive
practices.
Dominique Guellec
OECD/OCDE
2, rue Andre Pascal
75016 Paris France
Dominique.Guellec@oecd.org
Caroline Paunov
OECD
2, rue André Pascal
75 775 Paris Cedex 16
France
caroline.paunov@oecd.org

Introduction
Income inequalities have increased in most OECD countries over the past three decades (OECD, 2015a).
In the United States the income share of the top 1% has soared, rising from earning on average 27 times
more than the bottom 1% in 1980s to 81 times more in 2014. The top 1% income share is now almost
twice as large as the bottom 50% share. There has been close to zero growth for working-age adults in the
bottom 50% of the distribution since 1980 (Piketty et al., 2016).
In this paper we argue that the increasing importance of digital innovation (which are new products and
processes based on or embodied in software code and data, in and beyond IT industries) is magnifying
innovation-based (and possibly bigger) rents that contribute to increasing the income share of the top
income groups. Specifically the paper focuses on inequality coming from market rents accruing to top
executives, key employees and shareholders, but little to the average worker. Figure 1 summarizes the
mechanisms at work in our framework.
Figure 1: Impacts of digital innovation on market structures and the distribution of income
This issue has received surprisingly little attention in spite of the increase in market rents - the return on
productive resources, notably capital, in excess of what is needed for resources to be deployed in
production - and in spite of the fact that in recent years the evolution of top incomes owes much to
increased returns to capital (CEA, 2016; Piketty et al., 2016). The explanation adds to others that point to
globalization, the financialisation of the economy, unskilled-labor-displacing technologies and the
weakening of trade unions as causes of growing income inequalities. The paper shows that the explanation
provided here needs to be included in accounts of rising top income shares.
1

Viewed from the perspective of digital innovation, the increase in top income inequality partly results from
the non-rival character of these intangible products, referred to as digital non-rivalry (DNR) in the
remainder of the paper. This, however, does not imply that restraining innovation would improve the
wellbeing of the low- and medium-income categories: innovation is a major driver of economic growth,
and also a source of benefits to all groups in society, including the most disadvantaged. The issue for
public policy is to preserve innovation while limiting its negative impact on income inequalities,
specifically as addressing inequalities can help stimulate innovation-based growth.
The impact of digital innovation on the income distribution is reflective of the well-known effects of
innovation on market structures. It has been recognized since Schumpeter (1911) that innovation requires
and generates market rents. Successful innovation endows innovators with a temporary exclusivity over
their innovation, based on first-mover advantage, intellectual property rights (IPR) protection, brand
reputation, network externalities and entry barriers. This exclusivity allows innovators to set prices above
the marginal cost and gain rents from their innovation. The non-rivalrous nature of knowledge means that
the costs of new ideas comes mainly from their development – typically through R&D, design and market
research – while costs of implementing and diffusing them are much lower or even nil. This gives rise to
large returns to scale; the more an idea is applied the lower is the average cost. Increasing returns to scale
favor concentrated market structures, where in the end only a few companies supply most of the market as
large quantities mean lower unit production cost.
The effects of non-rivalry are magnified by intangible digital products that have constituted an increasing
share of the US economy over the past decades (Corrado et al., 2005, 2009). With wider use of information
technology (IT), software and data – the marginal cost of production is essentially nil and the intangible
component makes most of the value of products. This applies particularly to fully intangible products such
as software as increasing returns to scale are tied essentially to the intangible component of a product. The
tangible components might generate economies of scale, but not to the same extent as the intangible ones,
because their variable costs are not zero (with materials, labor and other input needed to produce additional
units). Effects apply beyond the IT sector because software code and data are increasingly important across
all fields of the economy.
As a consequence of digital non-rivalry, a growing number of industries are subject to "winner-take-all"
dynamics, i.e. markets akin to tournaments in which the best offer wins the race and captures most (if not
all) of the market (Rosen, 1981). Such market concentration allows winners to extract a rent, by raising the
price of output and/or lowering the price of inputs. Moreover, globalization has allowed successful firms to
dominate not only their national market but also the larger global one, hence increasing the size of the
corresponding market rent.
Digital innovation also lowers the costs of innovation raising opportunities for “creative destruction” – the
process by which new products replace current products sometimes involving the exit of incumbent
producers and entry of new producers - as it reduces barriers to entry on many markets. The capital
requirement for programming software, the core of digital innovation, is much lower than for other types
of innovative activities, such as those requiring special facilities to develop innovations (e.g. laboratories
and experimental settings in pharmaceuticals). The intangible nature of knowledge and the opportunities
for rapid scale-up facilitate creative destruction. This is exemplified by the "app economy"; individual
innovators and small companies offer their products on the internet at no direct cost.
Where opportunities for creative destruction and market entry arise, the level of risk is higher than in the
past: while on traditional markets, new, superior products may reduce the market share of incumbents, on a
winner-take-all market, new, (even slightly) superior products can result in new firms taking over the entire
market. Incumbents in such winner-take-all markets have higher market shares than firms in other markets.
However, firms and investors run the risk of losing it all as more creative destruction on winner-take-all
markets generates more instability in market shares, hence in income.
2