NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TEMPERATURE EFFECTS ON PRODUCTIVITY AND FACTOR REALLOCATION:
EVIDENCE FROM A HALF MILLION CHINESE MANUFACTURING PLANTS
Peng Zhang
Olivier Deschenes
Kyle C. Meng
Junjie Zhang
Working Paper 23991
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23991
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017
We thank Chris Costello, Jonathan Dingel, Soloman Hsiang, Charlie Kolstad, Peter Kuhn,
Mushfiq Mobarak, Paulina Oliva, and Chris Severen for their comments and suggestions. This
paper also benefited from seminar participants at UCSB, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Wuhan
University, Renmin University of China, and the Hong Kong Polytechnic University. Any
remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23991.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Peng Zhang, Olivier Deschenes, Kyle C. Meng, and Junjie Zhang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Temperature Effects on Productivity and Factor Reallocation: Evidence from a Half Million
Chinese Manufacturing Plants
Peng Zhang, Olivier Deschenes, Kyle C. Meng, and Junjie Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 23991
November 2017
JEL No. L60,O14,O44,Q54,Q56
ABSTRACT
This paper uses detailed production data from a half million Chinese manufacturing plants over
1998-2007 to estimate the effects of temperature on firm-level total factor productivity (TFP),
factor inputs, and output. We detect an inverted U-shaped relationship between temperature and
TFP and show that it primarily drives the temperature-output effect. Both labor- and capital-
intensive firms exhibit sensitivity to high temperatures. By mid 21st century, if no additional
adaptation were to occur, we project that climate change will reduce Chinese manufacturing
output annually by 12%, equivalent to a loss of $39.5 billion in 2007 dollars. This implies
substantial local and global economic consequences as the Chinese manufacturing sector
produces 32% of national GDP and supplies 12% of global exports.
Peng Zhang Kyle C. Meng
School of Accounting and Finance Bren School of Environmental
M507C Li Ka Shing Tower Science and Management
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University Department of Economics
Hung Hom Kowloon, Hong Kong University of California, Santa Barbara
peng.af.zhang@polyu.edu.hk 4416 Bren Hall
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
Olivier Deschenes and NBER
Department of Economics kmeng@bren.ucsb.edu
2127 North Hall
University of California, Santa Barbara Junjie Zhang
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 Duke Kunshan University
and NBER Office: CC #1076
olivier@econ.ucsb.edu No.8 Duke Avenue, Kunshan Jiangsu,
China 215316
junjie.zhang@duke.edu

1 Introduction
High temperatures have been linked with lower aggregate economic output in many parts
of the world (Hsiang, 2010; Dell et al., 2012; Deryugina and Hsiang, 2014; Burke et al.,
2015; Chen and Yang, 2017). The design of climate change adaptation policy requires un-
derstanding the mechanisms responsible for these temperature-driven output losses. If they
are due to costly factor reallocation, adaptation investments should focus on lowering factor
adjustment costs. If they are due to direct productivity effects, investments should prioritize
reducing the sensitivity of productivity to temperature.
We address this question by conducting the first joint empirical analysis of temperature
effects on total factor productivity (TFP), factor inputs, and output using firm-level data.
Specifically, we estimate the effects of temperature on manufacturing activity using plausibly
exogenous year-to-year variation in a firm’s exposure to the annual distribution of daily
temperatures. Using a detailed dataset covering the near-universe of Chinese manufacturing
plants during 1998-2007, we find an inverted U-shaped relationship between temperature
and TFP with particularly large negative effects at high temperatures. In our benchmark
specification, a day with temperature above 90◦F decreases TFP by 0.56%, relative to a day
with temperature between 50-60◦F.
Importantly, we find that the response function between daily temperature and manu-
facturing output is nearly identical to that of TFP. Compared to a day with temperature
between50-60◦F,adaywithtemperatureabove90◦Flowersmanufacturingoutputby0.45%,
or by $8,160 in 2007 dollars for the average firm. In contrast, temperature effects on labor
and capital inputs are less responsive. This implies that TFP losses in response to high tem-
peratures is the primary channel through which temperature alters manufacturing output in
our setting.
Projecting future climate change onto our empirical estimates, we consider the impact of
climate change on the Chinese manufacturing sector. Like other climate impact calculations
in the empirical literature, our calculations assume no additional adaptation that could
1

potentially reduce the sensitivity of output to high temperatures. Under this scenario, we
find that climate change will reduce Chinese manufacturing output annually by 12% on
average during the 2040-2059 period. At the national level, if China’s manufacturing output
share remains at its current 32% of GDP, climate-driven losses in manufacturing alone could
reduce annual Chinese GDP by 3.8% by mid-century. This is equivalent to a loss of $39.5
billionin2007dollars. Suchprojectedlossescouldalsohavelargeconsequencesfortheglobal
economy given that China’s manufacturing sector currently supplies 12% of global exports
(World Bank, 2013a).
Our analysis provides several contributions. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first study to jointly examine the effects of temperature fluctuations on TFP, factor inputs,
and output within the same data environment. By detecting temperature effects on TFP, we
improve our understanding of how temperature directly affects an economic parameter that
is essential for economic growth (Aghion and Durlauf, 2005; Syverson, 2011).1 Furthermore,
by demonstrating the similarity between TFP and output effects, we quantify the limited
extent to which factor reallocation dampens the temperature-TFP relationship.
Examining TFP allows us to look at the combined effect of labor and capital produc-
tivity. High temperatures could reduce labor productivity by causing discomfort, fatigue,
and cognitive impairment in workers. In addition, high temperatures could also affect ma-
chine performance and lower capital productivity. Previous studies have largely focused on
labor productivity (e.g., see Adhvaryu et al. (2014) and Somanathan et al. (2014)), without
examining capital productivity. Although one cannot explicitly disentangle TFP as labor
and capital productivity, we look for differential TFP effects for labor- and capital-intensive
firms. Our results suggest that high temperatures affect both labor and capital productivity.
Finally, most prior sectoral analyses of temperature impacts have focused on agriculture
(Mendelsohn et al., 1994; Schlenker et al., 2005, 2006; Deschˆenes and Greenstone, 2007;
1A growing literature in macroeconomics, industrial organization, labor, and trade seeks to understand
the determinants of productivity across firms and nations Syverson (2011). This paper documents that
temperature may be a new cause of productivity dispersion.
2