NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BID SHADING AND BIDDER SURPLUS IN THE U.S. TREASURY AUCTION SYSTEM
Ali Hortaçsu
Jakub Kastl
Allen Zhang
Working Paper 24024
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24024
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as
reflecting the views of the U.S. Department of the Treasury or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. We thank Philip Haile, Kenneth Hendricks, Darrell Duffie, Paulo Somaini, Terry
Belton and participants of the U.S. Treasury Roundtable, 2015 NBER IO Summer Meetings and
2015 NBER Market Design Meeting for their valuable comments. Kastl is grateful for the
financial support of the NSF (SES-1352305) and the Sloan Foundation, Hortaçsu the financial
support of the NSF (SES-1124073, ICES-1216083, and SES-1426823). All remaining errors are
ours.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24024.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Ali Hortaçsu, Jakub Kastl, and Allen Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bid Shading and Bidder Surplus in the U.S. Treasury Auction System
Ali Hortaçsu, Jakub Kastl, and Allen Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 24024
November 2017
JEL No. G12,L1
ABSTRACT
We analyze bidding data from uniform price auctions of U.S. Treasury bills and notes between
July 2009-October 2013. Primary dealers consistently bid higher yields compared to direct and
indirect bidders. We estimate a structural model of bidding that takes into account informational
asymmetries introduced by the bidding system employed by the U.S. Treasury. While primary
dealers’ estimated willingness-to-pay is higher than direct and indirect bidders’, their ability to
bid-shade is even higher, leading to higher yield/lower price bids. Total bidder surplus averaged
to about 3 basis points across the sample period along with efficiency losses around 2 basis
points.
Ali Hortaçsu Allen Zhang
Department of Economics Department of the Treasury
University of Chicago xpzhang2001@gmail.com
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
hortacsu@uchicago.edu
Jakub Kastl
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
jkastl@princeton.edu

1 Introduction
In 2013, the U.S. Treasury auctioned 7.9 trillion dollars of government debt to a global set of
institutions and investors (TreasuryDirect.gov). The debt was issued in a variety of instruments,
coveringbills(upto1yearmaturity),2-10yearnotes,30yearcouponbonds,andTreasuryInflation-
Protected Securities (TIPS). The mandate of the U.S. Treasury is to achieve the lowest cost of
financing over time, taking into account considerable uncertainty in the borrowing needs of the
governmentanddemandforU.S.Treasuriesbyinvestors.1 Treasuryalsoseeksto“facilitateregular
and predictable issuance” across a range of maturity classes. To this end, the Treasury adopted
auctions as their preferred method of marketing short term securities in 1920 (Garbade 2008),
and auctions became the preferred method of selling long-term securities in the 1970s (Garbade
2004). The Treasury employed a discriminatory/pay-as-bid format until 1998, when, after some
experimentationwithits2-and5-yearnoteauctionsin1992, theuniformpriceformatwasadopted
as the method of sale (Malvey and Archibald 1998).
A large theoretical literature, dating back to the classic work of Friedman (1960) and Vickrey
(1961), studies the design of Treasury auctions. The design of the auction mechanism becomes
an important question especially when individual bidders possess market power, as the exercise of
market power leads to deviations from efficient allocations (Ausubel, Cramton, Pycia, Rostek and
Weretka(2014)). ThecompetitivenessoftheTreasuryauctionprocessandthedesignoftheauction
systemhascomeunderthespotlightanumberoftimes,includingthe1991SalomonBrothers“short
squeeze” scandal (see e.g. Jegadeesh (1993)), and the discussions that led to Treasury’s switch to
the uniform price auction mechanism in November 1998 (Malvey and Archibald 1998).
While there is a large theoretical literature studying strategic bidder behavior, there has been
very little empirical work on the U.S. Treasury auction system that studies the behavior of in-
dividual bidders. This paper hopes to bridge this empirical gap by studying individual bid level
data. Specifically, our aim is to adapt models of strategic behavior to the particular institutional
setting of the U.S. Treasury auction market, and to develop quantitative benchmarks for assessing
1PeterFisher,thenUnderSecretaryofTreasuryforDomesticFinance,inaspeechtitled“RemarksbeforetheBond
Market Association Legal and Compliance Conference” on January 8, 2002, stated that “the overarching objective
for the management of the Treasury’s marketable debt is to achieve the lowest borrowing cost, over time, for the
federal government’s financing needs.”
2

the competitiveness and cost-effectiveness of this important marketplace.
We start, in Section 2, by describing differences in bid patterns across the three different classes
of bidders: primary dealers, direct bidders (financial institutions who are not primary dealers but
submit bids directly into the auction), and indirect bidders (financial institutions who submit bids
through primary dealers). As detailed in this section, we find that primary dealers systematically
bid lower prices (higher yields). What can drive this systematic difference? It is possible that
primarydealershavelowervaluationsfortheTreasurysecurities,andthislowervaluationtranslates
into lower bids. However, it is also possible that primary dealers possess market power, and are
able to exercise this market power by submitting (price) bids that are below their true valuations.
We thus provide, in Section 3, a model-based decomposition of the observed bids into the bid-
der’s true willingness-to-pay and a “bid shading”/market power component. Our theoretical model
adapts the seminal “share auction” model of Wilson (1979), in which bidders submit demand
schedules as their bids. This model captures the strategic complexity of the Treasury’s uniform
price auction mechanism very well, and it is in many ways related to classic models of imperfect
competition such as Cournot. In particular, consider a setting (depicted in Figure 1) where an
oligopsonistic bidder with downward sloping demand for the security knows the residual supply
function that she is facing, and is allowed to submit a single price-quantity point as her bid. Fol-
lowing basic monopsony theory, this bidder will not select the competitive outcome (Pcomp,Qcomp),
which is the intersection of her demand curve and the residual supply curve. Instead, she has the
incentive to “shade” her bid, and pick a lower price-quantity point on the residual supply curve,
such as (P∗,Q∗). This gives her higher surplus (the gray shaded area below her demand curve up
to (P∗,Q∗)) than if she had bid the competitive price and quantity.
The ability of this bidder to “shade” her bid depends on the elasticity of the residual supply
curve she is facing. If this were a small bidder among many others, the residual supply she would
be facing would essentially be flat, allowing for very little ability to bid-shade, as decreasing the
quantity demanded would not result in any appreciable change in the market clearing price. The
optimal bid then is to bid one’s true demand curve. Therefore, the key identifying variation in
the data is the (expected) shape of the residual supply curves that a bidder may face around the
3