NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BROKERS AND ORDER FLOW LEAKAGE:
EVIDENCE FROM FIRE SALES
Andrea Barbon
Marco Di Maggio
Francesco Franzoni
Augustin Landier
Working Paper 24089
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24089
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017
We thank Malcolm Baker, John Campbell, Laurent Frésard, Slava Fos (discussant), Gary Gorton,
Owen Lamont, Jongsub Lee (discussant), Andrew Lo, Toby Moskowitz, Erik Stafford, and
seminar participants at the Becker Friedman Institute CITE conference on New Quantitative
Models of Financial Markets, FINRA Market Structure conference, LAEF 2nd OTC Markets and
Securities Workshop, and AQR for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24089.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Andrea Barbon, Marco Di Maggio, Francesco Franzoni, and Augustin Landier. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Brokers and Order Flow Leakage: Evidence from Fire Sales
Andrea Barbon, Marco Di Maggio, Francesco Franzoni, and Augustin Landier
NBER Working Paper No. 24089
November 2017
JEL No. G12,G14,G23,G33
ABSTRACT
Using trade-level data, we study whether brokers play a role in spreading order flow information.
We focus on large portfolio liquidations, which result in temporary drops in stock prices, and
identify the brokers that intermediate these trades. We show that these brokers’ best clients tend
to predate on the liquidating funds: at the beginning of the fire sale, they sell their holdings in the
liquidated stocks, to then cover their positions once asset prices start recovering. The predatory
trades generate at least 50 basis points over ten days and cause the liquidation costs for the
distressed fund to almost double. These results suggest a role of brokers in fostering predatory
behavior and raise a red flag for regulators. Moreover, our findings highlight the trade-off
between slow execution and potential information leakage in the decision of optimal trading
speed.
Andrea Barbon Francesco Franzoni
Universita' Svizzera Italiana Swiss Finance Institute
andrea.barbon@usi.ch Via G. Buffi 13
6904, Lugano - Switzerland
Marco Di Maggio and University of Lugano
Harvard Business School francesco.franzoni@usi.ch
Baker Library 265
Soldiers Field Augustin Landier
Boston, MA 02163 the Toulouse School of Economics
and NBER 21 Allée de Brienne
mdimaggio@hbs.edu 31000 Toulouse, FRANCE
augustin.landier@tse-fr.eu

1 Introduction
Large institutional orders are typically split in smaller amounts over time to avoid market-impact
(see Garleanu and Pedersen, 2013, Di Mascio et al., 2016). One concern when executing an order
slowly over time is that other traders might anticipate the intent to trade the stock in the near future
and take advantage by trading in the same direction to benefit from the future price impact.
Predatory trading has strong theoretical support (Brunnermeier and Pedersen, 2005) and is borne
out by anecdotal evidence. For example, during the unwinding of LTCM’s portfolio in 1998, the
fund’s typical trading and lending counterparties, which were privy to its portfolio positions, also
sold the same assets. Given that predatory trading can make the market more illiquid at times of
crisis and amplify adverse shocks, some observers suggest that reducing the frequency of portfolio
disclosure can be desirable (Brunnermeier and Pedersen, 2005). Accordingly, hedge funds support
regulations that limit the granularity of their reporting (IAFE, 2001).
One wonders, however, if restricting the diffusion of public information is a sufficient measure
to prevent predatory behavior. In fact, the anecdotal evidence mentioned above suggests that
market participants possess information about forced liquidations thanks to their close relationship
with the liquidating managers. Among all actors in the market, brokers are in the privileged
position of observing the daily trades of a fund. In the case of hedge funds, prime brokers operate
also as lenders and risk managers, so that they are aware whether the fund is about to breach some
risk limit and deleverage its portfolio. They can also observe the trading habits of their clients,
such as whether they tend to cut trades in small orders over several days when executing a large
order. In sum, brokers are in a privileged position to predict the future trades of their clients.
Brokers may decide to spread the news that a client’s large trade is likely to extend over several
days to other traders. They may have an incentive to do so in order to establish a reputation as a
source of valuable information and attract new business. On the other hand, brokers may care about
the long-term relationship with their clients. Hence, brokers may be reluctant to foster predatory
trading against a client. Rather, according to this argument, they should invite other traders to
provide liquidity and take the other side of the slow trade. It remains, therefore, an open empirical
question whether brokers foster predatory trading or liquidity provision in case of slow trading by
a client. The paper aims to address this question.
1

Forced liquidations of portfolio holdings offer an ideal setting to investigate these issues. Other
traders, if made aware of the liquidation, can exploit these opportunities to sell the same assets in
anticipation of the price drop and reverse the trade once the price has fallen. This opportunistic
behavior makes liquidations more costly for the liquidating manager because it exacerbates the
adverse price move. We decide to focus on large liquidations (which we label “fire sales” for
convenience), and do not include large purchases in our analysis, because we aim to have a clean
identification of liquidity-motivated trades. First, in our data, the majority of institutional investors
are long-only (about 90%). Hence, it is somewhat less likely for a sale to be information motivated
(as the manager would need to have the stock already in the portfolio) than for a buy transaction.
Second, large cash inflows can be allocated slowly over time and are, therefore, less likely to
impose a concentrated liquidity demand on the market than large outflows.
Specifically, we exploit proprietary trade-level data and focus on asset managers that sell a
significant fraction of their portfolio during a relatively short amount of time. We restrict attention
to asset managers whose order flow is abnormally negative for at least five days in a row.
Moreover, we focus on managers that liquidate multiple stocks (on average about 20 stocks) at a
significantly faster pace than usual. We identify about four hundred of these events in the period
between 1999 and 2014. Because we are only interested in fire sales due to purely liquidity
motives, such as the need to meet large redemptions, we verify that the stock price movements
resulting from this sale are only temporary and that the asset managers do not buy back those
stocks. Price impact would have to display a permanent component, if sales were motivated by
fundamental reasons. Interestingly, controlling for the portfolio weights, we show that managers
are more likely to sell large, liquid, and low-volatility stocks, as well as past winners. This evidence
can inform the theoretical debate on optimal liquidation policy (e.g. Scholes 2000, Brown, Carlin,
and Lobo 2010).
Our empirical strategy takes advantage of two key sources of variation. First, not all brokers
employed by the liquidating fund are going to be aware that the fund is in distress. The liquidating
fund has little incentive to disclose its intention to liquidate a large fraction of its portfolio; in fact,
it is likely to use multiple brokers to minimize price impact and info leakage. Hence, only brokers
that observe a large enough fraction of the liquidation are deemed aware. Second, we should not
expect all traders to predate; in fact, brokers are likely to selectively disclose the order flow
information to maximize their rents.
2