NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UPSTREAM, DOWNSTREAM:
DIFFUSION AND IMPACTS OF THE UNIVERSAL PRODUCT CODE
Emek Basker
Timothy Simcoe
Working Paper 24040
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24040
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017, Revised August 2020
Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
The Census Bureau's Disclosure Review Board and Disclosure Avoidance Officers have
reviewed this data product for unauthorized disclosure of confidential information and
have approved the disclosure avoidance practices applied to this release (DRB Approval
Numbers: DRB-B0057-CED-20190530 and CBDRB-FY20- CES006-003). We thank Ali
Hortaçsu and two anonymous referees for comments that have greatly improved the paper. We
also thank Markus Mobius and David Weil for help obtaining the UPC data, Nathan Goldschlag
and Nikolas Zolas for help with the trademark data and for their trademark-firm bridge file,
and Randy Becker, James Bessen, David Brown, Nathan Chan, James Conley, Emin Dinlersoz,
Lucia Foster, Nathan Goldschlag, Micha l Grajek, Dan Gross, Fariha Kamal, Alex
Krasnikov, Mark Kutzbach, Florin Maican, Paul Messinger, Guy Michaels, Matilda Orth, Pham
Hoang Van, Jennifer Poole, Horst Raff, Rich Richardson, Marc Rysman, Martha Stinson, Mary
Sullivan, Dan Trefler, Kirk White, Zoltan Wolf, and seminar participants at the U.S. Census
Bureau, MINES-ParisTech, Seoul National University, Cornell, Queen's University, Bocconi
University, University of Massachusetts, University of Michigan, Harvard Business School,
Toulouse School of Economics, KU Leuven, LMU Munich, NBER Productivity Lunch, 2017
AEA (Chicago), 2017 IIOC (Boston), 2017 FSRDC Conference (Los Angeles), 2017 CAED
Conference (Seoul), 2018 NBER Summer Institute, and 2018 Israeli IO Day (Jerusalem) for
helpful comments and conversations.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Emek Basker and Timothy Simcoe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Upstream, Downstream: Diffusion and Impacts of the Universal Product Code
Emek Basker and Timothy Simcoe
NBER Working Paper No. 24040
November 2017, Revised August 2020
JEL No. L11,L15,L81,O33
ABSTRACT
We study the adoption, diffusion, and impacts of the Universal Product Code (UPC) between
1975 and 1992, during the initial years of the barcode system. We find evidence of network
effects in the diffusion process. Matched-sample difference-in-difference estimates show that
firm size and trademark registrations increase following UPC adoption by manufacturers.
Industry-level import penetration also increases with domestic UPC adoption. Our findings
suggest that barcodes, scanning, and related technologies helped stimulate variety-enhancing
product innovation and encourage the growth of international retail supply chains.
Emek Basker
US Census Bureau
Center for Economic Studies
4600 Silver Hill Road
Washington, DC 20233-9100
emek@emekbasker.org
Timothy Simcoe
Boston University
Questrom School of Business
595 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
tsimcoe@bu.edu

1 Introduction
The Universal Product Code (UPC) is widely touted as a major success of voluntary stan-
dardization. It was conceived in 1969 as a “standard human- [and machine-] readable code,
to be used at all levels in the distribution channel” (Wilson, Jr., 2001, p. 2). The UPC has
been credited with increasing product selection in stores (Holmes, 2001; Mann, 2001), shift-
ing the balance of power along the supply chain from manufacturers to retailers (Messinger
and Narasimhan, 1995), and stimulating labor-productivity growth by promoting the rise of
large retail chains (Sieling, Friedman, and Dumas, 2001; Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan,
2002).1
Although casual observation reveals that scanners and barcodes are ubiquitous in mod-
ern retail supply chains, there remains very little quantitative evidence of their effects. We
provide new evidence on the diffusion and impacts of the UPC by linking archival data on
UPC registrations to firm-level data on employment, revenue, and trademarking, as well
as industry-level data on trade flows. Our findings illustrate the role of network effects in
the adoption of the UPC system, and suggest that barcodes, scanning, and related tech-
nologies helped stimulate variety-enhancing product innovation and encourage the growth
of international retail supply chains.
PreviousaccountsofUPCdiffusionhaveemphasizedthatbarcodesoriginatedwithinthe
grocery industry before spreading to general merchandising and other retail supply chains
(Dunlop and Rivkin, 1997). We examine the role of network effects within this diffusion
process. Two-sided network effects imply that the return to adoption is higher for upstream
producers supplying “UPC-ready” retailers, and vice versa. Retailers become UPC-ready by
installing scanners and developing electronic data interchange (EDI) capabilities, including
electronic payments (Abernathy, Dunlop, Hammond, and Weil, 1999; Basker, 2012). Al-
1TimHarfordevennamedthebarcodeoneof“50ThingsThatShapedtheModernEconomy.” Theother
economy-shaping discoveries, inventions, and innovations include paper, the bicycle, and antibiotics. For his
explanation of this choice, see http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p04k0066.

though we lack comprehensive data on scanner adoption, we provide indirect evidence of
network effects by showing that there are positive spillovers in upstream UPC adoption.
Specifically, manufacturers became more likely to register for a UPC when other manufac-
turing firms that use the same retail distribution channels also register.
After examining UPC diffusion, we study firm-level impacts of UPC adoption on em-
ployment, revenue, andtrademarking, aswellastheindustry-levelrelationshipbetweenUPC
adoption and international trade. Difference-in-difference regressions on a matched sample
of UPC adopters and non-adopters from the manufacturing sector show that UPC regis-
tration is associated with increased revenue and employment. We discuss several possible
mechanisms for this result, including that firms select into UPC registration due to antic-
ipated demand shocks; that UPC registration coincides with adoption of a broader set of
complementary technologies, such as EDI and inventory-control systems, which can increase
demand or lower costs (Hwang and Weil, 1998; Holmes, 2001); and that UPC registration
promotes growth through business diversion because retailers prefer to work with upstream
vendors that have adopted barcodes. An event-study specification shows that manufacturer
employment increased by ten percent in the year of initial UPC registration, and another ten
percent over the next two years. We argue that this pattern is consistent with a combination
of selection on positive demand shocks and business diversion by manufacturers that can
integrate into large retailers’ supply chains more readily after registering for a UPC. We also
show that the increases in revenue and employment following UPC registration are greater
when there is more UPC adoption by other firms selling through the same retail channels,
consistent with the presence of network effects.
Aggregate time-series data show that within the grocery industry, growth in trademark
applications, new product introductions, and the number of Stock Keeping Units (SKUs)
stocked by a typical supermarket all increased dramatically in the early 1980s, just as scan-
2