NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CREDIT DEFAULT SWAPS, AGENCY PROBLEMS, AND MANAGEMENT INCENTIVES
Jongsub Lee
Junho Oh
David Yermack
Working Paper 24064
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24064
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017
Part of this paper was written while David Yermack was serving as a Visiting Professor at
Erasmus University Rotterdam. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24064.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Jongsub Lee, Junho Oh, and David Yermack. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Credit Default Swaps, Agency Problems, and Management Incentives
Jongsub Lee, Junho Oh, and David Yermack
NBER Working Paper No. 24064
November 2017
JEL No. G30,G33,G34,J33,M52
ABSTRACT
We show in a theoretical model that credit default swaps induce managerial agency problems
through two channels: reducing the opportunity for managers to transfer value to equityholders
from creditors via strategic default, and reducing the intensity of monitoring by creditors, which
leads to greater CEO diversion of assets as perquisites. We further show that boards can use
compensation awards that increase managerial performance incentives (delta) and risk-taking
incentives (vega) in order to mitigate these two agency problems, with increases in managerial
vega being particularly useful to alleviate the strategic default-related agency problem. We study
equity compensation awards to CEOs of S&P 1500 companies during 2001–2015 and find that
they occur in patterns consistent with these predictions.
Jongsub Lee David Yermack
Warrington College of Business Stern School of Business
Department of Finance New York University
PO Box 117168, STZ 315E 44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-160
jongsub.lee@warrington.ufl.edu New York, NY 10012
and NBER
Junho Oh dyermack@stern.nyu.edu
Warrington College of Business
Bryan Hall 100
Gainesville, FL 32611-7150
junho.oh@warrington.ufl.edu

Credit default swaps, agency problems, and
management incentives
1. Introduction
Credit default swaps (CDS) are insurance contracts between two parties with contingent
payoffs referenced to future credit events of the underlying entity. Credit events that trigger
CDS payments are potentially endogenous, since they may occur as outcomes of unobserved
interactions between shareholders and creditors. Several studies recently demonstrate that
CDS, once issued, may affect bargaining between shareholders and creditors on an ongoing
basis. Since CDS provide creditors with a form of default insurance, they could strengthen
their bargaining power in debt negotiations, which in turn could generate significant feed-
back effects on corporate financial policies. Lenders who heavily hedge their debt exposure
with CDS become “empty creditors” (Hu and Black, 2008; Bolton and Oehmke, 2011), who
may frequently reject debt exchange offers from shareholders in order to avail themselves of
voting rights that may attach during bankruptcy (Danis and Gamba, 2017). Such feedback
effects of CDS on various corporate policies have been extensively documented, including in-
creasing corporate leverage (Saretto and Tookes, 2013), more frequent outright liquidations
(Subrahmanyam, Tang, and Wang, 2014), and precautionary corporate liquidity manage-
ment (Subrahmanyam, Tang, and Wang, 2017) following the onset of CDS trading for the
debt of a specific firm. Importantly, these studies rely on the inception of CDS trading as
an identification strategy, since the listing of a new CDS contract occurs as a result of deci-
sions taken by third-party market makers who typically have no connection with the firm’s
managers.
Recent literature has focused on conflicts between shareholders and creditors in the pres-
ence of CDS, but these papers have generally overlooked potential agency problems arising
between shareholders and managers. This paper demonstrates that two types of managerial
1

agency problems may occur as a result of CDS introduction. First, managers may engage
in less strategic debt default than optimal, since creditors will bargain harder due to the
presence of the CDS insurance contract. Second, creditors may tend to monitor managers
with reduced intensity, since they become less concerned about the consequences of non-
repayment once they have access to CDS insurance. We present a theoretical model of how
CDS affects the incentives for managers to divert assets in the form of perquisites, and we
show that agency problems tend to increase through both of these channels. We then use a
sample of S&P 1500 firms between 2001–15 to study whether boards change CEO compen-
sation awards after CDS are introduced.
As our key measures for a CEO’s risk-taking and value enhancement incentives, we com-
pute the deltas and vegas for new stock and stock option compensation awards to CEOs
of our sample firms. In regression analysis we find that managerial vega increases by 133%
from its sample average following the inception of CDS trades. Moreover, we find that both
managerial option and share deltas significantly increase after CDS introduction, leading to
an increase in overall managerial delta. We find a $41,000 increase in the CEO’s wealth
from these newly granted incentive contracts when the underlying stock price increases by
one dollar.
IncreasingboththeCEO’seffectiveownershipandrisk-takingincentiveshelpstomitigate
the new agency problems between managers and shareholders. However, if we focus on the
agency problem arising from the extinguishment of the shareholders strategic default option,
those two contractual adjustments affect the manager differently. The agency cost induced
by strategic default is mainly driven by managerial actions that increase the probability of
default. Since greater effective ownership only motivates the manager in non-default states,
it has little impact on the manager’s motivation to threaten creditors with a default. In
contrast, greater risk-taking incentives are effective in this setting. Our empirical evidence
is consistent with this conjecture, as we find that for firms with valuable strategic default
options, stock option grants (which have nonzero vegas) increase significantly after CDS
2