NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STOCK PRICE CRASHES:
ROLE OF SLOW-MOVING CAPITAL
Mila Getmansky
Ravi Jagannathan
Loriana Pelizzon
Ernst Schaumburg
Darya Yuferova
Working Paper 24098
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24098
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2017, Revised February 2021
Previously circulated as "Stock Price Crashes: Role of Capital Constrained Traders." We thank
the Centre for Analytical Finance at the Indian School of Business and the National Stock
Exchange of India for data. We thank Viral Acharya, Lawrence Glosten, Merrel Hora, Dermot
Murphy, Nirmal Mohanty, Todd Pulvino, Ramabhadran Thirumalai, Ravi Varanasi, Vish
Viswanathan, Pradeep Yadav, Brian Weller, Roberto Renò, and Aleksey Kolokolov for helpful
comments. Isacco Baggio, Yakshup Chopra, Nuri Ersahin, Naveen Reddy Gondhi, Caitlin
Gorback, Mrinal Mishra, and Roberto Panzica provided valuable research assistance. Special
thanks to Rudresh Kunde and Tomasz Wisniewski for data support. Loriana Pelizzon gratefully
acknowledges the research support from the Research Center SAFE, funded by the State of
Hessen initiative for research LOEWE and Project 329107530 funded by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation). Mila Getmansky Sherman
acknowledges research support from National Science Foundation, Award #1940223 and
#1733942. All errors are our own. The views expressed in the paper are those of the authors and
do not represent the views of AQR Capital Management LLC or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24098.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Mila Getmansky, Ravi Jagannathan, Loriana Pelizzon, Ernst Schaumburg, and Darya
Yuferova. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Stock Price Crashes: Role of Slow-Moving Capital
Mila Getmansky, Ravi Jagannathan, Loriana Pelizzon, Ernst Schaumburg, and Darya Yuferova
NBER Working Paper No. 24098
December 2017, Revised February 2021
JEL No. G00,G1,G12,G14,G18,G2
ABSTRACT
We study the role mutual funds play in the recovery from fast intraday crashes based on data from
the National Stock Exchange of India for a single large stock. During normal times, trading activity
and liquidity provision by mutual funds is negligible compared to other traders at around 4% of overall
activity. Nevertheless, for the two intraday marketwide crashes in our sample, price recovery took
place only after mutual funds moved in. Market stability may require the presence of well-capitalized
standby liquidity providers for recovery from fast crashes.
Mila Getmansky Ernst Schaumburg
Isenberg School of Management AQR Capital Management LLC
Room 308C Greenwich Plaza
University of Massachusetts Greenwich, CT 06830
121 Presidents Drive, Amherst, MA 01003 ernst.schaumburg@gmail.com
msherman@isenberg.umass.edu
Darya Yuferova
Ravi Jagannathan Norwegian School of Economics (NHH)
Kellogg Graduate School of Management Helleveien 30
Northwestern University 5045 Bergen
2211 Campus Drive Norway
Evanston, IL 60208 darya.yuferova@nhh.no
and NBER
rjaganna@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Loriana Pelizzon
SAFE/Goethe University Frankfurt
House of Finance
Grüneburgplatz 1
60323 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
pelizzon@safe.uni-frankfurt.de

A liquid and stable stock market plays a critical role in the economy. It channels savings
into long-term illiquid investments while at the same time providing liquidity to investors,
thereby promoting economic growth (see Levine (2005)). The “Flash Crash” of May 6, 2010,
focused exchanges’ and regulators’ attention on the need to better understand liquidity
provision in the financial markets. In this paper, we focus on a particular role financial
institutions play in the liquidity provision during intraday crashes and recoveries.
We show that when the demand for liquidity is unusually large leading to intraday fast
crashes, mutual funds (MFs) acting as standby liquidity providers are able to step in to
provide liquidity, thereby helping price recovery. By looking at micro-level data we are able
to provide high-frequency evidence of MFs acting as liquidity providers during fast intraday
crashes. MFs have a natural advantage in making a market for stocks they hold when
the rewards are adequate (i.e., when price concessions are large enough). They move in
only after prices have dropped sufficiently, highlighting the slow-moving feature of standby
market-making capital.1
We use a unique database of orders and transactions data for the period April – June
2006 for one of the largest firms in the NIFTY and SENSEX indices traded on the National
Stock Exchange of India (NSE).2 Based on the number of trades, the NSE was the third-
largest stock exchange after NYSE and NASDAQ in the world as of April 2006.3 The NSE is
organized as a limit order book market similarly to NYSE and NASDAQ, which has become
the dominant market design.4 Even though we use data for three months in 2006 for just
one large stock from the NSE, we believe that our main conclusions carry over to the current
1Another potential reason for the slow-moving nature of MFs’ intermediation capital could be that a
sharp drop in a stock’s price draws MFs’ attention, after which MFs have to evaluate whether this drop is
due to lack of liquidity or adverse information. And this evaluation may take time, slowing the deployment
of market-making capital.
2NSE became the largest stock exchange in India in terms of volume traded, overtaking the Bombay
Stock Exchange (BSE) at the end of 1995.
3AccordingtotheWorldFederationofExchanges, thelargestexchangeintheworldbasedonnumberof
transaction was NASDAQ with more than 100,000 transactions per day, followed by the NYSE with around
91,000 transactions per day and the NSE with around 57,000 transactions per day as of April 2006.
4NASDAQ is a hybrid market, i.e., dealer market with a limit order book.
1

U.S. stock market and several other markets around the world, given the size of the NSE
market and the similarities of the market structures between NSE and the stock markets
worldwide.5 We would like to be upfront about limitation of our data since we conduct our
analyses on one stock. Even though it is one of the largest and representative stocks on the
NSE, we would like to acknowledge this limitation and potential heterogeneity that exists
among stocks. However, we believe that our emphasis on liquidity provision by different
types of traders especially during fast intraday crashes should not be biased by the choice of
a particular stock from the benchmark stock market index.6
Despite the above-mentioned limitation, our data have the following advantages. First,
the data have a unique identifier for each broker-trader combination, which allows us to
calculate the evolution of individual traders’ inventory over time. Second, the data have the
legal classification (Mutual Fund (MF), Foreign Institutional Investor (FII), and so on) for
each trader in addition to the unique individual trader identity. Therefore, we are able to
identify the types of legal entities who are standby liquidity providers. Some legal entities
are natural liquidity providers and demanders: MFs can tolerate deviations from their de-
sired holdings if prices become attractive; FIIs have a global view on the market, and thus
their behavior might be affected by the shocks originated outside the Indian market. We
concentrate our analysis on MFs and FIIs as these are the two largest well-known groups of
institutional investors worldwide.
We show that during normal periods (i.e., not during intraday crashes), FIIs and MFs
are of minor importance both in terms of their trading activity and liquidity provision as
5Weacknowledgethatnoovernightshort-sellingisallowedinequitymarketsinIndiaasopposedtoU.S.
However, giventhatwefocusonintradaycrashesandrecoveries, anyrestrictionsthatapplyovernightareof
a minor concern in such context. Besides that overnight short-selling restriction could be overcome through
single-stock futures (single stock-futures market is quite large in India as compared to U.S.). We also note
that high-frequency traders and day traders (short-term traders) tend to end their day flat, hence they are
unlikely to be influenced by any overnight restrictions. We show in the Internet Appendix that the trading
behavior of short-term traders during intraday crashes was similar to that of high-frequency traders during
the Flash Crash of May 6, 2010 in the U.S. market.
6WeprovideanexternalvaliditycheckbycomparingouranonymousstocktotheotherstocksinNIFTY50
and to stocks in S&P500 in Section I.
2