NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DID THE AMERICAN RECOVERY AND REINVESTMENT ACT HELP COUNTIES
MOST AFFECTED BY THE GREAT RECESSION?
Mario J. Crucini
Nam T. Vu
Working Paper 24093
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24093
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2017, Revised October 2020
The authors thank seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Board, the College of William and
Mary, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Miami University, Oberlin College, Vanderbilt
University, University of Cincinnati, and conference attendees at the Midwest Macroeconomics
Meetings. We thank August Graue for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Mario J. Crucini and Nam T. Vu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Did the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act Help Counties Most Affected by the Great
Recession?
Mario J. Crucini and Nam T. Vu
NBER Working Paper No. 24093
December 2017, Revised October 2020
JEL No. D31,E3,E62
ABSTRACT
One of the statements of purpose of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) was
“to assist those most impacted by the recession.” To consider this facet, the grants-in-aid portion
of the ARRA is assessed from the perspective of fiscal federalism. We estimate a trend-stationary
autoregressive model of county-level wage income dynamics where each county is subject to a
common shock (with county-specific factor loading) and an idiosyncratic shock. We then ask if
counties that experienced larger negative wage income shocks during the Great Contraction
subsequently received more transfers per capita in the form of grants-in-aid. The fact that the
negative business cycle shocks pre-date the passage of the ARRA and subsequent disbursements
allows identification of the risk-pooling channel of the grants before fiscal multiplier effects
confound these two channels. We find statistically significant and economically large risk-pooling
effects.
Mario J. Crucini
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
Box 1819 Station B
Nashville, TN 37235-1819
and NBER
mario.j.crucini@vanderbilt.edu
Nam T. Vu
Miami University
Farmer School of Business
Economics Department
800 E. High St.
Oxford, OH 45056
vunt@miamioh.edu

1 Introduction
The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) was signed into law by then-President
Barack Obama on February 17, 2009. As a discretionary peacetime fiscal measure, the total
appropriation was the largest in American history. The impetus for the stimulus was, of course,
the collapse of the stock market and a rapidly deteriorating macroeconomic situation in the
United States and abroad, at the onset of the Great Recession. Unfortunately, the appropriate
policy prescription and dosage were impossible to determine with any reasonable degree of
accuracy given the lack of consensus on the size of the fiscal multiplier, the economics profession
was left in the unenviable position of having to assess the policy ex-post. This evaluation is
ongoing and is proving to be a productive and challenging research area.
Much of the literature to date has focused on the question that macroeconomic models are
bestequippedtoanswer: HowlargeistheexpectedchangeinGDPassociatedwithanexogenous
increase in federal government consumption? Empirical studies of the fiscal multiplier have
a long intellectual history, recent work includes Feyrer and Sacerdote (2011), Wilson (2012),
Chodorow-Reich et al. (2012), Nakamura and Steinsson (2014), and Dupor et al. (2018). A
second branch of the post-ARRA literature has attempted to relate the stimulus to job creation
(see, for example, Goodman and Mance (2011), Conley and Dupor (2013), Bohn (2013), and
Dupor (2014)).1 Finally, a handful of papers deal with the subtle interactions of federal stimulus,
and fiscal spending and taxation, at the state and local levels (see, for example, Johnson (2009),
Cogan and Taylor (2010), and Leduc and Wilson (2017)).
Eachofthesestudieshasimprovedourunderstandingoffiscalpolicyandtherolethatspecific
parts of the ARRA stimulus package may have played in altering the paths of aggregate GDP
and employment relative to a counterfactual without it. Largely absent from the literature is a
systematic analysis of the heterogeneous impact of the Great Recession across locations within
the country and the role the ARRA may have had in mitigating or exacerbating geographic
income inequality arising from the Great Recession.
1) There is another related literature that deals specifically with the political economy aspect of the ARRA
program. See, for example, Inman (2010), Gimpel et al. (2012), and Boone et al. (2014).
1

Our work aims to help fill this gap in the literature by focusing on the second and fifth of
the five stated purposes of the ARRA: (1) to preserve and create jobs and promote economic
recovery; (2) to assist those most impacted by the recession; (3) to provide investments needed
to increase economic efficiency by spurring technological advances in science and health; (4) to
invest in transportation, environmental protection, and other infrastructure that will provide
long-term economic benefits and (5) to stabilize State and local government budgets, in order
to minimize and avoid reductions in essential services and counterproductive state and local tax
increases.2
To address the success or failure of the legislation along the dimension of changes in income
inequality, arising from the Great Recession, requires that we move from an analysis of the
macroeconomicimpacttothemicroeconomicimpact–fromafocusonthetimeseriesmovements
in national income per capita to movements of county-level income relative to the national
aggregate. Risk-sharing theory coupled with the theory of fiscal federalism provides the relevant
benchmark for understanding these types of policy choices.
Assessing the effectiveness of the ARRA in mitigating income inequality is empirically de-
manding, requiring microeconomic panel data on both income and ARRA disbursements. These
considerations led us to the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages, which ensures a na-
tionally comprehensive accounting of wage income with a frequency of observation conducive
to business cycle analysis. As a consequence, the focus is on location-specific, not individual-
specific, risks. Individual-specific risks will be averaged out as individual wages are aggregated
to the county level. The basic implication of risk-sharing in this setting, then, is that more
ARRA funds should be disbursed to counties that experienced larger income shocks during the
contractionary phase of the Great Recession.
A necessary, but not sufficient condition for the ARRA to achieve this goal is that dis-
bursements vary across counties. Establishing this fact is challenging because the ARRA was a
complex mix of tax changes, grants to state governments, and grants to other private and public
institutions. Our focus on counties rather than states is intended to preserve as much of the
2) 111th Congress, Public Law 5, Statute 115, page 123, U.S. Government Printing Office.
2