NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ON THE ECONOMICS OF AUDIT PARTNER TENURE AND ROTATION:
EVIDENCE FROM PCAOB DATA
Brandon Gipper
Luzi Hail
Christian Leuz
Working Paper 24018
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24018
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017, Revised June 2018
This study uses proprietary PCAOB data. To access these data, we submitted a research proposal
to the PCAOB describing the research questions, the research design as well as the data necessary
to conduct the study. As a condition of data access, our study is reviewed by the PCAOB with
respect to the release of nonpublic information (but not for its results). The PCAOB, as a matter
of policy disclaims responsibility for any private publication or statement by any of its economic
research fellows, advisors, and employees. The views expressed in this paper are the views of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Board, individual Board members, or staff
of the PCAOB. Brandon Gipper was an Economic Research Fellow of the PCAOB. Christian
Leuz is Economic Advisor of the PCAOB’s Center of Economic and Risk Analysis. We
appreciate the helpful comments of Preeti Choudhary, Michael Gurbutt, Robert Knechel, Luigi
Zingales, PCAOB staff, two partners from one audit firm in our sample, and seminar participants
at the PCAOB’s Center for Economic Analysis and Stanford Summer Camp. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Brandon Gipper, Luzi Hail, and Christian Leuz. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

On the Economics of Audit Partner Tenure and Rotation: Evidence from PCAOB Data
Brandon Gipper, Luzi Hail, and Christian Leuz
NBER Working Paper No. 24018
November 2017, Revised June 2018
JEL No. G30,J44,J62,K22,L84,M21,M41,M42,M51,M54
ABSTRACT
This paper provides the first partner tenure and rotation analysis for a large cross-section of U.S.
publicly listed firms over an extended period. We analyze the effects on audit quality as well as
economic tradeoffs related to partner tenure and rotation with respect to audit hours and fees. On
average, we find no evidence for audit quality declines over the tenure cycle and little support for
fresh-look benefits after rotations. Nevertheless, partner rotations have significant economic
consequences. We find increases in audit fees and decreases in audit hours over the tenure cycle,
which differ by partner experience, client size, and competitiveness of the local audit market.
More generally, our findings are consistent with efforts by the audit firms to minimize disruptions
and audit failures around mandatory rotations. We also analyze special circumstances, such as
audit firm switches and early partner rotations, and show that they are more disruptive than
mandatory rotations, and also more likely to exhibit audit quality effects.
Brandon Gipper Christian Leuz
Stanford University Booth School of Business
Graduate School of Business University of Chicago
655 Knight Way 5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Stanford, CA 94305 Chicago, IL 60637-1610
gipperbr@stanford.edu and NBER
cleuz@chicagobooth.edu
Luzi Hail
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
lhail@wharton.upenn.edu

1. Introduction
Does tenure of an audit partner at a given client influence audit quality? How disruptive and
costly are partner rotations, say, in terms of audit hours and fees? Do audit firms rotate partners
early when audit quality is low? Questions like these are central to audit practice and regulation
and have been studied extensively in academic research (see, e.g., DeFond and Zhang, 2014, and
Lennox and Wu, 2017, for overviews). This literature recognizes information asymmetry,
conflicts of interest, learning, and competition in audit market as key forces and highlights
several economic tradeoffs. For instance, engagement partners with long tenure have developed
close relationships with their clients, which could compromise audit quality or make them
reluctant to update audit procedures. A partner that comes in after a rotation did not approve
prior audit procedures and, hence, can take a “fresh look” at the engagement. Over the years,
engagement partners develop a deeper understanding and specific knowledge of their clients and
respective industries, which should enable them to perform audits better and more efficiently.
Newly-assigned partners need time to acquire this knowledge, which is costly and could
temporarily decrease audit quality. This short discussion highlights a myriad of potential effects.
Prior literature finds mixed evidence when it comes to the effects of partner tenure and
rotation on audit quality.6 However, many of these studies rely on small samples obtained from
individual audit firms or settings outside the U.S., where engagement partner names must be
disclosed. It is not obvious that the results from foreign settings carry over to the U.S. where
partner tenure and rotation have not been observable to outside investors until recently. In fact,
6 For instance, studies on the effects of mandatory partner rotation find decreases (Litt, Sharma, Simpson, and
Tanyi, 2014), increases (Lennox, Wu, and Zhang, 2014; and Laurion, Lawrence, and Ryans, 2016), and no
change (Chi, Huang, Liao, and Xie, 2009) in audit quality. Studies on audit partner tenure find evidence of
decreases (Carey and Simnett, 2006; Fitzgerald, Omer, and Thompson, 2018), increases (Chen, Lin, and Lin,
2008; Manry, Mock, and Turner, 2008), or an initial increase followed by a decrease (Chi and Huang, 2005) in
audit quality.
1

partner name disclosure could alter the effects of tenure and rotation. Moreover, the U.S.
environment features major litigation risk for auditors, relatively strict audit oversight, including
mandatory partner rotation every five years, as well as substantial monitoring by capital-market
participants such as investors and analysts. These forces could substantially mitigate agency
concerns relative to non-U.S. settings.
In this paper, we provide the first partner tenure and rotation analysis for a large cross-
section of U.S. publicly listed issuers over an extended period (2008-2014). We analyze audit
quality over the five-year tenure cycle, around partner rotations and as an impetus for early
rotations. We also go back to first principles and study the underlying audit process and the
economics of partner tenure and rotation. We shed light on how audit fees and hours evolve over
the partner cycle and how the patterns differ with competitive pressures and partner experience.
Our analysis provides novel evidence on the economic tradeoffs related to partner tenure and
rotation for U.S. audit firms. Among other things, this evidence can serve as baseline for future
research on the role of engagement partners using the disclosure of their names starting in 2017.
We use a proprietary dataset from the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board
(PCAOB) that matches audit partners with client issuers. Aside from partner names and tenure,
the dataset contains relevant engagement information, including total audit hours, partner hours,
audit fees, billing realization, review partner names and hours, and internal audit risk ratings of
the clients. Many of these data have not been previously analyzed for a large sample of U.S.
firms. Our sample covers over 3,300 clients of six large U.S. auditors (henceforth “Big 6”)7 from
2008 to 2014 and represents 46 percent of U.S. audit firms’ clients covered by Audit Analytics
7 The six large audit firms are BDO USA, Deloitte & Touche, Ernst & Young, Grant Thornton, KPMG, and PwC
PricewaterhouseCoopers. These firms are all subject to yearly PCAOB inspection and report partner and client
data to the PCAOB annually in machine-readable form. Smaller audit firms are also required to report this
information but do so with lower frequency (see Franzel, 2012).
2