NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EMPLOYER PENALTY, VOLUNTARY COMPLIANCE, AND THE SIZE DISTRIBUTION OF FIRMS:
EVIDENCE FROM A SURVEY OF SMALL BUSINESSES
Casey B. Mulligan
Working Paper 24037
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24037
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017
I appreciate the financial support of the Health Economics Initiative of the Becker Friedman
Institute at the University of Chicago, assistance from Samantha Loo, and comments from
Coleman Drake, Trevor Gallen, and seminar participants at the University of Chicago. The
survey was done in partnership with the Mercatus Center at George Mason University. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Casey B. Mulligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Employer Penalty, Voluntary Compliance, and the Size Distribution of Firms: Evidence
from a Survey of Small Businesses
Casey B. Mulligan
NBER Working Paper No. 24037
November 2017
JEL No. D22,H25,H32
ABSTRACT
A new survey of 745 small businesses shows little change in the size distribution of businesses
between 2012 and 2016, except among businesses with 40–74 employees, in a way that is closely
related to whether they offer health insurance coverage. Using measures of both size and
voluntary regulatory compliance, the paper links these changes to the Affordable Care Act’s
employer mandate. Between 28,000 and 50,000 businesses nationwide appear to be reducing their
number of full-time-equivalent employees to below 50 because of that mandate. This translates to
roughly 250,000 positions eliminated from those businesses.
Casey B. Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24037

I. Introduction
Taxes and regulations are known to affect the size distribution of businesses, due
to the fact that smaller businesses are less subject to enforcement. Large informal sectors
are an obvious result in developing countries (Gërxhani 2004), but measurement
challenges have hindered quantifying the size distortions’ impact on developed-country
employment and productivity. This paper uses new and unique data that is readily linked
to a specific regulation: the 2010 Affordable Care Act’s (ACA) employer mandate. The
mandate’s size provision took effect in 2015 and is especially interesting, not only due to
its notoriety, but because of its bright-line threshold and enforcement by monetary
penalty. This paper quantifies the size incentive of that penalty, develops a framework
for combining evidence on size with evidence on voluntary compliance, and uses a new
survey of businesses to quantify the number of businesses that changed from large to
small as a consequence of the law.
The key size threshold in the ACA is 50 full-time equivalent employees (FTEs),
which establishes the legal definition of a “large” business that is subject to the employer
mandate. Momentarily ignoring the distinction between FTEs and total employment, I
display in Figure 1 a time series of the share of employment by small businesses, by a 50-
total-employees criterion, among private businesses sized 25-99. The data is sourced
from the tables prepared by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality from the
insurance/employer component of the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey.1 Both the
2015 and 2016 shares are well outside the range observed in the recent history 2008-14,
and in the direction to be expected given that large employers were subject to a new
regulation.
Garicano, Lelarge, and Van Reenen (2016) show how the distortionary effects of
size-dependent regulations appear muted when the observer uses a different measure of
size than regulators do. This is the case in Figure 1, which looks at total employment as
1 The MEPC-IC is a nationally representative sample “drawn annually from the most recently
updated version of the U.S. Census Bureau’s Business Register” and includes about 39,000
private businesses each year (Agency for Healthcare Research Quality 2017). It has no public use
files.
1

opposed to the full-time equivalents specified by the ACA and has total employment
binned rather broadly (25-49 and 50-99). Both Garicano, Lelarge, and Van Reenen
(2016) and Gurio and Roys (2014) therefore obtain size measures that are especially
close to regulator measures and find large size distortions in the French economy. They
do not link the distortions to specific regulations, but instead focus on France where there
are many size-dependent regulations thought to be binding. One of their estimation
methods is to compare the actual firm size distribution to a Pareto distribution and
measure the nonmonotonicity of the actual distribution in the neighborhood of the
threshold.
The Mercatus-Mulligan data used in this paper has five measurement advantages.
First, it separately measures full- and part-time employment and therefore can produce
good proxies for FTEs. Second, the size distortion can be linked to a specific and
relatively new regulation, which permits a before-after analysis as shown in Figure 1.
Third, voluntary compliance – that is, offering employer-sponsored health insurance
(ESI) even when exempt from the mandate – can be measured. This allows the
measurement of size distortions to focus on businesses for which the employer mandate
is binding. Fourth, the survey was not conducted at the corporate level and therefore did
not require any corporation’s approval to publish results. Rather, individuals were
confidentially surveyed, and these individuals happened to be managers at businesses. If
the sample aggregate happens to reveal politically-incorrect business practices, such a
finding cannot impugn any particular business. Fifth, the managers of the sample
businesses were asked whether and how the law changed their hiring practices, with
answers that can be compared to size and compliance.
Section II of this paper briefly provides the quantitative details of the Affordable
Care Act’s employer mandate. Section III has a simple cost function framework for
considering a business’ tradeoffs between changing its hiring practices versus its fringe-
benefit offerings, especially as it relates to the propensity to offer ESI by size of business.
The Mercatus-Mulligan sample details are provided in Section IV. Section V displays
estimates of the nationwide prevalence of “49er” businesses, which are defined to be
small businesses that have fewer than 50 full-time-equivalent employees for the purpose
of avoiding employer-penalty assessments. Section VI concludes.
2