NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHO FALLS PREY TO THE WOLF OF WALL STREET?
INVESTOR PARTICIPATION IN MARKET MANIPULATION
Christian Leuz
Steffen Meyer
Maximilian Muhn
Eugene Soltes
Andreas Hackethal
Working Paper 24083
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24083
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017, Revised October 2023
We would like to thank Brad Barber, Joey Engelberg (discussant), Gur Huberman, Alex Imas,
Andrei Shleifer, Ahmed Tahoun, Joachim Voth, Tracy Wang, Joshua White and workshop
participants at the Burton Accounting Conference at Columbia, Case Western Reserve
University, University of Chicago Booth School of Business, European Accounting Association
Congress, European Finance Association Annual Meeting, Frankfurt School of Finance &
Management, Goethe University Frankfurt, HEC Lausanne, University of Michigan, University
of Muenster, NBER Behavioral Finance meeting, Securities and Exchange Commission, Stanford
University, Stockholm University, Temple University, and Vienna Graduate School of Finance
for their helpful comments. This research would not have been possible without the collaboration
of a German bank and we gratefully acknowledge the help provided by the bank and its
employees. We thank Sebastian de Schmidt and BaFin for kindly providing data on German tout
cases and many helpful conversations about the institutional setting. Christian Leuz gratefully
acknowledges financial support by the Initiative on Global Markets. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Christian Leuz, Steffen Meyer, Maximilian Muhn, Eugene Soltes, and Andreas
Hackethal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Who Falls Prey to the Wolf of Wall Street? Investor Participation in Market Manipulation
Christian Leuz, Steffen Meyer, Maximilian Muhn, Eugene Soltes, and Andreas Hackethal
NBER Working Paper No. 24083
November 2017, Revised October 2023
JEL No. D14,D18,G11,G14,G18,G28,G41,K22,K42,M48
ABSTRACT
Price distortions created by so-called “pump-and-dump” schemes are well known, but relatively
little is known about the investors in these frauds. By examining 470 “pump-and-dump” schemes
and a large data set of trading records for over 110,000 individual investors from a major German
bank, we provide comprehensive evidence on the participation rate, magnitude of the
investments, the losses, and the characteristics of the individuals who invest in such schemes.
Participation is quite common with nearly 8% of active retail investors participating in at least
one “pump-and-dump” losing on average nearly 30%. Next, we identify several distinct types
among participating investors, some of which (i.e., speculating day trader) should not be viewed
as falling prey to the schemes. Recognizing this heterogeneity is key when designing investor
protections because we find investor types respond differently to market manipulation. We also
show that portfolio composition and past trading behavior better explain scheme participation
than demographics. Lastly, we document longer-lasting effects on participating investors that go
beyond the immediate financial losses.
Christian Leuz Eugene Soltes
Booth School of Business Harvard Business School
University of Chicago Morgan Hall 365
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue Boston, MA 02163
Chicago, IL 60637-1610 esoltes@hbs.edu
and NBER
cleuz@chicagobooth.edu Andreas Hackethal
Goethe University Frankfurt
Steffen Meyer House of Finance
Aarhus University Theodor-W.-Adorno-Platz 3
Department of Economics 60323 Frankfurt a. M.
Building 2632 Germany hackethal@em.uni-
8000 Aarhus C, Denmark frankfurt.de
Denmark
steffen.meyer@econ.au.dk
Maximilian Muhn
Chicago Booth
5807 S Woodlawn Ave.
Chicago, IL 60637
maximilian.muhn@gmail.com
An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24083

1. Introduction
Well-functioning equity markets are predicated on access to reliable and accurate information.
There are many information sources that investors can utilize in their decisions including
disclosures issued by firms, news conveyed by information intermediaries (e.g., financial analysts,
journalists), social media (e.g., Reddit, Twitter) and information contained in prices themselves.
Manipulation of any of these sources of information can create distortions that undermine market
functioning, efficient capital allocation, and individuals’ willingness to invest in the stock market
(e.g., Aggarwal and Wu 2006; Kyle and Viswanathan 2008; Giannetti and Wang 2016).
Given these distortions and potential externalities, securities regulators mandate truthfulness
in disclosures and take action against those who seek to deceive. Regulators also prohibit deceptive
trading practices and market manipulation with the intention to protect investors. For example, the
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) describes its mission as one “to protect
investors, maintain fair, orderly, and efficient markets, and facilitate capital formation” (SEC
2016). However, these objectives, especially investor protection and facilitating efficient trading,
can compete with each other.1 Therefore, making appropriate tradeoffs between them requires
understanding the trading behavior of individual investors that the SEC seeks to protect.
There is a significant body of work examining the role of disclosure and securities regulation
in fostering capital formation and market quality (e.g., Leuz and Wysocki 2016 for a survey), but
much less research on even the most basic questions related to market manipulation and investor
protection. What is the participation rate in manipulative schemes? How damaging is market
manipulation to investors’ portfolios? To what extent do investors “fall prey” to manipulation,
rather than seek out manipulated stocks? This knowledge gap likely comes from the scarcity of
1 Similarly, lowering firms’ regulatory burden can foster capital raising in public markets, but also makes it more
likely that investors face duplicity in market transactions and lower market quality (e.g., Brüggemann et al. 2018).
1

transaction-level data, especially for representative samples. Yet, these questions have recently
received considerable attention as policy makers consider the role of individual investors in the
price formation process following the growth in “meme” stock trading (e.g., GameStop, AMC)
and the recent surge in penny stock trading (Phillips 2021).2
In this paper, we provide evidence on these questions by analyzing retail investor participation
in “pump-and-dump” schemes for a reasonably representative sample. In such schemes, a
promoter acquires a position in a stock and then artificially raises the price by disseminating false
or misleading information about the firm, which is why these schemes are also called “touts” (Kyle
and Viswanathan 2008; Putnins 2012). To facilitate a rapid run-up in price during the pump phase,
promoters often target more thinly traded stocks, for which limited liquidity leads to fast price
increases when demand rises. Once the stock has appreciated, promoters sell their shares causing
a rapid share price decline and significant losses for other investors.
Pump-and-dump schemes harm investors who purchase shares on the false premise that some
innovation or impending development justifies a rising valuation. Harm could spread further if
those investors come to distrust information about other stocks and, more generally, lose trust in
the stock market (Antweiler and Frank 2004; Guiso et al. 2008; Giannetti and Wang 2016; Soltes
2016). Regulators expend considerable resources seeking to curtail market manipulation to
mitigate these adverse effects. Yet, an effective regulatory response requires understanding who
invests in such schemes and why, as well as a sense of how investors fare in them.
Towards such an understanding, we examine actual participation in pump-and-dump schemes
using a novel data set of such schemes provided by the German supervisory authority, BaFin,
supplemented with an extensive hand-collection of cases. We combine these schemes with trade-
2 For a summary, see the U.S House Committee on Financial Services in “Game Stopped? Who Wins and Loses
When Short Sellers, Social Media, and Retail Investors Collude” (February 18, 2021).
2