NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DAILY PRICE LIMITS AND DESTRUCTIVE MARKET BEHAVIOR
Ting Chen
Zhenyu Gao
Jibao He
Wenxi Jiang
Wei Xiong
Working Paper 24014
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24014
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017
We are grateful to seminar participants at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Columbia University,
the Shenzhen Stock Exchange, Tsinghua University, the University of Hong Kong, and the University
of Maryland for helpful comments and suggestions. We especially thank Zhengjun Zhang and two
anonymous referees for constructive comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2017 by Ting Chen, Zhenyu Gao, Jibao He, Wenxi Jiang, and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Daily Price Limits and Destructive Market Behavior
Ting Chen, Zhenyu Gao, Jibao He, Wenxi Jiang, and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 24014
November 2017
JEL No. G12,G28
ABSTRACT
We use account-level data from the Shenzhen Stock Exchange to show that daily price limits, a
widely adopted market stabilization mechanism, may lead to unintended, destructive market
behavior: large investors tend to buy on the day when a stock hits the 10% upper price limit and
then sell on the next day; and their net buying on the limit-hitting day predicts stronger long-run
price reversal. We also analyze a sample of special treatment (ST) stocks, which face tighter 5%
daily price limits, and provide a causal validation from comparing market dynamics before and
after they are assigned the ST status.
Ting Chen Wenxi Jiang
Princeton University and Chinese University of Hong Kong
The Hong Kong University of Science Room 1250, 12/F.,
and Technology Cheng Yu Tung Building
colonct@gmail.com 12 Chak Cheung Street
Shatin, N.T.
Zhenyu Gao Hong Kong
Chinese University of Hong Kong jiangwenxi@gmail.com
Hong Kong
gaozhenyu@baf.cuhk.edu.hk Wei Xiong
Princeton University
Jibao He Department of Economics
Shenzhen Stock Exchange Bendheim Center for Finance
Shenzhen, China Princeton, NJ 08450
jbhe@szse.cn and NBER
wxiong@princeton.edu

Daily price limit rules are widely used by stock markets across the globe.1 These rules
are particularly popular in emerging markets with a large fraction of inexperienced
investors, as they give a time-out period during large price fluctuations and thus serve as a
market stabilization mechanism. China’s equity market (the second largest in the world by
capitalization) imposes daily price limits of 10% on regular stocks and 5% on special
treatment (ST) stocks. However, there is a growing concern that this rule might induce
destructive trading behavior by some speculators to take advantage of other investors.
Of particular concern is a popular strategy, which is often discussed in the news media
and also observed in some market enforcement cases, of certain speculators pushing up
stock prices to the upper price limit and then taking profits by selling on the next day. This
upper-price-limit strategy is reminiscent of the classic pump-and-dump strategy of market
manipulation (e.g., De Long et al., 1990), yet with several important differences. First, after
observing a stock hitting the daily upper price limit, it is natural for otherwise uninformed
investors to infer that the stock’s price has not fully incorporated all fundamental
information and thus be willing to offer a higher price on the following day. This inference
does not require any particular behavioral bias such as positive feedback trading and
extrapolation; it requires only the naivety of failing to recognize the speculators’ incentives
to profit by pushing up the prices to the upper price limit. Second, the events of stock prices
hitting the upper daily price limit often attracts the attention of new investors (e.g., Barber
and Odean, 2008; Seasholes and Wu, 2007), which further exacerbates the price increase
after the upper price limit is hit. Third, the publicly observed large price increase during a
trading day also serves as a convenient device for unrelated speculators to coordinate to
1 According to Deb, Kaley, and Marisetty (2010), out of 58 major countries, 41 countries have applied certain
types of price limit rules in their equity exchanges.
1

push up the price together. In other words, the speculators do not need to plan a
manipulation scheme as they can simply follow large price increases induced by
fundamental news. The possibility of the daily price limit rule inducing these unintended
effects motivates a systematic study of the impact of the daily price limit rule.
In this paper, we take advantage of account-level data from the Shenzhen Stock
Exchange to analyze how daily price limit rules affect market dynamics and in particular
whether the daily price limits may induce destructive trading behavior by a group of
speculators against other investors. Specifically, we examine accounts pooled into six
groups—one institution group, which includes all institutions, and five individual investor
groups classified by the average stock balance in the previous year. We are particularly
interested in the group of large investors, who have an average stock balance of over 10
million RMB. This group is particularly interesting because large investors tend to be more
sophisticated and because the speculators involved in the news media coverage of the
upper-price-limit strategy tend to be large investors.
We divide our study into two parts, one based on the sample of regular stocks and the
other on ST stocks. In the first part, we analyze price dynamics and the trading of different
investor groups subsequent to days when regular stocks hit the daily 10% upper price limit
and when they experience large daily returns less than the 10% limit. We organize our
analysis to test a central hypothesis that large investors push stocks that experience large
price increases during a trading day to close at the upper price limit and then profit from
selling at higher prices on the next day and, furthermore, their destructive trading behavior
causes stock prices to overreact to the initial price shocks.
2