NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY ARE BANKS EXPOSED TO MONETARY POLICY?
Sebastian Di Tella
Pablo Kurlat
Working Paper 24076
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24076
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017
We thank our discussants Nobu Kiyotaki, Skander Van den Heuvel, and Hervé Roche, as well as
Jonathan Berk, V.V. Chari, Valentin Haddad, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Ben Hébert, Ben Moll, and
Ed Nosal, for helpful comments, and Itamar Dreschler, Alexei Savov, Philipp Schnabl, William
English, Skander Van den Heuvel and Egon Zakrajsek for sharing their data with us. Ricardo de
la O Flores provided exceptional research assistance. This paper previously circulated under the
title “Monetary Shocks and Bank Balance Sheets”. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Sebastian Di Tella and Pablo Kurlat. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Why are Banks Exposed to Monetary Policy?
Sebastian Di Tella and Pablo Kurlat
NBER Working Paper No. 24076
November 2017
JEL No. E41,E43,E44,E51
ABSTRACT
We propose a model of banks’ exposure to movements in interest rates and their role in the
transmission of monetary shocks. Since bank deposits provide liquidity, higher interest rates
allow banks to earn larger spreads on deposits. Therefore, if risk aversion is higher than one,
banks' optimal dynamic hedging strategy is to take losses when interest rates rise. This risk
exposure can be achieved by a traditional maturity-mismatched balance sheet, and amplifies the
effects of monetary shocks on the cost of liquidity. The model can match the level, time pattern,
and cross-sectional pattern of banks’ maturity mismatch.
Sebastian Di Tella
Stanford University
Graduate School of Business
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
sditella@stanford.edu
Pablo Kurlat
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
pkurlat@stanford.edu

1 Introduction
The banking system is highly exposed to monetary policy. An increase in nominal interest
rates creates large financial losses for banks, which typically have maturity-mismatched bal-
ance sheets with long-duration nominal assets (like fixed-rate mortgages) and short-duration
nominal liabilities (like deposits). This leaves banks with weakened balance sheets, amplify-
ing and propagating monetary shocks. Banking regulators and monetary policy makers are
naturally concerned with the effects of monetary policy on financial stability.
But why do banks choose such a large exposure to movements in interest rates? In this
paper we argue that it’s part of a dynamic hedging strategy. Banks are willing to take
large financial losses when interest rates rise because they expect higher profits since deposit
spreadsrise. Ourmodelcansuccessfullyexplainbanks’average maturitymismatch, itstime-
series properties, and the cross-sectional evidence. It provides a laboratory to understand
how monetary policy determines banks’ risk taking decisions.
Our baseline model is a flexible-price monetary economy where the only source of shocks
is monetary policy. The economy is populated by banks and households. The distinguishing
feature of banks is that they are able to provide liquidity by issuing deposits that are close
substitutes to currency, up to a leverage limit. Importantly, because markets are complete,
banks are able to choose their exposure to risk independently of their liquidity provision. In
particular, we don’t make any assumptions about what kind of securities banks hold.
We show that if relative risk aversion is high (larger than one) banks optimally choose
to sustain losses when interest rates rise. The endogenous response of banks’ balance sheets
amplifies the effects of monetary policy shocks on the cost of liquidity. This exposure to risk
can be achieved with a portfolio of long-duration nominal assets and short-duration nominal
liabilities, as in a traditional bank balance sheet.
The mechanism works as follows. Because deposits provide liquidity services, banks earn
the spread between the nominal interest rate on illiquid bonds and the lower interest rate
on deposits. If nominal interest rates rise, the opportunity cost of holding currency goes up,
so agents substitute towards deposits. This drives up the equilibrium spread between the
nominal interest rate and the interest rate on deposits, increasing banks’ return on equity.
Because risk aversion is higher than one, banks want to transfer wealth from states of the
world with high return on equity to states of the world with low return on equity. They
are willing to take capital losses when interest rates rise because spreads going forward will
be high. Since the supply of deposits is tied to banks’ net worth, the cost of liquidity rises
further, amplifying the effects of the monetary shock.
2

We calibrate the model to match the observed behavior of interest rates, deposit spreads,
bank leverage and other macroeconomic variables. We find that an increase in the short-
term interest rate of 100 basis points produces losses of around 30% of banks’ net worth.
This endogenous response of banks’ net worth amplifies the effects of monetary shocks on
the cost of liquidity. An increase of 100 bp in interest rates has a direct effect on deposit
spreads of 62bp, and an additional indirect effect through lower bank net worth and deposit
supply of 15bp (an amplification by a factor of 1.25). The effect is non-linear, however. The
amplification through banks’ net worth is larger when banks’ net worth or interest rates are
high.
The model can match the level, time pattern, and cross-sectional pattern of banks’ ma-
turity mismatch. First, the model can account for the average maturity mismatch. In the
model, banks’ exposure to movements in interest rates can be implemented with an average
maturity mismatch between assets and liabilities of 3.9 years. We compare this to banking
data following the approach of English et al. (2012) and find an average maturity mismatch
for the median bank of 4.4 years. Second, the model reproduces the time pattern in the
data. Banks’ maturity mismatch rises during periods of low interest rates. While this may
look like “reaching for yield”, it is actually what our model predicts. The sensitivity of de-
posit spreads to interest rate movements is higher when interest rates are low, so banks’
dynamic hedging motive is larger at these times. The time-series correlation between the
model and the data is 0.77. Third, the model successfully accounts for the cross-sectional
evidence. Banks with a higher deposit-to-net-worth ratio should have a stronger dynamic
hedging motive and therefore choose a greater maturity mismatch. In the model, increasing
the deposit-to-net-worth ratio of a bank by one unit leads to an increase in the maturity
mismatch of 0.42 years. In the data, it leads to an increase of 0.43 years.
The baseline model with only monetary shocks is intended as a benchmark to examine
the mechanisms at play. We also study an arguably more realistic setting where the central
bank follows an inflation targeting policy. The economy is hit by real shocks that move the
equilibrium real interest rate and force the central bank to adjust the nominal interest rate
in order to hit its inflation target. The quantitative results are similar to the benchmark
model, with an average maturity mismatch of 4.7 years, a time-series correlation with the
data of 0.51, and an increase of 0.55 years in additional maturity mismatch per unit of
deposit-to-net-worth ratio.
There are several alternative explanations for banks’ exposure to interest rate risk. First,
one could conjecture that a maturity-mismatched balance sheet is inherent to the banking
3