NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOUSE PRICE BELIEFS AND MORTGAGE LEVERAGE CHOICE
Michael Bailey
Eduardo Dávila
Theresa Kuchler
Johannes Stroebel
Working Paper 24091
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24091
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017
We like to thank Jonathan Berk, Philippe Bracke, Peter DeMarzo, Nicola Gennaioli, Emmanuel
Farhi, Sean Hundtofte, Amit Seru, Alp Simsek, Venky Venkateswaran, and Iván Werning, as
well as seminar and conference participants at Bank of Ireland, Berkeley Haas, Chicago Booth,
CREi, Drexel University, Empirical Macro Workshop in Charleston, Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia, LMU Munich, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, NYC Real Estate
Conference, NBER Summer Institute, Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics, University
College London, University of Maryland, USC Rena Sivitanidou Lusk Research Symposium, UT
Austin, Washington University in St. Louis for helpful comments. Elizabeth Casano, Drew
Johnston, Hongbum Lee, and Luke Min provided excellent research assistance. This project was
supported through a grant of the Center for Global Economy and Business at NYU Stern. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24091.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Michael Bailey, Eduardo Dávila, Theresa Kuchler, and Johannes Stroebel. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

House Price Beliefs And Mortgage Leverage Choice
Michael Bailey, Eduardo Dávila, Theresa Kuchler, and Johannes Stroebel
NBER Working Paper No. 24091
November 2017
JEL No. D1,D14,E03,G0,G02,G11,G12,G21,R21,R30
ABSTRACT
We study the relationship between homebuyers' beliefs about future house price changes and
their mortgage leverage choices. From a theoretical perspective, whether more pessimistic
homebuyers choose more or less leverage is ambiguous and depends on their willingness to
reduce the size of their housing investment. When households primarily maximize the levered
return of their property investment, more pessimistic homebuyers reduce their leverage to
purchase smaller houses. On the other hand, when considerations such as family size pin down
the desired property size, pessimistic homebuyers reduce their financial exposure to the housing
market by making smaller downpayments to buy similarly-sized homes. To determine which
scenario better describes the data, we empirically investigate the cross-sectional relationship
between beliefs and leverage choices in the U.S. housing market. Our data combine mortgage
financing information and a housing market expectations survey with anonymized social network
data from Facebook. The survey shows that an individual's belief distribution about future house
price changes is affected by the recent house price experiences of her geographically distant
friends, allowing us to use these experiences as quasi-exogenous shifters of individuals' house
price beliefs. We find that more pessimistic homebuyers make smaller downpayments and choose
higher leverage, in particular in states where default costs are relatively low, as well as during
periods when house prices are expected to fall on average. Overall, our results provide evidence
for an important role of heterogeneous beliefs in explaining individuals' financial decision-
making.
Michael Bailey Theresa Kuchler
Facebook Stern School of Business
Economist New York University
mcbailey@fb.com 44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
Eduardo Dávila tkuchler@stern.nyu.edu
Stern School of Business
New York University Johannes Stroebel
44 West 4th Street Stern School of Business
New York, NY 10012 New York University
and NBER 44 West 4th Street
edavila@stern.nyu.edu New York, NY 10012
and NBER
johannes.stroebel@nyu.edu

Aggregate leverage ratios in the economy vary substantially over time and play a key role in driving economic
fluctuations(seeKrishnamurthyandMuir,2016;Mian,SufiandVerner,2016). Understandingthedeterminantsof
investors’ leverage choices is therefore a question of central economic importance. Leverage choices in the housing
market are of particular interest to policy makers (see DeFusco, Johnson and Mondragon, 2017): mortgages are
the primary liability on households’ balance sheets, and increased household leverage plays a key role in many
accountsoftherecentFinancialCrisis(e.g.,MianandSufi,2009). Inthispaper,weexploretheroleofhomebuyers’
beliefs about house price growth as one potential determinant of their mortgage leverage choices.
We first develop a parsimonious model that characterizes the channels through which homebuyers’ beliefs
about future house price growth can affect their mortgage leverage choices. We show that the direction of the
combinedeffectofbeliefsonleveragechoicesisambiguous,anddependsonthewillingnessofrelativelypessimistic
homebuyers to reduce the size of their housing market investment by either renting or buying a smaller house in a
cheaper neighborhood. We then empirically investigate the relationship between homebuyers’ beliefs about future
house price growth and their leverage choices, and find that more pessimistic homebuyers take on more leverage.
Our model adapts the portfolio choice framework of Geanakoplos (2010) and Simsek (2013) to the housing
market. We consider individuals who optimally choose non-housing consumption in addition to home size and
mortgage leverage given a schedule of loan-to-value ratios and interest rates offered by lenders. Introducing
consumption as an additional choice margin allows households to separately determine the size of their home and
their leverage. House price beliefs affect leverage choices through two forces. The first force works through the
perceived expected return on housing investments (“expected return force”). More optimistic agents want to buy
largerhouses,sincetheyexpecteachdollarinvestedinhousingtoearnahigherreturn. Inordertoaffordthelarger
home, they need to further lever up their fixed resources. The second force works through the protection against
house price declines offered by the ability to default on mortgages (“downpayment protection force”).1 Holding
housesizefixed,morepessimisticagents,whoperceiveahigherprobabilityofdefaultingontheirmortgage,choose
lower downpayments and higher leverage to limit the potential loss of their own funds in case of default.2
Our model captures an additional important feature of housing markets. Since owner-occupied housing is
bothaninvestmentandaconsumptiongood,theoptimalhomeisnotjustdeterminedbyhomebuyers’investment
motives,butalsobyconsumption-drivenmotivessuchasfamilysizeandneighborhoodpreferences. Thisintroduces
a“collateraladjustmentfriction” thatreduceshomebuyers’willingnesstoadjusttheirpropertysizeinresponseto
changesinhousepricebeliefs.3 Forexample,alargecollateraladjustmentfrictioncouldbetheresultofpessimists
not being willing to purchase in a less-safe neighborhood, or not wanting to buy a much smaller house. Our main
theoretical result is to show that the strength of this friction is central to determining the relationship between
homebuyers’ house price beliefs and their mortgage leverage choices.
We highlight the key mechanisms in our model by considering two polar scenarios for which we can obtain
explicit analytical results. We first consider a housing-as-investment scenario in which there is no collateral
1We show that this force is active independent of whether mortgage default is primarily strategic, with homeowners defaulting
as soon as their home is sufficiently “underwater,” or whether mortgage default only occurs when households also receive a negative
incomeshockthatmakesitimpossibleforthemtocontinuetheirmonthlymortgagepayments.
2As will become evident below, an equivalent exposition of the second force describes pessimists as perceiving a lower marginal
costofborrowing,sincetheyexpecttorepaytheirloaninfewerstatesoftheworld. Thismakeshigherleveragemoreappealing.
3We use the term friction to capture any force that reduces the willingness of individuals to adjust their exposure to the housing
collateralforpureinvestmentmotives. Inoursetting,thisforcecomesfromthepreferencesofhomebuyers,whoviewtheirhousenot
just as an investment, but also as a place to live, which puts additional constraints on house size. Our discussion of the collateral
adjustment friction focuses on the intensive margin of housing investment. In housing markets, renting rather than buying can give
individualstheoptiontoseparatetheirdecisionofwhathousetoliveinfromthedecisionofthesizeoftheirhousingmarketinvestment.
However,inmanycases,thesetofpropertiesavailableforrentisverydifferentfromthesetofpropertiesavailableforsale;indeed,large
single-family residences are almost exclusively owner-occupied. Therefore, reducing one’s housing market exposure through renting
willusuallyalsoinvolveapotentiallycostlyadjustmenttothetypeofhousingthatcanbeconsumed. Thisforcewillhavethesame
effectasthecollateraladjustmentfrictionweconsiderfortheintensivemarginadjustment.
2

adjustment friction and property size and leverage are determined by both the expected return force and the
downpaymentprotectionforce. Undertheappropriatedefinitionofoptimism,thisscenariorecoversthepredictions
fromtheportfoliochoiceprobleminSimsek(2013): morepessimistichomebuyersreducetheirleveragetopurchase
smaller houses because the expected return force dominates the downpayment protection force.
Wethenconsiderahousing-as-consumption scenario, inwhichthesizeofthehousinginvestmentiscompletely
pinned down by factors such as family size, and households allocate their resources between consumption and
making a downpayment to purchase the house. In this scenario, which corresponds to an infinite collateral
adjustment friction, the expected return force is inactive, but the downpayment protection force continues to
operate. As a result, more pessimistic agents make smaller downpayments to protect their assets against losses
in case of house price declines. In particular, a pessimistic homebuyer might think: “I need at least a 3-bedroom
house given my family size, but I think house prices are likely to fall, so I do not want to invest much of my own
money.” Such a borrower would then naturally choose higher leverage. As a reader explained to the Washington
Post (2011): “An acquaintance once told me he doesn’t believe in putting much money down on a mortgage loan
because that way he can ‘just walk away’ if things ever get bad. And walk away he did. His property is now in
foreclosure.” In the paper, we provide extensive evidence for the prevalence of such thinking among homebuyers.
When we move away from these polar cases, whether more pessimistic agents take on more or less leverage
depends on the magnitude of the collateral adjustment friction that captures the extent to which optimal home
sizeisdeterminedbyinvestmentorconsumptionmotives. Theempiricalcontributionofthispaperistoinvestigate
whichoftheseforcesdominatesinpractice. Thisanalysisfacesanumberofchallenges. Testingtheimplicationsof
models with belief heterogeneity is difficult because individuals’ beliefs are high-dimensional and hard-to-observe
objects. In addition, even if we could cleanly elicit homebuyers’ house price beliefs, we rarely observe forces that
induce heterogeneity in these beliefs without also inducing variation in their economic resources or other variables
that might independently affect their leverage choices.
Our empirical approach builds on Bailey et al. (2017a), who document that the recent house price experiences
in an individual’s geographically distant social network affect her beliefs about the attractiveness of local housing
market investments. Indeed, we verify that the recent house price experiences of geographically distant friends
can be used as shifters of individuals’ beliefs about the distribution of expected future house price changes. We
also show that friends’ house price experiences are unlikely to affect leverage choices through channels other than
beliefs. This allows us to explore the empirical relationship between beliefs and leverage by analyzing the cross-
sectional relationship between the leverage choices of individuals borrowing from the same lender to purchase
homes at the same time and in the same neighborhood, and the house price experiences of these homebuyers’
geographically distant friends.
In our data, we observe an anonymized snapshot of U.S. individuals’ friendship networks on Facebook, the
largestonlinesocialnetwork,withover231millionusersintheU.S.andCanada. Ourfirstempiricalstepcombines
these data with responses to a housing market expectation survey that was conducted by Facebook in April 2017.
The survey, which targeted Facebook users in Los Angeles through their News Feeds, elicited a distribution
of respondents’ expectations for future house price changes in their own zip codes. Individuals whose friends
experienced more recent house price increases expect higher average future house price growth. Quantitatively, a
one-percentage-point higher house price appreciation among an individual’s friends over the previous 24 months
is associated with individuals expecting a 33 basis points higher house price growth over the subsequent year. We
also find that individuals whose friends experienced more heterogeneous recent house price changes report a more
disperseddistributionofexpectedfuturehousepricegrowth. Thissuggeststhatthehousepriceexperienceswithin
an individual’s social network do not just affect her beliefs on average, but that other moments of the distribution
3