NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SOVEREIGN RISK CONTAGION
Cristina Arellano
Yan Bai
Sandra Lizarazo
Working Paper 24031
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24031
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017
This paper combines and replaces two previously circulated papers: “Linkages in Sovereign Debt
Markets” by the first two authors and “Contagion of Financial Crises in Sovereign Debt Markets”
by the last author. We thank Laura Sunder-Plassmann for superb research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the International Monetary
Fund, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Cristina Arellano, Yan Bai, and Sandra Lizarazo. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Sovereign Risk Contagion
Cristina Arellano, Yan Bai, and Sandra Lizarazo
NBER Working Paper No. 24031
November 2017
JEL No. F3,G01
ABSTRACT
We develop a theory of sovereign risk contagion based on financial links. In our multi-country
model, sovereign bond spreads comove because default in one country can trigger default in other
countries. Countries are linked because they borrow, default, and renegotiate with common
lenders, and the bond price and recovery schedules for each country depend on the choices of
other countries. A foreign default increases the lenders’ pricing kernel, which makes home
borrowing more expensive and can induce a home default. Countries also default together
because by doing so they can renegotiate the debt simultaneously and pay lower recoveries. We
apply our model to the 2012 debt crises of Italy and Spain and show that it can replicate the time
path of spreads during the crises. In a counterfactual exercise, we find that the debt crisis in Spain
(Italy) can account for one-half (one-third) of the increase in the bond spreads of Italy (Spain).
Cristina Arellano Sandra Lizarazo
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis International Monetary Fund
Research Department 1900 Pennsylvania Ave NW
90 Hennepin Avenue Washington, DC, 20431
Minneapolis, MN 55401 sanvaliz@gmail.com
and NBER
arellano.cristina@gmail.com
Yan Bai
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
216 Harkness Hall
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
yanbai06@gmail.com

1 Introduction
Sovereign debt crises occur in multiple countries at the same time. The Russian crisis of
1998, the Mexican crisis of 1994, and the Latin American debt crisis of the 1980s, among
others, spilled over to other emerging markets. During these crises, the sovereign risk of
many countries rose and fell in tandem. More recently, during the 2012 European debt crisis,
many countries also experienced sizable spikes in their sovereign risk.1 Yet, despite sovereign
debt crises occurring in multiple countries simultaneously, theoretical work on sovereign risk
has mainly studied countries in isolation.
We develop a multi-country model where default in one country triggers default in other
countries, generating comovement in sovereign risk. This contagion in sovereign risk arises
because countries borrow, default, and renegotiate with common lenders. A foreign default
lowers the home country’s bond prices and the future home recovery rates in the event of a
renegotiation. These two forces can induce a home default as rolling over the debt is more
difficult and renegotiating the defaulted debt in the future is more attractive. We apply our
model to the 2012 debt crises of Italy and Spain and show that it can replicate the time path
of spreads observed. In a counterfactual exercise, we assess the contribution of the foreign
debt crisis on home bond spreads and find that about one-half of the bond spread in Italy
and about one-third of the bond spread in Spain can be attributed to the debt crisis of the
other country.
The model economy is dynamic and consists of two symmetric countries that borrow,
default, and renegotiate their debt with competitive lenders that are risk averse. Borrowing
countries are subject to fluctuations in their output, and bond prices reflect the risk-adjusted
compensation for the loss that lenders face in case of default. Default entails costs for
borrowing countries in terms of access to financial markets and direct output costs. After
default, countries can renegotiate with a committee of lenders through Nash bargaining
and pay the debt recovery. When multiple countries renegotiate with lenders, they do it
simultaneously.
Countries are connected because bond prices and recovery rates for each country are
schedules that depend on both countries’ choices to default, borrow, and renegotiate, as
well as their output shocks. Borrowing countries are strategic players and understand that
their choices affect all bond prices and recoveries. We analyze an intraperiod game where
default, borrowing, andrenegotiationdecisionsarebestresponsesinthecontextofadynamic
recursive Markov equilibrium.
1Reinhart and Rogoff (2011) document not only that sovereign risk is highly correlated across countries,
but also that default events are clustered historically.
2

Countries’ default incentives depend on one another through the strategic renegotiation
channel and the pricing kernel channel. A foreign default lowers the expected recovery rates
for the home country reducing the cost of a default for the home country. This strategic
renegotiation channel can induce a default in the home country. A foreign default also makes
borrowing more expensive for the home country by increasing the bond pricing kernel which
increases the incentives to default for the home country. The dependency of home default on
foreign default arises during fundamental foreign defaults, where the foreign country defaults
because of high debt and low income, and also during self-fulfilling defaults, where both
countries default only because the other is defaulting. Such dependencies generate ex-ante
correlated bond spreads.
Renegotiations with multiple borrowing countries lead to lower recoveries because coun-
tries exert a large effective bargaining power when renegotiating simultaneously. Lenders are
willing to accept these lower recoveries because during these events they solve two default
events simultaneously. We show that this empirical implication of the model is borne out in
the historical cross-country data. In the data, recovery rates are about 16% lower on average
in years when many countries are renegotiating. We use these data to discipline this force in
our quantitative exercise.2
In our model, as in many dynamic models of borrowing and default, the shape and
responses of the bond price schedule are crucial for equilibrium spreads dynamics and co-
movements. The bond price schedule for each country incorporates a common pricing kernel
and the country specific default probabilities and expected recovery rates. As is standard in
these models, the bond price for the home country worsens with larger home borrowing and
lower home output because default probabilities rise with large debt and low output.3 The
novelty in our model is that the foreign country’s choices for default and borrowing as well as
its output also affect the bond price schedule for the home country. Foreign defaults worsen
the bond price schedule for the home country because they increase the lenders’ pricing ker-
nel as they lower lenders’ wealth and consumption. This tighter home bond price schedule
can induce a home default. Foreign defaults also increase the home country’s future default
probabilities and lower the home country’s expected recovery rates because the pricing ker-
nel effects from a foreign default last until the foreign country renegotiates and resolves the
default.
2The Brady plan of the early 1990s is a specific example in which many Latin American countries
renegotiated together and received an unusually good deal. These countries were able to exchange their
defaulted debt for new Brady bonds with principal collateralized by the U.S. government.
3See Aguiar and Gopinath (2006) and Arellano (2008) for an extensive discussion on the properties of
the bond price schedules in dynamic models of borrowing and default.
3