NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE CAUSAL EFFECT OF LIMITS TO ARBITRAGE ON ASSET PRICING ANOMALIES
Yongqiang Chu
David Hirshleifer
Liang Ma
Working Paper 24144
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24144
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2017, Revised October 2018
For helpful comments and suggestions, we thank Wei Xiong (the Editor), an anonymous
Associate Editor, two anonymous referees, Karl Diether, Lukasz Pomorski, Jeffrey Pontiff, Lin
Sun, and participants at the 2016 Rodney L. White Center for Financial Research Conference on
Financial Decisions and Asset Markets at Wharton and the 2017 American Finance Association
Meetings. This research has received financial support from the Moore School Research Grant
Program. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Yongqiang Chu, David Hirshleifer, and Liang Ma. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Causal Effect of Limits to Arbitrage on Asset Pricing Anomalies
Yongqiang Chu, David Hirshleifer, and Liang Ma
NBER Working Paper No. 24144
December 2017, Revised October 2018
JEL No. G12,G18,G4
ABSTRACT
We examine the causal effect of limits to arbitrage on 11 well-known asset pricing anomalies
using the pilot program of Regulation SHO, which relaxed short-sale constraints for a quasi-
random set of pilot stocks, as a natural experiment. We find that the anomalies became weaker on
portfolios constructed with pilot stocks during the pilot period. The pilot program reduced the
combined anomaly long-short portfolio returns by 72 basis points per month, a difference that
survives risk adjustment with standard factor models. The effect comes only from the short legs
of the anomaly portfolios.
Yongqiang Chu Liang Ma
University of South Carolina University of South Carolina
1014 Greene Street Darla Moore School of Business
Columbia, SC 29208 1014 Greene Street
yongqiang.chu@moore.sc.edu Columbia, SC 29208
United States
David Hirshleifer liang.ma@moore.sc.edu
The Paul Merage School of Business
University of California, Irvine 4291
Pereira Drive
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
david.h@uci.edu

1 Introduction
Over the last several decades, finance researchers have discovered many cross-sectional
asset pricing anomalies, wherein predetermined security characteristics predict future stock
returns.1 Such patterns can derive from either rational risk premia or market mispricing.
Themispricingexplanationgoeshand-in-handwiththeideathattherearelimitstoarbitrage
which delay the flow of wealth from irrational to sophisticated investors (Shleifer and Vishny
(1997)). In contrast, if return predictability is the result of rational risk premia for bearing
factor risk, limits to arbitrage should not affect expected returns.
It is therefore interesting to ascertain whether return anomalies, to the extent that they
reflect mispricing, are persistent because limits to arbitrage prevent sophisticated investors
from trading profitably against them. However, it is empirically hard to measure pure varia-
tions in limits to arbitrage that exclude variations in other economic forces that might affect
either risk premia or mispricing. In this paper, we study the causal effect of limits to arbi-
trage on 11 well-known asset pricing anomalies—namely, the momentum, gross profitability,
asset growth, investment to assets, return on assets, net operating assets, accruals, net stock
issuance, composite equity issuance, failure probability, and O-score anomalies. These 11
anomalies were the focus of Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2012) in their study of sentiment
and anomalies, and were chosen because of their survival after adjusting for the Fama-French
three factors. Examining the causal effect of limits to arbitrage on these anomalies provides
insightintowhether, andtowhatextent, well-knownreturnanomaliesderivefromriskversus
mispricing.
It is challenging to identify the causal effect of limits to arbitrage, as we seldom directly
observe them, or pure variations in them. The existing literature therefore often relies on
firm characteristics, such as idiosyncratic volatility, size, and stock liquidity, as proxies for
limits to arbitrage. However, these proxies are likely to be correlated with risk. For example,
1Harvey, Liu, and Zhu (2016) provide a comprehensive list of variables that can predict cross-sectional
stock returns.
1

size has been offered as the basis for a risk factor in the three-factor model of Fama and
French(1993), andvolatilitycanbeariskmeasureinmodelswithlimiteddiversificationsuch
as settings with costs of trading or with asymmetric information. This raises the possibility
that effects attributed to limits to arbitrage may actually be due to rational risk premia.
We offer here a pure test of the causal effect of limits to arbitrage on asset pricing
anomalies. Short sale constraints are one of the most important limits of arbitrage (e.g.,
Jones and Lamont (2002), Lamont and Thaler (2003), Nagel (2005), Gromb and Vayanos
(2010)). Research on the effect of short-sale constraints on asset prices relies mainly on
indirect proxies such as breadth of ownership (Chen, Hong, and Stein (2002)), institutional
ownership (Asquith, Pathak, and Ritter (2005), Nagel (2005), Hirshleifer, Teoh, and Yu
(2011)), firm size (Ali and Trombley (2006), Israel and Moskowitz (2013)), short interest
(Asquith, Pathak, and Ritter (2005)), and shorting cost estimated from stock borrowing and
lending behavior (Jones and Lamont (2002), Geczy, Musto, and Reed (2002), Drechsler and
Drechsler (2014)). Several of these proxies may be correlated across stocks or over time with
variations in factor risk.
We exploit a natural experiment, the Rule 202T pilot program of Regulation SHO (here-
after the pilot program), to identify the causal effect of limits to arbitrage, and in particular
short-sale constraints, on asset pricing anomalies. Regulation SHO was adopted by the Se-
curities and Exchange Commission (SEC) in July 2004. Within stocks in the Russell 3000
index as of June 2004, the pilot program designated every third stock ranked by average
daily trading volume (in the prior year) on each of NYSE, AMEX, and Nasdaq as pilot
stocks. The pilot program then removed short sale price tests on this quasi-randomly se-
lected group of pilot stocks. Prior to Regulation SHO, the specific form of short sale price
tests differed across different stock markets. NYSE/AMEX imposed the uptick rule, which
only allowed a short sale to be placed on a plus tick or a zero-plus tick. Nasdaq imposed
the bid price test, which did not allow short sales at or below the (inside) bid when the
inside bid was at or below the previous inside bid. From May 2, 2005 to August 6, 2007,
2