NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES THE STOCK MARKET MAKE FIRMS MORE PRODUCTIVE?
Benjamin Bennett
René Stulz
Zexi Wang
Working Paper 24102
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24102
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2017
Bennett is from the Fisher School of Business, The Ohio State University, Stulz is from the
Fisher School of Business, NBER and ECGI, and Wang is from the Institute for Financial
Management, University of Bern. We are grateful for comments to Kewei Hou, Xiaoji Lin and
participants at a seminar at the Ohio State University. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24102.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Benjamin Bennett, René Stulz, and Zexi Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does the Stock Market Make Firms More Productive?
Benjamin Bennett, René Stulz, and Zexi Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 24102
December 2017
JEL No. D22,G14,G31
ABSTRACT
We test the hypothesis that greater stock price informativeness (SPI) leads to higher firm-level
productivity (TFP). Management, directly or indirectly, learns more from more informative stock
prices, so that more informative stock prices should make firms more productive. We find a
positive relation between SPI and TFP. The relation is stronger for smaller, younger, riskier, less
capital-intensive, and financially-constrained firms. Product market competition and better
governance amplify the relation, while diversification weakens it. We address endogeneity
concerns with fixed effects, instrumental variables, and the use of brokerage house research
department closures and S&P 500 additions as plausibly exogenous events.
Benjamin Bennett Zexi Wang
The Ohio State University University of Bern
Fisher College of Business Institute for Financial Management
700 Fisher Hall Engehaldenstrasse 4
Columbus, OH 43210 CH-3012 Bern Switzerland
bennett.210@osu.edu zexi.wang@ifm.unibe.ch
René Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu

1. Introduction
One important role of the stock market is to provide price discovery (e.g., Bond, Edmans, and
Goldstein, 2012, Fama and Miller, 1972, Subrahmanyam and Titman, 1999, Dow and Gorton, 1997,
and Dow and Rahi, 2003). Investors and managers learn from stock prices. It is well-established that
the quality of price discovery varies across stocks and stock markets (see, for instance, Morck, Yeung,
and Yu, 2013). In this paper, we use differences in the quality of price discovery across U.S. firms to
investigate whether better price discovery makes firms more productive. We find that it does. In other
words, firms are more productive when the market for their stock leads to better price discovery.
Consider two firms. One firm’s stock moves exactly with the market, so no firm-specific
information is incorporated in the price. The other firm’s stock price incorporates a large amount of
firm-specific information. With the first stock, management learns nothing from price moves that it
would not learn by looking at a market index. In the other case, the stock price has information about
the firm that is separate from information about the market. Some of that information results from
trading by investors (e.g., Grossman and Stiglitz, 1980, Glosten and Milgrom, 1985, and Kyle, 1985).
The contention and evidence in the literature is that this information is valuable to management in
guiding its actions. In the case of the first firm, a drop in the stock price is not informative about firm-
specific developments; in the case of the second firm, it is.
Once private information is in the stock price, it informs the actions of managers and investors. For
example, corporate managers can learn from the information in stock prices for M&A decisions: if a
firm’s stock price drops after an M&A announcement, the manager may cancel the M&A plan (Luo,
2005), the acquirer may itself be taken over (Mitchell and Lehn, 1990), or the CEO may lose her job
(Lehn and Zhao, 2006). In addition to management, directors and activists can take actions to force
changes in how firms are managed and investors in general can take market-based corrective actions
(Bond, Goldstein, and Prescott, 2010). Bond, Goldstein, and Edmans (2012) review the theoretical and
empirical literature on the real effects of price discovery.
The extent to which trading incorporates private information in stock prices is measured in the
literature by a stock’s price informativeness (SPI). Throughout the paper, we highlight results using the
1

two measures of SPI that are most widely used in the literature, the probability of informed trading
(PIN) and stock price nonsynchronicity (PSI), but we also establish that our results hold for other
measures. PIN measures the probability of informed trading in a stock (Easley, Hvidkjaer, and O’Hara,
2002). This measure has a micro-foundation as it is based on a structural market microstructure model.
PSI measures firm-specific return variation. Initiated by Roll (1988), the logic of this measure is to filter
out the market and industry related components from stock returns. As a firm’s idiosyncratic variation
increases, the stock price reflects more private information (e.g., Morck, Yeung, and Yu, 2000, and
Durnev, Morck, and Yeung, 2004).
We use as our main measure of productivity Total Factor Productivity or TFP. TFP measures the
overall effectiveness and efficiency with which capital and labor are used in the production process. To
measure TFP, we have to estimate a production function with data available from Compustat. To do so,
we follow Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) and Ackerberg, Caves, and Frazer (2015). We also use other
measures of firm efficiency that are used in the corporate finance literature. We show that these
measures are also positively related to SPI, so that our conclusions do not depend on the use of TFP.
We find that the evidence supports our hypothesis that firms with better price discovery in the stock
market are more productive. Such a result could be explained by factors that influence both price
discovery and firm productivity. To make a causal interpretation of our results plausible, we address
potential endogeneity concerns in multiple ways. First, we use instrumental variables for SPI. Second,
we provide difference in differences estimations using exogenous shocks to SPI. Third, we use quasi-
natural experiments of changes in price informativeness of stocks. The first experiment involves
closures of analyst research departments and the second experiment uses additions to the S&P500 index.
Fourth, we control for firm fixed effects to minimize the possibility that a firm-invariant omitted
variable is affecting our results. Fifth, we use a moving average of SPI over the previous three years,
which helps alleviate simultaneity and reverse causality concerns. Our results are robust to these
approaches to address endogeneity concerns and hence provide strong support for the existence of a
causal effect of SPI on TFP.
One of our approaches to deal with endogeneity has important implications on its own. For a firm,
being added to the S&P 500 is viewed as an exogenous event as firms cannot directly get themselves
2