NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
RULES VERSUS DISCRETION:
ASSESSING THE DEBATE OVER THE CONDUCT OF MONETARY POLICY
John B. Taylor
Working Paper 24149
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24149
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2017
This paper was presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston’s 61st Economic Conference,
“Are Rules Made to be Broken? Discretion and Monetary Policy,” on October 13, 2017. I thank
the Boston Fed for asking me to assess the current state of the rules versus discretion debate at the
conference, and I thank Matthew Canzoneri, V.V. Chari, Geovanni Olivei, David Papell, Eric
Rosengren, and especially my discussant Donald Kohn for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by John B. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Rules Versus Discretion: Assessing the Debate Over the Conduct of Monetary Policy
John B. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 24149
December 2017
JEL No. E52,E58,F33
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews the state of the debate over rules versus discretion in monetary policy,
focusing on the role of economic research in this debate. It shows that proposals for policy rules
are largely based on empirical research using economic models. The models demonstrate the
advantages of a systematic approach to monetary policy, though proposed rules have changed and
generally improved over time. Rules derived from research help central bankers formulate
monetary policy as they operate in domestic financial markets and the global monetary system.
However, the line of demarcation between rules and discretion is difficult to establish in practice
which makes contrasting the two approaches difficult. History shows that research on policy
rules has had an impact on the practice of central banking. Economic research also shows that
while central bank independence is crucial for good monetary policy making, it has not been
enough to prevent swings away from rules-based policy, implying that policy-makers might
consider enhanced reporting about how rules are used in monetary policy. The paper also shows
that during the past year there has been an increased focus on policy rules in implementing
monetary policy in the United States.
John B. Taylor
Herbert Hoover Memorial Building
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
John.Taylor@stanford.edu

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction
1. How have the various rules suggested for monetary policy changed over time?
2. Have the reasons given for why we might want to tie a central banker's hands evolved?
3. How should we think about discretion, and what is the line demarcating a rules-based
policy and a discretionary policy when the latter already features a large systematic
component?
4. How is the practice of central banking being influenced by the current debate on the
optimal conduct of monetary policy?
5. How does the recently proposed Congressional legislation on conducting monetary policy
fit into this debate?
Conclusion
References
3

Introduction
The purpose of this paper is to assess the state of the debate about rules versus discretion
in monetary policy, an issue I have been researching for a long time and which now seems more
crucial than ever as monetary policy normalizes in the United States and other countries. I
organize the assessment along the helpful line of questions by which the staff of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston Fed defined the scope of the debate.1 These delve into (1) changes in
suggested policy rules over time, (2) the idea of tying the hands of central bankers, (3) the
difficulty of demarcating discretion, (4) the influence of policy rule research on the practice of
central banking and (5) the purpose of recently proposed legislation on monetary strategies.
1. How have the various rules suggested for monetary policy changed over time?
In addressing this question, it is important to note first that economists have been
suggesting monetary policy rules since the beginnings of economics. Adam Smith (1776) argued
in the Wealth of Nations that “a well-regulated paper-money” could improve economic growth
and stability in comparison with a pure commodity standard, as discussed by Asso and Leeson
(2012). Henry Thornton (1802) wrote in the early 1800s that a central bank should have the
responsibility for price level stability and should make the mechanism explicit and “not be a
matter of ongoing discretion,” as Robert Hetzel (1987) put it. David Ricardo (1824, pp.10-11)
wrote in his Plan for the Establishment of a National Bank that government ministers “could not
be safely entrusted with the power of issuing paper money” and advanced the idea of a rule-
guided central bank. Knut Wicksell (1907) and Irving Fisher (1920) in the early 1900s proposed
policy rules for the interest rate or the money supply to avoid the kinds of monetary induced
1 Conference Agenda, Session Details, https://www.bostonfed.org/discretionmonpol2017/agenda/
4