NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LABOR MARKET CONCENTRATION
José Azar
Ioana Marinescu
Marshall I. Steinbaum
Working Paper 24147
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24147
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2017, Revised February 2019
José Azar gratefully acknowledges the financial support of Secretaria d’Universitats I Recerca del
Departament d’Empresa I Coneixement de la Generalitat de Catalunya. Ref.2016 BP00358.
Marshall Steinbaum gratefully acknowledges the financial support of the Ewing Marion
Kauffman Foundation. We thank Jonathan Baker, Einer Elhauge, Hiba Hafiz, Larry Katz, Alan
Krueger and Michael Ransom for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24147.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by José Azar, Ioana Marinescu, and Marshall I. Steinbaum. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Labor Market Concentration
José Azar, Ioana Marinescu, and Marshall I. Steinbaum
NBER Working Paper No. 24147
December 2017, Revised February 2019
JEL No. J2,J3,L1,L4
ABSTRACT
A product market is concentrated when a few firms dominate the market. Similarly, a labor
market is concentrated when a few firms dominate hiring in the market. Using data from the
leading employment website CareerBuilder.com, we calculate labor market concentration for
over 8,000 geographic-occupational labor markets in the US. Based on the DOJ-FTC horizontal
merger guidelines, the average market is highly concentrated. Using a panel IV regression, we
show that going from the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile in concentration is associated with
a 17% decline in posted wages, suggesting that concentration increases labor market power.
José Azar Marshall I. Steinbaum
IESE Business School, Universidad de Navarra Roosevelt Institute,
Avinguda Perason 21 1789 Lanier Pl, NW Apt 1
08034 Barcelona, Spain Washington, DC 20009
jazar@iese.edu msteinbaum@gmail.com
Ioana Marinescu
University of Pennsylvania
School of Social Policy & Practice
3701 Locust Walk
Philadelphia PA, 19104-6214
and NBER
ioma@upenn.edu

1 Introduction
Thereisgrowingconcernaboutincreasingmarketconcentrationanditspotentialeffectson
theeconomy,includingincreasesinmarkups(DeLoeckerandEeckhout,2017)andthedecline
in the labor share (Autor et al., 2017; Barkai, 2016). Concerns about a lack of competition in
the labor market have also reached the policy debate (CEA, 2016). While interest in monop-
sony has grown in recent years (Ashenfelter, Farber and Ransom, 2010; Manning, 2011), firms’
abilitytopayworkerslessthantheirmarginalproductivityisnotgenerallytakenintoaccount
in antitrust practice. Antitrust enforcement is mainly concerned with consumer welfare, and
hence the impacts of a lack of competition on product prices, not wages. Antitrust enforcers
have historically paid little attention to labor market power, despite the labor economics liter-
ature finding that firms can have substantial market power in the labor market (Staiger, Spetz
andPhibbs,2010;Falch,2010;RansomandSims,2010;Matsudaira,2013). Thisempiricalwork
has generally focused on particular labor markets. Therefore it is not clear how widespread
labormarketpowertrulyis,andhowmuchitaffectswages.
In this paper, we approach this question by directly quantifying the level of labor mar-
ket concentration across a wide range of occupations and for almost every commuting zone
in the US. In a nutshell, we find that labor market concentration in the average market is
high, and higher concentration is associated with significantly lower posted wages. Given
high concentration, mergers have the potential to significantly increase labor market power.
This type of analysis could be used by antitrust agencies to assess whether mergers can create
anti-competitiveeffectsinlabormarkets.
WemeasurelabormarketconcentrationusingtraditionalmeasuressuchastheHerfindahl-
HirschmanIndex(HHI),whichhavetheadvantagethattheycanbecomparedwiththethresh-
oldsintheantitrustagencies’horizontalmergerguidelines(FTC/DOJ,2010). Thesamethresh-
olds apply to seller and buyer power, as the horizontal merger guidelines state that “To evalu-
ate whether a merger is likely to enhance market power on the buying side of the market, the
1

Agencies employ essentially the framework described above for evaluating whether a merger
is likely to enhance market power on the selling side of the market.” The buying side of the
marketreferstoinputsmarkets,includingthelabormarket. Therefore,amergercanbesaidto
enhancemarketpowerifitresultsinahighlevelofconcentrationinspecificlabormarkets.
Tocalculatemarketsharesingeographicandoccupationallabormarkets,weusedatafrom
CareerBuilder.com,thelargestonlinejobboardintheUnitedStates,matchingmillionsofwork-
ers and firms. We calculate vacancy shares and HHIs of market concentration for over 8,000
labor markets, defined by a combination of occupation at the SOC-6 level and commuting
zone. The occupations we cover include the most frequent occupations among CareerBuilder
vacancies, plus the top occupations in manufacturing and construction. We show that, on av-
erage, labor markets are highly concentrated: the average HHI is 3,157, which is above the
2,500 threshold for high concentration according to the Department of Justice / Federal Trade
Commission horizontal merger guidelines. Concentration varies by occupation and city, with
largercitiesbeinglessconcentrated.
Wedocumentanegativecorrelationbetweenlabormarketconcentrationandaverageposted
wages in that market. We then run both OLS and instrumental variables (IV) regressions of
posted wages on concentration at the market level (HHI), using quarterly panel data ranging
from 2010 to 2013. Our instrument for the IV specification is the inverse number of posting
employersinothergeographicmarketsforthesameoccupationinagivenquarter. Thisinstru-
ment uses variation in market concentration that is driven by national-level changes in occu-
pational hiring over time, and not by potentially endogenous changes in occupational hiring
withinaparticularlocalmarket.
The OLS and IV results are qualitatively similar, but quantitatively the instrumented esti-
mates are much larger. In the baseline IV specification, the elasticity of the real wage with re-
spect to the HHI is -0.127, while in the baseline OLS specification the elasticity is -0.038. Going
from the 25th to the 75th level of concentration decreases posted wages by 17% in the baseline
IVspecification, andby5%in thebaselineOLSspecifications. Theinstrumentwe usemaynot
2