NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECTS OF QUANTITATIVE EASING:
TAKING A CUE FROM TREASURY AUCTIONS
Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Walker Ray
Working Paper 24122
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24122
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2017, Revised March 2018
We thank Michael Bauer, Rhys Bidder, Michael Fleming, Ed Knotek, Matteo Maggiori, Eric
Swanson, Michael Weber, and seminar participants at Berkeley, New York Fed, Cleveland Fed,
San Francisco Fed, ASU, CMC, and Northwestern for comments on an earlier version of the
paper. We are grateful to Maxime Sauzet for excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Walker Ray. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effects of Quantitative Easing: Taking a Cue from Treasury Auctions
Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Walker Ray
NBER Working Paper No. 24122
December 2017, Revised March 2018
JEL No. E43,E44,E52
ABSTRACT
To understand the effects of large-scale asset purchase programs recently implemented by central
banks, we study how markets absorb large demand shocks for risk-free debt. Using high-
frequency identification, we exploit the structure of the primary market for U.S. Treasuries to
isolate demand shocks. These shocks are sizable, leading to large movements in Treasury yields
and impacting corporate borrowing rates. Informed by a preferred habitat model of the term
structure, we test for “local” demand effects and find evidence consistent with theoretical
predictions. Crucially, this local effect is strongest when financial markets are disrupted. Our
estimates are consistent with the view that quantitative easing worked mainly via market
segmentation, with a potentially limited role for other channels.
Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics
530 Evans Hall #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and IZA
and also NBER
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu
Walker Ray
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
walkerdray@econ.berkeley.edu

1 Introduction
Demand for safe assets, and U.S. Treasuries in particular, plays a central role in the
macro-financial landscape. To offset the negative effects of the recent financial crisis,
central banks have implemented various large scale asset purchases, representing a sharp
increase in demand for these assets. The most salient of these is the quantitative easing
(QE) programs carried out by the Federal Reserve, which involved two trillion dollars of
Treasury security purchases. Apart from the massive scale of these purchases, the Federal
Reserve disproportionately bought long-term government debt, thus departing from the
practice of having the distribution of its portfolio close to the distribution of outstanding
debt (Figure 1).
While evaluating the program, Ben Bernanke, the chair of the Fed at the time, ob-
served, “The problem with QE is it works in practice but it doesn’t work in theory.”
Indeed, QE was successful in reducing short- and long-term interest rates, but the mech-
anism behind this reaction is still not well understood. For example, standard macro-
financial models imply that the demand for assets such as Treasuries is determined solely
by economic agents’ intertemporal consumption decisions, which does not capture the
sources of demand shifts initiated by the Fed. Although the workhorse macroeconomic
models cannot readily explain the workings of the QE, several explanations have been put
forth. For instance, QE could be effective because it signaled to the markets that the Fed
is serious about keeping short-term interest rates low for a long time (forward guidance).
Or, perhaps the Fed exploited frictions (limited arbitrage and market segmentation) in
the financial markets by purchasing securities in a particular segment. Finally, by buying
assets on a massive scale, the Fed could signal a poor state of the economy which pushed
interest rates down (“Delphic” effect; see Campbell et al. (2012) for more details).
Future deployment of unconventional tools such as QE requires policymakers to move
beyond the “heat of the moment” policies, and hence a central question for policymaking
and academic research is which of these theories is the key channel. But given the paucity
of QE events, it has proven remarkably hard to provide clear empirical evidence for
each theory, as well as to assess the relative contributions of the proposed channels.
Indeed, many channels were likely active during QE rounds and the reactions to QE were
observed in a particular state of the economy, which potentially confounds identification
and interpretation.
The objective of this paper is to unbundle QE by focusing on one channel: market
segmentation and preferred habitat, which posits that certain investors have preferences
for specific maturities. Our approach is to identify shifts in private demand for Treasuries
that mimic QE, but are independent of the other channels discussed above. The key
mechanism through which market segmentation and preferred habitat forces operate is
not the source of demand shifts, but rather how marginal investors in the market for
1

Treasury debt absorb these demand shocks. Therefore, the best way to isolate and study
the preferred habitat channel of QE is to identify unexpected demand shifts that are
unrelated to other channels of QE.
Inordertoconstructdemandshockswiththeseproperties, weutilizethestructureand
timing of the primary market for Treasury securities. Similar to the empirical monetary
policy literature (e.g., Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), Gürkaynak et al. (2007), Gorod-
nichenko and Weber (2016)), we look at high-frequency (intraday) changes in prices of
Treasury futures in small windows around the close of Treasury auctions to identify un-
expected shocks to demand for Treasuries. The key for identification is that all of the
“supply” information (e.g. security characteristics such as the maturity, as well as the
amount of newly offered and outstanding securities) is known and priced in by the mar-
ket. For small enough windows around the close and release of the auction results, any
price changes are reactions to information regarding the demand for the Treasury securi-
ties from the given auction. We interpret these price changes as demand shocks. Utilizing
high-frequency changes in asset prices along with the timing of Treasury auctions in this
mannerallowsustoruleoutconfoundingfactorsandidentifyunexpectedshiftsindemand
in a model-free way.
Treasury auctions have a number of properties that can help us understand the work-
ings of QE. First, although the auctions are not as large as the QE rounds, the Treasury
sells about $150 billion in notes and bonds per month in recent years. Because the pri-
mary market for Treasuries is a convenient venue for investors who wish to purchase large
amounts of government securities, the release of Treasury auction results can reveal po-
tentially large shifts in demand for Treasuries. The surprise movements in the yields are
reasonably large: a typical (one standard deviation) shock is equivalent to a yield change
of roughly 2 basis points, which is much larger than similar changes on non-auction dates.
For comparison, Chodorow-Reich (2014) estimates that the first round of the QE pro-
gram in the U.S. cut Treasury rates (five-year maturity) by 9 basis points following the
announcement from Chairman Bernanke on December 1, 2008.
Second, we document that demand shocks are driven by institutional investors such
as foreign monetary authorities, investment funds, insurance companies and the like.
Moreover, these shocks are not driven by changes in expectations about inflation, output,
or other broad market conditions. Therefore, variation during Treasury auctions can help
us to isolate the effect of idiosyncratic purchases in specific asset segments on the level
and shape of the yield curve, which is difficult to achieve by examining only QE events.
Finally,insharpcontrasttoQEevents,Treasuryauctionsarefrequentandinformation
is available back to 1979. This gives us an opportunity for crisper inference and to study
state-dependence in the effect of targeted purchases of assets (e.g., crisis vs. non-crisis
states). Because QE events were both infrequent and confounded with a massive financial
crisis, having a long time series is instrumental for understanding how QE-like programs
2