NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE COSTS OF (SUB)SOVEREIGN DEFAULT RISK:
EVIDENCE FROM PUERTO RICO
Anusha Chari
Ryan Leary
Toan Phan
Working Paper 24108
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24108
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2017
We thank seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Board and conference participants at the
Interdisciplinary Sovereign Debt Research and Management Conference (DebtCon) in Geneva
for helpful comments and suggestions. We thank Mitu Gulati, Ju Hyun Kim, Violeta Sosa,
Christoph Trebesch, and John Walter for helpful discussions. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond or the Federal Reserve System.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Anusha Chari, Ryan Leary, and Toan Phan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Costs of (sub)Sovereign Default Risk: Evidence from Puerto Rico
Anusha Chari, Ryan Leary, and Toan Phan
NBER Working Paper No. 24108
December 2017
JEL No. F3,F4,G15,H2,H3
ABSTRACT
Puerto Rico’s unique characteristics as a U.S. territory allow us to examine the channels through
which (sub)sovereign default risk can have real effects on the macroeconomy. Post-2012, during
the period of increased default probabilities, the cointegrating relationship between real activity in
Puerto Rico and the U.S. mainland breaks down and Puerto Rico spirals into a significant decline.
We exploit the cross-industry variation in default risk exposure to identify the impact of changes
in default risk on employment. The evidence suggests that there are significantly higher
employment growth declines in government demand and external finance dependent industries.
An additional real effect of default anticipation is that heightened default risk Granger causes
Puerto Rico’s austerity measures. An event study analysis using government bond yields and
stock returns confirms that news of increased default risk increases the cost of capital for the
Puerto Rican government and for publicly traded Puerto Rican firms.
Anusha Chari Toan Phan
301 Gardner Hall The Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
CB#3305, Department of Economics 701 E Byrd St.
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Richmond, VA 23219
Chapel Hill, NC 27599 and University of North Carolina Chapel Hill
and NBER toanvphan@gmail.com
achari@unc.edu
Ryan Leary
CB #3305, Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill NC 27599
rleary@live.unc.edu
An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24108

1 Introduction
The global financial crisis and the subsequent debt crises highlight the heightened levels
of sovereign default risk across the developed world. A large literature in international
economics investigates the costs of sovereign default and default risk.1 This paper uses
Puerto Rico’s debt crisis to develop a novel identification strategy to extract the real costs
of (sub)sovereign default risk.
For most countries, it is difficult to isolate changes in sovereign default risk from changes
in banking and/or currency crises risk or from the impact of government interventions in-
volving private debt contracts. For example, in the most widely studied case of default of
Argentina in 2001, the sovereign default crisis was inextricably linked to a concurrent bank-
ing and currency crisis (Perez (2015); Hébert and Schreger (2017)). In the case of Greece,
the government intervened in the financial system, declaring a bank holiday, limiting deposit
withdrawals, and imposing controls on capital outflows (Arellano et al. (2015)). Although
Greece remained on the euro, the possibility of exit constituted ex-ante currency crisis risk.
Several factors make the case of Puerto Rico unique. First, as a U.S. territory, Puerto
Rico cannot by law abandon the U.S. dollar, effectively eliminating currency crisis risk (U.S.
Constitution, Article I, Sections 8 and 10). Second, Puerto Rico’s banks are protected by
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and comprise a small share of the U.S. banking
sector, thereby preventing bank runs and systemic financial risk. Further, according to the
PuertoRicoFederalRelationsActof1950andtheContractsClauseoftheU.S.Constitution,
the Puerto Rican government does not have the legal authority to intervene in the banking
system to limit deposit withdrawals or impose capital controls. The risk of a banking crisis
is therefore de minimis. Third, Puerto Rican data standards conform to the U.S. mainland.
An important advantage is that Puerto Rican data on macro-indicators such as employment
are available at higher frequencies and disaggregated at the industry level. Puerto Rico’s
unique characteristics allow us to examine the channels through which (sub)sovereign default
can have real effects on the macroeconomy.
We argue that Puerto Rico embodies a set of attributes that make it possible to treat it
as an interesting (sub)sovereign. First, it has a constitution, and the ability to tax and create
laws on local matters. In almost all of these aspects, Puerto Rico is very much a sovereign
akin to U.S. states. However, in some respects it is more sovereign than U.S. states. For
example, its subsidiaries, such as municipalities, cannot file for bankruptcy under Chapter 9
of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. Legally, while it is less clear what kind of sovereign immunity
1For example, Borensztein and Panizza (2009), Yeyati and Panizza (2011), Cruces and Trebesch (2013),
Hébert and Schreger (2017). The related literature provides a more comprehensive list.
2

Puerto Rico has, it likely has some (Gulati and Weidemaier (2016)). Given its unique status
as a U.S. territory, and similar to sovereign nations, the path to restructuring Puerto Rico’s
debt is therefore particularly unclear.
There are of course some ways in which Puerto Rico is not quite as sovereign as, for
example, Greece. While local Puerto Rican laws govern Puerto Rico’s bonds, Puerto Rico
cannot-in contrast to Greece-quite so easily change its laws to reduce its debt. While it
may have some latitude, the Contracts Clause provides U.S. constitutional protection on
government interference with private contracts that constrain it more than the European
laws perhaps constrained Greece (Commonwealth of Puerto Rico v. Franklin California
Tax-Free Trust et al., October 2015). In addition, enforcement is a real possibility in the
caseofPuertoRico,whereunpaidcreditorscangotocourtwitharealpossibilityofobtaining
recovery, assuming there are some assets. Finally, while there is no possibility of an IMF
bailout, there is always the possibility of a federal bailout, which could perhaps be much
more significant.2
Specifically, this paper examines the real effects of anticipation of Puerto Rico’s default.
First, using activity for the mainland U.S. as a control, we investigate whether the dete-
rioration in Puerto Rico’s credit rating and credit spreads that occurred after 2012 led to
a significant divergence in Puerto Rico’s real economic activity from the rest of the U.S..
Second, we use an approach similar to Rajan and Zingales (1998) to establish that increased
default risk reduces employment in industries that are ex ante more exposed or sensitive to
a default event due to greater dependence on external finance. We use this methodology to
address the concern that declines in economic activity may drive increased default proba-
bility and thus confound identification of the effect of default probability on employment.
Similarly, we investigate whether increased default risk reduces employment in industries
more exposed to government demand.
Third, we use an event study framework to investigate whether changes in Puerto Rico’s
credit risk affected yields on government debt or the stock returns of public Puerto Rican
firms. We identify changes in Puerto Rico’s credit risk using ratings actions on Puerto Rican
debt and legal events related to the legal rights of Puerto Rican government entities to
restructure their debt. Standard event-study assumptions allow us to causally identify the
effect of changes in sovereign risk on the cost of capital.
The main findings are as follows. First, while the U.S.’ private employment, economic
activity, and investment spending improved significantly post-2012, Puerto Rico’s did not.
Specifically, difference-in-difference estimates suggest that average quarterly private employ-
ment growth, economic activity growth, and investment spending growth were significantly
2WearegratefultoMituGulatiforclarifyingmanyofthesedetailsaboutPuertoRico’ssovereignstatus.
3