NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AUGMENTING MARKETS WITH MECHANISMS
Samuel Antill
Darrell Duffie
Working Paper 24146
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24146
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2017
We are grateful for expert research assistance from Yu Wu, for very helpful conversations with
Bruno Biais, Piotr Dworczak, Romans Pancs, and Haoxiang Zhu, for useful feedback from
Stanford faculty attending a preliminary presentation of this work on December 8, 2017, for
discussions of this paper by Kerry Back at the NBER Asset Pricing Conference, Anton Tsoy at
the 2018 Western Finance Association Meeting, and Yunzhi Hu at the NSF/CEME
Decentralization Conference, as well as commenters at the Penn Market Design Conference, the
Erasmus Liquidity Conference, the 2018 North American Summer Meeting of the Econometric
Society and seminar presentations at ITAM, Stanford University, NYU, Harvard University,
Johns Hopkins University, Goethe University, Cambridge University, the University of Chicago,
and MIT. We are also grateful to anonymous referees for very helpful expositional suggestions.
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate
Research Fellowship under Grant No. DGE-114747. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2017 by Samuel Antill and Darrell Duffie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Augmenting Markets with Mechanisms
Samuel Antill and Darrell Duffie
NBER Working Paper No. 24146
December 2017, Revised June 2020
JEL No. D47,D82,G14
ABSTRACT
We explain how the common practice of size-discovery trade detracts from overall financial
market efficiency. At each of a series of size-discovery sessions, traders report their desired
trades, generating allocations of the asset and cash that rely on the most recent exchange price.
Traders can thus mitigate exchange price impacts by waiting for size-discovery sessions. This
waiting causes socially costly delays in the rebalancing of asset positions across traders. As the
frequency of size-discovery sessions is increased, exchange market depth is further lowered by
the traders' reduced incentive to bid aggressively on the exchange, further delaying the
rebalancing of positions, and more than offsetting the gains from trade that occur at each of the
size-discovery sessions.
Samuel Antill
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305-7298
santill@stanford.edu
Darrell Duffie
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-7298
and NBER
duffie@stanford.edu

1 Introduction
In financial markets, investors with large trading interests recognize that their trades can move
the market-clearing price against themselves. These investors strategically avoid price-impact
costs by executing large orders slowly. The result is that, in equilibrium, the asset is reallocated
across traders more gradually than is socially optimal. This concern is exacerbated, under
post-crisis regulations, by the higher costs for intermediary dealer banks of absorbing large
customer orders onto their own balance sheets. Trade venue operators have introduced size-
discoverysessionsthatallowmarketparticipantstolowertheirprice-impactcostsbyusingtrade
protocols such as workups and dark pools that set the terms of trade based on the fixed price
set on the exchange. We show that, at least in our model setting, overall allocative efficiency is
reduced by augmenting price-discovery exchange markets with size discovery. This is true even
for size-discovery mechanism designs that efficiently reallocate the asset at every session.
It is already well understood from the work of Vayanos (1999), Rostek and Weretka (2015),
and Du and Zhu (2017) that traders bid less aggressively in a financial market in order to
strategically lower their price impacts, causing socially costly delays in rebalancing positions
across traders.1 In our model, price discovery occurs on an exchange that is modeled as a
sequential-double-auction market, along the lines of Du and Zhu (2017). Each auction is a
demand-function submission game, in the sense of Wilson (1979) and Klemperer and Meyer
(1989).
Weexaminethewelfareimplicationsofaugmentingexchangetradewithsize-discoverytrade.
At each of a sequence of size-discovery sessions, as in common practice, the terms of trade are
based on the most recent exchange price. Because this price is frozen for the purpose of size-
discovery trade, price impacts are avoided. As an example, we show that size discovery can
be based on a simple dark-pool mechanism that uses the most recent exchange price. We also
provide a non-linear strategy-proof mechanism design for size discovery.2
At each size-discovery session, traders are induced by the mechanism design to truthfully
report their excess inventories of the asset to the platform operator, which then allocates trans-
fers of cash and the asset. In equilibrium, each session is ex-post individually rational and
incentive compatible, budget balanced, and reallocates the asset perfectly efficiently among
traders. This seeming contradiction of Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983) is possible because of
the information available to the size-discovery platform operator through the prior equilibrium
1Sannikov and Skrzypacz (2016) study a similar setting with heterogeneous traders. They also consider
mechanismdesign,butsolelyasananalyticaldevicetosolvefortheequilibriumofaconditionaldouble-auction
model.
2Specifically, our results hold for a class of non-linear mechanisms that contains the Vickrey-Clarke-Groves
mechanism associated with the equilibrium value functions.
1

exchange price. As the mean frequency of size-discovery sessions is increased, traders reduce
their exchange order submissions, relying more on upcoming size-discovery sessions because of
their lower price-impact costs. Exchange market depth is therefore reduced, further increasing
the incentive to shade exchange order submissions. Traders also shade their exchange order
submissions in order to reduce the impact of their exchange trades on the expected price that
will be used to set the terms of trade at the next size-discovery session. Overall, the significant
expected gains from trade that occur at each size-discovery session are more than offset by the
effect of reduced exchange trading. Indeed, every trader is made worse off, ex ante, by the pres-
ence of size discovery. If, however, a size-discovery venue is available, traders will participate
whenever a size-discovery session is held.
Even if the size-discovery mechanism designer has enough information to avoid reliance on
exchange prices to set the terms of trade, we show that welfare cannot be improved by adding
size discovery, except for a size-discovery session that is run before the exchange market opens,
as shown by Duffie and Zhu (2017), who analyzed workup, a form of size discovery that is
heavily used in dealer-dominated markets, such as those for treasuries and swaps. Duffie and
Zhu (2017) also showed that workup is not a fully efficient form of size discovery because traders
under-report the sizes of their positions (or equivalently, under-submit trade requests), relative
tosociallyoptimalordersubmissions,duetoawinner’s-curseeffect. Asamechanismdesign,the
workup protocol places strong restrictions on the allowable forms of messages and transfers.
Our modeled size-discovery trade protocols are based on mechanism designs that reallocate
the asset with maximal efficiency. After each size-discovery session, however, traders’ asset
inventories are hit by new supply and demand shocks over time that cause a desire for further
rebalancing.
In our model, augmenting the exchange market with size-discovery sessions has no social
value, because the allocative benefits of size-discovery sessions are more than fully offset by a
corresponding reduction in gains from trade on the exchange market. While one might imagine
that this relatively discouraging result is caused by a size-discovery mechanism design that is
“tooefficient,” weshowthatoverallallocativeefficiencyisnothelpedbyimpairingtheefficiency
of the size-discovery protocol (at least within a given class of mechanisms) in order to better
support exchange market depth and trade volumes.
For tractability, we assume that traders have symmetric quadratic inventory holding costs
and that size-discovery sessions are held at Poisson arrival times. Despite this narrow model
parameterization, the underlying intuition for our welfare result seems relatively general. It
is natural that size discovery increases the incentive of individual traders to delay socially
beneficial exchange trading. Traders wait for size-discovery sessions in order to mitigate their
price-impact costs. But a price impact is merely a wealth transfer, not a welfare cost. Thus,
2