NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE FRAGILITY OF MARKET RISK INSURANCE
Ralph Koijen
Motohiro Yogo
Working Paper 24182
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24182
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2018, Revised March 2022
A.M. Best Company, Morningstar, and the NAIC own the copyright to their respective data,
which we use with permission under their license agreements with Princeton University. This
paper is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation grant 1727049 and the
Julis-Rabinowitz Center for Public Policy and Finance. Koijen acknowledges financial support
from the Center for Research in Security Prices at the University of Chicago. We thank Adam Xu
and Zhen Ye for assistance on constructing data from Morningstar Annuity Intelligence. We
thank Don Noh, Jihong Song, and Haiyue Yu for proofreading. For comments and discussions,
we thank Naoki Aizawa, Mark Flannery, Victoria Ivashina, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Emanuel
M¨onch, Borghan Narajabad, Theo Nijman, Anna Paulson, Richard Rosen, and Donghwa Shin.
We also thank seminar participants at Banque de France; Boston University; Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis; Federal Reserve Board; Michigan State University; NYU; Ohio State
University; Princeton University; Temple University; UC Berkeley; UCLA; University of
Chicago; University of Cincinnati; University of Delaware; University of Maryland; University
of Michigan; University of Nebraska; UNC; University of South Carolina; UT Austin; UVA;
Derivatives and Volatility 2017: The State of the Art; the 2017 DNB/Riksbank Macroprudential
Conference; the 2017 SITE Workshop on Financial Regulation; the 2017 NBER Conference on
Financial Market Regulation; the 2017 ICPM-Netspar Discussion Forum; the 2017 IMF
Conference on Monetary, Financial, and Prudential Policy Interactions in the Post-Crisis World;
the 2017 NBER Insurance Meeting; and the 2018 Macroeconomics of Pensions and Retirement
Financing Conference. This paper is based upon work supported by the National Science
Foundation under grant 1727049 and the Julis-Rabinowitz Center for Public Policy and Finance.
Koijen acknowledges financial support from the Center for Research in Security Prices at the
University of Chicago and the Fama Research Fund at the University of Chicago Booth School of
Business. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose as defined by the Journal of
Finance’s disclosure policy. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Ralph Koijen and Motohiro Yogo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Fragility of Market Risk Insurance
Ralph Koijen and Motohiro Yogo
NBER Working Paper No. 24182
January 2018, Revised March 2022
JEL No. G22,G32
ABSTRACT
Variable annuities, which package mutual funds with minimum return guarantees over long
horizons, accounted for $1.5 trillion or 35% of U.S. life insurer liabilities in 2015. Sales
decreased and fees increased during the global financial crisis, and insurers made guarantees less
generous or stopped offering guarantees to reduce risk exposure. These effects persist in the low
interest rate environment after the global financial crisis, and variable annuity insurers suffered
large equity drawdowns during the COVID-19 crisis. We develop and estimate a model of
insurance markets in which financial frictions and market power determine pricing, contract
characteristics, and the degree of market completeness.
Ralph Koijen
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Ralph.koijen@chicagobooth.edu
Motohiro Yogo
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
myogo@princeton.edu

The traditional role of life insurers is to insure idiosyncratic risk through products like life
annuities, life insurance, and health insurance. With the secular decline of private defined
benefit and government pension plans around the world, life insurers are increasingly taking
ontheroleofinsuring marketriskthroughminimumreturnguarantees. IntheUnitedStates,
life insurers sell retail financial products called variable annuities that package mutual funds
with minimum return guarantees over long horizons. Variable annuities have grown to be the
largest category of life insurer liabilities, larger than fixed annuities and life insurance, and
accountedfor$1.5trillionor35%ofU.S.lifeinsurerliabilitiesin2015. Variableannuitiesalso
represent an important share of the mutual fund sector because the underlying investments
are mutual funds.
Thelargesize ofthevariableannuity market reflects itsimportanceforhouseholdwelfare.
In theory, minimum return guarantees could facilitate efficient risk sharing across heteroge-
neous agents (Dumas (1989);Chan and Kogan(2002)) or overlapping generations (Allen and
Gale (1997); Ball and Mankiw (2007)). Investors cannot easily replicate minimum return
guarantees because traded options have shorter maturity and model uncertainty exposes in-
vestors to basis risk in a dynamic hedging program. Therefore, insurers complete a missing
market for long-maturity options by offering minimum return guarantees over long horizons.
From the insurers’ perspective, minimum return guarantees are difficult to price and
hedge because traded options have shorter maturities. Imperfect hedging leads to risk mis-
match that stresses risk-based capital when the valuation of existing liabilities increases with
a falling stock market, falling interest rates, or rising volatility. During the global financial
crisis, many insurers including Aegon, Allianz, AXA, Delaware Life, John Hancock, and
Voya suffered large increases in variable annuity reserves ranging from 27% to 125% of to-
tal equity. In June 2009, Hartford was bailed out by the Troubled Asset Relief Program
because of significant losses on their variable annuity business.1 Risk mismatch between
general account assets and minimum return guarantees leads to negative duration and neg-
ative convexity for the overall balance sheet, which pose a challenge for insurers in the low
interest rate environment after the global financial crisis. Consequently, the stock returns
of U.S. life insurers have significantly negative exposure to long-term bond returns after the
global financial crisis (Hartley, Paulson, and Rosen (2017)).
The COVID-19 crisis has again exposed the fragility of variable annuity insurers, which
suffered among the lowest stock returns in the overall financial sector that includes banking.
From January 2 to April 2, 2020, the equity drawdown, which is the maximum decrease
1Other examples of risk mismatch due to minimum return guarantees include the financial distress of
Japanese life insurers in the 1990s (Kashyap (2002)) and the failure of Equitable Life in 2000 (Roberts
(2012)).
2

in the cumulative stock return, was −51% for a value-weighted portfolio of U.S. variable
annuity insurers. AIG, Brighthouse Financial, and Lincoln National suffered the largest
equity drawdowns, each exceeding −65%. The equity drawdown on variable annuity insurers
was substantially larger than −34% for the S&P 500 index and −43% for the subset of
financial sector stocks in the S&P 500 index. To put the pain of variable annuity insurers
into perspective, the equity drawdown on the airline industry was −62%.
Given their size and potential risk, variable annuities are essential to understanding the
insurance sector more broadly. To this end, we construct a new and comprehensive panel
data set on the variable annuity market at the contract level. The data contain quarterly
sales, fees, and contract characteristics from 1999:1 (first quarter) to 2015:4 (fourth quarter).
We combine these data with the insurers’ annual financial statements from 2005 to 2015,
which contain information about the value of variable annuity liabilities and the share of
these liabilities that are reinsured. The data provide a detailed account of how the variable
annuity market has evolved over time as the changing valuation and risk exposure of existing
liabilities affected the insurers’ financial strength.
Quarterlysalesofvariableannuities grewrobustlyfrom$22billionin2005:1to$41billion
in 2007:4 and then decreased to $27 billion in 2009:2. At the same time, the average annual
fee on contracts with minimum return guarantees increased from 2.04% of account value
in 2007:4 to 2.38% in 2009:2, suggesting an important role for a supply shock. After the
globalfinancialcrisis, insurers madetheminimum returnguarantees less generousorstopped
offering guarantees to reduce risk exposure. The share of contracts with minimum return
guarantees decreased from 36% in 2007:4 to 20% in 2011:4. In the cross section of insurers,
sales decreased more for insurers that suffered larger increases in the valuation of existing
liabilities. These insurers moved their variable annuity reserves off balance sheet through
reinsurance, consistent with the importance of a risk-based capital constraint (Koijen and
Yogo (2016)).
To interpret this evidence, we develop a model of insurance markets in which financial
frictions and market power are important determinants of pricing, contract characteristics,
and the degree of market completeness. Insurers compete in an oligopolistic market by
choosing the fee and the rollup rate, where the latter is a key contract characteristic that
is equivalent to the strike price of a put option. Required capital increases in the rollup
rate because of a risk-based capital or an economic risk constraint. An adverse shock to
the valuation of existing liabilities increases the shadow cost of capital and drives up the
marginal cost of issuing contracts. The insurer reduces risk exposure by not only raising the
fee but also by reducing the rollup rate. When the shadow cost of capital is sufficiently high,
the insurer stops offering minimum return guarantees to avoid additional risk exposure.
3