NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE DEATH OF A REGULATOR:
STRICT SUPERVISION, BANK LENDING, AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY
João Granja
Christian Leuz
Working Paper 24168
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24168
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2017, revised May 2024
We thank our anonymous referee, Aytekin Ertan, Henry Eyring, Anil Kashyap, Anya
Kleymenova, Randy Kroszner, David Lucca (discussant), Daniel Paravisini, Hester Peirce, Raghu
Rajan, Thomas Rauter, Stephen Ryan, Amit Seru (discussant), Andrei Shleifer, Tobias Troeger
(discussant), and workshop participants at the AFA, Chicago Booth, Duke, ETH-NYU-SAFE
Law & Banking/Finance Conference, FDIC, IESE, Imperial College, LSE, NBER Corporate
Finance meetings, NYU, Rice, Vanderbilt, University of Texas at Dallas, and University of
Washington for their helpful comments and suggestions. We thank Tom Kim, Igor Kuznetsov,
Maximillian Muhn, Fabian Nagel, Thomas Rauter, and Steven Vanhaverbeke for their excellent
research assistance. This paper also benefited from a fellow visit by Christian Leuz at the Center
for Advanced Studies on the Foundations of Law and Finance funded by the German Research
Foundation (DFG). João Granja gratefully acknowledges support by the Jane and Basil Vasiliou
Faculty Research Fund at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by João Granja and Christian Leuz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Death of a Regulator: Strict Supervision, Bank Lending, and Business Activity
João Granja and Christian Leuz
NBER Working Paper No. 24168
December 2017, revised May 2024
JEL No. E44,E51,G21,G28,G32,G38,K22,K23,L51,M41,M48
ABSTRACT
We exploit the extinction of the thrift supervisor (OTS) to analyze the effects of supervision on
bank lending and bank management. We first show that the OTS replacement resulted in stricter
supervision of former OTS banks. Next, we analyze the ensuing lending effects and show that
former OTS banks on average increase small business lending by roughly 10 percent. This
increase is concentrated in well-capitalized banks and especially in banks that changed
management practices following the supervisory transition. These findings suggest that stricter
supervision operates not only through the enforcement of loss recognition and capital adequacy,
but can also act as a catalyst for operational changes that correct deficiencies in bank
management and lending practices, which in turn increase lending.
João Granja
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637-1610
joaogranja@chicagobooth.edu
Christian Leuz
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637-1610
and NBER
cleuz@chicagobooth.edu

1 Introduction
A recurring story line in banking crises is the public backlash against bank supervisors for
their failure to take prompt and decisive action to unearth and correct problems of weak banks.
These allegations often play an important role in justifying policy interventions that overhaul
the regulatory oversight of the banking system, including tighter rules and stricter supervision
of financial institutions (e.g., Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of
1989; Dodd-Frank Act of 2010). Despite the importance of such interventions, we have limited
evidence on the economic trade-offs associated with reforms that aim to limit regulatory
forbearance and promote stricter bank supervision.
In this paper, we study a reform of the U.S. banking system that forced a large number of
banks to transition from a lenient to a stricter supervisor. Stricter supervision with respect
to loss recognition could put pressure on banks’ balance sheets, and in turn, force them to
cut lending (e.g., Agarwal, Lucca, Seru, and Trebbi (2014)). However, the role of supervision
is not limited to enforcing loss recognition rules and ensuring capital adequacy. To guarantee
that banks operate in a safe and sound manner, supervisors perform other complex tasks such
as evaluating the quality of banks’ information and risk management systems, as well as their
loan management. We posit that a stricter supervisor not only enforces loss recognition more
forcefully but also evaluates banks’ operations more rigorously and is less likely to accept
poor management or lending practices. Thus, strict supervision could prompt banks to make
operational changes that correct lingering deficiencies. It could play the role of a “catalyst
for change” that ignites improvements to bank management and lending practices, which in
turn could even increase credit supply, especially for loans that require greater sophistication.
Thus, it is unclear ex-ante what the economic consequences of stricter supervision for lending
may be.
Effective July 2011, Title III of Dodd Frank abolished the Office of Thrift Supervision
(OTS) and transferred its powers to the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). This regulatory change was prompted
in part by the view that lax prudential supervision by the OTS played a significant role in
the failures of Washington Mutual, IndyMac, and Countrywide.1 The extinction of the OTS
was a major change in prudential supervision in the U.S. banking system, affecting thrifts,
a group of banks that accounted for roughly 10% of all depository institutions and 8.5% of
all U.S. deposits. It applied to banks across a wide spectrum of capital and liquidity levels,
operating in different geographies.2
1SeeCommitteeonHomelandSecurityandGovernmentalAffairs(2011)fordetailsontheturfwarbetween
FDIC and OTS and evidence on the regulatory failure and leniency of the OTS.
2Thrifts, also called Savings (& Loans) banks, have charters that require them to invest 65 percent of
1

The extinction of the OTS is a unique opportunity to examine how bank supervision shapes
credit supply. First, the resulting change in bank supervision is economically meaningful and
its timing is well defined. Second, in this setting, it is possible to distinguish the effects of
stricter supervision from the effects of economic shocks on local loan demand and business
activity because former OTS banks operate in the same areas as other commercial banks
whose supervisor did not change. Third, the transition is imposed on all thrifts, irrespective
of their financial condition. Moreover, charter switches before and after the OTS extinction
are rare and do not influence our analysis. Despite these advantages, the setting also comes
with challenges. The biggest one is that the residential mortgage market was the epicenter of
the financial crisis and, at the same time, represents the key lending area for thrifts. Thus, it
is important to control for crisis-induced changes in lending and thrift business models.
We begin our analysis by documenting that the extinction of the OTS and subsequent
supervisory transition of former OTS banks to the OCC and the FDIC in 2011 was followed by
significant changes at former OTS banks. We find that, following the OTS extinction, former
OTS banks were more likely to recognize losses on their portfolios of loans. The recognition of
losses on troubled loans is an important area of scrutiny in any supervisory exam and hence
our evidence illustrates that the new supervisors took a harder line than their predecessors
in enforcing loan loss recognition rules. Importantly, supervisory exams are not limited
to loan loss recognition; they should also identify other deficiencies in bank management.
Thus, stricter supervision might scrutinize thrifts’ existing management practices, prompting
improvements in core areas, such as loan and credit risk management. This could lead to the
adoption of alternative or more diversified lending strategies.
To explore such effects, we study formal supervisory agreements written by the OTS, the
OCC and the FDIC. We find that agreements between the new supervisors and former OTS
banks are more likely to include stipulations requesting changes in the risk rating and stress
testing system, improvements to collateral monitoring and borrower information collection,
and even requests to study or ensure the qualifications of senior management. In line with
this evidence, we document an increase in board turnover and executive exits at former OTS
banks following the OTS extinction. Furthermore, our findings reveal evidence of increased
non-interest expenses, aligning with expenditures on new lending technologies, information
systems, and consulting. Collectively, our findings suggest that the supervisory transition
prompted thrifts to make far-reaching changes, which have not been previously documented.
their assets in qualified thrift investments, which mostly comprise residential mortgages. The charters of
other commercial banks are usually unencumbered by such restrictions but are often subject to other state
and federal regulation. Due to their special charter, thrifts have historically been supervised by a distinct
regulator. The OTS was created in the aftermath of the S&L crisis to replace the Federal Home Loan Bank
Board (FHLBB) as the primary regulator of the thrift industry. In the Internet Appendix A, we provide
further historical background on thrifts and the rise and fall of the OTS.
2