NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ARE LEMONS SOLD FIRST? DYNAMIC SIGNALING IN THE MORTGAGE MARKET
Manuel Adelino
Kristopher Gerardi
Barney Hartman-Glaser
Working Paper 24180
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24180
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2018, revised March 2018
We thank the editor Toni Whited, the anonymous referee, Darren Aiello, Brendan Daley, Stuart
Gabriel, Brett Green, Joseph Mason, Christopher Palmer, Anthony Pennington-Cross, Tim
Riddiough, Hongfei Tang, Nancy Wallace, Paul Willen, Basil Williams, James Vickery,
conference participants at the AFA, AREUEA National Conference, Annual CEPR Symposium,
CHUM, FIRS, and NBER Corporate Finance, and seminar participants at Columbia, Duke, MIT
(Sloan), Minnesota (Carlson), Northwestern (Kellogg), Pittsburgh (Katz), Virginia (McIntire),
University of Colorado at Boulder, UNC Charlotte, and Wharton for their helpful comments and
discussions. We thank Valeria Vargas-Sejas for her outstanding research assistance. This paper
was previously circulated under the title “A Test of Dynamic Signaling Models: Evidence from
Mortgage Securitization.” The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Manuel Adelino, Kristopher Gerardi, and Barney Hartman-Glaser. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Are Lemons Sold First? Dynamic Signaling in the Mortgage Market
Manuel Adelino, Kristopher Gerardi, and Barney Hartman-Glaser
NBER Working Paper No. 24180
January 2018, revised March 2018
JEL No. D0,G0
ABSTRACT
A central result in the theory of adverse selection in asset markets is that informed sellers can
signal quality and obtain higher prices by delaying trade. This paper provides some of the first
evidence of a signaling mechanism through trade delays using the residential mortgage market as
a laboratory. We find a strong relationship between mortgage performance and time to sale for
privately securitized mortgages. Additionally, deals made up of more seasoned mortgages are
sold at lower yields. These effects are strongest in the ”Alt-A” segment of the market, where
mortgages are often sold with incomplete hard information, and in cases where the originator and
the issuer of mortgage-backed securities are not affiliated.
Manuel Adelino Barney Hartman-Glaser
Fuqua School of Business University of California at Los Angeles
Duke University 110 Westwood Plaza
100 Fuqua Drive Suite C421
Durham, NC 27708 Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER barney.hartman-glaser@anderson.ucla.edu
manuel.adelino@duke.edu
Kristopher Gerardi
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
1000 Peachtree St. NE
Atlanta, GA 30309
kristopher.gerardi@atl.frb.org

1. Introduction
One of the most widely studied market settings in economics is that of a seller with private in-
formation about the quality of an asset facing less-informed buyers. In this kind of setting with
adverse selection, sellers can take actions to reveal their private information, as in the classic sig-
naling model of Spence (1973). This notion of signaling has been successfully applied in theoretical
models of financial markets to explain a variety of phenomena, from the optimality of debt (De-
Marzo and Duffie (1999)) to the temporary freezing of asset markets (Daley and Green (2012)).
While many commonly observed behaviors are consistent with signaling, such as the attainment
of education or the propensity of underwriters to retain equity in an initial public offering, there
is little empirical evidence that agents actually engage in these activities to signal rather than
for other reasons. The fundamental challenge for a test of signaling theory is that it requires the
econometriciantoobserveagents’privateinformationorhidden“types.” Weaddressthischallenge
by using unique features of the U.S. mortgage market.
Wefirstpresentasimplemodelofmortgagesalestomotivateourempiricalwork. Inthemodel,
sellers privately observe mortgage quality, and sellers of high-quality mortgages have a lower cost
of waiting because they face lower probabilities of default. We assume that default is publicly
observable and eliminates the possibility of a sale. A separating equilibrium emerges in which the
time to sale of a mortgage increases in quality, a relationship often referred to as the skimming
property. Many recent studies (e.g., Fuchs and Skrzypacz (2013) and Fuchs et al. (2015)) find that
the skimming property can emerge in dynamic adverse selection models of financial markets, and a
number of others (e.g., Daley and Green (2012) and Daley and Green (2016)) find that the timing
of sales in asset markets can serve as a signal of quality. More broadly, the idea that the timing of
actions can reveal private information is a central prediction of many adverse selection models.1
Themortgagemarketiswell-suitedfortestingtheskimmingpropertyand,moregenerally,trade
delay as a signal of quality. Mortgages are durable assets characterized by an objective measure
of quality based on the probability of default. Detailed micro data are available to investors, orig-
inators, and the econometrician on the characteristics of borrowers and mortgage contracts, which
together serve as a good proxy for observable mortgage quality at the time of sale. Crucially, while
future default is not known at the time of sale, it is known to the econometrician ex-post. These
ex-post outcomesare(i)unknowntothebuyer(ii)knowntotheeconometricianand(iii)correlated
with unobserved heterogeneity in asset quality known privately by the seller, as previous studies
of the mortgage market show (Demiroglu and James (2012a), Jiang et al. (2014b), Griffin and
Maturana (2016), and Piskorski et al. (2015)). The most relevant type of private information that
originators collect is knowledge about borrower ability to repay, including future income prospects
1SeealsoNoldekeandVanDamme(1990),Swinkels(1999),JanssenandRoy(2002),GrenadierandWang(2005),
Kremer and Skrzypacz (2007), Guerrieri et al. (2010), Grenadier and Malenko (2011), Chang (2014), and Williams
(2016).
2

or stability of employment, or even measures of liquid wealth, none of which are included in data
sources available to investors. The distinction between observable and unobservable characteristics
is central to our tests and is one of the main reasons that adverse selection models are particularly
difficult to test empirically. In fact, most models predict that assets that are observably better
should trade faster, not slower.
This paper uses data on mortgages securitized in the non-agency, private-label securitization
(PLS) market, which was very active in the middle of the last decade. In this market, investors
in mortgage-backed securities (the buyers) purchased claims on large portfolios of mortgages from
originators (the sellers). We measure delay of trade from the creation of the asset (the date of
origination of each mortgage) up to the issuance of the securities that ultimately receive cash flows
on those mortgages. The fact that we have a natural starting point for measuring time to sale is
another advantage of using mortgages as a laboratory. While there is a chain of intermediaries
between the originators of mortgages and the ultimate buyers of the securities (as Stanton et al.
(2014) and Stanton et al. (2015) show), this in general would bias our tests against effectively
capturing the role of signaling in transmitting information. We are also able to (imperfectly)
observe the prices at which mortgage-backed securities were sold. While most of our analysis
focuses on trade delays and mortgage quality, the combination of the availability of observed and
unobserved quality measures and prices is rarely available in other contexts.
We find a negative relation between time to sale and the component of mortgage performance
that is not explained by observable mortgage characteristics. After conditioning on underwriting
characteristics, PLS loans sold five months or more after origination are approximately 5 percent-
age points less likely to default relative to loans sold immediately after origination. This is an
economically meaningful difference, as it is approximately 30% of the average default rate in our
sample (16%).
Interpreting these magnitudes through the lens of our model indicates that adverse selection
is an economically meaningful friction in this market. The difference between the best and worst
possible realizations of the originator’s private information is almost one third of the average
outcome. We provide a quantitative interpretation of our reduced form results by using a simple
calibrated version of our model. The cost of signaling is approximately $540 for a mortgage of
$300,000. This corresponds to a spread of 18 basis points that originators would charge borrowers
to compensate for expected signaling costs, a substantial magnitude when compared to the other
costs that borrowers pay when taking out a new mortgage.
Theresultsonex-post defaultareincontrasttothoseusingex-ante measuresofcreditrisk. We
construct predicted probabilities of default using only information available to mortgage investors
at the time that mortgages are sold into PLS deals. We then explore whether ex-ante observable
credit risk is related to time to sale. We find a positive relation between ex-ante observable risk
and time to sale for loans sold in the first 6 months after origination, the opposite of what we
find for ex-post default, despite the fact that the predicted default measure is highly correlated
3