NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MAKING DISCRETION IN MONETARY POLICY MORE RULE-LIKE
Frederic S. Mishkin
Working Paper 24135
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24135
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2017
This paper was being presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Annual Conference, “Are
Rules Made to Be Broken? Discretion and Monetary Policy,” October 13-14, 2017. It’s original
title was “Improving the Use of Discretion in Monetary Policy.” I thank participants in the macro
lunch seminar at Columbia University for their helpful comments. The views expressed here are
my own and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Columbia
University or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Disclosure of my outside compensated
activities can be found on my website at http://www0.gsb.columbia.edu/faculty/fmishkin/. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Frederic S. Mishkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Making Discretion in Monetary Policy More Rule-Like
Frederic S. Mishkin
NBER Working Paper No. 24135
December 2017
JEL No. E5,E52,E58
ABSTRACT
This paper argues that the rules versus discretion debate has been miscast because a central bank
does not have to choose only between adopting a policy rule versus pure discretion, both of which
have serious shortcomings. Rather it can choose a constrained discretionary regime that has rule-
like attributes. Monetary policy discretion can be made more rule-like, by 1) adopting a nominal
anchor such as an inflation target, and 2) communication of a monetary policy reaction process,
especially through data-based forward guidance, in which the monetary policy authorities
describe how the future policy path will change as economic circumstances change.
Frederic S. Mishkin
Columbia University
Graduate School of Business
Uris Hall 817
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
fsm3@columbia.edu

1 INTRODUCTION
The debate on whether a central bank should have a rule to set its policy instruments or
alternatively to conduct monetary policy with discretion has heated up in recent years with
proposed legislation in Congress, which has been passed by the House, to require the Federal
Reserve to report on a “directive” rule similar to a Taylor (1993) rule for its policy instruments.
In this paper, I discuss where I think the rules versus discretion debate is currently and argue that
in a sense, this debate has been miscast, because a central bank does not have to choose only
between adopting a policy rule versus pure discretion. Instead it can choose to adopt a
discretionary regime that has rule-like attributes, a regime that Ben Bernanke and I referred to as
“constrained discretion” in Bernanke and Mishkin (1997). However, how can be discretion be
constrained so it avoids the disadvantages of pure discretion? The answer I provide here is that
monetary policy discretion can be made more rule-like by pursuing monetary policy
communication that not only constrains discretion, but also has additional benefits in enabling
the markets to respond to shocks to the economy so both inflation and output are stabilized.
2

2 THE RULES VERSUS DISCRETION DEBATE
First, let’s define our terms. A rule requires that monetary policy is essentially automatic: it
involves a precise prescription for how monetary policy should react to a set of economic
circumstances. One example of a monetary policy rule is the constant-money-growth rule
advocated by Milton Friedman, in which the money supply is set by the central bank to grow at a
constant rate. A more recent alternative is the classic Taylor (1993) rule in which the policy
interest rate, the federal funds rate, is set to be a weighted average of an output gap (actual output
minus potential output) and an inflation gap (actual inflation minus the target inflation rate.) The
polar opposite of a monetary policy rule, according to the traditional classification of policy
regimes is based on discretion. Discretion, in its purist form, involves monetary policymakers
setting their policy instruments on a day-to-day basis as economic events unfold, with no public
commitments about its objectives or actions.
2.1 The Case for Rules
There are two basic arguments for monetary policy rules. First is that monetary policy makers
making discretionary decisions cannot be trusted. In their classic study of monetary policy
history, Friedman and Schwartz (1963) document many instances where Federal Reserve
policies led to sharp contractions in economic activity, as does Meltzer (2004, 2014) . Overly
expansionary monetary policy that followed the period discussed by Friedman and Schwartz and
Meltzer, led to the Great Inflation that lasted from the late 1960s to 1979, until actions by the
Federal Reserve under the chairmanship of Paul Volcker led to a low inflation period since the
early 1980s. Monetarists such as Friedman, Schwartz and Meltzer have argued that if the
Federal Reserve had pursued a constant-money-growth rule these episodes of severe economic
contractions and high inflation would have been avoided.
The second, and I would argue more powerful, argument for monetary policy rules
results from the literature on the time-inconsistency problem described by Kydland and Prescott
(1977), Calvo (1978) and Barro and Gordon (1983) in the context of monetary policy. The time-
inconsistency problem occurs because economic agents or policy makers always have a
temptation to deviate from an optimal long-run plan, which is therefore time-inconsistent, when
they operate with discretion. In other words, even when an optimal long-run plan is formulated,
3