NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ESTIMATING THE DIRECT AND INDIRECT EFFECTS OF MAJOR EDUCATION
REFORMS
Michael Gilraine
Hugh Macartney
Robert McMillan
Working Paper 24191
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24191
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2018, Revised August 2020
Previously circulated as "Education Reform in General Equilibrium: Evidence from California's
Class Size Reduction." We would like to thank Pat Bayer and Gregorio Caetano for helpful
discussions, and Marc-Antoine Chatelain, Damon Clark, Elaine Guo, Steve Lehrer, Ted
Rosenbaum, Eduardo Souza-Rodrigues, Wilbert van der Klaauw, workshop participants at the
University of Bristol (CPMO), Federal Trade Commission, New York Federal Reserve and
University of Toronto, and participants at the CIREQ Applied Economics Conference and 2018
SOLE Meetings for additional comments. Financial support is gratefully acknowledged from the
IES, SSHRC, Duke University, and the University of Toronto Mississauga. All remaining errors
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Michael Gilraine, Hugh Macartney, and Robert McMillan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Estimating the Direct and Indirect Effects of Major Education Reforms
Michael Gilraine, Hugh Macartney, and Robert McMillan
NBER Working Paper No. 24191
January 2018, Revised August 2020
JEL No. H40,I21,I22
ABSTRACT
We propose an approach for credibly estimating indirect sorting effects of major education
reforms and placing them alongside the reforms' direct and persistent effects for the first time.
Applying our approach to California's state-wide class size reduction program, we estimate a
large positive direct effect of smaller classes on test scores and an even larger indirect effect due
to demographic changes as private school students switch into public schools; both effects also
persist. Accounting for sorting using these estimates raises the program's benefit-cost ratio
significantly. Further, our analysis indicates that indirect sorting is likely relevant in policy
evaluations more generally.
Michael Gilraine Robert McMillan
New York University University of Toronto
Department of Economics Department of Economics
19 West 4th Street 150 St. George Street
New York, NY 10012 Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
mike.gilraine@nyu.edu CANADA
and NBER
Hugh Macartney mcmillan@chass.utoronto.ca
Duke University
Department of Economics
239 Social Sciences Building
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
hugh.macartney@duke.edu

1 Introduction
Empirical policy analysis often focuses on the direct, intended effects of policies “holding all else
equal.” Measuring such direct effects accurately is an important ingredient in policy making, al-
though it is well appreciated that large-scale reforms may have substantial indirect effects that
work in offseting or reinforcing ways. Because of their potential to alter the policy-making calculus
significantly, estimating the size of these indirect effects is of considerable practical interest. Yet
doing so presents challenges for empirical research, not least because additional sources of indepen-
dent variation are required to identify indirect effects separately from the direct impact of policies.
As a consequence, the literature seeking to gauge their extent is relatively undeveloped.1
This paper sets out an estimation approach that allows us to measure indirect effects of large-
scale reforms in a credible way and place them on a common footing with the direct policy effects
for the first time. We focus on an education context and a type of indirect response likely to matter
whenever(i)areformimprovespublicschoolqualitysignificantly–thebasicgoalofmosteducation
reforms,2 and (ii) private school options are popular pre-reform. In this common configuration
of circumstances, some households will have an incentive to re-sort by switching out of private
schools, potentially changing the student composition of public schools. In turn, to the extent
that resulting compositional changes influence education production, either because the new public
schoolstudentsaremoreadvantagedorviapeerspillovers,sotheyshouldaffectmeasuredoutcomes
such as test scores – the indirect effects we seek to identify.3
We develop our approach in the context of California’s class size reduction (CSR) program of
the late-1990s – up to that point, the largest state-led education reform ever implemented in the
United States. Inspired by Project STAR in Tennessee, a well-known experimental evaluation in
education and the subject of a number of influential studies,4 the California legislature sought to
replicate Project STAR’s publicized experimental benefits at an altogether larger scale. To that
end, the CSR program targeted kindergarten through third grade (as did Project STAR), and cut
class sizes in these early grades by around 20 percent throughout the state. The reform involved a
grade-specific roll-out, starting with first grade in 1996-97, and schools had to hire enough teachers
tolowerclasssizesbelow20intherelevantgradesinordertobeeligibleforCSRfunding,amounting
1ExceptionsareJepsenandRivkin(2009)andDinersteinandSmith(2016),whichwediscussfurtherbelow. Another
careful analysis, by Bianchi (2020), considers the indirect effects of a policy to expand Italian university enrollment:
as will be made clear, our focus is on policies that change school quality directly, with enrollment changes being an
indirect response.
2Schoolfinancereformsprovideoneexample–seeJackson,JohnsonandPersico(2015)andLafortune,Rothsteinand
Schanzenbach (2018).
3Other indirect effects may include changes to teacher labor markets – see Jepsen and Rivkin (2009) and Jackson
(2012) – and household residential sorting.
4Prominent among these are Krueger (1999), Krueger and Whitmore (2001), and Chetty et al. (2011).
1

to 10 percent of per-pupil expenditure.
The combination of strong financial incentives to implement the reform according to its specific
timetable, the substantial reductions in class size it produced, and the sheer scale of California’s
public education system would lead one to expect CSR to have broader effects. Convincing re-
search by Jepsen and Rivkin (2009) has already highlighted impacts on the teacher labor market,
showing that there was a sudden, significant increased need for new teacher hires, which dampened
CSR’s benefits in the short term. Further, the effects of the policy were non-uniform, with some
schoolsexperiencingreductionsinclasssizewithoutanyappreciabledeclineinteacherquality, thus
becoming potentially more attractive to parents as a result. Such public school quality changes
might in turn be expected to lead to sociodemographic sorting from some private to public schools
in response to CSR.5
We first document that significant re-sorting did occur. A difference-in-differences research
design comparing treated versus untreated grades before and after the reform reveals that CSR
caused a reduction in local private school shares of 1.4 percentage points for relevant elementary
grades, or 12 percent of the pre-CSR K-3 average private school share. Further, we see pronounced
changes in school sociodemographics in public schools with nearby private alternatives (relative to
those without), the proportion white increasing while the proportion Hispanic declined – evidence
consistent with recent research by Dinerstein and Smith (2016).6 We also show that a significant
fractionoftheextra37,500studentsfoundinpublicelementaryschoolsinagivenyearasaresultof
CSR remained there beyond third grade for the duration of elementary school; the evidence points
to around two-thirds of these students then returning back to the private sector for middle school.
To explore the effects of this substantial re-sorting on student performance, we use a framework
that parameterizes the public school education production function. This captures the reform’s
direct and indirect effects in terms of test scores, contemporaneously and also persisting into the
future, as in well-known recent research (see Chetty et al. 2011 and Chetty, Friedman and Rockoff
2014). Specifically, we assume the production technology is linear and additive in its inputs, as
is standard in much of the education literature, and express each cohort’s grade-year average test
score in terms of parameters governing the current and persisting effects of school resources and
sociodemographics, respectively.
Central to our analysis, we show the policy’s direct and indirect effects can be estimated on a
5These indirect sorting effects will be our primary focus, rather than indirect effects of CSR on the teaching force
studiedbyJepsenandRivkin(2009). Theapproachtoestimatingdirectandindirecteffectsweproposewillaccount
for changes in teacher quality using a control strategy (described below) that draws on Jepsen and Rivkin (2009).
6Those authors provide persuasive evidence that increased funding for public schools in New York City drew private
school students into the public system, both by choice and through the forced closure of (typically small) private
schools. They quantify the impact of public school policy on private school students, while we study the direct and
indirect effects on existing public school students.
2