NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SHADOW FUNDING COSTS:
MEASURING THE COST OF BALANCE SHEET CONSTRAINTS
Matthias Fleckenstein
Francis A. Longstaff
Working Paper 24224
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24224
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2018
We are grateful for the comments and suggestions of Andrea Eisfeldt, Tyler Muir, Laura Field,
Xiaoxia Lou, Michael Pagano, Fei Xi, Haoxiang Zhu, and seminar participants at the University
of Delaware and the 2017 Villanova University, Drexel University, Temple University, Lehigh
University, and University of Delaware joint conference. All errors are our responsibility. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24224.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Matthias Fleckenstein and Francis A. Longstaff. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Shadow Funding Costs: Measuring the Cost of Balance Sheet Constraints
Matthias Fleckenstein and Francis A. Longstaff
NBER Working Paper No. 24224
January 2018
JEL No. G12,G13,G21,G23,G28
ABSTRACT
Recent theory suggests that balance sheet frictions and constraints faced by financial
intermediaries can have major asset pricing implications. We propose a new measure of the
impact of these constraints on intermediary funding costs that is based on the implied cost of
renting intermediary balance sheet space. On average, balance sheet constraints add 81 basis
points to intermediary funding costs, but the impact often exceeds 200 basis points during a crisis.
We find that these balance sheet costs have real effects on intermediary investment decisions and
asset holdings. Increases in balance sheet costs are associated with short-term increases in the use
of derivatives, but longer-term declines in risk-taking by financial institutions. Balance sheet
costs introduce a wedge between on- and off-balance-sheet investments which may help resolve a
number of asset pricing puzzles.
Matthias Fleckenstein
University of Delaware
Lerner College of Business and Economics
310 Purnell Hall
Newark, DE 19716
mflecken@udel.edu
Francis A. Longstaff
UCLA
Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu

Balance sheet space is treated like expensive real estate, available only
1
to positions that can afford to pay rental fees that are now much larger.
— Darrell Duffie
Bankers are blaming tensions in the repo world on the increasing cost
2
of renting out their balance sheets.
— Izabella Kaminska
1. INTRODUCTION
One of the fundamental principlesof current asset pricing theory is that frictions
and constraints that impact financial intermediaries may play a central role in
determining security values. In particular, this literature demonstrates that bal-
ance sheet constraints faced by intermediaries—such as funding illiquidity or
regulatory capital and leverage restrictions—may impact the stochastic discount
factor used in the market. Key examples include Brunnermeier and Pedersen
(2009) who examine the relation between funding availability and asset prices,
Duffie (2010) who studies the effects of slow-moving capital on prices in finan-
cial markets, and He and Krishnamurthy (2013) who model how equity capital
constraints faced by intermediaries may affect risk premia in financial markets.
An important implication of this literature is that asset pricing effects are
directlyrelatedto howbindingbalancesheetconstraintsareonfinancialinterme-
diaries. To date, however, it has been difficult to quantify the effects of balance
sheet constraintson intermediaries. In particular, relatively little is knownabout
how these constraints affect the cost of funding or the cost of capital of inter-
mediaries over time. Clearly, having a measure of the impact of balance sheet
constraints on intermediary funding costs would not only allow us to evaluate
how binding these constraints are, but could also provide valuable perspective
1
Darrell Duffie, Why are Big Banks Offering Less Liquidity to Bond Markets?,
Forbes, March 11, 2016.
2
Izabella Kaminska, Exorbitant Privilege and the Cost of Renting America’s
Balance Sheet, Alphaville, Financial Times, March 23, 2016.
1

on their effects on asset pricing, market liquidity and stability, and risk sharing
in the financial sector.
This paper uses a simple new approach to measure the effects of balance
sheet constraints on these funding costs. This approach consists of comparing
the direct financingcost of owninga security (on balance sheet) to the impliedfi-
nancing cost of taking a position (off balance sheet) in the same security through
the derivatives market. Intuitively, by taking a synthetic position in the security
via derivatives, aninvestoressentially“rents”balancesheet spacefromthe finan-
cial intermediaryprovidingthe derivative. In equilibrium,the rental costsfor the
security should equal the sum of both the direct financing costs and the indirect
balance sheet costs an intermediary bears by owning the underlying security as
the hedge for the derivative contract. Thus, the impact of balance sheet con-
straints on intermediary funding costs—commonly known as balance sheet costs
or shadowfunding costs—can be measured directly as the difference between the
implied financing rate in the derivatives market and the direct financing rate in
the cash market.
We implement our approach by comparing the implied repo rates incorpo-
rated into Treasury note futures directly to the actual repo rates for Treasury
notes paid by financial intermediaries. Both the Treasury note cash and futures
markets are among the most liquid and actively-traded fixed income markets.
An important advantage of focusing on these markets is that we can measure
balance sheet costs over an extensive sample period ranging from 1991 to 2016.
A number of important results emerge from our analysis. First, we find
that balance sheet costs are positive and significant throughout much of the
sample period. On average, balance sheet constraints add 81 basis points to
an intermediary’s cost of funding. The funding cost impact, however, was as
high as 200 basis points in the aftermath of the Asian debt crisis of 1997 and
the financial crisis of 2008. To put these costs into perspective, we note that
the direct cost of funding earning assets (defined as the total interest expense
paid on deposits and other borrowed money as a percentage of average earning
assets) as reported by the FDIC averaged about 256 basis points during the
sample period. Thus, these indirect costs increased the average funding costs
of financial intermediaries by nearly one third. Furthermore, these costs are
multiples of typical FDIC deposit insurance assessment rates or the guaranty
3
fees for agency mortgage-backed securities. Clearly, balance sheet costs of this
3
ForcurrentFDICdepositinsuranceassessmentrates,seehttps://www.fdic.gov/
deposit/insurance/assessments/proposed.html. As examples of historical agency
mortgage-backed security guaranty fees, see https://www.fhfa.gov/AboutUs/Re
ports/ReportDocuments/GFee Report FINAL.pdf.
2