NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COLLATERAL DAMAGE
Gary B. Gorton
Toomas Laarits
Working Paper 24298
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24298
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2018
Prepared for the Banque de France Financial Stability Review. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Gary B. Gorton and Toomas Laarits. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Collateral Damage
Gary B. Gorton and Toomas Laarits
NBER Working Paper No. 24298
February 2018
JEL No. E4,E44,E58,G21
ABSTRACT
A financial crisis is an event in which the holders of short-term debt come to question the
collateral backing that debt. So, the resiliency of the financial system depends on the quality of
that collateral. We show that there is a shortage of high-quality collateral by examining the
convenience yield on short-term debt, which summarizes the supply and demand for short-term
safe debt, taking into account the availability of high-quality collateral. We then show how the
private sector has responded by issuing more (unsecured) commercial paper at shorter maturities.
The results suggest that there is a shortage of safe debt now compared to the pre-crisis period,
implying that the seeds for a new shadow banking system to grow exist.
Gary B. Gorton
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu
Toomas Laarits
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
toomas.laarits@yale.edu

Introduction
In a classic banking panic, holders of demand deposits want their cash back because they do not
trust the value of the banks’ loan portfolios backing the deposits. Deposit insurance solves this
problem. Inthecrisisof2007-8theholdersofshort-termdebt, intheformofrepo, cametodistrust
the bonds used as collateral and increased haircuts, generating a run on the banking system.1 Have
the many post-crisis legal and regulatory changes to banking systems mitigated this problem? Or,
have these changes exacerbated the shortage of good collateral, resulting in collateral damage? To
the extent new laws and regulations constrain private short-term debt issuance, they also create
an incentive to find new ways to produce private debt—a new shadow banking system. We seek
to study this incentive for private safe debt production by looking at the relative change in the
convenienceyieldonshort-termdebt,andtheprivatesectorresponsetoincreasesintheconvenience
yield.
Short-termmoney-likedebtisalwaysbackedbylong-termdebtascollateral.2 So,wecansummarize
thestateofsupplyanddemandoflong-termdebtcollateralindirectlybylookingattheconvenience
yield on short-term debt. The convenience yield summarizes the outcome of the plethora of legal
and regulatory changes post-crisis. Our results show that measures of the convenience yield have
notreturnedtopre-crisislevels. Further, wefindthatthequantityandmaturityofprivateissuance
of short-term debt claims is sensitive to high-frequency changes in Treasury supply, more so than
in the pre-crisis period. Overall, the results suggest a shortage of high-quality collateral.
In the last forty years the financial system permanently changed from a system that mostly pro-
ducedretail(insured)demanddepositstoasystemthatproducessignificantamountsofshort-term
(uninsured) debt for the wholesale market. This new system produces short-term debt to a large
extent with backing collateral produced from the very loans that the traditional banking system
originates, a process called securitization. The transformation of the financial system is dramatic.
UsingU.S.FlowofFunds(nowcalledtheFinancialAccountsoftheU.S.)data, Gortonetal.(2012)
analyzethetransformationoftheU.S.bankingsystemovertheperiod1952Q1through2009Q1. As
a percentage of the total amount of privately-produced safe debt, demand deposits fell from about
80% to 31%. Money-like debt (e.g., repo, commercial paper, money market funds) rose from 11%
to 21%. AAA asset-backed and mortgage-backed securities rose from zero to 18%. The shadow
banking system is the sum of the ABS/MBS and money-like debt components, which increased
from 11% to 38%, overtaking demand deposits in total value. This transformation seems to have
accelerated in the late 1980s, and it is apparent that the change is not temporary.
Hastheshadowbankingsystembecomesaferpost-crisis? Itishardtoanswerthisquestionbecause
there have been so many changes since the financial crisis, including the introduction of many new
bank regulations and capital requirements. Also, since the crisis, the production of privately-
produced collateral in the form of AAA securitization tranches has declined. The sovereign debt
of some countries is no longer considered safe.3 There was a large amount of net government debt
issuance during the crisis, but central bank quantitative easing programs absorbed considerable
amounts of government debt and other high quality collateral. And recent bank regulations, for
example the liquidity coverage ratio, have aimed at tying up high quality collateral, making it
1See Gorton and Metrick (2012) and Gorton et al. (2017).
2See Dang et al. (2012).
3On the global reduction in safe assets since the crisis see Barclays Capital (2012).
2

immobile.4 What has been the net effect of all these changes? Answering this question is essential
forunderstandingthepost-crisisfinancialsystem. Wearguethattheconvenienceyieldcanserveas
a valuable statistic summarizing the effects of these changes. A high convenience yield corresponds
to a relative scarcity of short-term safe debt, suggesting an insufficient amount of collateral to back
short-term debt.
Dang et al. (2012) argue that information-insensitivity is the defining feature of ”safe” debt. Maxi-
mal information-insensitivity is achieved by debt-on-debt, debt backed by debt. If there is a short-
age of collateral to back the debt, the private sector can respond by issuing unsecured short-term
debt (backed by a portfolio of debt, bonds or loans), attempting to make it information-insensitive
by shortening maturities. With an insufficient amount of bonds to back repo the private sector
will produce short-term debt elsewhere. We show a correlation between the issuance of (unsecured)
commercialpaperandheightenedconvenienceyieldsandthatthematurityofthecommercialpaper
has shortened. This has persisted since the crisis.
In Section 1 we examine the levels of various measures of the convenience yield, comparing the
current levels to pre-crisis values. In Section 2 we look at the sensitivity of the convenience yield to
exogenous (but anticipated) shocks to the amount of outstanding U.S. Treasury bills. In Section
3 we examine how the sensitivity of issuance and maturity of financial commercial paper have
changed, compared to the pre-crisis period. Section 4 concludes by briefly discussing what the
results mean.
1 Levels
Webeginbyexaminingchangesinthelevelsofvariousmeasuresoftheconvenienceyieldonlongand
short-termdebt. Thesemeasuresaretheoneandthreemonthspreadbetweenthegeneralcollateral
(GC) repo rate and the U.S. Treasury bill rate, the spread between AAA corporates and U.S.
Treasurybonds,andthespreadbetweenBaaandU.S.Treasurybonds. KrishnamurthyandVissing-
Jorgensen(2014)andKrishnamurthyandVissing-Jorgensen(2015)examinesuchconvenienceyield
measuresandassociatethemwiththeoutstandingaggregatesupplyofTreasuries. Anothermeasure
oftheconvenienceyieldcanbeconstructedbycomparingmarketrateswithratesfromafittedyield
curve, like in Greenwood et al. (2015). We construct a version of their “z-spread”—the average
spread between T-bills with remaining maturities between 4 to 26 weeks and fitted values from
Gu¨rkaynak et al. (2012). We subtract market rates from fitted rates to ensure a positive z-spread,
on average. As Figure 1 shows, this measure is strongly correlated with the GC-1 month Treasury
spread.
We want to see if these measures of the convenience yields marginally increased during the crisis
and again in the post-crisis period, compared to the pre-crisis baseline. To do this we run a simple
regression with a constant (the baseline), a dummy variable that is turned to one starting in July
2007 (the start of the crisis) and another dummy that is turned to one from 2012 to the present.
The coefficient on the first dummy tells us how the convenience yield level changed during the crisis
compared to the baseline. The coefficient on the second dummy tells us how the convenience yield
has changed since the crisis. We also report the p-value for the sum of the coefficients on the crisis
and post-crisis dummies being different from zero. If the coefficients sum to zero, then the current
4See Gorton and Muir (2016).
3