NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIQUIDITY REGIMES AND OPTIMAL DYNAMIC ASSET ALLOCATION
Pierre Collin-Dufresne
Kent D. Daniel
Mehmet Sa lam
Working Paper 24222
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24222
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2018, Revised October 2018
For valuable comments and suggestions, we thank Darrell Duffie, Hui Guo, Ron Kaniel, an
anonymous referee, and seminar participants at Princeton University, UCLA, University of
Cincinnati and the 2018 Zurich Workshop on Asset Pricing. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24222.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Pierre Collin-Dufresne, Kent D. Daniel, and Mehmet Sa lam. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Liquidity Regimes and Optimal Dynamic Asset Allocation
Pierre Collin-Dufresne, Kent D. Daniel, and Mehmet Sa lam
NBER Working Paper No. 24222
January 2018, Revised October 2018
JEL No. D53,G11,G12
ABSTRACT
We solve a portfolio choice problem when expected returns, volatilities and trading-costs follow
a regime-switching model. The optimal policy trades towards an aim portfolio given by a
weighted-average of the conditional mean-variance portfolios in all future states. The trading
speed is higher in more persistent, riskier and higher-liquidity states. It can be optimal to
overweight low Sharpe-ratio assets such as Treasury bonds because they remain liquid even in
crisis states. We illustrate our methodology by constructing an optimal US equity market timing
portfolio based on an estimated regime-switching model and on trading costs estimated using a
large-order institutional trading dataset.
Pierre Collin-Dufresne Mehmet Sa(cid:0)lam
Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne Assistant Professor of Finance
CDM SFI SFI-PCD Carl H. Lindner College of Business
EXTRA 209 University of Cincinnati
CH-1015 Lausanne 408 Lindner Hall
Switzerland Cincinnati, OH 45221
pierre.collin-dufresne@epfl.ch mehmet.saglam@uc.edu
Kent D. Daniel
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 421
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
kd2371@columbia.edu

1 Introduction
Mean-variance efficient portfolio optimization, introduced by Markowitz (1952), is still widely used
in practice and taught in business schools. When either expected returns or the covariance matrix
of returns changes over time then so will the conditional mean-variance efficient ‘Markowitz’ port-
folio. In the presence of transaction costs however, it will generally not be optimal for investors to
constantly rebalance to perfectly track the Markowitz portfolio. In recognition of this fact, practi-
tioners generally employ ad-hoc adjustments to Markowitz optimization, but it is recognized that
these approaches are not optimal (Grinold and Kahn 1999).
In a recent paper, Gaˆrleanu and Pedersen (2013, GP) show that in the presence of quadratic
transaction costs,1 an investor with mean-variance preferences should adopt a trading rule that
only partially rebalances from her current position towards an aim portfolio at a fixed trading
speed.2 They derive closed-form expressions for both the optimal aim portfolio and the trading
speed that depend on the dynamics of expected returns, the quantity of and aversion to risk, and
themagnitudeofpriceimpact. However, theGPmodelassumesthatboththecovariancematrixof
price changes and the price-impact parameters are constant. In this paper we derive a closed-form
solutionfortheoptimalportfoliotradingruleinasimilarsettingbutwhere, inadditiontoexpected
returns, volatilities and transaction costs may be stochastic. This is consistent with considerable
empirical evidence that stock return volatilities are stochastic and that transaction costs covary
with the level of stock volatility (going back at least to Rosenberg (1972) for the former and to
Stoll (1978) for the latter).
Here, we develop a closed-form solution for the optimal dynamic portfolio when expected re-
turns, covariances, and price impact parameters follow a multi-state Markov switching model.3
Consistent with GP, we assume that the investor’s objective function is ‘dynamic’ mean-variance:
investors maximize the expected discounted sum of portfolio returns net of trading costs, minus
a penalty for the variance of portfolio returns. While this objective function is frequently used
in practice and in academic papers, to our knowledge it lacks decision-theoretic foundations. In
Appendices D-G, we show that the resulting optimal strategy corresponds to that of an agent who
is risk-neutral to the regime-switching risk associated with variation in the investment opportunity
set, while remaining risk-averse to the diffusion risk associated with return shocks. In Appendix E,
we formalize this argument by defining a set of ‘source-dependent’ recursive (stochastic differen-
tial) utility preferences which result in the same objective function, building on Skiadas (2008),
and Hugonnier, Pelgrin, and St-Amour (2012).4
In this setting, and for an agent with these preferences, we show that the optimal trading
1Quadratic transaction costs emerge with a linear price impact model, i.e., trading ∆ shares of a stock move its
average price by λ∆ for a given constant λ.
2Litterman (2005) makes a similar point in an unpublished note.
3One additional advantage of this approach, which we discuss more below, and develop fully in Section 4, is that
it allows us to specify a process for return volatility as opposed to price-change volatility in each state, consistent
with the observed log-normality of prices.
4We thank the anonymous referee for encouraging us to provide decision-theoretic foundations to this objective
function.
2

rule is similar to that derived in GP, namely to partially trade from the current position towards
an aim portfolio. In GP the aim portfolio and trading speed are static. Here, when risk and
trading costs can change, both the aim portfolio and the trading speed are conditional on the state.
Specifically, the aim portfolio is a weighted average of the state-contingent Markowitz portfolios in
all possible future states, where the weight on each conditional-Markowitz portfolio is a function of
thelikelihoodoftransitioningtothatstate, thestatepersistence, andtheriskandtransactioncosts
faced in that state relative to the current one. Similarly, the optimal trading speed depends on
the relative magnitude of the transaction costs in various states and their transition probabilities.
Moreover,whilewesolvethemodelinadiscrete-timesettinginthebodyofthepaper,AppendicesB
and C solve a continuous time version of the model, and obtain consistent solutions.
To develop some of the intuition underlying the model, consider a simple setting with a single
risky asset, and with two states: a low volatility state L where transaction costs are zero, and a
high volatility state H where transaction costs are positive. When the economy is in the L-state,
it is clearly optimal to trade (at infinite speed) all the way to the aim portfolio because transaction
costsinthatstatearezero. Incontrast,tradingspeedwillbefiniteintheH-state. Further,theaim
portfolio in the H-state will equal the conditional Markowitz portfolio in that state.5 Intuitively, in
the H-state the investor should put zero-weight on the L-state Markowitz portfolio, because when
the economy enters that state she will face no cost to rebalance (to the optimal aim portfolio) in
that state. However, the aim portfolio in the L-state will be a weighed average of both H- and
L-conditionalMarkowitzportfolios,andwheretheweightontheH-conditionalMarkowitzportfolio
increases with the likelihood of transitioning from L to H, the persistence of the state H, and with
the ratio of the volatilities in the H- and L-states.
One immediate implication of our model is that the aim portfolio will deviate significantly
from the Markowitz benchmark in anticipation of possible future shifts in relative risk and/or
transaction costs. Consider two assets, which can be thought of as a “Treasury” and a “Corporate”
bond portfolio. Suppose that in the low-volatility state (state L), the Corporate portfolio has a far
higher Sharpe ratio than the Treasury portfolio, so that the conditional Markowitz portfolio has
most of its weight on Corporates. However, if the economy transitions to state H, then risk and
tradingcostswilldramaticallyincreaseforCorporates,butwillremainunchangedforTreasuries. In
anticipation of this, the aim portfolio in the L-state will have a large Treasury position. Intuitively,
if the economy transitions from the L to the H state, then the volatility of the Corporate portfolio
will increase, its Sharpe ratio will fall, and it will become illiquid and costly to trade out of. Thus,
the optimal dynamic “aim” portfolio preemptively reduces the position of the Corporate portfolio
in the L-state.
A related implication of the model relates to the trading speed in the L state. When the
current portfolio deviates from the aim portfolio, it may become optimal to trade the less liquid
Corporate portfolio more aggressively than the Treasury portfolio. Intuitively, if the economy does
transition to the H state, the Corporate portfolio will become much more expensive to trade, while
5That is, the aim portfolio in the H-state puts zero weight on the L-state Markowitz portfolio.
3