NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCIAL HETEROGENEITY AND THE INVESTMENT CHANNEL OF MONETARY
POLICY
Pablo Ottonello
Thomas Winberry
Working Paper 24221
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24221
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2018
We thank the editor Gianluca Violante, four anonymous referees, and Andy Abel, Adrien
Auclert, Cristina Arellano, Neele Balke, Paco Buera, Simon Gilchrist, Nils Gornermann, Chris
House, Erik Hurst, Alejandro Justiniano, Greg Kaplan, Rohan Kekre, Aubhik Khan, John Leahy,
Yueran Ma, Alisdair McKay, Fabrizio Perri, Felipe Schwartzman, Linda Tesar, Julia Thomas, Joe
Vavra, Ivan Werning, Toni Whited, Christian Wolf, Arlene Wong, and Mark Wright for helpful
conversations. We thank Alberto Arredondo, Mike Mei, Richard Ryan, Samuel Stern, Yuyao
Wang, and Liangjie Wu for excellent research assistance. This research was funded in part by the
Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business and the
Michigan Institute for Teaching and Research in Economics. Winberry also gratefully
acknowledges financial support from Chicago Booth. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Pablo Ottonello and Thomas Winberry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Financial Heterogeneity and the Investment Channel of Monetary Policy
Pablo Ottonello and Thomas Winberry
NBER Working Paper No. 24221
January 2018, Revised June 2020
JEL No. D22,D25,E22,E44,E52
ABSTRACT
We study the role of financial frictions and firm heterogeneity in determining the investment
channel of monetary policy. Empirically, we find that firms with low default risk – those with
low debt burdens and high “distance to default” – are the most responsive to monetary shocks.
We interpret these findings using a heterogeneous firm New Keynesian model with default risk.
In our model, low-risk firms are more responsive to monetary shocks because they face a flatter
marginal cost curve for financing investment. The aggregate effect of monetary policy may
therefore depend on the distribution of default risk, which varies over time.
Pablo Ottonello
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
ottonellopablo@gmail.com
Thomas Winberry
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
thomas.winberry@chicagobooth.edu

1 Introduction
Aggregate investment is one of the most responsive components of GDP to monetary shocks.
Our goal in this paper is to understand the role of financial frictions in determining this
investment channel of monetary policy. Given the rich heterogeneity in financial positions
across firms, a key question is: which firms are the most responsive to changes in monetary
policy? The answer to this question is theoretically ambiguous. On the one hand, financial
frictions generate an upward-sloping marginal cost curve for investment, which dampens
the response of investment to monetary policy for firms that are more severely affected by
financial frictions. On the other hand, monetary policy may flatten out this marginal cost
curve – for example, by increasing cash flows or improving collateral values – which amplifies
the response of investment for affected firms. This latter view is the conventional wisdom in
the literature, informed by applying the financial accelerator logic across firms.
We address the question of which firms respond the most to monetary policy using new
cross-sectional evidence and a heterogeneous firm New Keynesian model. Our empirical
work combines monetary shocks, measured using the high-frequency event-study approach,
with quarterly Compustat data. We find that investment done by firms with low default risk
is significantly and robustly more responsive to monetary policy than investment done by
firms with high default risk. Motivated by this evidence, our model embeds a heterogeneous
firm investment model with default risk into the benchmark New Keynesian environment
and studies the effect of a monetary shock. In our calibrated model, firms with low default
risk are more responsive to monetary policy, similar to our empirical estimates. We perform
a simple calculation to show how these heterogeneous responses imply that the effect of
monetary policy may become smaller when default risk in the economy is high. At the same
time, we find that all firms affected by default risk in our model are more responsive to
monetary policy than they would be in a version of our model without any default risk at
all, consistent with Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999).
Our baseline empirical specification estimates how the semi-elasticity of firm investment
with respect to a monetary policy shock depends on two measures of the firm’s default risk:
itsleverageratioandits“distancetodefault”(whichestimatestheprobabilityofdefaultfrom
2

the values of equity and liabilities). We control for firm fixed effects to capture permanent
differences across firms and control for sector-by-quarter fixed effects to capture differences
in how sectors respond to aggregate shocks. Conditional on our set of controls, leverage is
negatively correlated with distance to default and credit rating, and distance to default is
positively correlated with credit rating. Therefore, we view low leverage and high distance
to default as proxies for low default risk.
We find that having one standard deviation lower leverage implies that a firm is ap-
proximately one-fourth more responsive to monetary policy and that having one standard
deviation higher distance to default implies that the firm is one-half more responsive. These
differences across firms persist for up to three years after the shock and imply large differ-
ences in accumulated capital over time. Consistent with the idea that default risk drives
these heterogeneous responses, borrowing costs and the use of external finance increase by
less for high-risk firms than for low-risk firms following a monetary expansion.
In order to interpret these empirical results, we embed a model of heterogeneous firms
facing default risk into the benchmark New Keynesian framework. These firms invest in
capital using either internal funds or external borrowing; they can default on their debt,
leading to an external finance premium. There is also a group of “retailer” firms with sticky
prices, generatingaNewKeynesianPhillipscurvelinkingnominalvariablestorealoutcomes.
We calibrate the model to match key features of firms’ investment, borrowing, and lifecycle
dynamics in the micro data. Our model generates realistic behavior along non-targeted
dimensions of the micro data, and the peak responses of aggregate investment, output,
and consumption to a monetary policy shock are broadly in line with the peak responses
estimated in the data by Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005).
We simulate a panel of firms from our calibrated model and find that firms with low
measured default risk are more responsive to monetary policy, as in the data. These het-
erogeneous responses reflect how monetary policy directly changes the expected return on
capital, which drives the response of low-risk firms, and indirectly changes cash flows and
recovery values, which drive the response of the high-risk firms. Since low-risk firms are more
responsive overall, our empirical results indicate that the direct effects of monetary policy
dominate the indirect ones.
3