NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TARGETED PRICE CONTROLS ON SUPERMARKET PRODUCTS
Diego Aparicio
Alberto Cavallo
Working Paper 24275
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24275
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2018
We thank Manuel Bertolotto, Vivek Bhattacharya, Glenn Ellison, Ignacio Puente, Roberto
Rigobon, Paulo Somaini, Jean Tirole, and workshop participants at MIT for helpful comments.
All errors are our own. The data and scripts to reproduce the results in this paper are available at
http://www.thebillionpricesproject.com The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Diego Aparicio and Alberto Cavallo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Targeted Price Controls on Supermarket Products
Diego Aparicio and Alberto Cavallo
NBER Working Paper No. 24275
February 2018
JEL No. D22,E31
ABSTRACT
We study the impact of targeted price controls for supermarket products in Argentina from 2007
to 2015. Using web-scraping, we collected daily prices for controlled and non-controlled goods
and measured the differential effects on inflation, product availability, and price dispersion. We
first show that, although price controls are imposed on goods with significant CPI weight, they
have a temporary effect on aggregate inflation and no downward effect on other goods. Second,
contrary to common beliefs, we find that controlled goods are consistently available for sale.
Third, firms compensate for price controls by introducing new product varieties at higher prices.
This behavior, which increases price dispersion within narrow categories, is consistent with a
standard vertical differentiation model in the presence of price controls.
Diego Aparicio
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Mass Ave E52
Cambridge, MA 02139
dapa@mit.edu
Alberto Cavallo
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-512
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
acavallo@mit.edu

1 Introduction
Inmanycountries,governmentsoftenconsidersomeformofpricecontrolswhenthepricesof
populargoodsriseabovedesiredlevels. Onincreasinglyrareoccasions,thesepricecontrols
areimposedacross-the-board,affectingallgoodsandcausingwidespreadshortages.1 Butin
mostcases,governmentsprefertoimplementamoresubtleformof“targeted”pricecontrols
on a limited number of carefully-selected goods.2 Traditionally, these targeted controls
were limited to easy-to-regulate sectors, such as pharmaceuticals, utilities, or gas prices.3
More recently, the availability of online data, mobile phone apps, and electronic records
has dramatically increased the ability of governments to implement, monitor, and enforce
targeted price controls in all kinds of consumer goods. In particular, developing countries
such as Argentina, Ecuador, Israel, and Panama have had in the recent years some form of
targetedpricecontrolsforfoodandgroceryproducts.4
Despite the increased interest in the use of targeted price controls, there is still little
empiricalresearchinvestigatingtheireconomiceffects. Arethesecontrolsbinding? Dothey
affect prices and inflation of related goods? Can they avoid shortages associated with more
generalizedcontrols? Whatstrategiesdofirmsemploytodealwithpotentiallylowerprofits
andbetterenforcement?
In this paper, we try to answer some of these questions by studying the rich and
volatile experience with price controls in Argentina from 2007 to 2015. These were mostly
1Venezuela is a particularly troubling recent case of across-the-board price controls. The armed forces
are in charge of a strict price controls and food supply program. The country had over 250% inflation in
2016 and is experiencing an unprecedented economic crisis with massive food shortages. See New York
Times: http://nyti.ms/220pqO1; Financial Times: http://on.ft.com/2ba0eCM; The Wall Street Journal:
http://on.wsj.com/29z2nCL. InMay2017,PresidentMaduroannouncedthathewasconsideringacomplete
freezeofpricesthatwouldbeenforcedby“peopleinthestreets”. SeeElNacional: http://bit.ly/2pGhxSo.
2Targetedcontrolsarealsoreferredtoas“selectivecontrols”intheliterature(Rockoff(2004)).
3For example, developed countries such as Australia, Canada, and Switzerland currently have targeted
price control programs for pharmaceutical drugs. See http://www.pbs.gov.au/pbs/home; http://www.
pmprb-cepmb.gc.ca/home; https://www.trade.gov/td/health/drugpricingstudy.pdf; http://nyti.ms/
2yYIzWt. In the US, the main candidates in the recent presidential election suggested they would push
for legislation to control drug prices. See, for example, New York Times: http://nyti.ms/1FuGLq8,
http://nyti.ms/1NqhboW;Bloomberg: http://bloom.bg/2aFZHna;Forbes: http://bit.ly/2ljpBX1.
4See http://www.consumers.org.il/category/Price-monitoring; http://bit.ly/2i1rbNK; http://
bit.ly/2yXldjT.
2

targeted controls, affecting a selected set of consumer products (e.g. whole milk, 1 liter,
brand X) while similar varieties remained free from any kind of restrictions. To help with
thevisibilityandenforcementprograms,thegovernmentrequiredretailerstodisplaylabels
identifyingindividualgoodsasbeingundera“governmentagreement”,includingwhenthe
goods were being sold online (as many Argentine supermarkets do). This meant we could
use the information found on supermarket’s websites to distinguish price-controlled goods
and track their prices on a daily basis. In particular, we used web-scraping technologies to
collectdailypricesfromOctober2007toMay2015formorethan50thousandproductssold
byoneofthelargestsupermarkets,includingapproximately1.4thousandthatwereundera
pricecontrolatsomepointintime.5
With this high-frequency panel of controlled and non-controlled goods, we examine
thebefore-and-afterimpactsofpricecontrolsfrommicroandmacroperspectives. Ourmain
resultscanbesummarizedasfollows:
First, we show that price controls tend to be imposed on goods that have significant
weights in the CPI basket and for varieties sold by leading brands. This result is consistent
with Cox (1980), who argues that focusing on products with high CPI weight and on con-
centrated industries would ensure the greatest impact on CPI inflation as well as the ability
ofthegovernmenttoenforcethecontrols.
Second,theimpactoftargetedpricecontrolsonaggregateinflationistemporaryand
small. Controlled goods are sold at “government agreement” prices, which are on average
3.3% lower than before the control. This lower price is usually compensated by a similar
increaseinpricesassoonasthecontrolsarerelaxed.
Third, contrary to common beliefs, we find that controlled goods are seldom discon-
tinued and that their general availability is similar to that of non-controlled goods. They
haveahigherprobabilityofgoingtemporarilyoutofstock,butstockoutsareshort-livedand
goods are only occasionally discontinued. One likely explanation is that the government’s
5SeeCavallo(2016)andCavalloandRigobon(2016)fordetailsonthescrapingmethodology. Cavallo(2017)
comparesonlineandofflinepricesfor56largemultichannelretailersin10countriesandshowsthatpricestend
tobeidenticalmostofthetime.
3