NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?EVIDENCE
FROM ILLEGAL INSIDER TRADES
Kenneth R. Ahern
Working Paper 24297
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24297
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2018
I thank seminar participants at Indiana University for useful feedback on this paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Kenneth R. Ahern. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Do Proxies for Informed Trading Measure Informed Trading? Evidence from Illegal Insider
Trades
Kenneth R. Ahern
NBER Working Paper No. 24297
February 2018
JEL No. D53,D83,D85,G12,G14,K42
ABSTRACT
This paper exploits hand-collected data on illegal insider trades to test whether standard
illiquidity measures can detect informed trading. Controlling for unobserved cross-sectional and
time-series variation, sampling bias, and strategic timing of insider trades, I find that only
absolute order imbalance and the negative autocorrelation of order flows are statistically and
economically robust predictors of insider trading. However, this result only holds for short-lived
information. When information is long-lived, none of the measures of illiquidity I consider detect
informed trading, including bid-ask spreads, Kyle's lambda, and Amihud illiquidity. These
results suggest that standard measures of illiquidity have limited applications.
Kenneth R. Ahern
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
3670 Trousdale Parkway, HOH 718
Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER
kenneth.ahern@marshall.usc.edu

DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING? 1
“The construction of proxies for [information asymmetry] via empirical analysis of
[observablemarketphenomena]ranksasoneofthemostimportantgoalsofempirical
microstructure research.” — Joel Hasbrouck, 2007
A central theory of finance is that information asymmetry drives liquidity in financial markets
(Kyle,1985;GlostenandMilgrom,1985). Toimplementthistheory,financescholarshavedeveloped
a battery of proxies for information asymmetry based on measures of illiquidity, such as bid-ask
spread decompositions (Madhavan, Richardson, and Roomans, 1997), order imbalance (Easley,
Kiefer, O’Hara, and Paperman, 1996), and price impact (Glosten and Harris, 1988). Though the
theoryiscompellingandtheseproxiesarewidelyused,thereislittlecredibleempiricalevidencethat
theproxiesarevalid. Thisisbecausevalidatingtheproxiesrequirestherareopportunitytodirectly
observe informed trading. Given the importance of information asymmetry in finance, it is crucial
to assess which empirical proxies of informed trading are valid and under what circumstances.
In this paper, I exploit detailed data on illegal insider trading to provide new evidence on the
validity of a host of proxies for informed trading. Though illegal insider trading does not represent
all informed trading, these data help to overcome a number of empirical obstacles. First, the legal
documents in insider trading cases provide direct observations of the timing of information flows
and trades. Second, the trades documented in illegal insider trading cases are, by definition, based
on material non-public information, not speculation or public information. Third, the data include
observations of informed trading in a wide range of firms and events. Finally, the longevity of
information varies in thedata, allowing a comparison of short-lived versus long-lasting information.
The observations of insider trading are hand-collected from all insider trading cases filed by the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Department of Justice (DOJ) between 2009
and 2013, as collected in Ahern (2017). The sample includes 312 different firms in 410 different
insidertrading events over theperiod1996 to 2013. Mergers and acquisitions are themost common
event in the sample(52%), followed by earnings announcements (28%), news aboutdrugregulation
(9%), and other announcements about operations, security issuance, and financial distress. Firms
range from recently public firms to the largest firms in the economy, including Microsoft, Procter
& Gamble, and Berkshire Hathaway, and the median sample firm is comparable to the median firm
on the NYSE.

2 DO PROXIES FOR INFORMED TRADING MEASURE INFORMED TRADING?
Using direct observations of insider trading, I compare the power of widely used measures of
illiquidity to predict informed trading. Specifically, using intraday data from the NYSE Trades
and Quotes (TAQ) database, I calculate quoted, effective, and realized spreads, price impact,
absolute order imbalance, Kyle’s λ, and parameters from the spread decomposition of Madhavan,
Richardson, and Roomans (1997) (MRR). Using daily data, I also calculate the illiquidity measure
of Amihud (2002).
There are two primary obstacles to using illegal insider trading to test the predictive power of
illiquidity measures. First, informed trading does not occur in a random set of firms and dates.
This means that omitted variables could cause a spurious relationship between illiquidity and
informed trading. For example, high-tech firms might have higher illiquidity for reasons unrelated
to information asymmetry and at the same time, high-tech firms might also have greater informed
trading. Similarly, omitted variables could drive both the time series pattern of illiquidity and
informed trading.
To address these concerns, I use event fixed effects, event-day fixed effects, and time-varying
macroeconomic and firm-level factors to absorb omitted variables. The event fixed effects control
for all time-invariant properties of thefirm and event, such as thetype of event, thefirm’s industry,
financialpolicies, andgeographiclocation. Theevent-day fixedeffects controlfortheaverage runup
of informed trading and illiquidity before the public announcement of the event. The time-varying
factors control for systematic risk and a firm’s daily returns and trading volume.
A related concern caused by non-random trading is strategic timing by informed traders. The
theoretical model of Collin-Dufresne and Fos (2016) predicts that insiders with long-lived informa-
tion will strategically trade on days with low levels of illiquidity, generating a negative relationship
between insider trading and illiquidity. To address this concern, I exploit the variation of inside
traders’ lead time before their private information becomes public. When lead times are shorter,
inside traders have less ability to be strategic, and the timing of their trades is closer to random.
Thesecond primaryobstacle whenusingillegal insidertradingdata is potential samplingbias. If
regulators use illiquidity to detect illegal insider trading, then my tests would show that illiquidity
is related to the likelihood of getting caught rather than the likelihood of insider trading itself. To
addressthisconcern,IfirstdescribethemanymethodsusedbytheSECtodetectinsidertrading,of