NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SOCIAL TRANSMISSION BIAS AND INVESTOR BEHAVIOR
Bing Han
David Hirshleifer
Johan Walden
Working Paper 24281
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24281
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
February 2018, Revised January 2020
A previous version of this paper was entitled, “Self-Enhancing Transmission Bias and Active
Investing.” We thank seminar participants at Cambridge University, Central University of Finance
and Economics, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Columbia University, Emory University, the
Federal Reserve Board of New York, Nanyang Business School, National University of Singapore,
New York University, Oxford University, Princeton University, Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance,
Singapore Management University, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, UCLA,
UCSD, University of Hong Kong, University of North Carolina, University of Toronto, University of
Washington at Seattle, Washington University in St. Louis, Xiamen University, Yale University, and the
Institute for Mathematical Behavioral Sciences at UC Irvine; participants at the National Bureau of
Economic Research behavioral finance working group meeting in Chicago, the American Finance
Association annual meetings, the Applied Behavioral Finance Conference at UCLA, the Linde
Conference at Caltech, the BYU Red Rock Finance Conference, the SITE conference at Stanford
University, and the 2nd China International Forum on Finance and Policy; Jennifer Conrad (Editor), an
anonymous referee, the NBER discussant, Nick Barberis; the AFA discussant, Blake LeBaron; the
ABF discussant, Andrea Eisfeldt; the Five Star discussant JuanJuan Meng; Markus Brunnermeier,
Terry Burnham, Jean-Paul Carvalho, David Dicks, Jakub Jurek, Edward Rice, Nikolai Roussanov,
Martin Schmalz, Siew Hong Teoh, Paul Tetlock, Rossen Valkanov, Michela Verardo, Ivo Welch, Jeff
Wurgler, Hongjun Yan, Liyan Yang, and Wei Xiong for very helpful comments; and Jason Chan,
SuJung Choi, and Major Coleman for helpful research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Bing Han, David Hirshleifer, and Johan Walden. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Social Transmission Bias and Investor Behavior
Bing Han, David Hirshleifer, and Johan Walden
NBER Working Paper No. 24281
February 2018, Revised January 2020
JEL No. D03,D83,D85,D9,D91,G02,G11,G12,G14,G4,G41
ABSTRACT
We offer a new social approach to investment decision making and asset prices. Investors discuss
their strategies and convert others to their strategies with a probability that increases in
investment returns. The conversion rate is shown to be convex in realized returns.
Unconditionally, active strategies (e.g., high variance and skewness) dominate, although investors
have no inherent preference over these characteristics. The model has strong predictions for how
adoption of active strategies depends on investors' social networks. In contrast with nonsocial
approaches, sociability, self-enhancing transmission and other features of the communication
process determine the popularity and pricing of active investment strategies.
Bing Han Johan Walden
Department of Finance Haas School of Business
Rotman School of Management University of California at Berkeley
University of Toronto 545 Student services building, #1900
105 St. George Street Berkeley, CA 94720
Toronto, Ontario walden@haas.berkeley.edu
Canada
Bing.Han@Rotman.Utoronto.Ca
David Hirshleifer
The Paul Merage School of Business
University of California, Irvine
4291 Pereira Drive
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
david.h@uci.edu

1 Introduction
A neglected topic in financial economics is how investment ideas are transmitted from per-
son to person. In most investments models, the influence of individual choices on others
is mediated by price or by quantities traded in impersonal markets. However, more di-
rect forms of social interaction also affect investment decisions. As Shiller (1989) put it,
“...Investing in speculative assets is a social activity. Investors spend a substantial part
of their leisure time discussing investments, reading about investments, or gossiping about
others’ successes or failures in investing.” In one survey, individual investors were asked
what first drew their attention to the firm whose stock they had most recently bought.
Almost all referred to direct personal contact; personal interaction was also important for
institutional investors (Shiller and Pound 1989). Furthermore, an empirical literature finds
that social interactions affect investment decisions by individuals and money managers,
including selection of individual stocks.1
We offer a new social approach to the theory of investor behavior by modeling how the
process by which ideas are transmitted affects trading strategies. We explore how biases
in conversation promote superficially-appealing personal investing strategies, focusing on
active versus passive investment behavior in security markets. Our goal is to provide an
integrated explanation for several well-known puzzles and stylized facts in the literature
while providing new insights and empirical implications.
Notably, individualinvestorstradeactivelyandhaveinvestedinactiveinvestmentfunds
for decades, and thereby have on average underperformed net of costs relative to a pas-
sive strategy such as holding a market index—the active investing puzzle.2 Second is the
underdiversification puzzle, that investors hold individual stocks and active funds, thereby
1Shiller (2000, 2017) discusses other indications that conversation matters for security investment de-
cisions. The empirical literature includes Kelly and O’Grada (2000), Duflo and Saez (2002, 2003), Hong,
Kubik, and Stein (2004, 2005), Massa and Simonov (2005), Ivkovi´c and Weisbenner (2007), Brown et al.
(2008), Cohen, Frazzini and Malloy (2008, 2010), Shive (2010), Gray, Crawford, and Kern (2012), and
Mitton, Vorkink, and Wright (2018).
2On underperformance in individual trading, see Barber and Odean (2000a), Barber et al. (2009).
Carhart (1997) and Daniel et al. (1997) find that active funds typically do not outperform the returns of
passive benchmarks. French (2008) documents very large fees paid in the aggregate by investors to active
funds. In recent years there has also been a shift from active mutual funds toward both indexing but also
to hedge funds. In any case, what is notable is how slow has been the shift from active funds toward
indexing over a period of decades.
1

increasing portfolio volatility without adequate compensating mean returns. For example,
the idiosyncratic risk exposure of Swedish households accounts for half of the return vari-
ance for the median household (Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini 2007). Third, individual
investors are attracted to stocks with high skewness—so-called lottery stocks—see Kumar
(2009), Bali, Cakici, and Whitelaw (2011), Han and Kumar (2013), and Boyer and Vorkink
(2014). This behavior is not consistent with standard investor preferences. A final feature
of investor behavior is that flows into funds are a convex function of past performance
(Chevalier and Ellison 1997; Sirri and Tufano 1998).
The leading explanations typically focus on a subset of these puzzles and stylized facts,
and do not address other dimensions of investor behavior. Naive active investing, for
example, has been explained by individual-level cognitive biases. Excessive individual
investor trading is typically attributed to investor overconfidence (DeBondt and Thaler
1995; Barber and Odean 2000a), the tendency of investors to overestimate their abilities.
However, there is also evidence that trading aggressiveness is greatly exacerbated by social
interactions, a fact that is not emphasized by this literature.3
Standard explanations for underdiversification include hedging motives and heteroge-
neouspreferences, butseveralstudieshighlightthelimitationsoftheseexplanations. Massa
and Simonov (2006) find that hedging motives for human capital risk, which is a fundamen-
tal source of individual investor risk, does not explain heterogeneous investment behavior
among individual investors well. Similarly, Calvet, Campbell and Sodini (2007, 2009) find
that rational diversification and portfolio rebalancing motives do not suffice to explain
investors’ portfolio holdings well.
Theleadingexplanationsfortheattractionofinvestorstolotterystockshavebeenbased
on individual-level biases, and specifically on nontraditional preferences (Brunnermeier and
Parker 2005; Barberis and Huang 2008). Such explanations do not, however, explain why
higher intensity of social interactions is associated with stronger attraction of investors to
both high volatility and high skewness stocks, where this intensity is proxied by population
3For example, participants in investment clubs seem to select individual stocks based on reasons that
are easily exchanged with others (Barber, Heath, and Odean 2003); select small, high-beta, growth stocks;
turnovertheirportfoliosveryfrequently; andunderperformthemarket(BarberandOdean2000b). There
isevidence(mentionedinfootnote1)thatstockpickingbyindividualsandinstitutions,anactiveinvesting
behavior, spreads socially, and that stock market participation increases with measures of social connect-
edness (Hong, Kubik, and Stein 2004; Kaustia and Knu¨pfer 2012). Furthermore, during the millennial
high-tech boom, investors who switched early to online trading (and who were probably early participants
in online forms of social interaction) subsequently began to trade more actively and speculatively, and
earned reduced trading profits (Barber and Odean 2002; Choi, Laibson, and Metrick 2002).
2