NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DECISION FATIGUE AND HEURISTIC ANALYST FORECASTS
David Hirshleifer
Yaron Levi
Ben Lourie
Siew Hong Teoh
Working Paper 24293
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24293
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2018, Revised February 2018
We thank David Aboody, Kenneth Ahern, Michael Clement, Dan Givoly, Stanimir Markov,
David Solomon, Brett Trueman and an anonymous referee; seminar participants at UC Irvine;
conference participants at the American Accounting Associations Annual Meeting, the UCLA-
USC-UCI Accounting Research Conference, the Law and Finance Conference at the University
of San Diego, and the Financial Accounting and Reporting Section Midyear Meeting for helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by David Hirshleifer, Yaron Levi, Ben Lourie, and Siew Hong Teoh. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Decision Fatigue and Heuristic Analyst Forecasts
David Hirshleifer, Yaron Levi, Ben Lourie, and Siew Hong Teoh
NBER Working Paper No. 24293
February 2018, Revised February 2018
JEL No. D91,G02,G2,G24,G4,G41
ABSTRACT
Psychological evidence indicates that decision quality declines after an extensive session of
decision-making, a phenomenon known as decision fatigue. We study whether decision fatigue
affects analysts’ judgments. Analysts cover multiple firms and often issue several forecasts in a
single day. We find that forecast accuracy declines over the course of a day as the number of
forecasts the analyst has already issued increases. Also consistent with decision fatigue, we find
that the more forecasts an analyst issues, the higher the likelihood the analyst resorts to more
heuristic decisions by herding more closely with the consensus forecast, by self-herding (i.e.,
reissuing their own previous outstanding forecasts), and by issuing a rounded forecast. Finally,
we find that the stock market understands these effects and discounts for analyst decision fatigue.
David Hirshleifer Ben Lourie
The Paul Merage School of Business Merage School of Business
University of California, Irvine University of California, Irvine
4291 Pereira Drive Irvine, CA 92697
Irvine, CA 92697 blourie@exchange.uci.edu
and NBER
david.h@uci.edu Siew Hong Teoh
The Paul Merage School of Business
Yaron Levi University of Irvine
University of Southern California Irvine, CA 92697-3125
3670 Trousdale Parkway, Suite 308 steoh@uci.edu
Bridge Hall 308, MC-0804
Los Angeles, CA 90089
yaronlevi1@gmail.com

1. Introduction
The literature on the determinants of analyst forecasting behavior (e.g., Clement
1999; Bradshaw 2011) emphasizes the errors that derive from conflicts of interest (e.g.
Kothari, So, and Verdi 2016; Mola, and Guidolin 2009; Ljungqvist et al. 2007; Kirk
2011; Christophe, Ferri, and Hsieh 2010), and psychological bias (see Ramnath, Rock,
and Shane 2008 for a review of the literature). We test here whether analyst decision
fatigue (i.e., a decline in decision quality after an extensive session of decision-making)
affects forecasting behavior. Specifically, we investigate whether the number of forecasts
an analyst has already made during a given day affects the accuracy of the next forecast
the analyst makes on that same day. We also test whether analysts who have issued
more forecasts during a given day behave more heuristically in the form of herding in
their forecasts toward the consensus forecast, self-herding (i.e., reissuing their own
outstanding forecasts) or providing a rounded forecast (forecast that ends with zero or
five).
A large body of evidence in psychology suggests that judgments and decisions
made under greater pressure, distraction, or fatigue tend to be made more heuristically.
The distinction between heuristic and non-heuristic decision-making can be understood
using the classification of judgments and decisions emphasized by Kahneman (2011) and
initially introduced by Stanovich and West (2000). In this model, decisions arise either
2

from System 1, in which the decision is made using quick and easy intuitive cognitive
processes, or from System 2, in which decisions are the result of slow, rigorous reasoning
processes. System 2 thinking (i.e., non-heuristic decision-making) requires more mental
resources, so individuals tend to switch to System 1 thinking (i.e., heuristic decision-
making) after an extended period of System 2 thinking.
We expect that analysts who use System 2 thinking will produce higher-quality
forecasts than System 1 thinking. We also predict that when analysts become mentally
fatigued, they will exhibit a reduced ability to issue an accurate forecast and are more
likely to use heuristics (System 1 thinking) when issuing a forecast. These heuristics
include techniques such as conforming to the consensus or reiterating a previous
forecast.
Baumeister et al. (1998) describe decision fatigue as a consequence of “ego
depletion,” defined as a draining of mental resources. They argue that the self-control
required for careful cognitive processing and systematic decision-making requires mental
resources that are in limited supply. Self-control is typically impaired when the
cognitive resources available for decision-making are low. Thus, when people devote
effort to complex decisions over a given period of time, the resulting decision fatigue
temporarily reduces the quality of their subsequent decisions. Many subsequent studies
3