NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK LIQUIDITY, CREDIT SUPPLY, AND THE ENVIRONMENT
Ross Levine
Chen Lin
Zigan Wang
Wensi Xie
Working Paper 24375
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24375
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2018
Chen Lin acknowledges financial support from the Center of Financial Innovation and
Development and the Seed Funding for Strategic Interdisciplinary Research at Hong Kong
University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Ross Levine, Chen Lin, Zigan Wang, and Wensi Xie. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bank Liquidity, Credit Supply, and the Environment
Ross Levine, Chen Lin, Zigan Wang, and Wensi Xie
NBER Working Paper No. 24375
March 2018
JEL No. G21,O16,Q40,Q52,Q53
ABSTRACT
We evaluate the impact of the credit conditions facing corporations on their emissions of toxic air
pollutants. Exploiting cross-county, cross-time shale discoveries that generated liquidity windfalls
at local bank branches, we construct measures of (1) the degree to which banks in non-shale
counties, i.e., counties where shale was not discovered, receive liquidity shocks through their
branches in shale counties and (2) the degree to which a corporation in a non-shale county has a
relationship lender that receives liquidity shocks through its branches. From both the county- and
firm-level analyses, we discover that positive shocks to credit conditions reduce corporate
pollution.
Ross Levine Zigan Wang
Haas School of Business Faculty of Business and Economics
University of California at Berkeley The University of Hong Kong
545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685) Hong Kong
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900 wangzigan@gmail.com
and NBER
Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu Wensi Xie
Department of Finance
Chen Lin Chinese University of Hong Kong
Faculty of Business and Economics Hong Kong
The University of Hong Kong wensixie@baf.cuhk.edu.hk
Hong Kong
chenlin1@hku.hk

1
1. Introduction
Air pollution increases the incidence of respiratory and cardiovascular diseases,
cancer, asthma and allergies, reproductive and neurodevelopmental disorders, and premature
death.1 The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that in 2012 around 1 in 8 deaths
were attributable to air pollution. According to Ambient Air Pollution 2016 released by the
WHO, 92% of the world’s people breathe air with pollution concentrations that exceed WHO
Air Quality Guidelines (AQG) limits. Even in developed countries, environmental pollution
is the biggest threat to human health and well-being. For example, the Air Quality Report
2016 by the European Environment Agency estimates that approximately 50% of the EU’s
urban population was exposed to concentrations of small particulate matter exceeding WHO
AQG limits. As another example, the State of the Air 2017 report by the American Lung
Association shows that more than 40% of the people in the U.S. live in counties that have
unhealthful levels of air pollution.
In this paper, we examine how bank liquidity and credit supply affect the environment.
More specifically, we evaluate the impact of shocks to the supply of credit on corporate
emissions of toxic air pollutants.2 Although the literature shows that credit conditions shape
economic growth (e.g., King and Levine 1993, Jayaratne and Strahan 1996, Levine and
Zervos 1998), firm and industry dynamics (Cetorelli and Strahan, 2006), business cycle
fluctuations (e.g., Bernanke and Gertler, 1989, Morgan, Rime, and Strahan, 2004), innovation
(e.g., Brown, Fazzari, and Petersen 2009), and the distribution of income and economic
opportunities (e.g., Black and Strahan 2001, Beck, Levine, and Levkov 2012), the literature
has not focused on how credit conditions influence corporate emissions of toxic pollutants,
and as a result, the quality of the environment. In this study, we identify shocks to the supply
of bank credit and examine the impacts on corporate pollution and environmental quality.
1 In addition to harming public health (e.g., Chay and Greenstone 2003, Ebenstein et al. 2015, Schlenker and
Walker 2016, IIsen, Rossin-Slater, and Walker 2017), pollution reduces housing prices (e.g., Currie, Davis,
Greenstone and Walker 2015), lower labor productivity (e.g., Zivin and Neidell 2012), and influences industrial
production (e.g., Greenstone 2002).
2 U.S. Government Accountability Office estimates that industrial plants in the nation emit a total of about 4
billion pounds of toxic chemicals every year (Currie, Davis, Greenstone, and Walker, 2015).

2
A simple cost-benefit framework suggests how access to credit can shape toxic
emissions by corporations. The costs of reducing pollution involve sizeable upfront
investments, as shown by Walker (2013).3 The benefits, however, largely accrue over time,
as pollution abatement reduces expected fines and penalties from violating regulatory and
legal limits on toxic emissions, augments the health and productivity of its workers, and
boosts the firm’s reputation.4 Therefore, a boost in the supply of bank credit can improve
access to credit, allowing firms to finance large pollution abatement investments, and lower
interest rates, increasing the net present value of projects that reduce pollution. Similarly, if
credit conditions tighten, firms will be less likely to invest in pollution abatement and might
cut expenditures on existing environmental protection activities, increasing their emissions of
toxic air pollutants. Although we do not have corporate-level data on investment in pollution
abatement, we can evaluate how the supply of credit influences the emissions of toxic
pollutants by corporations.
To assess the impact of credit conditions on corporate pollution, we must address two
standard identification challenges: (1) unobserved factors might simultaneously drive both
the corporation’s credit conditions and its emissions of toxic air pollutants and (2) reverse
causality might drive the credit-pollution relationship, i.e., corporation’s environmental
policies might shape the credit conditions offered by its lenders. To address these challenges,
we develop and implement two complimentary empirical strategies for identifying shocks to
the credit conditions facing firms. The first strategy identifies shocks to the credit conditions
facing firms in a county and the second strategy identifies shocks to the credit conditions
facing individual firms.
Both of our empirical strategies start with the same building block: identifying
liquidity shocks to individual banks. In particular, we start with Gilje, Loutskina, and Strahan
(2016). They show that (1) unexpected technological breakthroughs in fracking made shale
gas production economically viable; (2) following these technological breakthroughs, the
3 The EPA estimates that in 2016 companies spent more than $13.7 billion on actions and equipment to control
pollution. See, https://www.epa.gov/enforcement/enforcement-annual-results-fiscal-year-2016.
4 According to the EPA, fees and penalties from for violating environmental laws and regulations reached $6
billion in 2016.