NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DESIGNING DYNAMIC SUBSIDIES TO SPUR ADOPTION OF NEW TECHNOLOGIES
Ashley Langer
Derek Lemoine
Working Paper 24310
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24310
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2018, Revised August 2018
We are grateful to the University of Arizona Renewable Energy Network for supporting this
work. Kyle Wilson, Max Rosenthal, and Sanguk Nam provided valuable research assistance. We
thank Todd Gerarden, Gautam Gowrisankaran, Erin Mansur, David Popp, Stan Reynolds, and Mo
Xiao for helpful discussions. We also thank participants at the 2016 POWER conference, the
2016 Summer Conference of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, the
2017 Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics, the 2018 National Bureau of Economic
Research Summer Institute, North Carolina State University, the University of British Columbia,
and the University of North Carolina/Duke. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Ashley Langer and Derek Lemoine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Designing Dynamic Subsidies to Spur Adoption of New Technologies
Ashley Langer and Derek Lemoine
NBER Working Paper No. 24310
February 2018, Revised August 2018
JEL No. H21,H23,H71,Q48
ABSTRACT
We analyze the efficient subsidy for durable good technologies. We theoretically demonstrate
that a policymaker faces a tension between intertemporally price discriminating by designing a
subsidy that increases over time and taking advantage of future technological progress by
designing a subsidy that decreases over time. Using dynamic estimates of household preferences
for residential solar in California, we show that the efficient subsidy increases over time. The
regulator's spending quintuples when households anticipate future technological progress and
future subsidies.
Ashley Langer
Department of Economics
University of Arizona
McClelland Hall 401
1130 E. Helen St.
Tucson, AZ 85721-0108
alanger@email.arizona.edu
Derek Lemoine
Department of Economics
University of Arizona
McClelland Hall 401EE
Tucson, AZ 85721
and NBER
dlemoine@email.arizona.edu

Langer and Lemoine Dynamic Technology Subsidies August 2018
1 Introduction
Policymakers commonly subsidize adoption of durable good technologies. The U.S. govern-
ment pays hospitals to adopt electronic medical record systems and car buyers to choose
electric vehicles. The U.S. and other countries have paid farmers to install more efficient
irrigation systems, firms to build renewable energy projects, and households to replace their
aging appliances. And many governments pay homeowners to install solar panels. These
subsidies often evolve over time according to an announced schedule. Policymakers may em-
ploy these subsidies to increase adoption, but these subsidies also interact with other goals
such as limiting public spending: two subsidy trajectories that eventually achieve the same
level of adoption could have very different implications for the public purse. Yet the design
of an efficient subsidy schedule has thus far remained an open policy question.
Weinvestigatehowaregulatorshoulddesignadurablegoodsubsidythatseekstoachieve
a target level of adoption by a certain date.1 Potential adopters have heterogeneous, private
values for the technology. The regulator announces how the subsidy will evolve over time,
values cumulative adoption, and dislikes spending public funds. Given that regulators often
want to achieve suboptimal targets, whether for political or budgetary reasons, we remain
agnostic about the welfare implications of the adoption target and refer to the “efficient”
subsidy as the one that maximizes the regulator’s objective subject to the target.2 We
theoretically disentangle the forces that determine whether the efficient subsidy increases or
decreases over time, and we combine the theoretical analysis with new dynamic estimates of
household preferences for rooftop solar electric systems in order to understand the relative
importance of these different forces in a prominent real-world application.
We formally show that the regulator has conflicting interests when designing the efficient
subsidy schedule. Of particular note, the regulator wants to offer a low initial subsidy to
induce adoption by consumers with a particularly high willingness-to-pay for the technology
and wants to increase the subsidy over time so as to then obtain adoption from consumers
with lower willingness-to-pay. Within a period, the regulator cannot discriminate between
consumers because all adopters receive the same subsidy, but the dynamic nature of the
1We formally demonstrate that our setting is equivalent to one in which the regulator has a fixed budget
instead of a fixed adoption target.
2We refer to our derived subsidy trajectories as “efficient” rather than “optimal” because the policy may
not maximize welfare, and we avoid “cost-effective” because the regulator’s objective need not reduce to
minimizing the spending required to meet the target.
1 of 41

Langer and Lemoine Dynamic Technology Subsidies August 2018
subsidy enables intertemporal price discrimination. By using a low subsidy early and a high
subsidy later, the regulator avoids “over-subsidizing” consumers who would be willing to
adopt the technology at a low subsidy level and thereby reduces the total cost of achieving
a given level of adoption. This price discrimination channel is strong when there are a lot of
inframarginal consumers who would adopt even at low subsidy levels and is weak when most
consumers are on the margin.3 However, when consumers anticipate future subsidies, some
consumers will simply wait for the later, higher subsidies.4 In effect, the set of inframarginal
consumers expands to include all those early adopters who would have to be compensated for
thelater,highersubsidy. Theregulatorcannolongerlimitthesetofinframarginalconsumers
as sharply merely by delaying the subsidy for one period. Consumers’ expectations therefore
constrain the regulator’s ability to intertemporally price discriminate and force the regulator
to commit to a flatter subsidy schedule.5
In contrast, anticipated improvements in technology usually favor a declining subsidy.
As technology improves, more people want to adopt the technology for a given subsidy.
If the regulator offered households the same subsidy as in the case without technological
change, then later periods would see greater adoption when technological change occurs.
The increase in adoption in later periods translates into an increase in subsidy spending
in later periods. However, many regulators will prefer to smooth spending over time. The
regulator accomplishes this smoothing by decreasing the subsidy in later periods relative to
earlier periods. Technological progress therefore generally favors a subsidy that decreases
over time. And endogenizing technological progress strengthens this effect: if the regulator
believes that early adoption makes costs decline faster, then the regulator has a stronger
3Boomhower and Davis (2014) estimate the fraction of inframarginal adopters in an energy efficiency
program in Mexico. They find that more than 65% of households are inframarginal and that about half
of adopters would have adopted in the absence of any subsidy. Chandra et al. (2010) find that the ma-
jority of Canadian vehicle purchasers who received a rebate for hybrid electric vehicles were inframarginal.
Gowrisankaran and Rysman (2012) find that consumers who buy digital camcorders in later periods have
lower values for the good than did consumers who purchased in earlier periods.
4In the theory and simulations, our consumers have rational expectations about the evolution of technol-
ogy costs and subsidies and attempt to time their adoption of the technology. However, we remain agnostic
about whether consumers accurately internalize the present discounted value of the stream of benefits from
thetechnology. Thispotentialundervaluationofastreamoffuturetechnologybenefitshasbeendiscussedat
length in the literature on the “energy efficiency paradox” (e.g., Allcott and Greenstone, 2012; Busse et al.,
2013; De Groote and Verboven, 2016).
5Relatedly, Conlon (2010) emphasizes that firms want to lower the price of a durable good over time in
order to intertemporally price discriminate, but consumers’ willingness to wait for lower prices limits the
rate at which firms can reduce prices.
2 of 41