NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WAITING FOR THE PAYDAY? THE MARKET FOR STARTUPS AND THE TIMING
OF ENTREPRENEURIAL EXIT
Ashish Arora
Andrea Fosfuri
Thomas Roende
Working Paper 24350
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24350
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2018
We thank seminar participants at Fuqua School of Business, Copenhagen Business School,
Carlos III University, Danish Technical University, University of Tübingen, University of
Mannheim, University of Southern California, KAIST, and the 6th HEC Paris Workshop on
Entrepreneurship, for comments and suggestions. An earlier draft was circulated with the title
“Investment in absorptive capacity and the decision between going early and waiting in the
market for technology”. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Ashish Arora, Andrea Fosfuri, and Thomas Roende. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Waiting for the Payday? The Market for Startups and the Timing of Entrepreneurial Exit
Ashish Arora, Andrea Fosfuri, and Thomas Roende
NBER Working Paper No. 24350
February 2018
JEL No. L26,O34
ABSTRACT
Most technology startups are set up for exit through acquisition by large corporations. In
choosing when to sell, startups face a tradeoff. Early acquisition reduces execution errors but later
acquisition improves the likelihood of finding a better match since in the early market, there are
fewer buyers because early acquisition requires costly absorptive capacity. Moreover, the buyer’s
decision to invest in absorptive capacity is related to the startup’s decision about the timing of the
exit sale. In this paper, we build a model to capture this complexity and the related tradeoffs. We
find that the early market for startups is inefficiently thin if the timing of exit is a strategic choice,
i.e. startups have to commit to whether to exit early or late. Too few startups are sold early, and
too few buyers invest in absorptive capacity. Paradoxically, venture capital aggravates the
inefficiency. However, if the timing of exit is a tactical choice, i.e. startups can choose to go late
after observing the early offers, there are too many early acquisitions and too much investment in
absorptive capacity by incumbents
Ashish Arora Thomas Roende
Fuqua School of Business Copenhagen Business School
Duke University Department of Innovation and
Box 90120 Organizational Economics
Durham, NC 27708-0120 DK-2000 Frederiksberg, Denmark
and NBER thr.ino@cbs.dk
ashish.arora@duke.edu
Andrea Fosfuri
Bocconi University
andrea.fosfuri@unibocconi.it

1. Introduction
Many inventions begin the journey to commercialization in startups. After a period of incubation and
development, the invention can be passed on to an incumbent, typically by the incumbent buying the
startup.1 When to sell a startups is an important decision for entrepreneurs and investors. There are natural
inflection points in the lifecycles of startups when they can be acquired or can choose to persist and
develop the technology closer to commercialization (Graebner and Eisenhardt, 2004; Allain et al. 2016).
As venture capitalist, Bill Janeway from Warburg Pincus, writes2
Given the much extended path to self-sustaining positive cash flow from operations, the
responsible entrepreneur and VC are charged with asking themselves the same question at
each step along the way:
- The technology does “light up” — do we sell now?
- We have three credible customers who will testify that they have bought our offering and
will buy more — do we sell now?
- We have access to another round of capital but it will be dilutive and Business Risk
looms — do we sell now?
It is not difficult to find other examples. Foursquare, a local search-and-discovery service mobile app
based in New York City, was offered $100 million by both Yahoo and Facebook, one year after it
launched in 2010, and both offers were turned down. Receptos, a San Diego-based biotechnology
company, waited seven years after its foundation before accepting a multibillion offer from Calgene,
which outbid AstraZeneca, Teva and Gilead. While both Foursquare and Receptos seem to have made the
right decision in postponing their exit, the counterfactual is unclear. Failure rates among technology
startups are extremely high.3 For instance, Maine and Thomas (2017) provide the example of an MIT
startup, BIND, which raised several rounds of capital to apply its nano-particle drug delivery to new
therapies. Despite going public via an IPO in 2013, in 2016, it was forced to file for bankruptcy following
a failed clinical trial. BIND was acquired by Pfizer shortly thereafter for its intellectual property assets.
1 The National Venture Capital Association reports that acquisitions accounted for 82% of the venture
capital-backed exits in 2016 in the US (https://nvca.org/pressreleases/2017-nvca-yearbook-highlights-
busy-year-venture-industry-nvca/). Cunningham (2017) shows that out of the 83 startups in the US
medical device industry that exited, 71 were acquired. Mathisen and Rasmussen (2016) also identify
acquisitions as the most frequent exit strategy in the case of successful Norwegian startups.
2 William Janeway, Warburg Pincus. https://medium.com/the-wtf-economy/enterprise-software-death-
and-transfiguration-99eb1d3fc4c0
3 Startup failure rates are as high as 90% in some industries. Remarkably, the probabilities of success of
biotech companies’ in stage III of drug development are lower than the those of large pharmaceutical
firms in comparable conditions (Guedj and Scharfstein, 2004; Arora et al., 2009).
1

Arguably, BIND would have been better off being acquired at an earlier stage rather than investing in
building an organization and clinical trials.
Figure 1 shows the timing of startup sales across three different industries: bio-pharma, software and
mobile devices.4 It plots the respective fractions of startups acquired before round A, before round B and
after round B. It shows that there is heterogeneity within as well as across industries in the timing of
startup sales, with a higher share of late acquisitions in bio-pharma. Insofar as development costs in
biotech typically are higher than in software, financial constraints on startups are unlikely to be the main
determinant of exit timing; other forces are likely to be at work.
Figure 1: Timing of acquisitions of startups, 1990-2015, by sector.
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Bio_Pharma Software Mobile
Before Round A Before Round B After Round B
Source: Authors’ calculation based on Crunchbase.
In this paper, we build a model to understand the factors that explain the timing of startup sales, and to
investigate the efficiency properties of the equilibrium between buyers and sellers. We focus on exit
through acquisition by an incumbent, which is by far the most common exit route for successful startups.5
The timing of the acquisition is important for understanding the division of innovative labor (Arora and
4 Figure 1 is based on Crunchbase data for 1990-2015. We consider only startups which were acquired.
Firms acquired before any institutional investment are classified as before Round A.
5 Formally, we ignore IPOs. However, as discussed below, our analysis could be extended to allow for an
IPO as a possible further stage if the startup is not acquired.
2