NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCE AND BUSINESS CYCLES:
THE CREDIT-DRIVEN HOUSEHOLD DEMAND CHANNEL
Atif R. Mian
Amir Sufi
Working Paper 24322
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24322
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2018
We thank Daron Acemoglu, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, Emil Verner, and Robert Vishny for
comments that substantially improved the draft. We thank Michael Varley for excellent research
assistance. We also thank the Julis Rabinowitz Center for Public Policy and Finance at
Princeton and the Initiative on Global Markets and the Fama-Miller Center at Chicago Booth for
financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Atif R. Mian and Amir Sufi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Finance and Business Cycles: The Credit-Driven Household Demand Channel
Atif R. Mian and Amir Sufi
NBER Working Paper No. 24322
February 2018
JEL No. E32,E5,G01,G2,R2
ABSTRACT
Every major financial crisis leaves its unique footprint on economic thought. The early banking
crises taught us the importance of financial sector liquidity and the lender of last resort. The Great
Depression highlighted the devastating effects of bank failures and the need for counter-cyclical
fiscal and monetary policy. The Great Recession has brought to the surface the importance of
credit-driven business cycles that operate through household demand. We discuss empirical
evidence accumulated over the last decade supporting this view, and we also describe
accompanying theoretical work that helps define these concepts.
Atif R. Mian
Princeton University
Bendheim Center For Finance
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
atif@princeton.edu
Amir Sufi
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
amir.sufi@chicagobooth.edu

1 Introduction
Every major financial crisis leaves its unique footprint on economic thought. The early banking
crises taught us the importance of financial sector liquidity and the lender of last resort. The
Great Depression highlighted the devastating effects of bank failures and the need for counter-
cyclical fiscal and monetary policy. The Great Recession has brought to the surface the importance
of credit-driven business cycles that operate through household demand. We discuss empirical
evidenceaccumulatedoverthelastdecadesupportingthisview,andwealsodescribeaccompanying
theoretical work that helps define these concepts.
We start with a striking empirical regularity of the Great Recession: the larger the increase in
household leverage prior to the recession, the more severe the subsequent recession. Figure 1 shows
that the change in household debt to GDP ratio from 2002 and 2007 is strongly correlated with the
subsequent increase in unemployment rate from 2007 to 2010, both across states within the United
States as well as across countries around the world.1
Figure 1 Household Debt and Unemployment
10
NV
8
6 FL CA
IN
A
U
NL
T
C
OWR S
G
A C
I A DRI
CONJ
AZ
4
WVMSKY CTDE
MD WYLA TXDC A O R M N H PT M A MT W ON NIYH ILM I I MMEA VA OK 2 KS IA SD MN NH
NE VT
AK
ND
0
0102
ot
7002
,etaR
tnemyolpmenU
egnahC
United States
15
ESP
10
IRL
5 USA GRC
HUN DNK
ISTWAE PRT 0 HKG J S P G N P CH T M E AH E K UA B X O T T P EN U F R O L C RO R L Z A C R E F AG I N N BR NLDAUS
DEU
IDN
−5
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Change HH debt to GDP Ratio, 2002 to 2007
0102
ot
7002
,etaR
tnemyolpmenU
egnahC
World
−20 0 20 40 60
Change HH debt to GDP Ratio, 2002 to 2007
This relationship is broader than the Great Recession. King (1994) shows that countries with
1The ability of household debt expansion to predict recession severity across geographical areas during the Great
Recession has been demonstrated by a number of research studies (e.g., Mian and Sufi (2010), Glick and Lansing
(2010), IMF (2012), and Martin and Philippon (2017)).
1

the largest expansion in household debt to income ratios from 1984 to 1988 witness the largest
shortfall in real GDP growth from 1989 to 1992. Mian et al. (2017a) show that states in the
United States with a larger increase in household debt from 1982 to 1989 see a larger increase in
unemployment and a larger decline in real GDP growth from 1989 to 1992.
Household debt expansion predicts recession severity conditional on a recession, but it also
unconditionally predicts a decline in real GDP growth. Mian et al. (2017b) utilize a panel of 30
countries over the past 40 years, and they show that a rise in the household debt to GDP ratio in a
given country systematically predicts lower subsequent growth and a rise in unemployment. More
recent research by the IMF (2017) confirms the Mian et al. (2017b) result in a larger sample.
A large body of research conducted since the onset of the Great Recession explores the links be-
tween household debt, the housing market, and business cycles in order to elucidate the underlying
factorsgeneratingthepredictivepowerofhouseholddebtexpansionfortherealeconomy. Basedon
this emerging literature, the specific idea we put forward in this article is that expansions in credit
supply, operating primarily through household demand, are an important driver of business cycles.
We call this the credit-driven household demand channel. While scholars have modeled expansions
in credit supply in different ways, our working definition is that a credit supply expansion is when
lenders increase the quantity of credit or decrease the interest rate on credit for reasons unrelated
to changes in income or productivity of borrowers.
The credit-driven household demand channel rests on three main pillars. First, an expansion in
creditsupply,asopposedtotechnologyshocksorpermanentincomeshocks,isakeyforcegenerating
expansion and contraction in economic activity. In Section 2, we review studies showing that shifts
in credit supply lead to a boom-bust cycle the real economy. This phenomena was pervasive in the
2000 to 2010 period, but it has also been a strong force in global business cycle patterns over the
last five decades.
Credit supply expansions affect the real economy. But what is the precise mechanism? The
second pillar of the credit-driven household demand channel is that the expansionary phase of the
credit cycle affects the real economy primarily through boosting household demand as opposed to
boostingproductivecapacityoffirmsintheeconomy. InSection3, wedescribeamethodologythat
allows us to separate whether credit supply expansions boost household demand versus productive
capacity,andwehighlightanumberofresearchstudiesshowingthatthehouseholddemandchannel
2