NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PUBLIC TAX-RETURN DISCLOSURE
Jeffrey L. Hoopes
Leslie Robinson
Joel Slemrod
Working Paper 24318
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24318
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2018
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Jeffrey L. Hoopes, Leslie Robinson, and Joel Slemrod. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Public Tax-Return Disclosure
Jeffrey L. Hoopes, Leslie Robinson, and Joel Slemrod
NBER Working Paper No. 24318
February 2018
JEL No. H25,H26,M4
ABSTRACT
We investigate the consequences of public disclosure of information from company income tax
returns filed in Australia. Supporters of more disclosure argue that increased transparency will
improve tax compliance, while opponents argue that it will divulge sensitive information that is,
in many cases, misunderstood. Our results show that in Australia large private companies
experienced some consumer backlash and, perhaps partly in anticipation, some acted to avoid
disclosure. We detect a small increase (decrease) in tax payments for private (public) firms
subject to disclosure suggesting differential costs of disclosure across firms. Finally, we find that
investors react negatively to anticipated and actual disclosure of tax information, most likely due
to anticipated policy backlash rather than consumer backlash or the revelation of negative
information about cash flows. These findings are important for both managers and policy makers,
as the trend towards increased tax disclosure continues to rise globally.
Jeffrey L. Hoopes Joel Slemrod
Kenan-Flagler Business School University of Michigan
University of North Carolina 701 Tappan Street
300 Kenan Center Drive Room R5396
Chapel Hill, NC 27599 Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
Jeffrey_Hoopes@kenan-flagler.unc.edu and NBER
jslemrod@umich.edu
Leslie Robinson
Dartmouth College
Tuck School of Business
leslie.a.robinson@tuck.dartmouth.edu

1. Introduction
There is currently widespread public and political pressure for action to limit perceived
harmful tax practices by businesses. One response to this pressure has been to increase the amount
of information available to taxing authorities for enforcement, while another is to improve
accountability and compliance via mandatory tax disclosure to the public. The latter response is of
particular concern to firm managers fearing that the private costs of tax-related public disclosure
will outweigh the benefits (Graham et al. 2014; Ernst & Young 2011). For instance, it can
potentially create compliance burdens, divulge sensitive information, generate confusion about
company behavior, and impose reputational damage on firms. Although more transparency results
in potential costs that must be weighed against the perceived benefits, policy discussions generally
proceed in a near-absence of evidence about its potential impacts.1
Our paper seeks to fill this void by considering the recent case wherein the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO) disclosed firm-level data from Australian company tax returns, including
income and taxes payable, for listed and private firms. We analyze a variety of hypothesized
potential effects, focusing on changes in firm behavior, consumer sentiment, and investor
responses. Our results suggest that private companies took relatively more action to avoid public
disclosure than public companies, and the effect of public disclosure appears to have raised the tax
payments of private companies but lowered the tax payments of public companies, consistent with
differences in disclosure costs among firms. Relatedly, private firms subject to disclosure
1 For example, on July 4, 2017 the European Parliament voted in favor of public country-by-country reporting whereby
limited tax information for MNCs is broken down by taxing jurisdiction. While these reports are designed to aid tax
administrators, policymakers are evaluating the possibility of making this information public. Although making less
political headway in the U.S., several members of Congress wrote a letter to the Financial Accounting Standards Board
on July 18, 2017, urging them to require information from country-by-country reports in financial statement footnote
disclosures. Analysis of the Norwegian and Japanese experience with public tax disclosure has provided what up to
now is known about its consequences. For instance, some attention has been paid to small firms in Norway and Japan
(Bø et al. 2015; Hasegawa et al. 2013) and individuals in Japan (Hasegawa et al. 2013). We discuss this in Section 2.
1

experienced a small decline in consumer sentiment, suggesting that expectations of consumer
backlash may have motivated some private firms to avoid disclosure. Finally, we find a negative
investor reaction to both anticipated and actual disclosure. Cross-sectional tests point to anticipated
policy backlash resulting in adverse changes to the tax code as the likely source of the reaction.
For instance, in the 2016−17 Budget, the Australian government announced that it would introduce
a diverted profits tax, effective on 1 July 2017.2 The momentum for this new law was almost
certainly fueled by public scrutiny of the newly disclosed tax information.
In 2013, the Australian legislature began debating publicizing tax-return data. Proponents
argued that more transparency would encourage companies to pay their “fair share” of tax, improve
accountability, and educate the public about compliance with tax laws (Bradbury 2013).
Opponents argued that disclosure would create compliance burdens, divulge sensitive information
to competitors, generate confusion about company behavior, and impose risks on business owners
(Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand 2015; Hurst 2015). The legislature passed a
bill mandating disclosure for foreign-owned private firms and Australian listed firms reporting
more than 100 AUD million of “total income” on the Australia company tax return.3 Disclosure
occurred on December 17, 2015 for the first year covered by the legislation (2013-2014). The same
policy went into effect for Australian-owned private firms reporting more than 200 AUD million,
with disclosure for this set of companies occurring on March 22, 2016. This generated substantial
2 The new legislation imposes a 40 percent tax on diverted profits. Diverted profits are profits deemed to be reported
outside of Australia by Australian companies that use tax avoidance arrangements between related parties to divert,
or report, profits offshore that do not have economic substance. https://www.ato.gov.au/general/new-legislation/in-
detail/direct-taxes/income-tax-for-businesses/diverted-profits-tax/?=redirected
3 Total income refers to line 6S (before deductions) on a company income tax return in Australia:
https://www.ato.gov.au/uploadedFiles/Content/MEI/downloads/Company-tax-return-2016.pdf.
2