NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MORTGAGE DESIGN IN AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF THE HOUSING MARKET
Adam M. Guren
Arvind Krishnamurthy
Timothy J. McQuade
Working Paper 24446
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24446
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2018
The authors would like to thank Chaojun Wang and Xuiyi Song for excellent research assistance and
seminar participants at SED, SITE, Kellogg, Queen's, Indiana, LSE, Boston University, HULM, Housing:
Micro Data, Macro Problems, NBER Summer Institute Capital Markets and the Economy, CEPR Housing
and the Macroeconomy, Chicago Booth Asset Pricing, UCLA, University of Pittsburgh, MIT Sloan,
Wharton, the University of Pennsylvania, Tomasz Piskorski, Erwan Quintin, Jan Eberly, Alex Michaelides,
Alexei Tchistyi, and Andreas Fuster for useful comments. Guren acknowledges research support from
the National Science Foundation under grant #1623801 and from the Boston University Center for
Finance, Law, and Policy. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Adam M. Guren, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Timothy J. McQuade. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Mortgage Design in an Equilibrium Model of the Housing Market
Adam M. Guren, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Timothy J. McQuade
NBER Working Paper No. 24446
March 2018, Revised December 2019
JEL No. E4,G0,G01,G2
ABSTRACT
How can mortgages be redesigned to reduce housing market volatility, consumption volatility, and
default? How does mortgage design interact with monetary policy? We answer these questions using
a quantitative equilibrium life cycle model with aggregate shocks, long-term mortgages, and an equilibrium
housing market, focusing on designs that index payments to monetary policy. Designs that raise mortgage
payments in booms and lower them in recessions do better than designs with fixed mortgage payments.
The benefits are quantitatively substantial: In a simulated crisis under a monetary regime in which
the central bank lowers real interest rates in a bust, house prices fall 2.24 percentage points less, 23
percent fewer households default, and consumption falls by 0.79 percentage points less with ARMs
relative to FRMs. Among designs that reduce payments in a bust, we show that those that front-load
the payment reductions and concentrate them in recessions outperform designs that spread payment
reductions over the life of the mortgage. Front-loading alleviates household liquidity constraints in
states where they are most binding, reducing default and stimulating housing demand by new homeowners.
To isolate this channel, we compare an FRM with a built-in option to be converted to an ARM with
an FRM with an option to be refinanced at the prevailing FRM rate. Under these two contracts, the
present value of a lender's loan falls by roughly an equal amount, but the FRM that can be converted
to an ARM, which front loads payment reductions, reduces the declines in prices and consumption
six times as much, and reduces default three times as much.
Adam M. Guren Timothy J. McQuade
Department of Economics Stanford Graduate School of Business School
Boston University 655 Knight Way
270 Bay State Road Stanford, CA 94305
Boston, MA 02215 tmcquade@stanford.edu
and NBER
guren@bu.edu
Arvind Krishnamurthy
Stanford Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
akris@stanford.edu

1 Introduction
The design of mortgages is crucial to both household welfare and the macroeconomy. Home equity
is the largest component of wealth for most households, and mortgages tend to be their dominant
source of credit, so the design of mortgages has an outsized effect on household balance sheets
(Campbell, 2013). In the mid-2000s boom and subsequent bust, housing wealth extraction through
the mortgage market boosted consumption in the boom and reduced consumption in the bust (e.g.,
MianandSufi, 2011; Mian, Rao, andSufi, 2013). Mortgagedebtalsoledtothewaveofforeclosures
that resulted in over six million households losing their homes, badly damaging household balance
sheets and crippling the housing market (e.g., Guren and McQuade, 2019; Mian, Sufi, and Trebbi,
2015). Finally, in the wake of the recession, there has been increased attention paid to the role
that mortgages play in the transmission of monetary policy to the real economy through household
balance sheets (e.g., Auclert, 2019; Wong, 2019; Di Maggio et al., 2017; Beraja et al., 2019).
In this paper, we study how to best design mortgages in order to reduce household consump-
tion volatility and default and to increase household welfare. There is considerable evidence that
implementation frictions prevent financial intermediaries from modifying mortgages ex post in a
crisis (e.g., Agarwal et al., 2017a; Agarwal et al., 2017b). As a result, a better-designed ex ante
contract can likely deliver significant welfare benefits (e.g., Campbell and Cocco, 2015; Piskorski
andTchistyi,2017; Greenwald,Landvoigt,andVanNieuwerburgh,2018; PiskorskiandSeru,2018).
We are further motivated by the evidence that not just the level of household mortgage debt (e.g.,
loan-to-value or payment-to-income ratio), but also the design of such debt and in particular the
time path of payments, can impact household outcomes including consumption and default. For
example, Fuster and Willen (2017) and Di Maggio et al. (2017) study cohorts of borrowers with
hybrid adjustable rate mortgages contracted in the years before the crisis. Exploiting heterogeneity
in the timing of monthly payment reductions as mortgages transitioned from initial fixed rates to
adjustable rates during the crisis, these papers show that downward resets resulted in substantially
lowerdefaultsandincreasedconsumption. Similarly, studiesthatexploitquasi-randomvariationin
housing market interventions in the Great Recession such as the Home Affordable Refinance Pro-
gram (HARP) (Agarwal et al., 2017b) and the Home Affordable Modification Program (HAMP)
(Agarwal et al., 2017a; Ganong and Noel, 2019) have found that monthly payment reductions
significantly reduced default and increased consumption.
Such empirical evidence suggests that given the cyclicality of interest rates, indexing mortgage
paymentstointerestratescanimprovehouseholdoutcomesandwelfare. Wepursuethisindexation
questionsystematicallyusingaquantitativeequilibriummodelfeaturingheterogeneoushouseholds,
endogenousmortgagespreads,andendogenoushouseprices. Inacrisis,defaultincreasesthesupply
of homes on the market, further pushing down prices, which in turn generates more default. Using
this framework, we quantitatively assess a variety of questions related to mortgage design. How
would consumption, default, home prices, and household welfare change if we were to alter the
design of mortgages in the economy, particularly in a deep recession and housing bust like the one
experienced during the Great Recession? In an economy that transits between booms, recessions,
and crises, how well do different indexed mortgages perform? What is the most effective simple
form of indexation?
1

Our main finding is that designs in which mortgage payments are higher in booms and lower
in recessions do better than designs with fixed mortgage payments for risk and insurance reasons.
Moreover, among such designs, the most effective ones front-load the payment reductions so that
theyare concentratedduring recessionsratherthan spreadoutoverthe lifeofthe mortgage. Front-
loading payment relief smooths consumption and limits default for homeowners who are liquidity
constrained and stimulates new housing demand by constrained current renters. The reduction in
default and increase in demand helps short-circuit a price-default spiral. Consequently, the benefit
of different designs depends largely on how effectively they deliver immediate payment reductions
to highly constrained households.
Our model features overlapping generations of households subject to both idiosyncratic and
aggregate shocks, making endogenous decisions over home purchases, borrowing, consumption,
refinancing, and costly default. We consider different relationships between the interest rate and
the exogenous aggregate state, reflecting alternative monetary policies. Competitive lenders set
spreads for each mortgage to break even in equilibrium, so lenders charge higher interest rates
when a mortgage design hurts their bottom line. We calibrate the lender stochastic discount factor
(SDF) to options data so that lenders charge more for contracts that cost them more in crisis
states. Equilibrium in the housing market implies that household decisions, mortgage spreads,
and the interest rate rule influence the equilibrium home price process. Household expectations
regarding equilibrium prices and mortgage rates feed back into household decisions, and we solve
thisfixed-pointprobleminarichquantitativemodelusingcomputationalmethodsbasedonKrusell
and Smith (1998).
A key aspect of our analysis is that mortgage design affects household default decisions and
hence home prices, which in equilibrium feeds back to household indebtedness. The quantitative
implications of our model depend on accurately representing the link between home prices and
default. Consequently, after calibrating our model to match standard moments, monetary policy
since the 1980s, and the empirical distributions of mortgage debt and assets, we evaluate its ability
to quantitatively capture the effect of payment reductions on default by simulating the Fuster and
Willen (2017) quasi-experiment in our model. The model does a good job matching their findings
quantitatively. Simulating quasi-experiments in our calibration procedure is an innovation that
ensures that our model accurately captures the effects of changes in LTVs and interest rates as we
alter mortgage design.
Thecalibratedmodelprovidesalaboratorytoassessthebenefitsandcostsofdifferentmortgage
designs, shedlightonthekeyeconomicchannelsthroughwhichtheywork, andprovidemagnitudes
for how much different designs may stabilize prices, default, and consumption in a crisis.1 Our
primary application is the impulse response to a housing crisis, although we also consider the
unconditional performance of different mortgages. We begin by comparing an economy with all
fixedratemortgages(FRMs)againstonewithalladjustableratemortgages(ARMs). WhileARMs
1As with any structural exercise, we have made modeling choices that trade off tractability and realism. It is
likelythatthemodelleavesoutsomeaspectsofreality,suchasnon-pecuniarydefaultspillovers,householdbehavior
that can generate momentum in home prices, investor behavior that can generate realistic movements in the term
premium, frictional conversion between the owner-occupied and renter-occupied stock, or refinancing inertia. Thus,
whileourmodelfitsmanyimportantmomentsofthedataquitewell,itmissesonothers,andasaresultouranalysis
should be seen as providing a sense of the magnitudes involved in different mortgage designs.
2