NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHAT IS THE IMPACT OF SUCCESSFUL CYBERATTACKS ON TARGET FIRMS?
Shinichi Kamiya
Jun-Koo Kang
Jungmin Kim
Andreas Milidonis
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 24409
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24409
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2018, Revised July 2018
We thank Claudia Biancotti, Andrei Gonçalves, Jan Jindra, Christos Makridis, and seminar participants
at Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Kent State University, Korea University, and the SEC for their
useful comments. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24409.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Shinichi Kamiya, Jun-Koo Kang, Jungmin Kim, Andreas Milidonis, and René M. Stulz.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What is the Impact of Successful Cyberattacks on Target Firms?
Shinichi Kamiya, Jun-Koo Kang, Jungmin Kim, Andreas Milidonis, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 24409
March 2018, Revised July 2018
JEL No. G14,G32,G34,G35
ABSTRACT
We examine which firms are targets of cyberattacks and how they are affected. We find that
cyberattacks cause firms to reassess the risks that they are exposed to and their consequences, so
that they have real effects on firm policies even when targets are not financially constrained.
Cyberattacks are more likely to occur at more visible firms, firms with more intangible assets,
and firms with less board attention to risk management. Attacks where personal financial
information is appropriated are associated with a negative stock-market reaction, a decrease in
sales growth for large firms and retail firms, an increase in leverage, a deterioration in financial
health, and a decrease in investment in the short run. Firms further respond to cyberattacks by
reducing CEO bonuses and risk-taking incentives and by strengthening their risk management.
Shinichi Kamiya Andreas Milidonis
Nanyang Technological University University of Cyprus
Nanyang Business School School of Economics and Management
50 Nanyang Avenue Department of Accounting and Finance
Singapore P.O. Box 20537, Nicosia
skamiya@ntu.edu.sg CY-1678 Nicosia
Cyprus
Jun-Koo Kang andreas.milidonis@ucy.ac.cy
Nanyang Technological University
Nanyang Business School René M. Stulz
50 Nanyang Avenue The Ohio State University
Singapore Fisher College of Business
JKKANG@ntu.edu.sg 806A Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
Jungmin Kim and NBER
Hong Kong Polytechnic University stulz@cob.osu.edu
School of Accounting and Finance
Hong Kong
jungmin.kim@polyu.edu.hk

I. Introduction
Cyber risk has become an important source of risk for corporations.1 For example, in 2017, risk
practitioners estimated that the most important operational risk is cyber risk and data security.2 A survey of
CEOs across the world by PWC found that more than half of the CEOs expect cybersecurity and data
breaches to threaten stakeholder trust in their industries over the next five years.3 Despite the widespread
recognition of emerging threats posed by cyber risk and its importance as a new type of risk, there is little
evidence on how successful cyberattacks affect corporations. In particular, we know little about which types
of firms are more likely to experience successful cyberattacks, and how such attacks affect target firm
shareholder wealth, growth, and financial strength. We also know little about how firms change managerial
risk-taking incentives and their risk management after attacks. In this study, we investigate these important
but unexplored issues by analyzing a comprehensive sample of disclosed cyberattacks involving data
breaches on public corporations from 2005 to 2017.
Although there is no systematic evidence on the impact of cyberattacks on firms, the case of Target
Corporation, the Minnesota-based second largest discount store retailer, provides a useful illustration of
what the impact of such an attack can be. From November 27 to December 15, 2013, Target experienced a
massive cyberattack that resulted in the loss of almost 70 million customers’ personal information such as
phone numbers and credit card information.4 On December 19, 2013, Target publicly acknowledged the
breach and unveiled measures that cost $100 million for upgrading its IT system and adapting new
technology to increase the security of credit card transactions. Despite its strong public commitment to take
1 Although there is no consensus about an exact definition of cyber risk, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security
describes it as “capabilities to disrupt, destroy, or threaten the delivery of essential services, or exploit vulnerabilities
to steal information and money by sophisticated cyber actors and nation-states” (“Cybersecurity Overview,”
Homeland Security, https://www.dhs.gov/cybersecurity-overview).” The Institute of Risk Management views cyber
risk as “any risk of financial loss, disruption or damage to the reputation of an organization from some sort of failure
of its information technology systems (“Cyber Risk,” The Institute of Risk Management,
https://www.theirm.org/knowledge-and-resources/thought-leadership/cyber-risk/”).
2 “Top 10 Operational Risks for 2017,” Risk.net (January 23, 2017).
3 See “Risk in Review 2017 Study,” PWC (April 2017), p. 20.
4 “Timeline of Target's Cyberattack and Aftermath: How Cyber Theft Snowballed for the Giant Retailer,”
International Business Times (May 5, 2014), http://www.ibtimes.com/timeline-targets-data-breach-aftermath-how-
cybertheft-snowballed-giant-retailer-1580056.
1

measures to reduce the risk of being attacked, the stock price of Target dropped by almost 2.2% on the
announcement day, which represents an estimated market value loss of $890 million. Target’s EBIT
decreased by $1.59 billion (-28.6%) from $5.52 billion during the four quarters prior to the breach to $3.94
billion during the four quarters after the breach. In addition, Target reported data breach-related expenses
of $292 million including the settlement of class action lawsuits and investigations by state prosecutors in
its 2016 10-K. This example shows that a cyberattack can have a large negative impact on the target firm.
This example is by no means extreme. For instance, two months after the announcement of the 2017
cyberattack on Equifax, a consumer credit reporting agency, its stock price was lower by almost a quarter
than before the attack.
We provide a simple model to examine the economic implications of successful cyberattacks. We
define a successful cyberattack as one that breaches the firm’s defenses. In the following, we use
cyberattack to denote a successful cyberattack for simplicity.5 We distinguish between cyberattacks that
change the assessment of the loss distribution of cyberattacks versus those that have no such impact. With
the loss distribution unchanged, we show that a firm’s loss from a cyberattack should not affect its future
actions if it is not financially constrained except for actions that restore it to its financial position before the
attack. If the loss distribution or more generally the firm’s assessment of its risk exposures changes, the
firm will adjust its policies to its new understanding of the loss distribution. The change in the assessment
of the loss distribution may be rational – the result of the firm having more information – or can be due to
behavioral reactions to adverse outcomes that were believed to have an extremely low probability. As the
loss distribution becomes less favorable, the firm increases its expenditures to decrease the probability of
an attack, invests more in risk management, and decreases its willingness to take other risks. We test these
predictions by examining the costs of cyberattacks (i.e., adverse effects on firm value) and post-attack
changes in firm policies.
To provide systematic evidence on how successful cyberattacks affect firm value, financial strength,
5 Throughout the paper, we use the words “cyberattacks” and “attacks” interchangeably.
2