NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAPITAL INFLOWS, EQUITY ISSUANCE ACTIVITY, AND CORPORATE INVESTMENT
Charles W. Calomiris
Mauricio Larrain
Sergio L. Schmukler
Working Paper 24433
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24433
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2018
We thank Laura Alfaro, Nathan Converse (discussant), Erik Gilje (discussant), Jeanne Lafortune,
Atif Mian, Gabriel Natividad, Luis Serven, Jose Tessada, Shang-Jin Wei, and participants at
presentations held at the ASSA Annual Meetings, Finance UC Conference, Hebrew University,
HEC Paris, Kansas City Fed, LACEA-LAMES Annual Meetings, Southern Economic
Association Annual Meetings, University of Chile, University of Michigan, University of
Santiago Chile, and Vienna Graduate School of Finance for useful comments. We are grateful to
Soha Ismail for superb research assistance, to Facundo Abraham, Juan Cortina, and Ruth Llovet
for their valuable help at different stages of the project, and to Tatiana Didier and Tomas
Williams for facilitating access to data. Larrain acknowledges funding from Proyecto Fondecyt
Iniciacion #11160879. Schmukler thanks the financial support of the World Bank Knowledge for
Change Program. The views expressed here do not necessarily represent those of the World
Bank. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Charles W. Calomiris, Mauricio Larrain, and Sergio L. Schmukler. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Capital Inflows, Equity Issuance Activity, and Corporate Investment
Charles W. Calomiris, Mauricio Larrain, and Sergio L. Schmukler
NBER Working Paper No. 24433
March 2018
JEL No. F21,F3,F36,F41,F62,F65,G11,G15,G3,O16
ABSTRACT
We use issuance-level data to study how equity capital inflows that enter emerging market
economies affect equity issuance and corporate investment. We show that foreign inflows are
strongly correlated with country-level issuance. The relation reflects the behavior of large issuers
issuing in domestic equity markets and that of firms issuing in international markets. Those
larger, more liquid, and highly valued firms are the ones more likely to raise equity when their
country receives capital inflows. To identify supply-side shocks, we instrument capital inflows
into each country with exogenous changes in other countries’ attractiveness to foreign investors.
Shifts in the supply of foreign capital are important drivers of increased equity inflows.
Instrumented inflows lead a subset of firms (large domestic issuers and foreign issuers) to raise
new equity, which they use mainly to fund investment. Corporate investment increases between
one-tenth and four-tenths the amount of foreign equity capital entering the country.
Charles W. Calomiris Sergio L. Schmukler
Graduate School of Business The World Bank
Columbia University MSN MC3-301
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall 1818 H Street, N.W.
New York, NY 10027 Washington, DC 20433
and NBER Sschmukler@worldbank.org
cc374@columbia.edu
Mauricio Larrain
Catholic University of Chile
School of Management
Avenida Vicuña Mackenna 4860
Santiago
Chile
mauriciolarraine@gmail.com

I. Introduction
Capital inflows are prevalent in emerging market countries. In 2014, foreign investors invested
more than one trillion U.S. dollars into emerging countries. Of those inflows, 90 billion U.S.
dollars came in the form of equity, i.e., foreign investors’ purchases of stocks of publicly traded
emerging market firms.
In this paper, we study how those capital inflows affect the economies that receive
them by analyzing their connection to equity financing and corporate investment. In particular,
we investigate whether publicly traded firms in emerging countries issue more equity when
their country receives inflows of foreign capital. Ours is the first study, of which we are aware,
that examines the links between capital inflows and investment using issuance-level data. We
distinguish between issuances in international and domestic equity markets. We also examine
whether firms differ in the degree to which their issuance of new equity responds to increased
funding by foreign equity investors. Lastly, we analyze the extent to which firms that raise new
equity use the funds raised in the offerings to finance corporate investment. To implement
our analysis, we assemble a granular dataset containing information on equity issuances and
financial statements for 17,682 firms in 25 emerging market countries, in addition to capital
inflows during the 25-year period 1990-2014.
Figure 1 presents the evolution of the aggregate amount of equity investing by foreign
investors into our sample countries alongside the value of equity raised by firms in those
countries, which provides a first pass at the aggregate evidence. The figure shows that periods
of large capital inflows coincide with periods of active equity issuance activity. This suggests
that inflows imply more than a simple transfer of equity ownership from domestic to foreign
investors, and that issuances are not financed solely by domestic investors. In terms of
causality, this correlation could reflect the role of foreign equity inflows (resulting, for example,
1

from greater global liquidity) that shift the supply of capital.1 A shift in the supply of foreign
participation implies a higher demand for equity, and lower required equity returns, which in
turn, encourages destination countries’ firms to issue shares. On the other hand, the positive
correlation between inflows and issuance could reflect shifts in the demand for capital by firms
(resulting, for example, from improvements in investment opportunities at the country or firm
level). According to that view, better firms’ prospects induce foreign investors to send more
funds to the country.
In this paper, we use firm-level data together with a novel set of instrumental variables
to distinguish between supply-side and demand-side influences. Before proceeding to the
micro-level analysis, we first estimate the country-level relation between capital inflows and
equity issuance. We regress each country’s equity issuances on equity inflows, taking into
account country and year fixed effects. We find a strong association between the two. For
every million U.S. dollars foreign investors purchase of emerging market equity, the value of
issuance proceeds increases by at least 0.18 million U.S. dollars (our point estimate is 0.48
million dollars). The results are the same for issuances that take place in domestic and
international equity markets.
We then move to the micro-level analysis to better understand the mechanisms that
drive these aggregate issuance patterns. We first regress firm-level issuance proceeds in both
domestic and international markets on equity capital inflows, controlling for firm and year
fixed effects. We find no significant correlation between capital inflows and the value of
issuance proceeds for the typical emerging market firm. When we focus on only domestic
1 Chari et el. (2012) document significant effects of U.S. monetary policy surprises around FOMC meetings on
capital flows from the U.S. to a range of emerging markets as well as on the associated emerging market
valuations. They find that equity positions and valuations are more sensitive to monetary policy shocks than debt
positions and valuations.
2