NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MORTGAGE MARKET CREDIT CONDITIONS AND U.S. PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS
Alexis Antoniades
Charles W. Calomiris
Working Paper 24459
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24459
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2018
We thank Howard Rosenthal, participants in the October 2015 Meetings of the International
Atlantic Economic Society, and seminar participants at Georgetown University, University of
Heidelberg, University of Cyprus, and the Max-Planck Institute in Bonn for comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Alexis Antoniades and Charles W. Calomiris. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Mortgage Market Credit Conditions and U.S. Presidential Elections
Alexis Antoniades and Charles W. Calomiris
NBER Working Paper No. 24459
March 2018
JEL No. D72,E51,G01,G21,L51,N22,N42,P16
ABSTRACT
Voters punish incumbent Presidential candidates for contractions in the local (county-level)
supply of mortgage credit during market-wide contractions of credit, but they do not reward them
for expansions in mortgage credit supply in boom times. Our primary focus is the Presidential
election of 2008, which followed an unprecedented swing from very generous mortgage
underwriting standards to a severe contraction of mortgage credit. Voters responded to the credit
crunch by shifting their support away from the Republican Presidential candidate in 2008. That
shift was particularly pronounced in states that typically vote Republican, and in swing states.
The magnitude of the effect is large. If the supply of mortgage credit had not contracted from
2004 to 2008, McCain would have received half the votes needed in nine crucial swing states to
reverse the outcome of the election. The effect on voting in these swing states from local
contractions in mortgage credit supply was five times as important as the increase in the
unemployment rate; if unemployment had not increased from 2004 to 2008, that improvement in
local labor markets would only have given McCain only 9% of the votes needed to win the nine
crucial swing states. We extend our analysis to the Presidential elections from 1996 to 2012 and
find that voters’ reactions are similar for Democratic and Republican incumbent parties, but
different during booms and busts of mortgage credit. These asymmetric results indicate that
voters react strongly and negatively to credit supply contraction; however, organized political
bargaining (the “smoke-filled room channel”) rather than voting was the primary vehicle for
rewarding politicians for supporting government subsidies for mortgage risk during booms.
Alexis Antoniades
Georgetown University
aa658@georgetown.edu
Charles W. Calomiris
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu

I. Introduction
Empirical work on the economic voter hypothesis consistently shows that the state of the
economy affects voting behavior.1 But the same work fails to pin down at the micro level the
economic variables (e.g. inflation, unemployment) that matter the most for voters. Here we offer
another economic variable for consideration, which is the change in the supply of credit.
There are good reasons to suspect voting and credit subsidies are related: government policies
subsidizing homeownership have been a hallmark of American politics for nearly a century and have
also figured prominently in various electoral campaigns across the world. That said, we also recognize
that there are mechanisms other than voting that may reward politicians for supporting credit
subsidies. For example, apart from voting, politicians may be rewarded by the financial or political
support of well-defined and organized vested interests, which may include banks and urban activist
organizations, which played a crucial role in promoting mortgage credit subsidies, especially from
1992 to 2007 (Calomiris and Haber 2014). We will refer to these two alternatives as “the smoke-filled
room channel” and “voting channel,” respectively.2
While there is ample evidence of the strong relation between the state of the macro-economy
and elections’ outcomes (Fair 1978, 1996, 1998, 2002; Lewis-Beck and Stegmaier 2000) there is no
micro evidence of the relation between changes in credit supply and voting behavior. In this paper,
we provide the first such micro evidence and find that voters do, in fact, punish incumbent Presidential
candidates for experienced contractions in the supply of mortgage credit. We build on Fair’s work by
connecting votes for President at the county level to county-level conditions in the mortgage market,
as well as other economic variables, including unemployment. Using the Home Mortgage Disclosure
1 For a review of the literature see Lewis-Beck and Stegmaier (2000) and references therein.
2 We avoid referring to political support for mortgage credit subsidies as reflecting “populist politics” because populism
has multiple meanings. Our results are more consistent with Riker’s (1982) broad definition of populism than with the
narrower definition that refers to claiming to represent the interests of common people.
1

Act (HMDA) data on banks’ provision of mortgage credit, we identify supply shifts in mortgage
credit at the county level and examine how shifts in the supply of mortgage credit affected voting in
the Presidential election of 2008. We focus primarily on the period 2004 to 2008, and the election
results of 2008 because this four year period saw an unprecedented swing from the most generous
underwriting standards for mortgages in U.S. history in 2004-2006 to a severe contraction of
mortgage credit during the subprime crisis of 2007-2009. It also saw a dramatic swing in electoral
results, with the Republican Presidential candidate winning many key swing states in 2004, but losing
those same states in 2008.
We find that, after controlling for other relevant factors, voters responded to the contraction
in credit by shifting their support away from the Republican Presidential candidate in the 2008
Presidential election (John McCain). The shift toward the Democratic Presidential candidate (Barack
Obama) was particularly pronounced in swing states (those that have the least predictable support for
either party). The magnitude of the effect of mortgage credit supply shifts on voting is large in 2008.
Our estimates indicate that in the absence of the mortgage credit supply contraction, some important
swing states – most obviously, North Carolina – would have cast their electoral votes for McCain. In
other swing states, the absence of mortgage credit supply contraction by itself would not have
reversed the electoral result, but nevertheless, would have substantially narrowed the gap between
votes received by McCain and Obama in 2008. Overall, taking into account the effects of mortgage
credit in the crucial swing states that voted for Obama, we find that if mortgage credit supply had not
shifted adversely from 2004 to 2008, McCain would have received half the votes needed to capture
all nine of the swing states that Bush had won in 2004 but that McCain lost in 2008, which would
have reversed the outcome of the election. In that sense, the contraction in mortgage credit supply
from 2004 to 2008 was five times as important as the increase in the unemployment rate; if
2