NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LONG-TERM AND HETEROGENEOUS EFFECTS OF JOB-SEARCH ASSISTANCE
Dayanand S. Manoli
Marios Michaelides
Ankur Patel
Working Paper 24422
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24422
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2018, Revised May 2023
This paper is derived from a project titled “The Effects of Employment and Earnings on Tax
Filing and Tax Liability: Evidence on Short-term and Long-term Effects Using Administrative
Tax Data.” This project is partly based on data collected by IMPAQ International, LLC (IMPAQ)
as part of a study funded by the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL). This research was conducted
while Ankur Patel was an employee at the U.S. Department of the Treasury. The views, findings,
interpretations, errors, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors
and do not reflect or represent the views or the official positions of the U.S. Department of the
Treasury, the Office of Tax Analysis, DOL, IMPAQ, the United States Internal Revenue Service,
any other government agency, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Any taxpayer data
used in this research was kept in a secured Treasury or IRS data repository, and all results have
been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. Day Manoli is grateful for
funding from Arnold Ventures. We are grateful to numerous people for helpful comments and
suggestions, including DOL and IMPAQ staff, and conference and seminar participants.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Dayanand S. Manoli, Marios Michaelides, and Ankur Patel. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Long-Term and Heterogeneous Effects of Job-Search Assistance
Dayanand S. Manoli, Marios Michaelides, and Ankur Patel
NBER Working Paper No. 24422
March 2018, Revised May 2023
JEL No. I38
ABSTRACT
This paper examines long-term and heterogenous treatment effects of an experimental job-search
assistance program that operated in Nevada from July through December 2009. Over the eight-
year follow-up period, the program increased participants’ employment and earnings, reduced
short-term UI receipt, reduced loss of homeownership, and increased Federal tax filing and tax
receipts. Related to heterogeneity, roughly 40 percent of the sample is estimated to have negative
treatment effects on long-term employment which are corroborated by accompanying positive
treatment effects on entry into disability insurance. Positive impacts on homeownership appear
concentrated among individuals with positive employment treatment effects.
Dayanand S. Manoli Ankur Patel
McCourt School of Public Policy Department of the Treasury
Georgetown University Ankur.Patel@treasury.gov
37th St NW and 0 St. NW
Old North #100
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
day.manoli@gmail.com
Marios Michaelides
University of Cyprus
mariosm@ucy.ac.cy

I. Introduction
Unemployed workers who collect Unemployment Insurance (UI) benefits are typically
required to actively search for work while collecting benefits. Over recent decades, policymakers
in the United States and other developed countries have established job-search assistance programs
to help UI beneficiaries connect to suitable jobs and undergo eligibility reviews to ensure that they
are compliant with UI work search requirements (Meyer, 1995; Wandner, 2010; Kahn, 2010; Card
et al., 2015; Michaelides and Mueser, 2021). While prior studies have provided experimental
evidence on average short-term effects of these interventions (Meyer, 1995; Decker et al., 2000;
Klepinger et al., 2002; Black et al., 2003, Michaelides and Mueser, 2018, 2021; Michaelides et
al., 2021), identifying the long-term and potentially heterogeneous impacts of these programs is
important for understanding how individuals search for jobs and how job-search assistance
programs may affect their job-search behavior and individual well-being.
In this paper, we examine the long-term and heterogeneous treatment effects of an
experimental job-search assistance program that operated in the state of Nevada from July through
December of 2009. The Nevada program required a random sample of UI beneficiaries to attend
a one-on-one meeting with program staff at the early stages of their UI spells to undergo an
eligibility review, in which they provided information about their job-search activities. These
individuals were then offered job counseling during the same meeting, including a skills
assessment, development of a work-search plan, resume development assistance, and direct
referrals to jobs. To enforce requirements, the Nevada UI agency disqualified from collecting
additional UI payments those who did not show up for the required meeting and those identified
during the meeting as not conducting an active job search.
The empirical analysis uses program data on the universe of unemployed workers who started
Page 1

collecting UI in Nevada from July through December 2009 (near the depth of the Great Recession),
and were eligible for random assignment for participation in the program. These data are merged
with administrative tax data from 2001 through 2017, allowing us to measure a wide range of
outcomes for treatment and control individuals for up to eight years after program assignment.
Third-party reported tax documents are used to measure individual salary employment and income,
contractor income, and receipt of UI and social security disability benefits. Third-party reported
mortgage interest statements are used to measure homeownership, while filed tax returns are used
to measure spousal employment and tax-related outcomes, such as federal income tax return filing,
tax payments, and after-tax income. In addition to estimating effects on these outcomes, we use
machine learning techniques, specifically causal forests, to assess heterogeneous treatment effects
to better understand underlying program mechanisms.
The results indicate positive long-term average treatment effects on wage employment and
earnings. The analysis confirms relatively large short-term increases in employment for the
treatment group relative to the control group in 2010, the first year after program assignment
(Michaelides and Mueser, 2018; 2021). Average employment treatment effects gradually declined
over time but remained positive for the entire eight-year follow-up period, indicating persistent
employment effects. Consistent with these results, the program led to positive effects on salary
earnings through the entire eight-year follow-up. The program also had positive average treatment
effects on secondary outcomes for participants and their families. The program reduced receipt of
UI benefits in the first post-program year but did not affect receipt of UI in later periods or receipt
of disability benefits. Thus, on average, short-term decreases in UI receipt were not offset by
longer-term increases in UI receipt or disability insurance receipt among qualified individuals.
Further analysis shows that treated individuals were less likely to move out of homeownership,
Page 2