NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCIAL CENTRALITY AND LIQUIDITY PROVISION
Arun G. Chandrasekhar
Robert Townsend
Juan Pablo Xandri
Working Paper 24406
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24406
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2018
We thank Ben Golub, Matthew Jackson, and Juan Passadore for helpful discussions as well as
seminar participants at NYU, Princeton, SAET Faro, Minnesota, MIT, and various other seminars
and conferences. Chandrasekhar is grateful for support from the National Science Foundation
GFRP and Townsend is grateful for support from the NICHD. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Arun G. Chandrasekhar, Robert Townsend, and Juan Pablo Xandri. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Centrality and Liquidity Provision
Arun G. Chandrasekhar, Robert Townsend, and Juan Pablo Xandri
NBER Working Paper No. 24406
March 2018
JEL No. D14,E44,G01,L14,O16
ABSTRACT
We study an endowment economy in which agents face income risk, as if uncertain returns on a
portfolio, and agents can only make transfers in states when they are actively participating in the
market. Besides income risk, agents also have limited and stochastic market access, with a
probability distribution governed by an underlying social network. While network connections
may serve to dissipate shocks, they may also provide obstacles to the sharing of risk, as when
participation frictions are generated through the network.
We identify and quantify the value of key players in terms of whether they are likely to be able to
smooth the resulting market participation risk and how valuable that smoothing would be when
they are there. We define financial centrality in economic terms, given the model, as the ex ante
marginal social value of injecting an infinitesimal amount of liquidity to the agent.
We show that the most financially central agents are not only those who trade often – as in
standard network models – but are more likely to trade when there are few traders, when income
risk is high, when income shocks are positively correlated, when attitudes toward risk are more
sensitive in the aggregate, when there are distressed institutions, and when there are tail risks. We
extend our framework to allow for endogenous market participation. Observational evidence
from village risk sharing network data is consistent with our model.
Arun G. Chandrasekhar Juan Pablo Xandri
Department of Economics Department of Economics
Stanford University Princeton University
579 Serra Mall Fisher Hall, Office 212
Stanford, CA 94305 Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER jxandri@princeton.edu
arungc@stanford.edu
Robert Townsend
Department of Economics, E52-538
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
rtownsen@mit.edu

FINANCIAL CENTRALITY AND LIQUIDITY PROVISION
ARUN G. CHANDRASEKHAR‡, ROBERT M. TOWNSEND§, AND JUAN PABLO XANDRI?
Abstract. Westudyanendowmenteconomyinwhichagentsfaceincomerisk,asifuncertain
returns on a portfolio, and agents can only make transfers in states when they are actively
participating in the market. Besides income risk, agents also have limited and stochastic
marketaccess,withaprobabilitydistributiongovernedbyanunderlyingsocialnetwork. While
network connections may serve to dissipate shocks, they may also provide obstacles to the
sharing of risk, as when participation frictions are generated through the network.
We identify and quantify the value of key players in terms of whether they are likely to
be able to smooth the resulting market participation risk and how valuable that smoothing
would be when they are there. We define financial centrality in economic terms, given the
model,astheexantemarginalsocialvalueofinjectinganinfinitesimalamountofliquidityto
the agent.
We show that the most financially central agents are not only those who trade often -- as
in standard network models -- but are more likely to trade when there are few traders, when
income risk is high, when income shocks are positively correlated, when attitudes toward
risk are more sensitive in the aggregate, when there are distressed institutions, and when
there are tail risks. We extend our framework to allow for endogenous market participation.
Observational evidence from village risk sharing network data is consistent with our model.
JEL Classification Codes: D14, E44, G01, L14, O16
Keywords: Financial networks, networks, market participation, liquidity injection
1. Introduction
Wefocusonameasureoffinancialcentralityandtheidentificationofkeyplayersinfinancial
markets in environments in which disruptions to markets take the form of shocks to market
participation.
These shocks are consistent with the foundations of several types of models that are widely
used to think about financial markets. The first class of models include search frictions with
bilateral and stochastic matching as in Duffie et al. (2005), and, in particular, directed search
modelsinwhichsubsetsofagentsgrouptogetherfacingatradeoffbetweenoffersandmatching
Date: March 15, 2018.
We thank Ben Golub, Matthew Jackson, and Juan Passadore for helpful discussions as well as seminar partic-
ipants at NYU, Princeton, SAET Faro, Minnesota, MIT, and various other seminars and conferences. Chan-
drasekhar is grateful for support from the National Science Foundation GFRP and Townsend is grateful for
support from the NICHD.
‡Stanford University. Email: arungc@stanford.edu.
§Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Email: rtownsen@mit.edu.
?Princeton University. Email: jxandri@princeton.edu.
1

FINANCIAL CENTRALITY AND LIQUIDITY PROVISION 2
rates as in Armenter and Lester (2015). The second class of models include market partici-
pation models used in finance and monetary economics, in particular, when the number and
composition of traders who can deal with one another is stochastic as in Kiyotaki and Wright
(1989), Trejos and Wright (1995), Freeman (1996) and Green and Zhou (2002), Santos and
Woodford (1997). We focus especially on the resulting risk of thin markets, as this is a par-
ticular concern to the traders individually and to overall social welfare. Putting this another
way, we focus not only on liquidity shocks but also insurance against them. Broker dealers
are such key traders in the private sector, as in Cocco et al. (2009) where relationships among
dealers with less correlated shocks allows insurance against shortage of funds in the reserve
maintenance period.
Much of the financial network literature posits unanticipated shocks which can hit the bal-
ancesheetofselectedtradersex-postandfocuseshowtheseadverseshocksmayspreadthrough
the financial system via the network. Empirical studies on such networks include Upper and
Worms (2004)Bech and Atalay (2010), Boss et al. (2004), Cohen-Cole et al. (2013), Craig and
Von Peter (2014), Cont et al. (2013), Langfield et al. (2014), Jaramillo (2012), and others. The
economic and/or network theory is developed in Allen and Gale (2000), Freixas et al. (2000)
and Eisenberg and Noe (2001), and more recently in Gai and Kapadia (2010), Battiston et al.
(2012), Acemoglu et al. (2015), and Elliott et al. (2014). See Allen and Babus (2009) and
Summer (2013) for surveys.
Many of the papers in this literature, motivated by the financial crisis, are concerned with
how the pattern of connections and obligations across banks could induce contagion. In this
sense interconnectedness is viewed as problematic and indeed financial systems are being reg-
ulated accordingly, identifying institutions regarded as systematically important and imple-
menting requirements that have the intent of limiting their size and/or limiting the exposure
of the market to them, as in risk capital and liquidity ratios. But as Summer (2013) notes,
many of the models of this literature miss the intuition provided by the standard risk sharing
model. A shock to a highly interconnected system might be more easily dissipated because
it can be absorbed by more parties (Acemoglu et al., 2010; Elliott et al., 2014). This idea
was key in the original work of Allen and Gale (2000); when they allow a complete contract
structure, they do not get contagion, as they note. Thus the actual network of exposures may
be conducive to the sharing of idiosyncratic risk.
On the other hand, depending on how it is modeled, the network structure may provide an
obstacletorisk-sharingandleaveagentsexposed(Ambrusetal.,2010). Indeedinkeyexamples,
we link the network structure to the way stochastic market participation shocks are generated.
We can then distinguish across institutions or traders by their position in a network, and we
show that financial centrality matters. However, our notion of ex-ante financial centrality,
associated with a constrained Pareto outcome in the face of these market shocks, is different
from the typical graph-theoretic definitions of network centrality and those implemented in
the empirical literature. For us degree centrality, eigenvalue centrality, betweenness, closeness,
and other measures of network centrality are potentially different from the correct measure of