NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE RETURN TO WORK AND WOMEN’S EMPLOYMENT DECISIONS
Nicole Maestas
Working Paper 24429
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24429
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2018
This research was supported by NIH/NIA under grant number R03AG023108, and the Alfred P.
Sloan Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Nicole Maestas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Return to Work and Women’s Employment Decisions
Nicole Maestas
NBER Working Paper No. 24429
March 2018
JEL No. J14,J22,J26,J3
ABSTRACT
It is well documented that individuals in couples tend to retire around the same time. But because
women tend to marry older men, this means many married women retire at younger ages than
their husbands. This fact is somewhat at odds with lifecycle theory that suggests women might
otherwise retire at later ages than men because they have longer life expectancies, and often have
had shorter careers on account of childrearing. As a result, the opportunity cost of retirement—in
terms of foregone potential earnings and accruals to Social Security wealth—may be larger for
married women than for their husbands. Using the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), I find
evidence that the returns to additional work beyond mid-life are greater for married women than
for married men. The potential gain in Social Security wealth alone is enough to place married
women on nearly equal footing with married men in terms of Social Security wealth at age 70.
Nicole Maestas
Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
maestas@hcp.med.harvard.edu

Husbands and wives tend to retire around the same time within couples. But because
women tend to marry men older than they, the joint retirement of married couples means
that married women retire at younger ages than their husbands do. This difference in age
at retirement seems counterintuitive since women have longer life expectancies and have
shorter careers due to delayed or interrupted labor force participation while raising
children.1 Thus, they should optimally retire at older ages than men.
The observation that husbands and wives tend to retire at the same time, even when
they greatly differ in age, has been noted in several different data sets for the U.S. and
across different cohorts (e.g., Blau, 1998; Coile, 2004; Gustman and Steinmeier, 2000, 2004,
2014; Hurd, 1990; Maestas, 2001; Michaud and Vermuelen, 2011; Schirle, 2008). Evidence
of coordinated retirement behavior has also been documented in Canada (Baker, 2002;
Schirle, 2008), in England (Banks, Blundell and Casanova, 2010; Schirle, 2008), and in
continental Europe (Honoré and De Paula, 2015).
Certainly, some degree of retirement coordination between married partners is
expected, if for no other reason than because husbands and wives share a budget set. For
example, married women with greater wealth might individually choose to consume more
leisure by retiring earlier, and so might their husbands, who share the same assets.
Married couples may also have similar, or even directly linked, pension incentives (e.g.,
Social Security spousal benefits) that make possible retirement around the same time.
Nonetheless, the dominant explanation for joint retirement may not even arise through the
1 The female-male difference in life expectancy conditional upon living to age 65 is about three years
(Arias, 2002), plus women are on average 2-3 years younger than their husbands, depending on birth
cohort.
-2-

budget set, but through common preferences for joint leisure (Gustman and Steinmeier
2000, 2004; Maestas, 2001; Michaud and Vermuelen, 2011). In other words, spouses value
each other’s company and leisure complementarity leads them to retire around the same
time.
Despite the utility benefits of joint leisure, the relatively younger retirement of
married women may be costly for at least two reasons. First, with delayed or discontinuous
labor force participation, married women may experience their peak earnings years just as
they retire. Their husbands, on the other hand, may be past their peak earnings years, both
on account of being older and having had relatively continuous labor force participation. As
such, married women may forego earnings opportunities that could both increase their
Social Security benefit entitlements2 and increase private household net worth3 through
additional saving. Second, married women tend to retire before age 65, when they would
be eligible for Medicare, and they therefore face the additional cost of purchasing health
insurance from the time they retire until they turn 65. Even those with employer-
subsidized retiree health benefits may face significantly greater costs for health insurance
before age 65 than after. Unless married couples compensate by increasing other assets,
women’s younger retirement may result in lower resources during the couples’ remaining
life together, and during any subsequent divorce or widowhood.
We know significantly less about the retirement behavior of women than we do about
men, and virtually no research attention has been devoted to considering the implications
2 See Gelber, Isen and Song, This Volume for an analysis of the reverse pathway—how Social Security
income affects women’s labor supply at older ages.
3 See Lusardi and Mitchell, This Volume for an analysis of household net worth and women’s labor
supply.
-3-