NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BUYING THE VERDICT
Lauren H. Cohen
Umit G. Gurun
Working Paper 24542
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24542
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2018
We would like to thank Daniel Klerman, Prasad Krishnamurthy, Panos Patatoukas, Raghu Rau,
Stephen Solomon, Jed Stiglitz, and seminar participants at the University of California at
Berkeley Law School and Haas Business School as well as the 2017 Conference on Empirical
Legal Studies held at Cornell University. We gratefully acknowledge funding from the National
Science Foundation (SciSIP-1535813). All errors are ours. Please send comments to either
author. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Lauren H. Cohen and Umit G. Gurun. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Buying the Verdict
Lauren H. Cohen and Umit G. Gurun
NBER Working Paper No. 24542
April 2018
JEL No. D22,G30,K41,K42,L14,M21,M37
ABSTRACT
We document evidence that firms systematically increase specialized, locally targeted advertising
following the firm being taken to trial in that given location - precisely following initiation of the
suit. In particular, we use legal actions brought against publicly traded firms over the 20 year
sample period that progress to trial from 1995-2014. In terms of magnitude, the increase is
sizable: targeted local advertising increases by 23% (t=4.39) following the suit. Moreover, firms
concentrate these strategic increases in locations where the return on their advertising dollars are
largest: in smaller, more concentrated advertising markets where fewer competitor firms are
advertising. They focus their advertisement spikes specifically toward jury trials, and in fact
specifically toward the most likely jury pool. Lastly, we document that these advertising spikes
are associated with verdicts, increasing the probability of a favorable outcome.
Lauren H. Cohen
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 273
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
lcohen@hbs.edu
Umit G. Gurun
University of Texas at Dallas
School of Management
800 W Campbell Rd. SM41
75080 Richardson, TX
umit.gurun@utdallas.edu

Firms are legally obliged to operate within the standards of their operating
jurisdictions. Even so, and despite the fact that firms spend substantial capital in
order to stay within this legal framework, infractions occur. While many of these
infractions are settled privately, a large number do make it into the court system to
be adjudicated. These tend to be larger stakes cases (from a value-weighted
perspective) for the firms involved.1 Moreover, the U.S. legal system is founded
upon the notion that a jury of one’s peers can conduct an arms-length review of a
case adjudicating the guilt (or lack of sufficient evidence for guilt) of the alleged
legal infraction. However, the moment that a party is sued, it has a clear incentive
to influence the jury in its favor. Much of this convincing takes place inside the
courtroom. However, one power that large, publicly facing, and well-funded
organizations have at their disposal is to do so also outside of the courtroom. In
this paper, we document strong evidence for one form of that influence – namely,
we find that firms systematically increase specialized, local advertising when it is
taken to a court-trial in a given location – specifically in the geographic location of
the court deliberation, and precisely following initiation of the suit.
We test all legal actions taken against publicly traded firms in federal
courthouses over the nearly 20-year sample period from 1995-2014. In particular,
we focus on those that progressed to trial proceedings. We find that these are spread
throughout the United States, across industries, and over time. However, they share
1 Lederman, Leandra, 1999, “Which Cases Go to Trial: An Empirical Study of Predictors
of Failure to Settle,” Case Western Law Review, Volume 49-2.
Buying the Verdict - 1

a common response by the firms who are defendants. Upon being sued in a given
location, firms significantly increase advertising in that location. In terms of
magnitude, they increase advertising by 23% (t=4.39) following the suit. In
contrast, we see no increase: i.) in the same city, by the firm, but before and leading
up to suit (we find a sharp discontinuity directly following the suit); ii.) in any other
similar city at the same time by the same firm (so it is not a firm-level or even firm-
market type policy move); and iii.) in the exact same city where the firm is located
by any other firm operating there. Moreover, firms are significantly more likely to
initiate advertising in cities (in which it had previously advertised zero), directly
following lawsuit – probability of advertising initiation increasing by 25% (t=4.45).
To concretize this, assume we find that Walmart is sued in Akron, OH in 2001. We
see a large spike in Walmart’s advertising in Akron directly following the suit. We
see no abnormal movement in Walmart’s advertising policy or spending leading up
to the suit. Additionally, Walmart does not increase advertising following the suit
in Toledo, OH (a similar sized market with similar growth rates leading up to 2001).
Moreover, Target shows no abnormal move in the same sued-location, Akron, OH,
at the exact same time that Walmart is ramping up advertising (so it has nothing
to do with a general location-time effect).
We establish the precision of our effect to the specific time, firm, and location
of our shocks using a number of placebo-effect set-ups (e.g., redefining the “suit”
year as years prior in the same location). Additionally, we do so through the
inclusion of a number of fine fixed-effects. In particular, we include firm-by-time
Buying the Verdict - 2