NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SOPHISTICATED INVESTORS AND MARKET EFFICIENCY:
EVIDENCE FROM A NATURAL EXPERIMENT
Yong Chen
Bryan Kelly
Wei Wu
Working Paper 24552
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24552
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2018
We thank Vikas Agarwal, George Aragon, Robert Battalio, Utpal Bhattacharya, Marie Brière,
Charles Cao, Alan Crane, Kevin Crotty, Daniel Ferreira, Mila Getmansky, Menna El Hefnawy,
Jennifer Huang, Shiyang Huang, Harrison Hong, Liang Jin, Shane Johnson, Hagen Kim, Tse-
Chun Lin, Andrew Lo, Veronika Pool, Sorin Sorescu, Sheridan Titman, Charles Trzcinka, Tarik
Umar, Kumar Venkataraman, Ivo Welch, Russ Wermers, Hongjun Yan, Liyan Yang, Mao Ye,
Fernando Zapatero, Hong Zhang, Ben Zhang, Bart Zhou, Frank Zhou, as well as the participants
at the 2018 AFA Conference, 2018 MFA Conference, 2017 Helsinki Finance Summit, 2017
Summer Institute of Finance, the 1st SAFE Market Microstructure Conference, the 25th Finance
Forum, and 2017 Manchester Hedge Fund Conference for helpful discussions and comments.
We thank Wenting Dai, Lexi Kang, Yutong Li, James Nordlund, Eric Shim, and Yuan Xue for
excellent research assistance. We are grateful to Alon Brav for sharing the data on hedge fund
activism. AQR Capital Management is a global investment management firm, which may or may
not apply similar investment techniques or methods of analysis as described herein. The views
expressed here are those of the authors and not necessarily those of AQR or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24552.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Yong Chen, Bryan Kelly, and Wei Wu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Sophisticated Investors and Market Efficiency: Evidence from a Natural Experiment
Yong Chen, Bryan Kelly, and Wei Wu
NBER Working Paper No. 24552
April 2018
JEL No. G12,G14
ABSTRACT
We study how sophisticated investors, when faced with changes in information environment,
adjust their information acquisition and trading behavior, and how these changes in turn affect
market efficiency. We find that, after exogenous reductions of analyst coverage due to closures of
brokerage firms, hedge funds scale up information acquisition. They trade more aggressively and
earn higher abnormal returns on the affected stocks. Moreover, the participation of hedge fund
significantly mitigates the impairment of market efficiency caused by coverage reductions. Our
results show a substitution effect between sophisticated investors and public information
providers in facilitating market efficiency in a causal framework.
Yong Chen Wei Wu
Department of Finance Department of Finance
Mays Business School Mays Business School
360 Wehner Building (4218) 360 Wehner Building (4218)
Texas A&M University Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843-4218 College Station, TX 77843-4218
ychen@mays.tamu.edu wuwei001@tamu.edu
Bryan Kelly
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Ave.
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
bryan.kelly@yale.edu

Information plays a key role for the efficiency of security markets and the real economy
(e.g., Hayek, 1945; Fama, 1965). The information environment is continuously evolving
at both the market and firm levels. For example, Regulation Fair Disclosure and the
Dodd-Frank Act in the U.S. and the MiFID II in Europe have had wide-ranging impacts
on how information is transmitted in the marketplace. In addition, substantial variation
exists across firms regarding how and what information is disseminated into the market.
Over the past four decades, institutional investors have become the dominant player in
the U.S. financial markets (e.g., French, 2008). Hedge funds, in particular, represent the
(arguably) most sophisticated investors (e.g., Brunnermeier and Nagel, 2004) and they
add value to the financial system in a number of ways (e.g., Brown, Kacperczyk,
Ljungqvist, Lynch, Pedersen, and Richardson, 2009). Motivated by these observations,
we attempt to address the following questions: How do sophisticated investors alter their
behavior in response to changes of information environment? And how do their actions
in turn affect market efficiency?
Understanding sophisticated investors’ reactions to changes of information
environment is important for at least three reasons. First, it speaks directly to how
sophisticated investors trade and profit from information advantage (e.g., Grossman and
Stiglitz, 1980). Second, it sheds light on the way markets incorporate information that is
not accessible to all participants (e.g., Fama, 1970). Third, it helps us better understand
the interactions between different types of information processors (e.g., sell-side analysts
and hedge funds) in financial markets.
The impacts of changes of information environment on sophisticated investor
behavior are theoretically ambiguous. On one hand, sophisticated investors will have a
greater comparative advantage when information available to other market participants
becomes noisier. Thus, faced with a more opaque information environment, sophisticated
investors may have greater incentives to acquire information and trade in security
markets. On the other hand, if sophisticated investors are concerned about adverse
selection in trading, they may trade less actively when the information environment
becomes murky. Thus, how changes of information environment affect sophisticated
investors is ultimately an empirical question.
1

It is, however, a challenging task to empirically investigate the above relation.
There is a reverse causality problem as the activities of sophisticated investors can change
firms’ information environment. For example, institutional investors may demand that
firms change their disclosure policies. Moreover, there is likely to be an omitted variable
problem. For example, when there are important corporate events, such as mergers and
acquisitions, the coverage decisions of sell-side analysts and the trading activities of
sophisticated investors can change simultaneously.
To overcome these endogeneity challenges, we exploit a natural experiment: the
exogenous reductions of sell-side analysts due to closures and mergers of brokerage firms
(Hong and Kacperczyk, 2010; Kelly and Ljungqvist, 2012). As documented in Kelly and
Ljungqvist (2012), such closures and mergers are driven by adverse regulatory changes
and unfavorable business conditions in the equity research industry, instead of the
prospects of the affected stocks.1 Thus, closure and merger-related coverage reductions
provide credible exogenous shocks to firms’ information environment. We study how
hedge funds, as a proxy for sophisticated investors, respond to the coverage reductions by
adjusting their information acquisition and trading activities. We also examine the
changes in hedge funds’ profitability on the affected stocks and the impacts of their
activities on market efficiency.
We assemble our sample by merging several datasets covering brokerage closures,
hedge fund stock holdings, EDGAR Internet search traffic, analyst coverage, earnings
conference call transcripts, as well as stock prices and characteristics. Our hedge fund
holdings data are obtained from quarterly 13F filings in which hedge fund companies are
identified by manually matching 13F institutions’ names with a list of hedge fund
1 Similar changes to the equity research industry are taking place in Europe currently. The Markets in
Financial Instruments Directive (MiFID II) regulation, effective in the European Union (EU) on January 3,
2018, bans the usage of soft dollar commissions and requires institutional investors to pay banks and
brokers directly for research. This policy will affect the equity research industry, leading to changes in
information environment. For details of MiFID II, see the website of the European Securities and Markets
Authority (ESMA) https://www.esma.europa.eu/policy-rules/mifid-ii-and-mifir.
2