NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SOVEREIGN CREDIT RISK AND EXCHANGE RATES:
EVIDENCE FROM CDS QUANTO SPREADS
Patrick Augustin
Mikhail Chernov
Dongho Song
Working Paper 24506
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24506
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2018, Revised June 2018
We thank Nelson Camanho, Peter Hoerdahl, Alexandre Jeanneret, Francis Longstaff, Guillaume
Roussellet, Lukas Schmid, Jesse Schreger, Gustavo Schwenkler, and Andrea Vedolin for
comments on earlier drafts and participants in the seminars and conferences sponsored by the
2018 Financial Intermediation Research Conference, the 2018 SFS Cavalcade, the 15th IDC
Herzliya Annual Conference in Financial Economics, the Bank of France, Duke-UNC 2018, HEC
Paris, Hong Kong Monetary Authority, McGill, Penn State, the Swedish House of Finance,
UCLA. Augustin acknowledges financial support from the Fonds de Recherche du Québec -
Société et Culture grant 2016-NP-191430. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Patrick Augustin, Mikhail Chernov, and Dongho Song. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Sovereign Credit Risk and Exchange Rates: Evidence from CDS Quanto Spreads
Patrick Augustin, Mikhail Chernov, and Dongho Song
NBER Working Paper No. 24506
April 2018, Revised June 2018
JEL No. C1,E43,E44,G12,G15
ABSTRACT
Sovereign CDS quanto spreads—the difference between CDS premiums denominated in U.S.
dollars and a foreign currency—tell us how financial markets view the interaction between a
country's likelihood of default and associated currency devaluations (the Twin Ds). A noarbitrage
model applied to the term structure of quanto spreads can isolate the interaction between the Twin
Ds and gauge the associated risk premiums. We study countries in the Eurozone because their
quanto spreads pertain to the same exchange rate and monetary policy, allowing us to link cross-
sectional variation in their term structures to cross-country differences in fiscal policies. The ratio
of the risk-adjusted to the true default intensities is 2, on average. Conditional on the occurrence
of default, the true and risk-adjusted 1-week probabilities of devaluation are 5% and 77%,
respectively. The risk premium for the euro devaluation in case of default exceeds the regular
currency premium by up to 0.3% per week.
Patrick Augustin Dongho Song
Desautels Faculty of Management Carey Business School
McGill University 100 International Drive
1001 Sherbrooke Street West, Room 552 Baltimore, MD 21202
Montreal, Qc H3A 1G5 Canada dongho.song@jhu.edu
patrick.augustin@mcgill.ca
Mikhail Chernov
Anderson School of Management
University of California, Los Angeles
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C-417
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
mikhail.chernov@anderson.ucla.edu

1 Introduction
The risk of sovereign default and exchange rate fluctuations are inextricably linked. The
depreciation of a country’s currency is often a reflection of poor economic conditions. De-
faulteventstendtobeassociatedwithcurrencydevaluations. Suchdevaluationsmayeither
strategically support the competitiveness of the domestic economy, or penalize a country’s
growth due to increased borrowing costs or reduced access to international capital markets.
Despite the importance of studying the Twin Ds (default and devaluation), the subject has
received relatively limited attention in the literature. In our view, one reason for this is
that it is exceedingly difficult to measure the interaction between the two. Indeed, both
types of events are rare, so few data are available for researchers to use. Disagreement
over measurements are a clear manifestation of the problem. For example, Reinhart (2002)
estimates the probability of devaluation conditional on default at 84%, while Na, Schmitt-
Groh´e, Uribe, and Yue (2017) find it to be 48%. Another hard-to-measure dimension of
the Twin Ds is whether default has an immediate or long-term impact on the exchange
rate. Krugman (1979) argues that default leads to a change in the expected depreciation
rate (change in exchange rate), while Na, Schmitt-Groh´e, Uribe, and Yue (2017) suggest a
one-off drop in the exchange rate at default.
Inthisstudy, wearethefirsttotakeadvantageofarecentdevelopmentinfinancialmarkets
to offer an asset-pricing perspective on the measurement of the risk premia associated with
the Twin Ds. Specifically, sovereign credit default swap (CDS) contracts are available in
different currency denominations starting from August 2010. For example, contracts that
protect against a credit event in Germany could be denominated in euros (EUR) or U.S.
dollars (USD) (we use the terms default and credit event interchangeably). The difference
between the two respective CDS premiums of the same maturity, also known as quanto
CDS spread, reflects the market’s view about the interaction between the Twin Ds. Quanto
spreads of different maturities are informative about the interaction over different horizons.
Wefocusonquantospreadsinthe17Europeancountriesthatsharetheeuroasthecommon
exchangerate. WefindtheassociatedCDSmarketsparticularlyinterestingfortworeasons.
First, despite the common currency and monetary policy, the term structures of quanto
spreadsaredifferent,suggestingintriguingimplicationsregardingthedifferentfiscalpolicies.
Second, the contractual arrangements of the European contracts make observed quanto
spreads transparent in terms of the implications for the Twin Ds. Specifically, in contrast
to contracts for emerging markets (EM), payouts on Western European sovereign CDS of
alldenominationsaretriggeredirrespectiveofwhetheradefaultisassociatedwithdomestic
or foreign debt.
We start by explaining the institutional arrangements behind sovereign CDS in different
currencies. We then explain how quanto spreads are related to the interaction between the
Twin Ds. Next, we develop a model that allows us to characterize the relation between
default and devaluation probabilities.
1

Describing the joint behavior of 17 different term structures and an exchange rate is a
daunting task. Therefore, we limit ourselves to a no-arbitrage affine term structure model
that allows us to evaluate whether it is possible to reconcile all of this evidence within
a tractable specification. Along the way, we encounter a typical problem in the analysis
of credit-sensitive financial instruments: as the realization of credit events is rare, we can
identify only the risk-adjusted distribution of these events based on asset prices. We exploit
(i) the interaction between credit risk and currency risk, and (ii) the currency commonality
to identify the true distribution of credit events. As a bonus, our approach allows us to
identify the loss given default (LGD), which we assume to be constant and the same for all
countries. While this assumption is an oversimplification, it nevertheless offers progress on
a thorny empirical problem.
The model we propose features the following critical components: a model of the U.S.
reference interest rate curve, a model of credit risk, and a model of the spot/forward FX
curve. We use overnight indexed swap (OIS) rates as a reference curve and construct a
two-factor model to capture its dynamics.
The starting point for our credit risk model is a credit event whose arrival is controlled by
a doubly-stochastic Cox process, a popular modeling device in the literature. The default
intensity in each country is controlled by two factors – global and regional – which are
weighted differently for each country. We identify the global factor by setting the weights
on Germany’s regional factors to zero. Given that our data are from countries in the
Eurozone during the sovereign debt crisis, we derive an extension of our model to allow for
the possibility of credit contagion: the occurrence of a credit event in one country affecting
the probability of a credit event in another country.
Lastbutnotleast, wemodelthebehaviorofthespotUSD/EURFXrateandtheassociated
forward rates. We follow the literature on realistic modeling of the time series on FX rates.
Weallowfortime-varyingexpectedchangesinthedepreciationrate,heteroscedasticregular
shocks to the rates, and extreme events.
We connect jumps in the FX rate to sovereign credit risk by requiring them to take place
simultaneously with credit events. This modeling feature is our identifying assumption that
helps us to establish the true distribution of credit events. To enhance the statistical relia-
bility of our estimates, we follow Bai, Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Helwege (2015) and
complement our identification strategy by associating realized credit events with extreme
movements in quanto spreads.
We use joint data on the term structure of the quanto spreads of six countries, which
represent the most liquid CDS contracts across the European core and periphery, some
data on Greece prior to its credit event, the spot and forward FX rates, and a cross-section
of credit events for the six countries. We estimate the model via the Bayesian Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method. The model offers an accurate fit to the data. It also
fits the quanto spreads of the remaining 10 Eurozone countries that were not used in the
estimation.
2