NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PROPERTY RIGHTS TO FRONTIER LAND AND MINERALS:
US EXCEPTIONALISM
Gary D. Libecap
Working Paper 24544
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24544
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2018
Prepared for the Handbook of Cliometrics, 2nd ed., edited by Claude Diebolt and Michael
Haupert. Very helpful comments and direction were provided by Daron Acemoglu, Susan Carter,
Robert Ellickson, Eric Edwards. Stanley Engerman, Richard Epstein, Peter Lindert, Deirdre
McCloskey, Larry Neal, Claire Priest, Richard Sutch, Tom Weiss, and Gavin Wright. Excellent
research assistance was provided by Chester Lindley. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Gary D. Libecap. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Property Rights to Frontier Land and Minerals: US Exceptionalism
Gary D. Libecap
NBER Working Paper No. 24544
April 2018
JEL No. K11,N5,N51,N56,Q15,Q24,Q32,Q35
ABSTRACT
Property rights are the most fundamental institution in any society. They determine who has
decision-making authority over assets and who bears the costs and benefits of those decisions.
They assign ownership, wealth, political influence, and social standing. They make markets
possible; define timelines; and provide incentives for investment, innovation, and trade. They
mitigate the losses of open access and provide the basis for long-term economic growth.
Economists and economic historians have long recognized the importance of secure property
rights for economic outcomes. Other political economy, philosophy, historical, and legal
literatures emphasize different, but critical attributes based on how property rights are allocated
and to whom. The linkages among the social, political, and economic effects are examined here
with respect to US and Latin American frontier land and minerals. Property rights were sharply
different across the two frontiers with apparent long-term consequences for economic growth,
innovation, wealth distribution, private investment in public goods, as well as social and political
stability. The distinct assignment of property rights to land and minerals is likely a basis for
long-term US exceptionalism in economic performance, individualism, mobility, and optimism.
The mechanisms through which property rights to land in a frontier society affect outcomes in a
contemporary, highly urban one are complex. Because property rights to land were broadly
distributed, Americans could participate in capital markets using land as collateral. This ability
shaped opinions regarding markets, capitalism, and individual opportunity. In the 21st century,
these critical attributes may be eroding, inviting more analysis from economists and economic
historians.
Gary D. Libecap
Bren School of Environmental Science
and Management and Economics Department
University of California, Santa Barbara
Bren Hall 4412
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-5131
and NBER
glibecap@bren.ucsb.edu

“If a man owns a little property, that property is him.…it is part of him….in some ways he’s bigger because he owns it.”
John Steinbeck, The Grapes of Wrath, (1939, 1976, 48).
Introduction.
The above quotation points to attributes of property rights that are more individualistic, social, and political than are those
emphasized in most economic discussions. Nevertheless, there are direct linkages across these characteristics, and emphasizing the
relationships is the focus of this Chapter. Attention is directed to frontiers in North and South America where property rights were
distributed to land and minerals in very dissimilar ways, seemingly leading to starkly different consequences—economic, political,
and social. These varying frontier experiences appear to have had long-term consequences. Frontiers provide a natural experiment
because, by definition, they are areas where new rights to resources are emerging. The discussion is based on the existing literature
and does not provide tests of hypotheses regarding property rights and various outcomes. Causality between property rights structures
and observed variation in immigration patterns, middle class development, innovation, social and political cohesion, individualism,
reduced reliance upon the state, private investment in public goods as well as, long-term economic growth seems, however, to be
supported by available research.
Property rights are the most fundamental institution in any economy and society. The economics and economy history
literatures explore the role of secure property rights in mitigating the losses of the common pool, in promoting markets and exchange,
and in encouraging investment. These facilitate long-term economic growth and welfare. Older political economy, philosophy, and
history literatures, as well as growing legal scholarship, point to widespread ownership of land and related resources in molding social,
economic, and political relationships, and the role of individuals relative to the state. In those literatures, the existence of secure
private property rights leads to more independent, self-reliant, and individualistic citizens. They innovate, are politically conservative,
and invest in local public goods. They rely on rents they discover and generate. The state is less important than the market, and the
economy in turn is less centralized, more atomistic, market-based, and supportive of entrepreneurship.
1

For the US, the frontier is defined according to the US Census as an unsettled region where population density was less than 2
persons/mile2 (https://www.census.gov/dataviz/visualizations/001/). In Latin America, frontier regions were new to Europeans, but
often had denser native occupation, and there were multiple frontiers. Nevertheless, for land and minerals the definition of the frontier
is used here for European settlers in the region. The settlement of temperate North America by European migrants, molded in part by
the English common law of property and contract, along with the actions of colonial and US courts and legislatures, granted access to
and ultimate ownership of unimaginable riches to common individuals in a piecemeal fashion. In Latin America, land and mineral
ownership was retained by the sovereign with use rights to large tracts of land granted to political and economic elites. Mineral rents
largely were reserved by the crown. In the post-colonial period, hierarchical, centralized control continued, although individuals could
obtain title to their land. Minerals remained owned by the state. These differences in the property rights to land and minerals
allocated to individuals by the state between North and South America appear to have had long-lasting, important economic, political,
and social effects that are collected from the relevant literatures and described below. The outcomes underscore the perhaps
underappreciated far-reaching and enduring impact of the nature of property rights to fundamental resources that exist in any society.
They go far in offering an explanation for contemporary differences observed across nations and across times in development, equity,
opportunity, entrepreneurship, and social and political stability.
The Economic Institutions of Property Rights.
Property rights critically shape economic behavior by fixing incentives for resource use, investment, exchange, and
inheritance. They set time frames and define the decision makers for such actions. They determine flows of associated benefits and
costs and designate who will receive or bear them. Externalities arise from incomplete property rights, when decision makers do not
internalize the full benefits and costs of their actions. Depending on the size of the imprecision in definition of property rights,
incentives are distorted, leading to losses in potential resource value and welfare. Property rights can be informal (implicitly
recognized) or formal (legally documented) and can range from state ownership to group rights to private property rights. In all cases
to be stable, they must be socially-sanctioned and often are enshrined in established law.
Property rights can exist with almost any imaginable array of attributes. They may a). be held by a single party or be divided
with one party having use rights and another actual ownership; b). be permanent or short-term; c). have comprehensive or restricted
authority over use, exchange, investment, and assignment to heirs; d). completely direct costs and benefits to rights holders or split
costs and benefits among multiple entities, including users, sovereign rulers, politicians, and bureaucrats; e). be well defined or
imprecise; and f). be secure or insecure. This assortment of possible attributes leads to a similar multiplicity of economic outcomes for
the same resources and decision makers.
2