NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES AND THE FINANCIAL CRISIS OF 2008:
A POST MORTEM
Juan Ospina
Harald Uhlig
Working Paper 24509
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24509
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2018
This research has been supported by the NSF grant SES-1227280. We are grateful to the research
assistance by Avigail Kifer at a very early, but crucial first stage of this paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Juan Ospina and Harald Uhlig. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Mortgage-Backed Securities and the Financial Crisis of 2008: a Post Mortem
Juan Ospina and Harald Uhlig
NBER Working Paper No. 24509
April 2018
JEL No. G01,G21,G23,G24
ABSTRACT
We examine the payoff performance, up to the end of 2013, of non-agency residential mortgage-
backed securities (RMBS), issued up to 2008. We have created a new and detailed data set on the
universe of non-agency residential mortgage backed securities, per carefully assembling source
data from Bloomberg and other sources. We compare these payoffs to their ex-ante ratings as
well as other characteristics. We establish seven facts. First, the bulk of these securities was
rated AAA. Second, AAA securities did ok: on average, their total cumulated losses up to 2013
are 2.3 percent. Third, the subprime AAA-rated segment did particularly well. Fourth, later
vintages did worse than earlier vintages, except for subprime AAA securities. Fifth, the bulk of
the losses were concentrated on a small share of all securities. Sixth, the misrating for AAA
securities was modest. Seventh, controlling for a home price bust, a home price boom was good
for the repayment on these securities. Together, these facts provide challenge the conventional
narrative, that improper ratings of RMBS were a major factor in the financial crisis of 2008.
Juan Ospina
Banco de la Republica de Colombia
juan.jose.ospina@gmail.com
Harald Uhlig
Dept. of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
huhlig@uchicago.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24509

1 Introduction
post mortem: an examination of a dead body to determine the cause of death1
Gradually, the deep financial crisis of 2008 is in the rearview mirror. With that, standard
narratives have emerged, which will inform and influence policy choices and public perception
in the future for a long time to come. For that reason, it is all the more important to examine
these narratives with the distance of time and available data, as many of these narratives were
created in the heat of the moment.
One such standard narrative has it that the financial meltdown of 2008 was caused by an
overextension of mortgages to weak borrowers, repackaged and then sold to willing lenders
drawn in by faulty risk ratings for these mortgage back securities. To many, mortgage backed
securities and rating agencies became the key villains of that financial crisis. In particular,
rating agencies were blamed for assigning the coveted AAA rating to many securities, which
did not deserve it, particularly in the subprime segment of the market, and that these ratings
then lead to substantial losses for institutional investors, who needed to invest in safe assets
and who mistakenly put their trust in these misguided ratings.
In this paper, we re-examine this narrative. We seek to address two questions in particular.
First, were these mortgage backed securities bad investments? Second, were the ratings wrong?
We answer these questions, using a new and detailed data set on the universe of non-agency
residential mortgage backed securities (RMBS), obtained by devoting considerable work to
carefullyassemblingdatafromBloombergandothersources. Thisdatasetallowsustoexamine
the actual repayment stream and losses on principal on these securities up to 2014, and thus
with a considerable distance since the crisis events. In essence, we provide a post-mortem on a
market that many believe to have died in 2008. We find that the conventional narrative needs
substantial rewriting: the ratings and the losses were not nearly as bad as this narrative would
lead one to believe.
Specifically, we calculate the ex-post realized losses as well as ex-post realized return on
investing on par in these mortgage backed securities, under various assumptions of the losses
for the remaining life time of the securities. We compare these realized returns to their ratings
in 2008 and their promised loss distributions, according to tables available from the rating
agencies. We shall investigate, whether ratings were a sufficient statistic (to the degree that
a discretized rating can be) or whether they were, essentially, just “noise”, given information
already available to market participants at the time of investing such as ratings of borrowers.
1The market for non-agency residential mortgage backed securities pretty much died with the financial crisis: new issuance
slowedtoatrickle. Thus,thetitle.
1

We establish seven facts. First, the bulk of these securities was rated AAA. Second, AAA
securities did ok: on average, their total cumulated losses up to 2013 are 2.3 percent. Third, the
subprimeAAA-ratedsegmentdidparticularlywell. Fourth, latervintagesdidworsethanearlier
vintages, except for subprime AAA securities. Fifth, the bulk of the losses were concentrated
on a small share of all securities. Sixth, the misrating for AAA securities was modest. Seventh,
controlling for a home price bust, a home price boom was good for the repayment on these
securities.
Table 10 presents more detailed results for these returns, depending on the market segment
and assumptions regarding terminal value: these results are presented in greater detail in
subsection 5. The most important result here may be that various categories of AAA securities
provided an internal rate of return of about 2.44% to 3.31% on average, depending on the
assumptionsregardingtheirterminalvalue. Theyieldon10-yeartreasuriesin2008wasbetween
3 and 4 percent: the difference is surely smaller than what the standard crisis narrative seems
to suggest. It mattered quite a bit, whether the mortgages were fixed rate or floating rate. We
do not deny that losses occurred and that these were magnitudes larger than those that should
be expected of AAA securities. However, we suggest that these data on the realized returns on
AAA RMBS present an interesting challenge to researchers, seeking to place these securities at
the center of the storm, tossing world-wide financial markets into the abyss.
Losses were considerably larger on securities with ratings other than AAA. We examine
them in considerable detail. Some were practically wiped out as a group, despite rather stellar
non-AAAratingsexante. Thetotalmarketshareofthesesecuritieswasbelow14percentofthe
market for non-agency RMBS, however. Moreover, we calculate that the the total losses on all
non-agency RMBS amounted to less than 350 billion dollars: less than 2.5 percent of US GDP
or less than half a percent annualized over that period, and quite a bit less than the amount
devoted to the 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act or “stimulus” package. We
suggest that it is an interesting challenge to craft a theory of a world-wide recession, triggered
by the these losses.
We should emphasize that we only examine non-agency residential mortgage backed se-
curities. Agency-backed securities were backed implicitly by the tax payer and explicitly by
programs of the Federal Reserve Bank. Therefore their role in the crisis was largely a matter
of policy, and investors did not expect losses on investments in these securities to be large. By
contrast, the non-agency portion really was the “wild west” of that market, and provides the
most stringent restrictions for challenging the conventional narrative. Also, we do not inves-
tigate higher layers of leveraging and repackaging, such as, say, AAA-rated collateralized debt
securities, backed by a basket of lower-rated mortgage-backed securities. Note that losses here
2