NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANKING ON DEPOSITS:
MATURITY TRANSFORMATION WITHOUT INTEREST RATE RISK
Itamar Drechsler
Alexi Savov
Philipp Schnabl
Working Paper 24582
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24582
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2018
We thank Markus Brunnermeier, Eduardo Davila, John Driscoll, Mark Egan, Mark Flannery, Raj Iyer,
Arvind Krishnamurthy, Yueran Ma, Gregor Matvos, Monika Piazzesi, Anthony Saunders, David Scharfstein,
Andrei Shleifer, Philip Strahan, Adi Sunderam, Bruce Tuckman, James Vickery, and seminar participants
at the American Economic Association Meeting, BIS Research Meeting, Brandeis University, Carnegie
Mellon, Chinese University in Hong Kong, ECB Monetary Policy Forum, FDIC, FRB Chicago, FRB
New York, FRB Philadelphia, FRB San Francisco, Federal Reserve Board, Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology, International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, LBS Summer Symposium,
MIT Macroeconomics Seminar, NBER Summer Institute Corporate Finance, NBER Monetary Economics,
Northwestern Macroeconomics Seminar, Ohio State University, Office of Financial Research, Princeton
University, Purdue University, SITE, University of Amsterdam, University of Michigan, University
of Pittsburgh, University of Rochester, and Yale University for their comments. We also thank Patrick
Farrell, Manasa Gopal, and Pauline Liang for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Itamar Drechsler, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Banking on Deposits: Maturity Transformation without Interest Rate Risk
Itamar Drechsler, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl
NBER Working Paper No. 24582
May 2018, Revised January 2020
JEL No. E43,E52,G21,G31
ABSTRACT
We show that maturity transformation does not expose banks to significant interest rate risk|it hedges
it. This is due to banks' deposit franchise. The deposit franchise gives banks substantial market power
over deposits, allowing them to pay deposit rates that are low and insensitive to market interest rates.
Maintaining this power requires banks to incur large, interest-insensitive operating costs, so that the
total costs of deposits are similar to fixed-rate, long-term debt. Hedging these costs therefore requires
banks to lend long term|i.e., to do maturity transformation. As predicted by this theory, we document
that banks' net interest margins have been highly stable and insensitive to interest rates, and banks'
net worth is largely insulated from monetary policy shocks. We further show that banks match the
interest-rate sensitivities of their expenses and income one-for-one, so that banks with less interest-sensitive
deposits (more market power) hold assets with substantially longer duration. Our results show that
deposits are special because they are short-term and yet have interest-insensitive costs, which explains
why banks are able to supply long-term credit.
Itamar Drechsler Philipp Schnabl
Wharton School Stern School of Business
University of Pennsylvania New York University
3620 Locust Walk 44 West Fourth Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104 New York, NY 10012
and NBER and NBER
idrechsl@wharton.upenn.edu schnabl@stern.nyu.edu
Alexi Savov
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-80
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
asavov@stern.nyu.edu

I Introduction
A defining function of banks is maturity transformation—borrowing short term and lending
long term. This function is important because it supplies firms with long-term credit and
households with short-term, liquid deposits. In textbook models, banks engage in maturity
transformation to earn the average difference between the long- and short-term rates—the
term premium—but this exposes them to interest rate risk. An unexpected increase in the
short rate makes banks’ interest expenses rise relative to interest income, pushing down
net interest margins and depleting banks’ capital. Interest rate risk is therefore viewed as
fundamental to the economic model of banking, and it underlies discussion of how monetary
policy impacts the banking sector.1
In this paper, we show that in fact banks do not take on interest rate risk, despite having
a large maturity mismatch. The reason for this is the deposit franchise. Because of the
deposit franchise, maturity transformation actually reduces the amount of risk banks take
on. The deposit franchise has two essential properties that drive this result. The first is that
it gives banks market power over retail deposits, which allows them to borrow at rates that
are both low and insensitive to the market short rate. The second is that running a deposit
franchise incurs high costs (branches, salaries, marketing), but these costs are largely fixed
and hence also insensitive to the short rate. Therefore, even though deposits are short-term,
funding via a deposit franchise resembles funding with long-term fixed-rate debt.
This makes it natural for banks to hedge their deposit franchise by holding long-term
fixed-rate assets. And since deposits are very large, so too are banks’ long-term asset hold-
ings. Thus, a big maturity mismatch actually insulates banks’ profits from interest rate risk.
We show empirically that this is true in the aggregate: bank profits are insensitive to even
large fluctuations in interest rates. It is also true in the cross section: banks that have a
stronger deposit franchise—and hence less sensitive interest expenses—hold more long-term
assets. Moreover, there is a close quantitative match: banks with less sensitive interest ex-
penses have one-for-one less sensitive interest income, which makes their profits fully hedged
1In 2010, Federal Reserve Vice Chairman Donald Kohn argued that “Intermediaries need to be sure that
as the economy recovers, they aren’t also hit by the interest rate risk that often accompanies this sort of
mismatch in asset and liability maturities” (Kohn 2010). See also Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin (2010).
1

with respect to interest rates.
Our findings have several important implications. First, they explain why deposit taking
and long-term lending take place within the same institution, thereby providing a new an-
swer to one of the fundamental questions in banking (e.g., Kashyap, Rajan, and Stein 2002).
This question underlies the renewed debate surrounding narrow banking, which argues for
separating deposit taking from long-term lending (Friedman 1960, Cochrane 2014). Our re-
sults suggest that narrow banking could make banks more exposed to interest rate risk and
reduce the supply of long-term credit.2 Second, our findings have implications for the trans-
mission of monetary policy. In particular, they imply that banks are largely insulated from
the balance sheet channel of monetary policy, the idea that interest rate changes influence
bank lending by shocking their net worth (Bernanke and Gertler 1989, Bernanke, Gertler,
and Gilchrist 1999).3 More broadly, our results show that, in a world where interest rates
fluctuate widely, the deposit franchise is the reason why banks can provide long-term loans
without taking on interest rate risk.
Webegintheanalysisbydocumentingthatbanksdoinfactengageinsignificantmaturity
transformation. Aggregate bank assets have an average estimated duration of 4.2 years,
versus only 0.4 years for liabilities. This mismatch of about 4 years is large and stable
over time. It implies that if banks paid market rates on their liabilities (as assumed in the
textbook model), then a 100-bps level shock to interest rates would cause a cumulative 400-
bps reduction in net interest margins (interest income minus interest expenses, divided by
assets) over the following years. This loss in profits would lead to a 4% decline in the book
value of assets relative to liabilities over the same period. This is a very large hit for banks;
it amounts to four years worth of profits given that the industry return on assets is just 1%.
Although it would take time for the losses to be reflected in book values, investors would
immediately price in the full 4% drop in market values. And since banks are levered ten to
one, the 4% drop in assets would translate to a 40% drop in banks’ stock prices.
Yet in practice we find that a 100-bps shock to interest rates induces only a 4.2% drop
2We understand narrow banking as allowing banks to invest only in short-term safe claims, precisely to
avoid the interest-rate exposure that the literature associates with maturity transformation.
3Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl (2017) present an alternative channel of monetary policy that does not
rely on variation in banks’ net worth.
2