NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE ROLE OF TECHNOLOGY IN MORTGAGE LENDING
Andreas Fuster
Matthew Plosser
Philipp Schnabl
James Vickery
Working Paper 24500
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24500
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2018
We thank an anonymous reviewer, Sudheer Chava, Scott Frame, Itay Goldstein, Wei Jiang,
Andrew Karolyi, Chris Mayer, Stephen Zeldes, and seminar and conference participants at
Columbia (RFS FinTech conference), NYU Stern, Kellogg School of Management, University of
St. Gallen, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 2017 Real Estate Conference, Homer Hoyt Institute,
and the University of Technology, Sydney, for helpful comments. We also thank a number of
anonymous mortgage industry professionals for providing information about institutional details
and industry trends. Katherine di Lucido, Patrick Farrell, Eilidh Geddes, Drew Johnston, April
Meehl, Akhtar Shah, Shivram Viswanathan and Brandon Zborowski provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Andreas Fuster, Matthew Plosser, Philipp Schnabl, and James Vickery. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Role of Technology in Mortgage Lending
Andreas Fuster, Matthew Plosser, Philipp Schnabl, and James Vickery
NBER Working Paper No. 24500
April 2018
JEL No. G21,G23
ABSTRACT
Technology-based ("FinTech") lenders increased their market share of U.S. mortgage lending
from 2% to 8% from 2010 to 2016. Using market-wide, loan-level data on U.S. mortgage
applications and originations, we show that FinTech lenders process mortgage applications about
20% faster than other lenders, even when controlling for detailed loan, borrower, and geographic
observables. Faster processing does not come at the cost of higher defaults. FinTech lenders
adjust supply more elastically than other lenders in response to exogenous mortgage demand
shocks, thereby alleviating capacity constraints associated with traditional mortgage lending. In
areas with more FinTech lending, borrowers refinance more, especially when it is in their interest
to do so. We find no evidence that FinTech lenders target marginal borrowers. Our results
suggest that technological innovation has improved the efficiency of financial intermediation in
the U.S. mortgage market.
Andreas Fuster Philipp Schnabl
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Stern School of Business
Research Group New York University
33 Liberty St 44 West Fourth Street
New York, NY 10045 New York, NY 10012
andreas.fuster@gmail.com and NBER
schnabl@stern.nyu.edu
Matthew Plosser
Financial Intermediation Function James Vickery
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street Financial Intermediation Function
New York, NY 10045 33 Liberty Street
matthew.plosser@ny.frb.org New York, NY 10045
james.vickery@ny.frb.org
A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24500

I Introduction
The U.S. residential mortgage industry is experiencing a wave of technological innovation as
bothstart-upsandexistinglendersseekwaystoautomate, simplifyandspeedupeachstepof
the mortgage origination process. At the forefront of this development are FinTech lenders,
which have a complete end-to-end online mortgage application and approval process that
is supported by centralized underwriting operations, rather than the traditional network of
local brokers or “bricks and mortar” branches. For example, Rocket Mortgage from Quicken
Loans, introduced in 2015, provides a tool to electronically collect documentation about
borrower’s income, assets and credit history, allowing the lender to make approval decisions
based on an online application in as little as eight minutes.
In the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis, FinTech lenders have become an increasingly
important source of mortgage credit to U.S. households. We measure “FinTech lenders”
as lenders that offer an application process that can be completed entirely online. As of
December 2016, all FinTech lenders are stand-alone mortgage originators that primarily
securitize mortgages and operate without deposit financing or a branch network. Their
lendinghasgrownannuallyby30%from$34bnoftotaloriginationsin2010(2%ofmarket)to
$161bn in 2016 (8% of market). The growth has been particularly pronounced for refinances
and for mortgages insured by the Federal Housing Administration (FHA), a segment of the
market which primarily serves lower income borrowers.
In this paper, we study the effects of FinTech lending on the U.S. mortgage market. Our
main hypothesis is that the FinTech lending model represents a technological innovation that
reduces frictions in mortgage lending, such as lengthy loan processing, capacity constraints,
inefficient refinancing, and limited access to finance by some borrowers. The alternative
hypothesis is that FinTech lending is not special on these dimensions, and that FinTech
lenders offer services that are similar to traditional lenders in terms of processing times and
scalability. Under this explanation, there are economic forces unrelated to technology that
explain the growth in FinTech lending (e.g., regulatory arbitrage or marketing).
Itisimportanttodistinguishbetweentheseexplanationstoevaluatetheimpactoftechno-
logical innovation on the mortgage market. If FinTech lenders do indeed offer a substantially
1

different product from traditional lenders, they may increase consumer surplus or expand
credit supply, at least for individuals who are comfortable obtaining a mortgage online. If,
however, FinTech lending is driven primarily by other economic forces, there might be little
benefit to consumers. FinTech lending may even increase the overall risk of the U.S. mort-
gage market (e.g., due to lax screening). In addition, the results are important for evaluating
the broader impact of recent technological innovation in loan markets. Mortgage lending is
arguably the market in which technology has had the largest economic impact thus far, but
other loan markets may undergo similar transformations in the future.1
Our analysis identifies several frictions in U.S. mortgage markets and examines whether
FinTech lending alleviates them. We start by examining the effect of FinTech lending on
loan outcomes. We focus particularly on the time it takes to originate a loan as a measure of
efficiency. FinTech lenders may be faster at processing loans than traditional lenders because
online processing is automated and centralized, with less scope for human error. At the same
time, this more automated approach may be less effective at screening borrowers; therefore,
we also examine the riskiness of FinTech loans using data on loan defaults.
We find that FinTech lenders process mortgages faster than traditional lenders, measured
by total days from the submission of a mortgage application until the closing. Using loan-
level data on the near-universe of U.S. mortgages from 2010 to 2016, we find that FinTech
lenders reduce processing time by about 10 days, or 20% of the average processing time.
In our preferred specifications, this effect is larger for refinance mortgages (14.6 days) than
purchase mortgages (9.2 days). The result holds when we restrict the sample to non-banks,
indicating that it is not solely due to differences in regulation. The results are also robust
to including a large set of borrower, loan, and geographic controls; along with other tests
we conduct, this suggests that faster processing is not explained by endogenous matching of
“fast” borrowers with FinTech lenders.
Faster processing times by FinTech lenders do not result in riskier loans. We measure
loan risk using default rates on FHA mortgages, which is the riskiest segment of the market
in recent years. We find that default rates on FinTech mortgages are about 25% lower than
1Many industry observers believe that technology will soon disrupt a wide range of loan markets includ-
ing small business loans, leveraged loans, personal unsecured lending, and commercial real estate lending
(Goldman Sachs Research, 2015).
2