NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
POLICY UNCERTAINTY AND INNOVATION:
EVIDENCE FROM IPO INTERVENTIONS IN CHINA
Lin William Cong
Sabrina T. Howell
Working Paper 24657
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24657
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2018
The authors especially thank Shai Bernstein and Manju Puri for helpful discussions and suggestion.
They also thank Viral Acharya, Philip Bond, Jennifer Carpenter, Francois Derrien, Shan Ge, Steve
Kaplan, Elisabeth Kempf, Charles Lee, Yifei Mao, Gustavo Manso, Holger Mueller, Raghuram Rajan,
Mike Schwert, Amir Sufi, Qian Sun, Margarita Tsoutsoura, Shan Zhao, and conference and seminar
participants at NBER Chinese Economy Meeting, CICF, Asian Finance Association Meeting, Econometric
Society Asian Meeting, the Changing Role of Stock Markets in Capital Formation Conference, HEC,
Mannheim, HKU, HKUST, NUS, NYU Stern, University of Washington Foster School, and Peking
University for comments and feedback. For data assistance, they are also grateful to the Private Capital
Research Institute (PCRI), Xiaobo Zhang, and especially Rania Zhang with whom we had repeated
discussions and consultations that helped shape an initial version of the paper. Cong’s research was
funded by the Initiative on Global Markets, the Fama-Miller Center, and the Polsky Center at the University
of Chicago Booth School of Business. Howell’s research was funded by the NYU Stern Center for
Global Economy and Business and the Kauffman Foundation. Ammon Lam, Danye Wang, Xiao Zhang,
and Yi Zhang provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Lin William Cong and Sabrina T. Howell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Policy Uncertainty and Innovation: Evidence from IPO Interventions in China
Lin William Cong and Sabrina T. Howell
NBER Working Paper No. 24657
May 2018, Revised April 2020
JEL No. G3,O3
ABSTRACT
Public equity is an important source of risk capital, especially in China. The Chinese government has
occasionally suspended IPOs, exposing firms already approved to IPO to indeterminate listing delays.
The temporary bar on going public increases uncertainty about access to public markets for affected
firms. We show that suspension-induced delay reduces corporate innovation activity both during the
delay and for years after listing. Negative effects on tangible investment and positive effects on leverage
are temporary, consistent with financial constraints during the suspensions being resolved after listing.
Our results suggest that predictable, well-functioning IPO markets are important for firm value creation.
They demonstrate that corporate innovation is cumulative and is negatively affected by policy uncertainty.
Lin William Cong
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
will.cong@cornell.edu
Sabrina T. Howell
NYU Stern School of Business
KMC 9-93
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
showell@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
This paper studies the impact on innovation of a government policy that created
uncertainty by suspending IPO activity indefinitely. Specifically, the policy temporarily
prevented certain firms that had already been approved to go public from accessing public
markets through IPOs. This unique situation offers an ideal setting to explore the impact
of policy uncertainty, which is typically difficult to isolate in empirical analysis. In our
context, we can contemporaneously compare firms facing policy uncertainty, which lose
access to public markets for an indefinite period of time but ultimately go public, with very
similar firms that have only short periods of normal processing time between their IPO
approval and listing. The forced, uncertain suspension-induced delay reduces innovation,
which we measure using patenting activity. The decline in innovation endures after listing,
suggesting that innovation has a cumulative dimension and that temporary suspensions
could have a persistent impact by altering manager preferences.
The literature has established that when firms intending to IPO face strategic
incentives to remain private, staying private improves innovation quality (Ferreira, Manso
& Silva 2012, Bernstein 2015). At the same time, other studies find that public equity
enables innovation by providing risk capital (Atanassov, Nanda & Seru 2007, Acharya &
Xu 2017). We shed light on an as-yet unstudied dimension: certainty in access to public
markets. This is especially relevant in emerging economies, where alternative sources of
risk capital are less mature and regulatory infrastructure is less predictable than in
developed countries (Rajan & Zingales 2001, Hsu, Tian & Xu 2014, Ahlstrom, Bruton &
Yeh 2007, Cong, Lee, Qu & Shen 2018). No emerging financial market is more important
than China’s (Allen, Qian & Qian 2008).
We exploit a novel source of variation offered by the Chinese setting: Regulators have
on multiple occasions suspended all IPO activities. While related to the state of the market,
the suspensions were not scheduled and were not anticipated multiple months in advance.
The suspensions generate plausibly exogenous listing delay among firms already approved to
1

go public because firms have little ability to time the IPO market. IPO approval takes two
to three years in normal, non-suspension times. Once approved, firms take several months
to complete the final steps. As a result of this multi-year time frame from application to
listing, aggregate market conditions do not affect the order of firms listing around suspension
announcements. While normal, predictable time between approval and listing may create
financial constraints, suspension-induced delay adds the element of uncertainty in addition
to further delay.
In analysis, we focus on a sample of firms that Chinese regulators approve to IPO
in the twelve months before a suspension announcement for two suspensions, the first from
September2008toJuly2009,andthesecondfromOctober2012toJanuary2014. Allofthese
firmsultimatelygopubliconChineseexchanges,butdependingontheirapprovaldates,some
experience sharply greater listing delays induced by the suspensions (see Figure 1). Members
of the control group are approved earlier and list with normal delay (i.e. standard processing
time), while members of the treated group must wait until the suspension ends and face a
longer time between approval and listing as well as greater uncertainty about when they can
list. No firms in our sample choose to withdraw and list abroad.1 In a key placebo test
we show that variation in normal delay due to processing time – which contains no policy
uncertainty – operates very differently from suspension-induced delay; it has no effect on
innovation. This helps to demonstrate the importance of policy uncertainty independently
of any financial constraint effect.
Firms in the control and treatment groups are similar before approval and we verify
that the order of listing closely follows the order of IPO approval. As we explain in Section
4.1, if any queue-jumping occurs after approval, it does not adversely bias our estimation,
because we define treatment by the date of approval, which occurs before a suspension
announcement; if queue-jumping occurs before approval, it should affect treatment and
1This may reflect the sunk cost fallacy, as the firm will have expended considerable resources to apply to IPO in
China. It could also reflect the expectation of a more favorable domestic market valuation, or firm-specific factors
that make the firm poorly suited to IPO on a foreign exchange.
2