NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PRICE STICKINESS ALONG THE INCOME DISTRIBUTION AND THE EFFECTS
OF MONETARY POLICY
Javier Cravino
Ting Lan
Andrei A. Levchenko
Working Paper 24654
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24654
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2018
We are grateful to Andres Blanco, John Leahy, our discussant Indrajit Mitra, and workshop
participants at different institutions for helpful comments, and to Sam Haltenhof for excellent
research assistance. Financial support from the National Science Foundation under grant
SES-1628879 is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Javier Cravino, Ting Lan, and Andrei A. Levchenko. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Price Stickiness along the Income Distribution and the Effects of Monetary Policy
Javier Cravino, Ting Lan, and Andrei A. Levchenko
NBER Working Paper No. 24654
May 2018
JEL No. E31,E52
ABSTRACT
We document that the prices of the goods consumed by high-income households are more sticky
and less volatile than those of the goods consumed by middle-income households. This suggests
that monetary shocks can have distributional consequences by affecting the relative prices of the
goods consumed at different points on the income distribution. We use a Factor-Augmented VAR
(FAVAR) model to show that, following a monetary policy shock, the estimated impulse
responses of high-income households' consumer price indices are 22% lower than those of the
middle-income households. We then evaluate the macroeconomic implications of our empirical
findings in a quantitative New-Keynesian model featuring households that are heterogeneous in
their income and consumption patterns, and sectors that are heterogeneous in their frequency of
price changes. We find that: (i) the distributional consequences of monetary policy shocks are
large and similar to those in the FAVAR model, and (ii) greater income inequality increases the
effectiveness of monetary policy, although this effect is modest for realistic changes in inequality.
Javier Cravino Andrei A. Levchenko
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of Michigan University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street, Lorch Hall 365B 611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109 Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER and NBER
jcravino@umich.edu alev@umich.edu
Ting Lan
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
tinglan@umich.edu

1 Introduction
Thereisgrowingrecognitionthatmonetarypolicyshockshavedistributionalconsequences.
An active literature argues that monetary policy can have differential effects across vari-
ous types of agents: savers vs. borrowers (Doepke and Schneider, 2006), financially con-
strained vs. unconstrained (Williamson, 2008), or young vs. old (Wong, 2016). In turn,
theheterogeneityintheimpactofmonetarypolicyacrossagentscandetermineitsoverall
effectiveness (Auclert, 2017; Beraja et al., 2017; Kaplan et al., 2018). Coibion et al. (2017)
show empirically that monetary contractions increase both income and consumption in-
equality. Inallofthesecontributions,thedistributionalconsequencesofmonetarypolicy
arisefromitsheterogeneousimpactonthevalueofagents’incomeorwealth.
This paperproposes andquantifies a novelmechanism throughwhich monetarypol-
icy shocks have distributional consequences. If the effects of monetary shocks on prices
are heterogeneous across types of goods (Boivin et al., 2009), and consumption baskets
differacrosstheincomedistribution(e.g.,Almås,2012),thenshockswilldifferentiallyaf-
fect the prices faced by households of different incomes. We document that the prices of
the goods consumed by high-income households are (i) more sticky and (ii) less volatile
than those of the goods consumed by middle-income households. We then use both a
Factor-AugmentedVAR(FAVAR)modelandaquantitativeNewKeynesianDSGEmodel
to quantify the distributional consequences of monetary policy shocks. Both methodolo-
gies indicate that these consequences are large relative to the aggregate impact of mon-
etary policy on prices: a shock that increases inflation by 1% after a year also generates
a −0.2% difference in the inflation faced by households at the top vs. the middle of the
incomedistribution.
Our analysis uses three main sources of data. The first is the US Consumer Expen-
diture Survey (CES), from which we obtain expenditure shares across detailed product
categories for households at different percentiles of the income distribution. The second
is the item-level consumer price data from the BLS, which are the most finely disaggre-
gated consumer prices publicly available for the US. Finally, we employ the measures of
pricestickinessconstructedbyNakamuraandSteinsson(2008),whoreportthefrequency
ofpriceadjustment(i.e. theprobabilitythatapricechangesinaparticularmonth)forev-
erydetailedproductcategoryintheUSCPI.
We combine these data to compute the average frequencies of price changes for the
baskets of goods purchased by households at each income percentile in the CES. We
find systematic differences in the price-stickiness of the consumption baskets of differ-
ent households. On average, 22% of the goods consumed by households in the middle
1

of the income distribution change prices in a given month. However, the frequency of
price changes is 24% lower for the goods consumed by the richest percentile.1 We also
compute income-specific consumer price indices (CPIs) and show similar differences in
thevolatilityofpricesfacedbydifferenthouseholds: thestandarddeviationoftheCPIof
thetoppercentileis38%lowerthanthatoftheCPIofthemiddle-incomehouseholds.
These differences across consumption baskets imply that income-specific CPIs may
respond differentially to monetary policy shocks. In particular, the CPIs of high-income
households should be less responsive to monetary shocks than the CPIs in the middle of
the income distribution. We evaluate this hypothesis both econometrically and quantita-
tively. We first implement a FAVAR model following Bernanke et al. (2005) and Boivin et
al.(2009),thatallowsustoestimatetheimpulseresponsesofalargenumberofeconomic
seriestomonetarypolicyshocks. Ourinterestisestimatingtheimpactofmonetarypolicy
shocks on household-specific CPIs. We thus include 100 income-percentile-specific CPIs
in the FAVAR. The estimates indeed show that after 12 months, the CPIs of high-income
households respond about 22% less to the same monetary policy shocks than the CPIs of
the middle-income households. Thus, the consumption basket differences in price stick-
iness and inflation volatility have the expected impact on the differential responses of
households-specificCPIstomonetarypolicyshocksinthedata.
Wethenperformaquantitativeassessmentusingamulti-sector,multi-householdmodel
with Calvo-style nominal rigidities. In the model, sectors are heterogeneous with respect
to their price stickiness, and households are heterogeneous with respect to their income
levels and consumption baskets. We calibrate the model to the observed levels of price
stickiness and observed cross-household differences in consumption patterns, and simu-
late the model’s response to a monetary policy shock, paying special attention to how a
monetary shock differentially affects households. As expected, high-income households’
CPIsrespondlesstoamonetarypolicyshockthanmiddle-incomehouseholds’CPIs. The
difference is once again quantitatively large: after 12 months, the CPI of the households
in the top percentile of the income distribution responds by 13% less than that of the
middle-income households. We also show that shifting the distribution of income to-
wards households that consume more sticky goods (i.e. more income inequality) would
increase the effectiveness of monetary policy, although this effect is modest for realistic
changesininequality.
Our paper draws on, and contributes to, two literatures. The first is the research
agenda on the distributional aspects of monetary policy reviewed above. The second is
1Thesenumberscorrespondtofrequenciesofregularpricechanges(i.e.excludingsales).Theresultsare
similarforthefrequencyofallpricechanges(includingsales).
2