NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INVESTOR EXPERIENCES AND FINANCIAL MARKET DYNAMICS
Ulrike Malmendier
Demian Pouzo
Victoria Vanasco
Working Paper 24697
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24697
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2018
We thank Marianne Andries, Nick Barberis, Dirk Bergemann, Julien Cujean, Xavier Gabaix,
Lawrence Jin, and workshop participants at LBS, LSE, NYU, Pompeu Fabra, Stanford, UC
Berkeley, as well as the ASSA, NBER EFG Behavioral Macro, NBER Behavioral Finance, SITE
(Psychology and Economics segment), SFB TR 15 (Tutzing, Germany) conferences for helpful
comments. We also thank Felix Chopra, Marius Guenzel, Canyao Liu, Leslie Shen, and Jonas
Sobott for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Ulrike Malmendier, Demian Pouzo, and Victoria Vanasco. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Investor Experiences and Financial Market Dynamics
Ulrike Malmendier, Demian Pouzo, and Victoria Vanasco
NBER Working Paper No. 24697
June 2018
JEL No. E03,G02,G11,G12
ABSTRACT
How do macro-financial shocks affect investor behavior and market dynamics? Recent evidence
suggests long-lasting effects of personally experienced outcomes on investor beliefs and
investment but also significant differences across older and younger generations. We formalize
experience-based learning in an OLG model, where different cross-cohort experiences generate
persistent heterogeneity in beliefs, portfolio choices, and trade. The model allows us to
characterize a novel link between investor demographics and the dependence of prices on past
dividends, while also generating known features of asset prices, such as excess volatility and
return predictability. The model produces new implications for the cross-section of asset
holdings, trade volume, and investors' heterogeneous responses to recent financial crises, which
we show to be in line with the data.
Ulrike Malmendier Victoria Vanasco
Department of Economics Stanford University
549 Evans Hall # 3880 Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley vvanasco@stanford.edu
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ulrike@econ.berkeley.edu
Demian Pouzo
University of California at Berkeley
530-1 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
dpouzo@econ.berkeley.edu

1 Introduction
Recent crises in the stock and housing markets have stimulated a new wave of macro-
finance models of risk-taking. A key challenge, and motivation, has been to find tractable
models of investor expectations that account not only for asset pricing puzzles such as
return predictability (Campbell and Shiller (1988), Fama and French (1988)) and excess
volatility (LeRoy and Porter (1981), Shiller (1981), LeRoy (2005)), but also for micro-
level stylized facts such as investors chasing past performances. As argued by Woodford
(2013), the empirical evidence suggests a need for dynamic models that go beyond the
rational-expectations hypothesis. In line with Woodford’s proposal, models of natural
expectation formation (Fuster, Hebert, and Laibson (2011); Fuster, Laibson, and Mendel
(2010)) and over-extrapolation (Barberis, Greenwood, Jin, and Shleifer (2015); Barberis,
Greenwood, Jin, and Shleifer (2016)) successfully capture a wide range of the stylized
facts. A core feature of these models is that agents over-weigh recent realizations of the
relevant economic variables when forming beliefs.
Another set of emerging stylized facts, which focuses on the long-lasting effects of
macro-financial shocks and their systematic cross-sectional differences, has been harder
to capture by these approaches. As conveyed by the notion of “depression babies” or the
“deep scars” of the 2008 financial crisis (Blanchard (2012)), macro-economic shocks ap-
pear to alter investment and consumption behavior for decades to come, beyond the time
frame of existing models, and there is significant cross-sectional heterogeneity. Younger
cohorts tend to react significantly more strongly than older cohorts. A growing em-
pirical literature on experience effects documents, for example, that personal lifetime
experiences in the stock-market predict future willingness to invest in the stock market
(Malmendier and Nagel (2011)), and the same for IPO experiences and future IPO in-
vestment (Kaustia and Knu¨pfer (2008); Chiang, Hirshleifer, Qian, and Sherman (2011)).
There is also evidence of experience effects in non-finance settings, e.g., on the long-term
1

effects of graduating in a recession on labor market outcomes (Oreopoulos, von Wachter,
and Heisz (2012)) or of living in (communist) Eastern Germany to political attitudes
post-reunification (Alesina and Fuchs-Schundeln (2007)).1 In all of these applications,
researchers identify a long-lasting impact of crisis experiences on individual risk-taking
and illustrate their cohort-specific impact.
Much of the evidence on experience effects pertains directly to stated beliefs, e.g.,
beliefs about future stock returns (in the UBS/Gallup data), about future inflation (in
the Michigan Survey of Consumers), or about the outlook for durable consumption (also
in the MSC).2 A key difference relative to over-extrapolation and related approaches is
that experience-based learning generates cohort-specific differences in beliefs and in their
updating after a common shock. While more evidence on the exact process of household-
level learning is needed (see the discussions in Campbell (2008) and Agarwal, Driscoll,
Gabaix, and Laibson (2013)), the over-weighing of personal experiences appears to be
a pervasive and robust psychological phenomenon affecting belief formation, which is
related to availability bias as first put forward by Tversky and Kahneman (1974), as well
as the extensive evidence on the different effects of description versus experience.3
This growing empirical literature on experience effects and its strong psychological un-
derpinning raise the question whether experience-based learning and the implied dynamic
cross-cohort differences have the potential to explain aggregate dynamics. For example,
which generations invest in the stock market and how much? What are the dynamics of
stock market investment? How will the market react to a macro-shock?
Our paper develops an equilibrium model of asset markets that formalizes experience-
based learning and the resulting belief heterogeneity across investors. The model clarifies
1 See also Giuliano and Spilimbergo (2013), who relate the effects of growing up in a recession to
redistribution preferences.
2 Cf. Malmendier and Nagel (2011), Malmendier and Nagel (2016), Malmendier and Shen (2017).
3See, for example, Weber, B¨ockenholt, Hilton, and Wallace (1993), Hertwig, Barron, Weber, and
Erev (2004), and Simonsohn, Karlsson, Loewenstein, and Ariely (2008).
2