NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HYSTERESIS AND THE WELFARE EFFECT OF CORRECTIVE POLICIES:
THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM AN ENERGY-SAVING PROGRAM
Francisco Costa
François Gerard
Working Paper 24608
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24608
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2018
We would like to thank four anonymous referees, Michael Best, Gharad Bryan, Robin Burgess, Lucas
Davis, Marina de Mello, Ben Faber, Claudio Ferraz, Fred Finan, Greg Fischer, Meredith Fowlie, Jason
Garred, Gustavo Gonzaga, Michael Greenstone, Ryan Kellog, Gilat Levy, Jamie McCasland, Guy
Michaels, Edward Miguel, Mushfiq Mobarak, Marcelo Moreira, Gerard Padro i Miquel, Joana Naritomi,
Emmanuel Saez, Edson Severnini, Reinaldo Souza, Anna Spurlock, Eric Verhoogen, Catherine Wolfram,
and seminar participants at ASU, the Behavioural Environmental Economics conference (Toulouse),
Cergy-Pontoise, EconCon, the EEA meetings, FGV EPGE, FGV EESP, the Granthan Institute for
Climate Change, IADB, IFS, IPEA, LBS, LSE, the NBER Public Economics Meetings, PacDev, PSE,
Puc-Rio, UC Berkeley, University of Bristol, University of Cambridge, University of Chicago, UPF,
UQAM, USP, UT Knoxville, UCSD, and the World Bank. Stephanie Dinoa, Louise Guillouet, Tiago
Lazier, Gustavo Macedo, John Pease, and Beatriz Rache provided outstanding research assistance.
We also thank ANEEL, PROCEL, LIGHT, FAME, and Whirlpool for sharing important data. Francois
Gerard benefited from the support of an Excellence Scholarship of Wallonie-Bruxelles International.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Francisco Costa and François Gerard. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Hysteresis and the Welfare Effect of Corrective Policies: Theory and Evidence from an Energy-Saving
Program
Francisco Costa and François Gerard
NBER Working Paper No. 24608
May 2018
JEL No. D62,H23,Q50
ABSTRACT
A growing body of evidence documents that policies can affect household behaviors persistently,
even if they are no longer in place. This paper studies the importance of such "hysteresis" – the
failure of an effect to reverse itself as its underlying cause is reversed – for the welfare evaluation
of corrective policies. First, we introduce hysteresis into the textbook framework used to derive
canonical sufficient statistics formulas for the welfare effect of corrective policies. We then
derive new formulas allowing for hysteresis. We show that, under certain conditions, the
persistent effect of a short-run (i.e., temporary) policy becomes a new key statistic for evaluating
the welfare effect of such a policy, and also of a long-run (i.e., permanent) version of a similar
policy. Second, we estimate the persistent effect of a short-run policy, for which we argue that
these conditions are met, in a policy-relevant context: residential electricity use in a developing
country setting. We estimate that about half of the dramatic short-run reductions in residential
electricity use induced by a 9-month-long policy that was imposed on millions of Brazilian
households in 2001 persisted for at least 12 years after the policy ended. Finally, we combine our
estimates with our framework to illustrate the implications that hysteresis can have for the
welfare evaluation of corrective policies.
Francisco Costa
Getulio Vargas Foundation (FGV/EPGE)
Praia de Botafogo, 190 / 1100
Rio de Janeiro, RJ 22250-900
Brazil
francisco.costa@fgv.br
François Gerard
Department of Economics
Columbia University
1022 IAB
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
fgerard@columbia.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24608

Inthepresenceofanexternality,apolicythatchangesthebehaviorofprivateeconomicagents
may be socially beneficial. For instance, environmental damages from energy generation may
justify a tax to reduce energy demand. A canonical result in economics is that such a policy must
weigh the welfare gain from addressing the externality and the loss in private surplus due to the
change in the behavior at stake. When evaluating this tradeoff, the literature typically assumes
away the possibility that a policy may affect choices persistently, even if it is no longer in place.
This paper studies the importance of such “hysteresis” – the failure of an effect to reverse itself as
itsunderlyingcauseisreversed(Dixit,1989)–forthewelfareevaluationofcorrectivepolicies.
Agrowingbodyofevidencedocumentsthepersistenteffectsofshort-run(i.e.,temporary)poli-
cies on a range of individual or household behaviors (e.g., the adoption of new health or income-
generating technologies, energy use, water consumption, smoking, commuting, and voting) and
someofthemechanismsbehindtheseeffects(e.g.,investmentsinphysicalcapital,informationac-
quisition, and habit formation).1 This evidence suggests that hysteresis is a relevant phenomenon
to consider for evaluating corrective policies. Several papers show that the persistence affects the
cost-effectivenessofpoliciesintheircontext. However,theliteraturelacksageneralframeworkto
evaluatetheimplicationofhysteresisforthewelfareeffectofcorrectivepolicies.
This paper aims to address that limitation. First, we introduce the possibility of hysteresis
in household behaviors into the textbook framework used to derive canonical sufficient statistics
formulasforthewelfareeffectofcorrectivepolicies(e.g.,foraPigouviantax). Wethenderivenew
formulas allowing for hysteresis. We show that, under certain conditions, the persistent effect of a
short-runpolicybecomesanewkeystatisticforevaluatingthewelfareeffectofsuchapolicy,and
also of a long-run (i.e., permanent) version of a similar policy. Second, we estimate the persistent
effect of a short-run policy, for which we argue that these conditions are met, in a policy-relevant
context: residential electricity use in a developing country setting. We find that about half of the
dramatic short-run reductions in residential electricity use induced by a 9-month-long policy that
was imposed on millions of Brazilian households in 2001 persisted for at least 12 years after the
policy ended. Third, we combine our empirical estimates with our framework to illustrate the
implicationsthatsuchhysteresiscanhaveforthewelfareevaluationofcorrectivepolicies.
We begin by laying out a standard partial-equilibrium framework, in which a representative
household must choose its level of a behavior of interest – we use electricity use as running ex-
ample – in each of two periods. We introduce hysteresis by allowing choices in the first period to
affect the marginal utility from electricity use in the second period in two ways. First, the house-
hold can make “active” investments (e.g., in physical capital or information acquisition) that may
1See,forinstance,ReissandWhite(2008),CharnessandGneezy(2009),Giné,KarlanandZinman(2010),Ferraro
andPrice(2013),AllcottandRogers(2014),Bryan,ChowdhuryandMobarak(2014),Dupas(2014),AclandandLevy
(2015),Ito(2015),Fujiwara,MengandVogl(2016),Miller(2016),Brandonetal.(2017),Ito,IdaandTanaka(2017)
andLarcom,RauchandWillems(2017).
1

affect its present and future utility from electricity use, as these investments may be persistent.
Second, past consumption choices may “passively” affect the household’s utility from electricity
use, like in experienced-good or habit formation models. We motivate the need for corrective
policies in this framework by assuming that electricity use generates negative externalities (e.g.,
environmentaldamages). Wethenderivesufficientstatisticsformulasforthewelfareeffectoftwo
types of policies: a short-run policy, in which the government restricts electricity use in period 1
only, and a long-run policy, in which it restricts electricity use in both periods. We first show that
weobtainexistingformulasintheliteratureifweassumeawaythepossibilityofhysteresis. Next,
we obtain new formulas allowing for hysteresis, and we highlight the bias from failing to take it
intoaccountwhenevaluatingthewelfareeffectofcorrectivepolicies.
We first derive formulas under benchmark assumptions that electricity is priced at a constant
marginalcost,thattherestrictions areimplementedthroughtraditionalinstruments(i.e.,quotasor
taxes), and that the household fully internalizes the effect of its choices on its future utility. As-
sumingawayhysteresis,thewelfareeffectoftheshort-runpolicyisthesumofawelfaregainfrom
addressing the externality in period 1 and of a loss in consumer surplus in that period. Moreover,
threestatisticsaresufficientforevaluatingtheseeffects: thechangeinelectricityuse,themarginal
damage of electricity use, and the slope of the demand curve for electricity. Allowing for hystere-
sis, however, the household may also use less electricity in period 2 after the policy ended. Price
theory implies that the slope of the demand curve in period 1 remains a sufficient statistic for the
overall change in consumer surplus, if the policy was expected to be short run. In that case, the
onlyadditionaleffecttoevaluateisthewelfaregainfromapossiblecorrectionoftheexternalityin
period 2. The persistent impact of the policy on electricity use and the marginal damage in period
2 are sufficient for evaluating this effect, as well as the bias from assuming away hysteresis. Our
qualifierregardingpolicyexpectationsmattersforactivemechanismsofhysteresis. Thehousehold
maymakeinvestmentsinperiod1thatitwouldnotmakeifitknewthatthepolicyweretobetem-
porary,andtheircostisnotcapturedbythedemandcurveinperiod1. Thishighlightsalimitation
of the results from existing studies for our purpose. Studies estimating the persistent effect of a
short-runpolicyrarelyspecifywhetherthepolicywasexpectedtolastlongerthanitdid.
The persistent effect of a short-run policy is also key for evaluating the welfare effect of a
long-run policy. Assuming away hysteresis, one can evaluate its welfare effect by using the same
approachusedfortheshort-runpolicybutinbothperiods. Insodoing,onewouldcorrectlyaccount
for the correction of the externality in both periods. However, one would overestimate the loss in
consumersurplusinthepresenceofhysteresis. Inthatcase,partofthereductioninelectricityuse
inperiod2wouldtakeplaceinabsenceofanypolicyinthatperiodbecauseofthechoicesinduced
bythepolicyinperiod1. Moreover,theassociatedlossinconsumersurplusisalreadycapturedby
the demand curve in period 1. Because of this, the slope of the demand curve in period 2 should
2