NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COMPLEX DISCLOSURE
Ginger Zhe Jin
Michael Luca
Daniel J. Martin
Working Paper 24675
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24675
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2018, Revised February 2021
Part of the research was conducted when Jin took leave at the Federal Trade Commission. The
views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the U.S.
Federal Trade Commission, any individual Commissioner, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. Martin would like to thank both the Paris School of Economics and the Camargo
Foundation for their hospitality during the writing of this paper. Early stages of this project were
supported by the French National Research Agency, through the program Investissements
d'Avenir, ANR-10--LABX_93-01. We would like to thank Patrick Rooney, Byron Perpetua, and
Philip Marx for excellent assistance. All rights reserved. All errors are ours.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Ginger Zhe Jin, Michael Luca, and Daniel J. Martin. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Complex Disclosure
Ginger Zhe Jin, Michael Luca, and Daniel J. Martin
NBER Working Paper No. 24675
June 2018, Revised February 2021
JEL No. D8,D91,K2,L15
ABSTRACT
We present evidence that unnecessarily complex disclosure can result from strategic incentives to
shroud information. In our lab experiment, senders are required to report their private information
truthfully, but can choose how complex to make their reports. We find that senders use complex
disclosure over half the time. This obfuscation is profitable because receivers make systematic
mistakes in assessing complex reports. Regression and structural analysis suggest that these
mistakes could be driven by receivers who are naive about the strategic use of complexity or
overconfident about their ability to process complex information.
Ginger Zhe Jin Daniel J. Martin
University of Maryland Northwestern University
Department of Economics Kellogg School of Management
College Park, MD 20742-7211 2211 Campus Drive
and NBER Evanston, IL 60208
ginger@umd.edu d-martin@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Michael Luca
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mluca@hbs.edu

1. Introduction
Firms are often required to disclose contract terms and other relevant information
to consumers. For example, credit card companies are required to disclose interest rates.
Tech companies are required to disclose privacy policies. And public firms are required
to disclose financial performance. Ben-Shahar and Schneider (2014) and Lowenstein et
al. (2014) provide a long list of hard-to-understand disclosures and have argued that
mandated disclosure has failed as public policy as a consequence. Financial experts even
blame the complexity of financial products for the 2008 financial crisis, although the
risks embedded in these products were supposedly disclosed to a ratings agency.2
Some of these disclosures are complex by necessity – simply because firms need
to provide very detailed information. However, because firms have the ability to
manipulate the complexity of their reports, some of these disclosures may be far more
complex than they need to be. For example, credit card companies can present payment
schedules, penalties, and fees clearly or bury potentially important details in the fine
print.3 Privacy policies can be written in easy to understand language or shrouded in
pages of complex legalese. When public firms make financial disclosures, they can
summarize them in several paragraphs or run them as long as 257 pages.4
The extent to which firms can exploit consumers by increasing complexity depends
crucially on how consumers respond when they observe complex information. If consumers are
sufficiently skeptical about firms that use complex disclosures and account for this in their
decision-making process, then firms that offer better terms or higher-quality products will want
to present this information as clearly and simply as possible to prevent themselves from being
mistaken for worse firms. As a result, we would expect only the worst firms to use complex
disclosures, which is similar to the “unraveling” results in voluntary disclosure (Viscusi 1978;
2 https://www.ft.com/content/24f73610-c91e-11dc-9807-000077b07658 accessed on September 26, 2017.
3 The Truth in Lending Act of 1968 (TILA) requires lenders to disclose consumer credit terms and cost in a
standardized way. The Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act of 1974 (RESPA) requires lenders and others
involved in mortgage lending to provide borrowers with pertinent and timely disclosures regarding the
nature and costs of a real estate settlement process. In 2015, the US Consumer Finance Protection Bureau
consolidated the disclosure requirements under TILA and RESPA, resulting in the Loan Estimate Form and
the Closing Statement Form, which standardize the content and format of disclosure in mortgage lending.
4 The SEC does not impose a limit on the length of a filing, and the average 10-K has grown from roughly
30,000 words in 2000 to 42,000 words in 2013, with GE’s 2014 10-K stretching to 103,484 words and 257
pages. Source: https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-109-894-word-annual-report-1433203762.
2

Grossman and Hart 1980; Grossman 1981; Milgrom 1981). However, systematic mistakes by
consumers when facing complex reports can give rise to strategic incentives to complexify,
motivating companies to choose complexity over simplicity in their disclosures.
In reality, it is difficult to determine if consumers are sufficiently skeptical about
firms that use complex disclosures and account for this in their decision-making process,
because it is hard to discern whether disclosures are complex by necessity or the outcome
of firms strategically choosing to make information unnecessarily complex. To overcome
this difficulty, we design a laboratory experiment to study the strategic use of complexity
in a controlled setting. In our experiment, complexity arises only from its strategic use,
the conflicting interests of senders and receivers are clear, the amount and over-use of
complexity are quantifiable, and the beliefs of agents are easily elicited.
There are two roles in our experiment: a sender (e.g., the firm) and a receiver
(e.g., the consumer). Subjects are randomly paired in each round, one randomly assigned
to be the sender and the other to be the receiver.5 In each round, the sender observes a
new state (which is an integer drawn uniformly from 1 to 10) and chooses how complex
to make their report of the state. Based on the sender’s report, the receiver then makes a
guess of the state.
We impose a strong and clear conflict of interest: the sender would like receivers
to guess that the true state is as high as possible, and the receiver would like to guess as
accurately as possible. In our main sessions, we debrief both players at the end of each
round about the true state, the sender’s choice of complexity, and the receiver’s guess in
that round. This way, subjects have many opportunities to learn the strategic forces in the
game and the consequences of their actions.6
When a sender’s report is simple, the state is presented as a single integer. When
their report is complex, the state is presented as several computer-generated numbers (up
to 20) that add up to the state. While this is just one of many ways to operationalize
complexity, it has the advantage that individuals have experience with the task and may
hold well-formed beliefs about their ability to internalize complexity of this form. In
5 Roles were randomly assigned so that subjects could experience both roles, which allowed subjects to be
well informed about the actions and payoffs available in both roles.
6 As a robustness check, we also ran sessions without feedback. In addition, we ran a robustness check
where we limit the number of complexity levels available to senders. See Section A.4 of the appendix.
3