NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHO BENEFITS FROM PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH? DIRECT AND INDIRECT EFFECTS
OF LOCAL TFP GROWTH ON WAGES, RENTS, AND INEQUALITY
Richard Hornbeck
Enrico Moretti
Working Paper 24661
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24661
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2018, Revised January 2019
For helpful comments and suggestions, we thank Hunt Alcott, Rebecca Diamond, Victor Gay,
Chang-Tai Hsieh, Erik Hurst, Patrick Kline, Brian Kovak, Matt Notowidigdo, Martin Rotemberg,
Jose Vasquez, Owen Zidar, and others including seminar participants at BEA, Bocconi, Chicago
Economics and Harris, CUHK, European Central Bank, LSE, NBER Labor Meeting, NYU,
Oxford, Paris School of Economics, Stanford, University of Bologna, USC, and Yale. Andrea
Cerrato, Julius Luettge, and Joseph Root provided extended research assistance, with additional
assistance provided by Georgios Angelis, William Cockriel, Melissa Eccleston, Alonso Sanchez,
and Alex Weckenman. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is
disclosed.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Richard Hornbeck and Enrico Moretti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Who Benefits From Productivity Growth? Direct and Indirect Effects of Local TFP Growth
on Wages, Rents, and Inequality
Richard Hornbeck and Enrico Moretti
NBER Working Paper No. 24661
May 2018, Revised January 2019
JEL No. E24,J0,R0
ABSTRACT
We estimate direct and indirect effects of total factor productivity growth in manufacturing on US
workers' earnings, housing costs, and purchasing power. Drawing on four alternative instrumental
variables, we consistently find that when a city experiences productivity gains in manufacturing,
there are substantial local increases in employment and average earnings. For renters, increased
earnings are largely offset by increased cost of living; for homeowners, the benefits are
substantial. Strikingly, local productivity growth in manufacturing reduces local inequality, as it
raises earnings of local less-skilled workers more than the earnings of local more-skilled workers.
This is due, in part, to lower geographic mobility of less-skilled workers.
However, local productivity growth also has important indirect effects through worker mobility.
We estimate that 38% of the overall increase in workers' purchasing power occurs outside cities
directly affected by local TFP growth. The indirect effects on worker earnings are substantially
greater for more-skilled workers, due to greater geographic mobility of more-skilled workers,
which increases inequality in other cities. Neglecting these indirect effects would both understate
the overall magnitude of benefits from productivity growth and misstate their distributional
consequences.
Overall, US workers benefit substantially from manufacturing productivity growth. Summing
direct and indirect effects, we find that manufacturing TFP growth from 1980 to 1990 increased
purchasing power for the average US worker by 0.5-0.6% per year from 1980 to 2000. These
gains do not depend on a worker's education; rather, the benefits from productivity growth mainly
depend on where workers live.
Richard Hornbeck
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
richard.hornbeck@chicagobooth.edu
Enrico Moretti
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and CEPR
and also NBER
moretti@econ.berkeley.edu

Economists have long considered productivity growth a key source of economic gains and
long-run improvements in the standard of living. Indeed, increases in workers’ consumption
levels depend on productivity growth in many macroeconomic models (see, e.g., Solow, 1956).
In practice, however, it is not clear to what extent productivity growth actually translates into
higher real earnings and worker welfare. In country-level data, the correlation between wage
growth and productivity growth appears to have weakened.1 Moreover, the share of output
that accrues to labor, as opposed to capital, appears to be declining in many countries, raising
concerns that workers may benefit less from economic growth.2 There is a surprising lack of
direct evidence on the impacts of productivity growth, however, relative to the central role that
productivity growth plays in modern economics.
In this paper, we examine geographical differences in total factor productivity growth in
manufacturing across United States metropolitan areas, and estimate who benefits from this
productivity growth. We measure city-level changes in total factor productivity (TFP) between
1980 and 1990 using confidential plant-level data on the universe of manufacturing establish-
ments from the Census of Manufacturers. Manufacturing productivity growth is very unevenly
distributed across US cities, and we estimate its direct and indirect effects on city employment,
earnings, and housing costs using US Census data from 1980 to 2010.
We focus on manufacturing productivity for several reasons. First, in the period that we
focuson, themanufacturingsectorwasatitspeakandemployed20millionAmericans(Charles,
Hurst and Notowidigdo, 2018). Providing a third of private sector employment, and 41% of
laborincome, manufacturingwasbyfarthemostimportant1-digitindustryintheUSeconomy.
Second, manufacturing accounted for the vast majority of employment in the tradable sector,
i.e., thesectorthatexportsgoodsorservicesoutsidethecity. Ifworkerscanmoveacrosssectors,
productivity shocks in manufacturing can be expected to have effects not just in manufacturing,
but also on other parts of the local labor market. Third, the manufacturing sector experienced
large gains in productivity in our sample period, through technological improvements and other
channels. By contrast, other sectors like retail, wholesale, utilities, education, and health care
did not experience substantial changes in output per worker.3
Whenacityexperienceslocalproductivitygrowthinmanufacturing, labordemandincreases
1See,forexample,Schwellnus,KappelerandPionnier(2017)andStansburyandSummers(2017). Jonesand
Klenow (2016) study the relationship between GDP per capita and country-level measures of worker welfare.
2See, for example, Blanchard, Nordhaus and Phelps (1997); Blanchard and Giavazzi (2003); Bentolila and
Saint-Paul (2003); Jones (2005); Rodriguez and Jayadev (2010); Elsby, Hobijn and S¸ahin (2013); Pessoa,
Van Reenen et al. (2013); Piketty (2014); Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014); Autor et al. (2017b). See Rognlie
(2015) for related analysis, which highlights the role of land scarcity. Suarez Serrato and Zidar (2016) analyze
the incidence of local tax changes on labor, land, and capital.
3In addition, the measurement of total factor productivity (TFP) has a long tradition in economics and
relies on good data. Measuring TFP in service sectors is less common and presents substantial data challenges,
whereasmeasurementofTFPinthemanufacturingsectorfollowsawell-developedliteratureandismorefeasible
despite remaining challenges discussed below.
1

and we expect local wages to increase and attract workers from other cities. This in-migration,
and associated increases in local housing costs, may offset much of the local wage gains. This
has potentially important implications for the ultimate incidence of productivity growth. For
example, San Francisco and New York City have experienced rapid productivity growth in
recent decades, mostly driven by an agglomeration of high-tech, bio-tech, and finance (Moretti,
2012). The cost of living has also increased substantially in these cities, however, and benefited
incumbent landowners while dampening increases in purchasing power for workers. Because
housing and other non-tradable goods account for the majority of worker consumption, changes
intheircostcanhavelargeconsequencesforworkers’standardofliving. Thus, thesplitbetween
labor and land is potentially more consequential for understanding the effects on standard of
living than the split between labor and capital that has been the main focus of recent research.
This point revives the classical concern of Ricardo, in which land is in fixed supply and so
landowners capture all gains from productivity growth.
An important aspect of our approach is that we do not limit our analysis to direct effects of
a local TFP shock, i.e., effects of a TFP shock in a city on earnings and housing costs in that
samecity. WeallowforthetotalimpactofalocalTFPshocktoincludeindirecteffects, through
worker mobility, on labor markets and housing markets in other cities. Thus, in addition to
estimating direct effects, we also quantify indirect effects of a local TFP shock on wages and
housing costs in other cities. Empirically, these indirect effects will prove to be quantitatively
important and will change the conclusions that emerge from an analysis that focuses only on
the direct effects.
In the first part of the paper, we focus on estimating direct effects of local TFP shocks
on cities directly hit by the shock. We use four instrumental variables to isolate exogenous
changes in local manufacturing productivity. We begin with a baseline “shift-share” instru-
mental variable, which reflects industry-specific TFP changes nationwide that have differential
effects on cities due to differences in their initial industry concentration. Second, we construct
an alternative instrument based on technological innovation, as measured by patenting activity
within technology classes, which affects cities differently due to initial differences across cities
in the presence of each technology class. A third instrument is based on changes in exposure
to export markets, since trade exposure has been associated with patenting and investment in
R&D (Aghion P, 2017; Autor et al., 2017a). We also use a fourth instrument, based on changes
in stock prices by industry, to isolate variation in manufacturing productivity growth that is
unexpected.
Theinstrumentsusedifferentsourcesofempiricalvariation, inpractice, andareinlargepart
uncorrelatedwitheachother. ThecitiesthatarepredictedtohavelargerTFPchangesbyoneof
ourinstrumentsareoftendifferentfromthecitiesthatarepredictedtohavelargerTFPchanges
by the other instruments. The alternative instruments yield similar estimates, however, and
2