NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SELECTION VERSUS TALENT EFFECTS ON FIRM VALUE
Briana Chang
Harrison Hong
Working Paper 24672
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24672
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2018
We thank Toni Whited (Editor) and an anonymous referee for many helpful comments. We are
also extremely grateful to Jeffrey Kubik for many helpful comments and to Jay Ritter for
providing the IPO underpricing data. We also thank Bernard Salanie, Pierre-André Chiappori, Raj
Iyer, Antoinette Schoar, Marcin Kacperczyk, Pengjie Gao, Bruno Biais, Doug Diamond, Eugene
Fama, Diego Garcia, Vish Vishwanathan, Sheridan Titman, Laura Starks and seminar participants
at Chicago Booth Business School, Imperial University, Gerzensee Corporate Finance
Conference, Nanyang Technological University, AFA 2017, Conference on Finance and
Accounting, University of Wisconsin, University of Texas at Austin and Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology for helpful suggestions. This paper subsumes our earlier work
circulated as "Assignment of Stock Market Coverage". The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Briana Chang and Harrison Hong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Selection versus Talent Effects on Firm Value
Briana Chang and Harrison Hong
NBER Working Paper No. 24672
May 2018
JEL No. G20,G24,G30,G34
ABSTRACT
Measuring the value of labor-market hires for stock prices, be it underwriters when firms go
public (IPOs) or chief executive officers (CEOs), is difficult due to selection. Opaque firms with
higher costs of capital benefit more from prestigious underwriters, while productive firms benefit
more from talented CEOs. Using assignment models, we show that the importance of talent (or
agent heterogeneity) relative to selection (or firm heterogeneity) is measured by wage increases
across agents of different compensation ranks divided by changes in output across their firms.
The median of this ratio is 0.5% for underwriters and 2% for CEOs.
Briana Chang
Department of Finance, Investment and Banking
University of Wisconsin - Madison
bchang@bus.wisc.edu
Harrison Hong
Department of Economics
Columbia University
1022 International Affairs Building
Mail Code 3308
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
hh2679@columbia.edu

1. Introduction
Measuring the value of labor market hires for stock prices is a fundamental question in
financial economics. Two labor markets are particularly important and widely studied. The
first is the market for underwriters when firms issue equity. Firms compete and spend
significant resources to hire reputable underwriters (typically investment banks with track
records of successful placements) for their initial public offerings (IPOs) so as to alleviate
adverse selection (see, e.g., Allen and Faulhaber (1989), Carter and Manaster (1990), Welch
(1989)). Measuring the value of prestigious underwriters is a long-standing goal in the IPO
literature (for reviews, see, e.g., Ritter and Welch (2002)). The second is the market for
Chief Executive Officers (CEOs). There is a large literature on the value-added of a CEO
(see, e.g., Bertrand and Schoar (2003)). In particular, valuing different attributes of a CEO,
be it intelligence or other personality attributes, remains a widely researched topic (see, e.g.,
Kaplan et al. (2012), Graham et al. (2013)).1
Regardless of the situation, quantifying these hires’ impact on stock prices is difficult
due to selection or sorting in competitive labor markets (Becker (1973) and Rosen (1974)).
Firms that hire better underwriters might have more opacity or information asymmetry
and higher costs of capital to begin with. So correlating a firm’s stock valuation with the
status of the underwriter it hired is potentially problematic due to this selection. Indeed,
recent empirical work suggests that such competitive selection effects between firms and
underwriters (Fernando et al. (2005), Akkus et al. (2013)) might inform the long-running
debate onIPO underpricing, thefirst-dayreturn thoughtto compensate investors foradverse
selection. Prestigious underwriters were associated (correlated) with less underpricing before
the Internet period but became associated with more underpricing during and after the
Internet period. This change in the sign of this underpricing-prestige correlation remains
puzzling. Selection effects arising from assortative matching in a competitive labor market
1Due to CEO wage inequality, this question continues to be important in the popular press and across
various disciplines such as strategy and management (see, e.g., "Do CEOs Matter?" by The Atlantic in the
June 2009 issue which surveyed a variety of contrasting views of whether CEOs add any value.).
1

for CEO talent are also problematic. Terviö (2008) and Gabaix and Landier (2008) point
to a positive assortative matching between managerial talent and firm productivity due to
complementarities in firm production functions.
To understand the role of selection from the direct effect of agent talent, we develop
an assignment model where firms compete to hire a talented agent, be it an underwriter
or a CEO, to raise their stock valuations. Specifically, the value of the match depends
on the role of the agent in the asset market. In the labor market for underwriters when
firms go IPO, our asset market follows the classical IPO underpricing set-up (Rock (1986),
Benveniste and Wilhelm (1990), Habib and Ljungqvist (2001)), in which adverse selection
generates underpricing. More prestigious underwriters are assumed to be able to bring in
moreuninformedinvestorsandhencealleviatetheneedforunderpricing. Inthelabormarket
forCEOs, atalentedCEOraiseslong-termfundamentalvalueasinTerviö(2008)andGabaix
and Landier (2008).
We characterize the assignment equilibrium that maps (assigns) these multiple dimen-
sions of firms into agent talent and solve for the wage function and stock price. There are two
effects that shape the relationship between firm value, be it the underpricing or fundamental
value, and agent talent, be it a prestigious underwriter or a talented CEO. The first is the
"direct effect" of hiring a more talented agent: all else equal, a firm with a better agent
will have a lower cost of capital or higher value since the more prestigious underwriter will
bring more uninformed investors to the IPO or the more talented CEO will lead to a greater
increase in firm profitability. The second is the "selection effect". Firms with greater opacity
or more productivity benefit more and pay more for a better agent.
Thestrengthoftheselectioneffectincreaseswithheterogeneityacrossfirms(beitopacity
orfirmproductivity)relativetothetalentdistributionofagents. Forinstance, iffirmopacity
is tightly distributed in the population, the highly opaque firms still hire the most talented
agents and so the direct effect dominates and firms with better agents have lower costs of
capital. As dispersion of firm types increases this association flips signs from negative to
2