NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIVESTREAMING POLLUTION:
A NEW FORM OF PUBLIC DISCLOSURE AND A CATALYST FOR CITIZEN ENGAGEMENT?
Emiliano Huet-Vaughn
Nicholas Muller
Yen-Chia Hsu
Working Paper 24664
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24664
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2018
The authors thank Karen Fisher-Vanden, Joel Landry, and seminar participants at the Penn State
University Energy and Environmental Economics and Policy Seminar, as well as the Allegheny
County Health Department for providing call records. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Emiliano Huet-Vaughn, Nicholas Muller, and Yen-Chia Hsu. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Livestreaming Pollution: ¸˛A New Form of Public Disclosure and a Catalyst for Citizen Engagement?
Emiliano Huet-Vaughn, Nicholas Muller, and Yen-Chia Hsu
NBER Working Paper No. 24664
May 2018
JEL No. D62,D91,Q52,Q53,Q55,Q58
ABSTRACT
Most environmental policy assumes the form of standards and enforcement. Scarce public
budgets motivate the use of disclosure laws. This study explores a new form of pollution
disclosure: real-time visual evidence of emissions provided on a free, public website. The paper
tests whether the disclosure of visual evidence of emissions affects the nature and frequency of
phone calls to the local air quality regulator. First, we test whether the presence of the camera
affects the frequency of calls to the local air quality regulator about the facility monitored by the
camera. Second, we test the relationship between the camera being active and the number of
complaints about facilities other than the plant recorded by the camera. Our empirical results
suggest that the camera did not affect the frequency of calls to the regulator about the monitored
facility. However, the count of complaints pertaining to another prominent industrial polluter in
the area, steel manufacturing plants, is positively associated with the camera being active. We
propose two behavioral reasons for this finding: the prior knowledge hypothesis and affect
heuristics. This study argues that visual evidence is a feasible approach to environmental
oversight even during periods with diminished regulatory capacity.
Emiliano Huet-Vaughn Yen-Chia Hsu
University of California – Los Angeles Robotics Institute
4284 School of Public Affairs Carnegie Mellon University
Los Angeles, California 90095 5000 Forbes Avenue
ehuetvaughn@ucla.edu Pittsburgh, PA 15213
yenchiah@andrew.cmu.edu
Nicholas Muller
Department of Engineering, and Public Policy
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
Posner 254C
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
nicholas.muller74@gmail.com

Introduction.
Environmental policy in developed economies depends on effective monitoring and
enforcement. Monitoring ambient levels of pollution and direct mensuration of
emissions are expensive and therefore incomplete.1 A vast swath of the economy
remains unmonitored. Enforcement, which is often contentious, requires the
deployment of scarce public resources and is, therefore, imperfect. Recent
developments in the federal political environment suggest even more limited federal
enforcement (New York Times, 2017).
The dearth of pollution monitors and incomplete enforcement motivates public
disclosure as a means to affect change among polluting firms (Tietenberg, 1998). Direct
information on pollution provided to concerned citizens may enhance public pressure
on regulatory agencies to enforce existing rules and laws. Traditional approaches to
public disclosure in the environmental realm manifest as legal requirements for firms to
reveal, or list, their emissions (Graham, 2002). Prominent examples of disclosure laws
include the Toxic Release Inventory (TRI), and the Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program
(GHGRP), (40 CFR Part 98).
1 The current network of ambient air pollution monitors in the United States (see
https://www.epa.gov/outdoor-air-quality-data) is sparsely distributed. Monitoring
sites are typically chosen to maximize the likelihood of detecting a violation. Hence, the
monitors are clustered in densely populated locations. Further, the Continuous
Emissions Monitoring System (CEMS), an example of a system of emissions monitors,
only tracks discharges of nitrogen oxides (NO ) and sulfur dioxide (SO ) at certain point
x 2
sources.
2

This study focuses on a new means to provide the public with information on emissions
and ambient pollution: visual evidence of emissions captured by camera, and broadcast
on a free, public website. Essentially, livestreaming images of emissions is a means of
disclosing risk to the public. In contrast to perhaps more conventional means (such as
periodically reporting pollution levels or announcing risks to certain population
groups) broadcasting live imagery of emissions provides a contemporaneous view of
the threat from pollution in a more graphic, tangible, and visceral manner. Previous
research suggests that people react to risk messaging in two general ways: systematic,
or cognitive, responses and emotional responses (Lowenstein and Mather, 1990;
Lowenstein et al., 2001; Slovic et al., 2002; Dillard and Anderson, 2004; Hastings, Stead,
and Webb, 2004). Providing quantitative risk estimates - like direct measurements of
pollution data - clearly speaks to cognitive message processing. The camera targets
emotional reactions – anger or fear - that may trigger acute responses such as picking
up the phone and calling the local air quality regulator (Averbeck, Jones, and
Robertson, 2011).
Undergirding our analysis is the argument that visual disclosure may present a new set
of tools for regulators, environmental advocates, and concerned communities to affect
behavior of firms that manage to circumvent traditional regulatory frameworks.
Recognizing the potential for visual evidence as an important complement to customary
monitoring and enforcement, Giles (2013) notes that:
“[W]e are not far from the day when the public will have access to pollution
monitoring tools. Communities with monitoring data will encourage better
3