NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FORCED MIGRATION AND HUMAN CAPITAL:
EVIDENCE FROM POST-WWII POPULATION TRANSFERS
Sascha O. Becker
Irena Grosfeld
Pauline Grosjean
Nico Voigtländer
Ekaterina Zhuravskaya
Working Paper 24704
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24704
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2018, Revised July 2019
We received excellent comments at Boston University, the Chicago Booth Miniconference on
Economic History, the NBER Political Economy Meeting, the Conference on ‘Deep-Rooted
Factors in Comparative Development’ at Brown University, the ‘Workshop in Political Economy
and Economic Policy’ at QMU London, the Oxford-Warwick-LSE (OWL) Workshop, the
‘Culture, Institutions and Prosperity’ conference in Paris, the Barcelona GSE Summer Forum, the
International Conference of Europeanists in Madrid, and seminars at Barcelona GSE, Bristol,
Cambridge, Chicago Harris, DIW Berlin, EALE Lyon, EEA-ESEM, Frankfurt, Harvard, PSE,
Simon Fraser, UC Berkeley, UC Davis, UPF, Stanford, and Warwick. We thank Samuel Bazzi,
Luis Candelaria, and Giampaolo Lecce for insightful discussions, Ilona Kawalec from CBOS for
outstanding collaboration, and Vladimir Avetian for excellent research assistance. Sascha O.
Becker acknowledges financial support by the ESRC Centre for Competitive Advantage in the
Global Economy (grant no. ES/L011719/1). Ekaterina Zhuravskaya thanks the European
Research Council (ERC) for funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and
Innovation program (grant agreement No. 646662). The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Sascha O. Becker, Irena Grosfeld, Pauline Grosjean, Nico Voigtländer, and Ekaterina
Zhuravskaya. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Forced Migration and Human Capital: Evidence from Post-WWII Population Transfers
Sascha O. Becker, Irena Grosfeld, Pauline Grosjean, Nico Voigtländer, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya
NBER Working Paper No. 24704
June 2018, Revised July 2019
JEL No. D74,I25,N33,N34
ABSTRACT
We exploit a unique historical setting to study the long-run effects of forced migration on
investment in education. After World War II, the Polish borders were redrawn, resulting in large-
scale migration. Poles were forced to move from the Kresy territories in the East (taken over by
the USSR) and were resettled mostly to the newly acquired Western Territories, from which
Germans were expelled. We combine historical censuses with newly collected survey data to
show that, while there were no pre-WWII differences in education, Poles with a family history of
forced migration are significantly more educated today. Descendants of forced migrants have on
average one extra year of schooling, driven by a higher propensity to finish secondary or higher
education. This result holds when we restrict ancestral locations to a subsample around the Kresy
border and include fixed effects for the destination of migrants. Since Kresy migrants were of the
same ethnicity and religion as other Poles, we bypass confounding factors of other cases of
forced migration. We show that labor market competition with natives and selection of migrants
are also unlikely to drive our results. Survey evidence suggests that forced migration led to a
shift in preferences, away from material possessions and towards investment in a mobile asset –
human capital. The effects persist over three generations.
Sascha O. Becker Nico Voigtländer
Department of Economics UCLA Anderson School of Management
University of Warwick 110 Westwood Plaza
Coventry CV4 8GL C513 Entrepreneurs Hall
United Kingdom Los Angeles, CA 90095
s.o.becker@warwick.ac.uk and NBER
nico.v@anderson.ucla.edu
Irena Grosfeld
Paris School of Economics Ekaterina Zhuravskaya
48 Bd Jourdan Paris School of Economics
Paris 48 Bd Jourdan
France 75014 Paris
irena.grosfeld@gmail.com France
ezhuravskaya@gmail.com
Pauline Grosjean
School of Economics
The University of New South Wales
Sydney NSW 2052 Australia
Australia
p.grosjean@unsw.edu.au
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24704

“Andsoithappenedthat... themarshallcame: ‘Leave’—‘ButwhereshouldIgo?’—‘To
Poland.’ AndIsay: ‘IaminPoland.’ Andhesays: ‘ThisisnotPolandanymore.’ ”1
1 Introduction
Forced migration is a life-changing experience, leaving deep scars in the memory of expellees.
Doestheexperienceaffectalsosubsequentgenerations? Inhisbestsellingautobiographicalnovel,
Amos Oz writes “It was always like that with Jewish families: they believed that education was
an investment for the future, the only thing that no one can [...] take away from your children,
even if, God forbid, there’s another war, ... another migration” (p. 172; Oz, 2005). The idea that
forced migration may affect preferences for education has been attributed by Stigler and Becker
(1977) to Chicago economist Reuben Kessel. This argument has not only been made for Jews,
but more generally – for example, in the academic literature by Brenner and Kiefer (1981): “a
group which had been compelled to emigrate from a country might take the portability of an asset
into consideration when making an investment in a new country.” However, this “uprootedness”
hypothesishasprovedhardtotest. Evenforthemostprominentcase–thatoftheJews–Botticini
and Eckstein (2012) have convincingly challenged the idea that expulsion and discrimination are
the main drivers of their educational lead.2 It is notoriously difficult to identify the link between
forced migration and investment in education. Forced migrants typically differ from locals along
other socio-economic and cultural characteristics such as ethnicity, language, and religion. In
addition,labormarketcompetitionwithlocalsoftenaffectseducationalchoicesofmigrants.
In this paper, we explore a unique historical setting that allows us to study the effect of forced
migration on human capital investment, absent the typical confounding factors. We study popu-
lation transfers of millions of Poles in the aftermath of WWII when Polish frontiers were moved
westward. Figure 1 illustrates the re-drawing of Poland’s borders. The former Eastern Polish ter-
ritories (Kresy) became part of the Soviet Union, while the former German areas – the Western
Territories (WT) – became Polish. The latter had been home to about 8 million Germans before
WWII, who had to resettle, leaving land and capital stock behind, with only about one million
native Poles remaining there. In the East, Poles were forced to leave the Kresy territories, and the
vast majority of them resettled in the largely emptied Western Territories. We can thus shed light
on the long-run effects of uprootedness, by comparing the descendants of Poles who were forced
tomigratewithallotherPoles–ofthesameethnicity,language,andreligion.
1Testimony cited in an exhibition of the Polish History Museum devoted to forced migrants from Kresy. See
AppendixIfordetailandsamplephotographs.
2TheyarguethatJewishpreferencesforeducationareexplainedbyreligiousmotives: Jewishboyswereexpected
toreadtheTorah. ThesepreferencestracebacktothetimeofthefallofthesecondtempleinJerusalem(in70CE),
beforeJewsstartedtoberepeatedlyexpelled.
1

We cooperated with the Polish social survey ‘Diagnoza’ to include questions about respon-
dents’ancestorsfromKresyintheir2015wave. Amongthealmost30,000respondents,morethan
11% had ancestors from Kresy. We find that descendants of forced migrants have significantly
higher education today, as compared to all other Poles. The education advantage of descendants
of forced migrants is quantitatively important: They have on average one extra year of school-
ing, driven by a higher propensity to finish secondary or higher education. Importantly, education
levels of forced migrants were not higher before WWII. Figure 2 illustrates the reversal in the
education of Poles from Kresy and their descendants: Before WWII, when Poland consisted of
the Kresy territories and Central Poland (CP), Poles in the former had, if anything, lower literacy
rates. In contrast, in today’s Poland, people with ancestors from Kresy have substantially higher
rates of secondary education.3 This receives further support when we examine the educational
advantage of Kresy descendants by birth cohorts: Figure 3 shows that those forced migrants who
had likely finished school by the time they were expelled from Kresy (i.e., the cohort born before
1930) do not differ from other Poles in terms of their education. For younger cohorts, we find a
significant education advantage of Kresy descendants, even for those born two generations after
theirancestorshadbeenexpelled.4
The Diagnoza Survey contains only information about ancestors from Kresy, but not about
other ancestors. This may lead to recall bias if more educated respondents are more likely to re-
member the location of origin of their ancestors in general – and thus ancestors from Kresy in
particular. To address this, we conducted an additional Ancestry Survey in 2016 in the Western
Territories,wherethemajorityofKresymigrantsweretransportedafterWWII.Weaskedarepre-
sentative sample of about 4,000 respondents about the origin location of all their ancestors (from
the generation of youngest adults in 1939). We obtained the detailed location of almost 12,000
ancestors from all over Poland, as well as from Kresy. Using these data, we show that our results
are not affected by recall bias. In addition, the Ancestry Survey allows us to compare the educa-
tion levels of the descendants of forced migrants from Kresy, of voluntary migrants from Central
Poland, and of Poles who had already lived in WT before the war (autochthons). We find that
descendants of migrants from Kresy are the most educated, followed by descendants of voluntary
migrants. DescendantsofautochthonsaretheleasteducatedgroupinPoland’sWesternTerritories
today.
The detailed ancestor locations reported in our Ancestry Survey also allow us to confirm our
3WeusetheshareofpeoplewithasecondarydegreeinFigure2becauseitiscomparabletoliteracyratesin1921
intermsofitsnationwideaverage.Amongtherespondentsinoursurveys,therateofprimaryeducationisabove99%,
withoutanymeaningfulvariation. Inourempiricalanalysis,weuseyearsofschoolingasthemainoutcomevariable.
4TheresultsshowninFigure3usefixedeffectsforrespondents’countyofresidencetoday. Theseabsorbpotential
localdifferencesintheeducationsystemandinthelabormarketenvironment.
2