NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PORTFOLIO REBALANCING IN GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM
Miles S. Kimball
Matthew D. Shapiro
Tyler Shumway
Jing Zhang
Working Paper 24722
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24722
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2018
We thank seminar participants at Columbia University, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
Utah State University, the University of Windsor, the University of Southern California, the
University of California at San Diego, the University of Michigan, the Bank of Japan, and the
2012 Society for Economic Dynamics meeting for helpful comments. We are grateful for the
financial support provided by National Institute on Aging grant 2-P01-AG026571. The views
expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Federal Reserve System, or its Board of Governors. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Miles S. Kimball, Matthew D. Shapiro, Tyler Shumway, and Jing Zhang. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Portfolio Rebalancing in General Equilibrium
Miles S. Kimball, Matthew D. Shapiro, Tyler Shumway, and Jing Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 24722
June 2018
JEL No. D53,E44,G11
ABSTRACT
This paper develops an overlapping generations model of optimal rebalancing where agents differ
in age and risk tolerance. Equilibrium rebalancing is driven by a leverage effect that influences
levered and unlevered agents in opposite directions, an aggregate risk tolerance effect that
depends on the distribution of wealth, and an intertemporal hedging effect. After a negative
macroeconomic shock, relatively risk tolerant investors sell risky assets while more risk averse
investors buy them. Owing to interactions of leverage and changing wealth, however, all agents
have higher exposure to aggregate risk after a negative macroeconomic shock and lower exposure
after a positive shock.
Miles S. Kimball Tyler Shumway
Department of Economics Ross School of Business
University of Colorado University of Michigan
256 UCB 701 Tappan Street
Boulder, CO 80309 Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER shumway@umich.edu
miles.kimball@colorado.edu
Jing Zhang
Matthew D. Shapiro Research Department
Department of Economics Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
University of Michigan 230 S LaSalle Street
611 Tappan St Chicago, IL 60604
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220 Jing.Zhang@chi.frb.org
and NBER
shapiro@umich.edu

1 Introduction
Understanding how different people trade in response to large market movements, or how
theyrebalancetheirportfolios, iscentralto financeand macroeconomics. Studying rebalanc-
ing in a meaningful way requires a model that incorporates investor heterogeneity because,
if all investors are identical, then all will hold the same portfolio and there will be no trade.
We study optimal rebalancing behavior with a simple general equilibrium overlapping gen-
erations model that features heterogeneity in both age and risk tolerance. The model is
focused on asset allocation, with one risky asset in fixed supply and a risk-free asset in zero
net supply. We find that both general equilibrium and lifecycle considerations have large
effects on optimal rebalancing and thus should be inherent parts of asset allocation mod-
els. Optimal rebalancing is fairly complex, with trading driven by leverage, aggregate risk
tolerance, and intertemporal hedging effects.
Understanding the effects that drive optimal rebalancing behavior is particularly impor-
tant for two reasons. First, as more empirical work is done on the rebalancing behavior of
individuals it is important to have a benchmark for equilibrium behavior in an economy in
which investors behave optimally. While our model is quite simple, it helps to provide such
a benchmark. Second, to meet the needs of investorswith different horizons and preferences,
the mutual fund industry has created a number of products called “lifecycle” or “target-
date” funds that are designed to serve as the whole portfolio for a large group of investors
over their lifespans. To the extent that these funds follow simple linear rules of thumb for
allocating assets across time, their allocations will be both suboptimal and generally infea-
1

sible if universally adhered to because simple rules ignore general equilibrium constraints.
Our model helpsto illustratehow “universal target-date” funds can be structured. Universal
target-date fundsfollowan optimalstrategy overtimeandarefeasibleingeneralequilibrium.
Empirical work on observed rebalancing is still relativelyrare. Its primary finding is that
most investors appear to display inertia in their asset allocations.1 To motivate our analysis
along these lines, we plot nonparametric estimates of stock share as a function of age from
three waves of the Survey of Consumer Finances around the recent financial crisis. The left
panel of Figure 1 depicts stock shares in the 2004 and 2007 waves, between which stock
prices rose about 30 percent. The right panel covers 2007 and 2010, between which prices
fell about 28 percent. Both plots also give the “passive” share implied by market returns
and initial shares. Average rebalancing by age is therefore given by the difference between
the passive curve and the actual curve for the second wave in each plot.2
Several interesting features are immediately apparent when looking at the plots. First,
older investors have consistently higher stock shares in these data, which may be due to
cohort effects such as those described in Malmendier and Nagel (2011). Second, there is
substantial rebalancing in the data. While many individual investors may display inertia
in their asset allocations, in aggregate investors do appear to react to market movements.
Third, most age groups do not simply revert to their initial share. Rather, older investors,
1Calvet, Campbell and Sodini (2009) use four years of Swedish data to show that households only par-
tiallyrebalance their portfolios, or they only partially reverse the passive changes in their asset allocations.
Brunnermeier and Nagel (2008) find similarresults using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics.
2ThecurvesareestimatedwithsimplenonparametricregressionsusingEpanechnikovkernels. Thepassive
curves are plottedassumingthe stock returns reported inthetext andtotalaveragenon-stockreturns of6%
between 2004 and 2007 and 4% between 2007and 2010. To be included in the sample each individualmust
report at least $10,000of financial wealth and some positivestock holding. There are 1389, 1260,and 1313
observations in 2004, 2007 and 2010, respectively.
2