NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TRUST IN LENDING
Richard T. Thakor
Robert C. Merton
Working Paper 24778
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24778
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2018
We thank Barney Hartman-Glaser (discussant) and participants at the 2018 Financial
Intermediation Research Society Conference, 2018 North American Summer Meeting of the
Econometric Society, and Minnesota Junior Finance Conference for helpful comments. We also
thank Xuelin Li for research assistance. We alone are responsible for remaining errors, if any.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24778.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Richard T. Thakor and Robert C. Merton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Trust in Lending
Richard T. Thakor and Robert C. Merton
NBER Working Paper No. 24778
June 2018
JEL No. E44,E51,E52,G21,G23,G28,H12,H81
ABSTRACT
We develop a theory of trust in lending, distinguishing between trust and reputation, and use it to
analyze the competitive interactions between banks and non-bank lenders (fintech firms). Trust
enables lenders to have assured access to financing, whereas a loss of investor trust makes this
access conditional on market conditions and lender reputation. Banks endogenously have stronger
incentives to maintain trust. When borrower defaults erode trust in lenders, banks are able to
survive the erosion of trust when fintech lenders do not. Trust is also asymmetric in nature—it is
more difficult to gain it than to lose it.
Richard T. Thakor
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South, 3-255
Minneapolis, MN 5545
rthakor@umn.edu
Robert C. Merton
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-634
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
rmerton@mit.edu

1 Introduction
This paper examines the role of trust in affecting the cost of lending and credit market
competition between banks and non-banks. Trust in financial products and institutions is
often essential for financial markets to function efficiently. Since the very origins of banking,
trust has played a foundational role in banks, with “my word is my bond” defining the very
essence of banks with regard to their safekeeping and depository functions. This notion of
trust in financial institutions also has deep implications for the credit that lenders provide,
since intermediaries use the funds they raise from depositors and investors to make loans.
For example, if a bank uses the money it raises via deposits to knowingly make a bad loan,
then it endangers the trust that depositors place in the bank and hence future funding. In
line with this, the concept of trust has emerged in policy discussions regarding the potential
impact of non-intermediated credit on banks and the credit market, with particular focus on
financial technology (fintech) lenders such as peer-to-peer (P2P) lending platforms (see He
et al. (2017)). Even with fintech lending, practitioners and market participants understand
the role of trust in enabling fintech firms to compete with banks.1
Trust in lending is therefore central to financial intermediation—it affects the ability of
banks and other intermediaries to sustain their funding models. But analyzing trust can also
generate a perspective on the future evolution of the credit market in the face of the growth
of non-intermediated credit such as P2P and other fintech lending. Ever since the 2007-2009
financial crisis, P2P lending platforms and other types of lending by fintech companies have
been growing at a rapid clip.2 Although still small compared to bank lending, this lending
has come at a time when bank lending capacity seems to not be growing (see Fenwick,
McCahery, and Vermeulen (2017) and Demyanyk, Loutskina, and Kolliner (2017)). This
1For example, Rhydian Lewis, co-founder and chief executive of RateSetter, says “Banks can currently
access money more cheaply than marketplace lenders and, in order to be truly competitive, this gap must
reduce. The route to this for lending platforms is to build trust and acceptance, which comes with a strong
track record” (see Green (2016)).
2While it initially started as non-intermediated platform-assisted credit transactions between peers, the
investorsintheseplatformsarenowmainlyinstitutionalinvestors;duringthefirstquarterof2016,only15%
of Lending Club’s loans came from individuals investing on their own (see Salisbury (2016)).
2

has been observed not only in the U.S. but also in Europe, causing many to debate whether
fintech companies will eventually replace banks in performing lending and other functions
(e.g. Sorkin (2016)). While we have not yet observed any major crises or scandals in fintech
lending, there are many ways in which they can create suspicion of being untrustworthy.3
Our analysis suggests that the growth of fintech firms may be halted if there is an event that
erodes trust; this would cause funding to dry up and their borrowers to return to banks. We
therefore posit that understanding the role of trust in lending is central to understanding
the future evolution of the credit market, especially in terms of the relative provision of
intermediated and non-intermediated credit.
These developments raise a number of important questions: What is the effect of trust
on the access to and cost of financing for lenders? How is trust related to and different from
lender reputation? What incentives do lenders have to maintain trust and what can erode
it? How do these incentives differ across banks and fintech lenders?
We develop a theoretical model in order to address these questions. As a starting point,
we note that from a functional perspective (e.g. Merton (1990, 1993, 1995) and Merton
and Bodie (1995, 2005)), the lending functions of banks and fintech firms are similar—both
provide debt financing to clients. However, these lenders have different institutional features.
We therefore take an institutional perspective in order to examine the differences between
banks and fintech firms in terms of their ability to endogenously sustain trust.
In taking this institutional perspective, we focus on one key difference between banks and
fintech lenders, which is that banks raise significant financing through deposits (and thus are
leveraged lenders), whereas fintech lenders like P2P platforms are all-equity financed (see
Philippon (2015, 2016)).4 We draw upon the earlier work of Merton (1993, 1995, 1997) and
3For example, Lending Club sold a major portfolio of $22 million to a large investor and subsequently
discovered the loans were neither what Lending Club had advertised nor what the investors had asked for.
Lending Club bought back the loans and launched an investigation that led to the firing of three senior
executives. See Wallace (2016).
4Not all fintech lenders are all-equity financed, but the key is they are non-banks with no access to
deposits. Thus, the crucial distinction between banks and fintech that our analysis relies on is that banks
have access to lower-cost funding via deposits, but fintech lenders lack this access.
3