NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A MACROECONOMIC MODEL WITH FINANCIALLY CONSTRAINED PRODUCERS
AND INTERMEDIARIES
Vadim Elenev
Tim Landvoigt
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Working Paper 24757
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24757
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2018
We thank our discussants Aubhik Khan, Xiaoji Lin, Simon Gilchrist, Sebastian Di Tella, Michael
Reiter, Pablo Kurlat, Tyler Muir, and Motohiro Yogo, and seminar and conference participants at
the Econometric Society Summer Meeting, the New York Fed, UT Austin, the SED Meetings in
Toulouse, the CEPR Gerzensee Corporate Finance conference, the Swedish Riksbank Conference
on Interconnected Financial Systems, the LAEF conference at Carnegie Mellon University, the
University of Chicago, the University of Houston, the American Finance Association meetings in
Chicago, the Jackson Hole Finance Conference, Ohio State, the NYU macro lunch, Georgetown
University, the FRSB Conference on Macroeconomics, the University of Minnesota, the Federal
Reserve Board, the Macro-Finance Society, CEMFI, the NBER Summer Institute Asset Pricing
meeting, London Business School, the Bank of Canada's Financial Stability and Monetary Policy
conference, MIT Sloan, Boston College, the BI CAPR Conference for Production-based Asset
Pricing, and Catholic University of Leuven for useful comments. We thank Pierre Mabille for
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Vadim Elenev, Tim Landvoigt, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Macroeconomic Model with Financially Constrained Producers and Intermediaries
Vadim Elenev, Tim Landvoigt, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
NBER Working Paper No. 24757
June 2018
JEL No. E02,E1,E20,E44,E6,G12,G18,G21
ABSTRACT
How much capital should financial intermediaries hold? We propose a general equilibrium model
with a financial sector that makes risky long-term loans to firms, funded by deposits from savers.
Government guarantees create a role for bank capital regulation. The model captures the sharp
and persistent drop in macro-economic aggregates and credit provision as well as the sharp
change in credit spreads observed during the Great Recession. Policies requiring intermediaries to
hold more capital reduce financial fragility, reduce the size of the financial and non-financial
sectors, and locally increase macro-economic volatility. They redistribute wealth from savers to
the owners of banks and non-financial firms. Current capital requirements are close to optimal.
Vadim Elenev Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Johns Hopkins University Stern School of Business
100 International Drive New York University
Suite 1329 44 W 4th Street, Suite 9-120
Baltimore, MD 21202 New York, NY 10012
velenev@jhu.edu and NBER
svnieuwe@stern.nyu.edu
Tim Landvoigt
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
timland@wharton.upenn.edu

1 Introduction
The financial crisis and Great Recession of 2007-09 underscored the importance of the financial
systemforthebroadereconomy. Borrowerdefaultrates, bankinsolvencies, governmentbailouts
offinancialinstitutions, andcreditspreadsallspikedwhilerealinterestrateswereverylow. The
disruptions in financial intermediation fed back on the real economy. Consumption, investment,
and output all fell substantially and persistently.
These events have prompted a vigorous yet unresolved debate among policymakers and aca-
demics on whether the economy would be better off with stricter bank capital requirements.
The December 2017 Minneapolis Plan reflects the Federal Reserve’s view and proposes raising
bank capital requirements to 23.5% of risk-weighted assets, with further increases to 38% for
banks that remain systemically important. In their seminal book, Admati and Hellwig (2013)
propose raising capital requirements to 25% of assets. Larger equity capital buffers would re-
sult in less risk-taking, lower risk of bank failure and concomitant government bailouts, but
also in a smaller banking sector that lends less to the real economy, depressing investment and
output. Considering this trade-off, Admati and Hellwig argue that “for society, there are in
fact significant benefits and essentially no cost from much higher equity requirements.” The
authors of the Minneapolis Plan agree, writing that their plan “will have paid for itself many
times over if it avoids one financial crisis.” This argument is not without controversy in the
academy (Calomeris, 2013) and heavily contested by the industry.
What is missing in this debate is a quantitative general equilibrium model that embeds a
financial sector in a model of the macro-economy, and that can capture infrequent but large
financial crises. Our paper proposes such a model. In the model, banks extend long-term
loans to firms who invest and are subject to aggregate and idiosyncratic productivity shocks.
Firm default results in losses for their lenders, which can trigger bank default. Even banks
that remain standing become fragile and cut lending to firms. A large and persistent decline
in credit depresses output persistently. The high leverage of banks, which far exceeds that of
firms, amplifies modest credit losses into financial disasters. The nonlinear behavior of credit
spreads reflects this financial distress. The government bails out the creditors of the banks that
fail by issuing government debt, gradually repaid through future taxation. Because financial
intermediaries are constrained in their ability to re-lever and raising new equity from their
1

shareholders is expensive, the banking sector shrinks substantially and persistently. Real inter-
est rates must fall to induce savers to accommodate the reduction in deposits. Banks’ reduced
ability to absorb aggregate risk in financial crises results in a deterioration of risk sharing and
higher macro-economic volatility. The intermediary-driven dynamics arise in equilibrium since
all aggregate shocks emerge from the real sector.
The calibrated model matches many features of the data, both in terms of macro-economic
quantities and prices. It matches the average credit spread and its volatility. Faced with a
realistic corporate bond rate, firms choose the observed amount of leverage. The non-financial
leverageratiois37%,closetotheU.S.data. Themodeldeliversa93%leverageratioforfinancial
firms, a key moment not directly targeted by the calibration, which is close to the data. Debt
is attractive to banks for four reasons. First, debt enjoys a tax shield. Second, the government
guarantees the liabilities of the bank. This guarantee captures not only deposit insurance but
also broader too-big-to-fail guarantees to banks and the rest of the levered financial system.1
Third, banks face equity adjustment costs which increase the cost of equity relative to debt.
Fourth, banks provide a safe asset to patient households with a strong preference for holding
suchrisk-freeassets. Whilethefirstmotivefordebtfinancingalsoappliestonon-financialfirms,
the other three do not. The large wedge between financial and non-financial sector leverage is a
key feature of many developed economies and crucial to understanding systemic risk in society.
The equilibrium fully takes into account that the cost of bank debt changes endogenously with
the safety of the financial sector.
Our main exercise is to study macro-prudential policy in this environment. We study in-
creasing the minimum bank equity capital requirement from its pre-crisis level of 6% of assets.
Higher capital requirements reduce financial fragility but at the cost of shrinking the economy
and, in some cases, increasing macroeconomic volatility. They are successful at reducing finan-
cial leverage and the bank failure rate. Banks that hold more equity capital become effectively
more risk averse and stay away farther from their regulatory constraint. They also become
smaller, shrinking both assets and liabilities. The charter value of a bank shrinks because
banks with more onerous equity capital requirements have reduced ability to take advantage of
1Weusethelabelsintermediariesandbanksinterchangeablytomeantheentireleveredfinancialsector. That
sector also includes broker-dealers and insurance companies, which are subject to macro-prudential regulation
and enjoy explicit or implicit government guarantees on their liabilities. Appendix C.7 provides a detailed
definition of our intermediary sector.
2