NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE RATIONALE FOR MOTIONS IN THE DESIGN OF ADJUDICATION
Steven Shavell
Working Paper 24703
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24703
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2018
This article is forthcoming in the American Law and Economics Review. I am grateful to Robert
Bone, William Hubbard, Keith Hylton, Louis Kaplow, Daniel Klerman, Bruce Kobayashi, A.
Mitchell Polinsky, Richard Posner, David Rosenberg, Holger Spamann, Neel Sukhatme, Eric
Talley for comments, Allison Bray, D. Chanslor Gallenstein, Sarah Kahwash, Daria Levina, Nino
Monea, and Heinrich Nemeczek for research assistance, and the John M. Olin Center for Law,
Economics, and Business at Harvard Law School for research support. This article is based on a
lecture that I presented at the annual meeting of the American Law and Economics Association in
Chicago on May 9, 2014, on receiving the Ronald M. Coase Medal for contributions to
scholarship in economic analysis of law. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Steven Shavell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Rationale for Motions in the Design of Adjudication
Steven Shavell
NBER Working Paper No. 24703
June 2018
JEL No. D02,D8,K15,K40,K41
ABSTRACT
The conduct of adjudication is often influenced by motions––requests made by litigants to modify
the course of adjudication. The question studied in this article is why adjudication is designed so
as to permit the use of motions. The answer developed is that litigants will naturally know a great
deal about their specific matter, whereas a court will ordinarily know little except to the degree
that the court has already invested effort to appreciate it. By giving litigants the right to bring
motions, the judicial system leads litigants to efficiently provide information to courts that is
relevant to the adjudicative process.
Steven Shavell
Harvard Law School
1575 Massachusetts Avenue
Hauser Hall 508
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
shavell@law.harvard.edu

The Rationale for Motions in the Design of Adjudication
Steven Shavell*
The conduct of adjudication is often influenced by motions––requests made by litigants to modify
the course of adjudication. The question studied in this article is why adjudication is designed so
as to permit the use of motions. The answer developed is that litigants will naturally know a
great deal about their specific matter, whereas a court will ordinarily know little except to the
degree that the court has already invested effort to appreciate it. By giving litigants the right to
bring motions, the judicial system leads litigants to efficiently provide information to courts that
is relevant to the adjudicative process.
JEL Classifications: D02, D8, K15, K40, K41
Forthcoming in American Law and Economics Review
1. Introduction
It is self-evident that the conduct of adjudication in our legal system is often influenced
by requests made to courts by the litigants themselves. A litigant may move for dismissal of a
case or for summary judgment, seek an order for the protection of the confidentiality of
information, petition for an extension of time before a hearing would occur, ask that a new
witness be allowed to testify, or appeal a judicial finding—the list of adjudicative changes that
litigants may entreat courts to grant is various and long.1 Moreover, the allowance of some such
pleas to courts seems to be an almost universal characteristic of adjudication; requests by
* Samuel R. Rosenthal Professor of Law and Economics, Harvard Law School, and Research Associate, National
Bureau of Economic Research. This article is forthcoming in the American Law and Economics Review. I am
grateful to Robert Bone, William Hubbard, Keith Hylton, Louis Kaplow, Daniel Klerman, Bruce Kobayashi, A.
Mitchell Polinsky, Richard Posner, David Rosenberg, Holger Spamann, Neel Sukhatme, Eric Talley, and an
anonymous referee for comments, Allison Bray, D. Chanslor Gallenstein, Sarah Kahwash, Daria Levina, Nino
Monea, and Heinrich Nemeczek for research assistance, and the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and
Business at Harvard Law School for research support. This article is based on a lecture that I presented at the annual
meeting of the American Law and Economics Association in Chicago on May 9, 2014, on receiving the Ronald M.
Coase Medal for contributions to scholarship in economic analysis of law.
1 See the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, and detailed discussion and commentary in Wright et al. (2017b),
especially § 1190, discussing the multiplicity of motions. The rules of civil procedure of the states are similar, on
which, see, for example, N.Y. C.P.L.R. § 4401–08 (McKinney); and Cal. Civ. Proc. Code. See also rules governing
criminal procedure, notably, the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure and Wright et al. (2017c).

litigants influence the process of adjudication in the legal regimes of countries apart from ours,2
before arbitration organizations3 and religious tribunals,4 and in other private venues for the
resolution of disputes.5 I will refer broadly here to requests by litigants to modify the course of
adjudication as motions.
The main question that I address is why adjudication is designed so as to permit the use
of motions. That is, what is the functional advantage of imbuing adjudication with opportunities
for parties to bring motions to alter its progress rather than of fashioning the rules of adjudication
so that courts alone would exercise control over its unfolding?
At a general level, the answer to this question about the structure of adjudication is
straightforward. Parties in a legal dispute will naturally know a great deal about their specific
matter, whereas a court will ordinarily have little or no understanding of it except to the degree
that the court has invested judicial resources to appreciate it. By according the parties the right to
bring motions about the path of adjudication, and by devising appropriate standards for granting
them, the judicial system can aspire to induce the parties to provide information to the court that
2 See the discussion of motions in Germany and other civil law countries in Section 3(e) below.
3 The rules of adjudication before arbitration organizations refer to numerous steps that arbitrators may take in the
conduct of proceedings on the basis of requests made by the parties (concerning, for instance, the provision of
evidence, the appearance of witnesses, and the narrowing of issues). See, for example, Commercial Arbitration
Rules and Mediation Procedures (2013) of the American Arbitration Association, Rules 10–12, 22, and 33, among
others.
4 See, for example, The Code of Canon Law (1985), Book VII, Part I, Title III: The Discipline to be Observed in
Tribunals, mentioning different ways in which adjudication responds to requests of the parties (such as about time
limits and delays); and Presbyterian Law for Presbytery and Synod (1977), General Rules for Judicatories, Of
Motions, pp. 196–198.
5 See, for example, By–Laws of the Cocoa Merchants Association of America (2015), Rule 3–Arbitration
Procedure; University of Chicago Student Manual (2016), Disciplinary System for Disruptive Conduct; FINRA
Code of Arbitration Procedure for Customer Disputes (2017), Rule 12503–Motions (Generally), Rule 12509–
Motions to Compel Discovery; and NFL Collective Bargaining Agreement (2011), Article 43–Non–Injury
Grievance, Article 44–Injury Grievance, Article 46–Commissioner Discipline.
2