NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO FOREIGN INVESTORS IMPROVE MARKET EFFICIENCY?
Marcin Kacperczyk
Savitar Sundaresan
Tianyu Wang
Working Paper 24765
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24765
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2018
We thank Miguel Ferreira, Anton Lines (discussant), Thomas Philippon (discussant), Tarun
Ramadorai, Antoinette Schoar, Raman Uppal, and seminar participants at the BPI/Nova
Conference, EDHEC, the Federal Reserve Board, the FIRS Conference, Imperial College, the
INQUIRE Conference, Lancaster University, the NBER Long-Term Asset Management
meetings, the Royal Economic Society Conference, the University of Oklahoma, and the
University of Reading for useful comments. We thank Pedro Matos for providing assistance with
institutional ownership data and Miguel Ferreira for sharing governance index data. Kacperczyk
acknowledges the support of the ERC Consolidator grant. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Marcin Kacperczyk, Savitar Sundaresan, and Tianyu Wang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Foreign Investors Improve Market Efficiency?
Marcin Kacperczyk, Savitar Sundaresan, and Tianyu Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 24765
June 2018
JEL No. G11,G12,G14,G15
ABSTRACT
We study the impact of foreign institutional investors on global capital allocation and welfare
using novel firm-level international data. Using MSCI index inclusion as an exogenous shock to
foreign ownership, we show that greater foreign ownership leads to more informative stock prices
and this effect arises more from increased price efficiency than from improved firm governance.
We further show that the impact of capital flows on price efficiency is due to real efficiency
gains, as opposed to better information disclosure. Finally, we show that foreign ownership
increases market liquidity, reduces firms' cost of equity, and leads to subsequent growth in their
real investments, thus improving overall welfare.
Marcin Kacperczyk Tianyu Wang
Imperial College Business School Imperial College London
Tanaka Building South Kensington Campus
South Kensington Campus London, SW7 2AZ
London SW7 2AZ U.K.
United Kingdom t.wang12@imperial.ac.uk
m.kacperczyk@imperial.ac.uk
Savitar Sundaresan
Imperial College Business School
Tanaka Building
South Kensington Campus
London SW7 2AZ
United Kingdom
s.sundaresan@ic.ac.uk

1 Introduction
One of the key purposes of financial markets is to efficiently allocate capital to the real sec-
tor.1 Foreign investors have emerged as an important force in this process. As globalization
has increased, financial markets have witnessed substantial inflows of capital from foreign in-
vestors. The empirical literature has studied the consequences of financial market liberalization
for volatility and aggregate equity prices,2 but we know considerably less about the direct im-
pact of foreign portfolio investments on market efficiency and welfare. Moreover, the evidence
on aggregate efficiency and welfare in the international economics literature is either inconclusive
or finds economically small gains.3 In this paper, we revisit efficiency and welfare gains due to
foreign stock ownership using disaggregated panel data on firms and investors from 40 countries.
Whether and how foreign investors affect the price informativeness of local stocks is not obvi-
ous. On the one hand, information held by foreign investors could be a subset of the information
held by domestic investors or corporate managers, which would imply limited impact on prices
and real decisions. Even if such investors could produce unique information, their capacity to
invest internationally could be constrained. On the other hand, foreign investors’ participa-
tion could indicate that the investment opportunity was too good to pass up, thus indicating
their being more informed about individual investment opportunities. Further, they can provide
unique expertise and better risk sharing, which would then lead to their higher impact on price
informativeness and welfare.
We focus on institutional investors for several reasons. First, through their expertise and
superior resources, institutional investors possess a strong advantage over retail investors in iden-
tifying inefficiencies in asset prices and correcting them through trading (e.g., Bai, Philippon and
Savov, 2016). Second, through their voting power, they can affect firms’ real decisions either
through monitoring or by taking active ownership. Third, they are economically large with re-
gard to total global capital flows (e.g., Ferreira and Matos, 2008; Maggiori, Neiman and Schreger,
2017)4 and can thus meaningfully affect the liquidity and risk sharing of individual stocks.
1TheQ-theoryofTobin(1969)postulatesthatassetpricesshouldconveyusefulinformationaboutthequalityof
investments. Intermediation-basedtheoriesinthespiritofBagehot(1873)andSchumpeter(1912)focusonlenders’
andintermediaries’abilitytoscreenoutbadprojects. Agencytheory(Jensen,1986)emphasizescontractingfeatures
that incentivize managers to pursue value-maximizing investment policies. Empirically, Wurgler (2000) shows the
benefits of financial markets for investments in a sample of developed economies.
2For empirical evidence on the topic, see, for example, Chan et al. (1992), Bekaert and Harvey (1995), Stulz
(1999), Bekaert et al. (2005), Chari and Henry (2004, 2008).
3Passari and Rey (2015) provide an excellent summary of this evidence.
4In our sample from 2000 to 2013, the value-weighted average institutional ownership increased from 50% to
1

To conduct our empirical tests, we construct a rich panel data set on institutional equity
ownership worldwide. Our sample covers almost 24,000 firms from 40 countries, both developed
and emerging, between 2000 and 2016. These data have been used before in other contexts
(e.g., Ferreira and Matos, 2008) but, to our knowledge, we are the first to relate institutional
ownership worldwide to individual firms’ stock price informativeness, real efficiency, and welfare.
We supplement the data with macroeconomic, market, and accounting information. We follow
Bai et al. (2016) and define stock-level price informativeness as the predicted variation of cash
flows using market prices. It is a welfare-based measure and, therefore, more relevant to real
outcomes than other conventional measures are (e.g., price nonsynchronicity and variance ratios,
which we study for robustness). In forming predictions, we consider two horizons: one year and
three years.
In our first set of results, we relate foreign institutional ownership to price informativeness at
the stock level. We begin with a portfolio sorting approach, sorting on foreign ownership, and
find that the average price informativeness of the portfolio with the highest ownership level is
significantlygreaterthanthatoftheportfoliowiththelowestownership. Theeffectisstatistically
and economically significant for both short and long horizons. A similar result is obtained when
we sort stocks based on their domestic ownership levels; however, foreign ownership contributes
relatively more to the higher price informativeness. In addition, the positive correlation between
foreign institutional ownership and price informativeness is stronger in developed markets than
in emerging markets.
While the portfolio sorting approach is a good way to summarize correlations in the data, a
potential concern is that our results could be driven by other factors that affect ownership and
informativeness. To allay this concern, we use a multivariate regression approach in which we
can use time-varying firm characteristics and various fixed effects across firms, time, countries,
and industries. The results corroborate the finding that price informativeness increases with
institutional ownership with a high degree of economic and statistical significance.
To address the possibility of omitted time-varying variables affecting our results, we take
advantage of the following institutional regularity: stocks added to the global Morgan Stanley
Capital International (MSCI) index subsequently experience a strong increase in foreign own-
ership. The event generates an economically meaningful and reasonably exogenous variation in
75%forU.S.stocks,whiletheaveragenon-U.S.stockhasobservedanincreaseinitsownershiplevelsfromaround
5% to 24%.
2