NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ONLINE SYNDICATES AND STARTUP INVESTMENT
Christian Catalini
Xiang Hui
Working Paper 24777
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24777
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2018, Revised January 2019
We thank Avi Goldfarb, Kevin Laws, Meng Liu, Hong Luo, Ramana Nanda, Scott Stern and Jane
Wu for helpful discussions and comments. The researchers acknowledge the support of the Junior
Faculty Research Assistance Program at the MIT Sloan School of Management, and the MIT
Initiative on the Digital Economy (http://ide.mit.edu/). The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Christian Catalini and Xiang Hui. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Online Syndicates and Startup Investment
Christian Catalini and Xiang Hui
NBER Working Paper No. 24777
June 2018, Revised January 2019
JEL No. G24,L26,O31,O33
ABSTRACT
Early crowdfunding platforms were based on a premise of disintermediation from professional
investors, and relied on the ‘wisdom of the crowd’ to screen high quality projects. This becomes
problematic when equity is involved, as the degree of asymmetric information between
entrepreneurs looking for funding and the crowd is higher than in reward-based crowdfunding.
As a result, platforms later experimented with incentives for professional investors to curate deals
for crowd. We study how the introduction of such incentives influenced the allocation of capital
on the leading US platform, finding that the changes led to a sizable 33% increase in capital flows
to new regions. Professional investors use their reputation to vouch for high potential startups that
would otherwise be misclassified because of information asymmetry. This allows them to
arbitrage opportunities across regions and shift capital flows to startups that are 37% more likely
to generate above median returns. At the same time, this ‘democratization effect’ relies on the
presence of intermediaries with professional networks that bridge these new regions to California.
Using a large-scale field experiment with over 26,000 investors we further unpack the frictions to
online investment, and show that social networks constitute a key barrier to additional
democratization, since they influence how the crowd evaluates intermediaries in the first place.
Christian Catalini
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-480
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
catalini@mit.edu
Xiang Hui
Washington University in St Louis
and MIT
hui@wustl.edu

1 Introduction
Early crowdfunding platforms (e.g. Kickstarter, Indiegogo) were based on a premise of complete
disintermediation from professional investors: the crowd would directly fund projects based
on the information shared online by the entrepreneurs, bypassing in the process traditional
gatekeepers. This approach becomes problematic when equity is involved because of asymmetric
information between entrepreneurs and investors. Moreover, it favors geographic regions that
already attract a disproportionate share of capital offline, as online investors free ride on others
and rely on highly visible (but imperfect) proxies for quality such as accumulated capital, formal
education, affiliation with top accelerator programs, prominent advisors, etc. Online investors
have also little incentive to perform costly due diligence because they invest small amounts and
all receive the same investment terms. Traditional solutions to this problem used in other online
markets are ineffective, as entrepreneurs may lack an established track record, and transactions
are too rare, idiosyncratic and uncertain to support a robust reputation or feedback system.
Whileplatformscouldinvestincurationandbecomethird-partycertifiers, thisapproachdoes
not scale, as information about investment opportunities is dispersed across different domains of
expertise and regions, and due diligence is labor-intensive and time-consuming. This has led to
the emergence of an alternative market design approach which borrows ideas from the venture
capital model: the creation of a market for curation. By allowing experienced, professional
investors to screen startups and invite the crowd to participate in their deal flow in exchange
for a share of future profits (the ‘carry’),1 platforms can avoid the unraveling of the market,
and align incentives between the crowd, the startups and the experts. This model resembles
the relationship between general and limited partners in a venture capital firm, with the crowd
replacing limited partners as the source of funding. It also has the advantage of turning what
would otherwise be a one-time relationship between online investors and startups into a repeated
1Inreward-basedequitycrowdfunding(e.g. Kickstarter,Indiegogo),platformstypicallyearnafeeonthetotal
amount successfully raised through the website, irrespective of long run outcomes. Such a model is particularly
ineffective when equity is involved, as it does not incentivize platforms to surface and match only high quality
deals, but encourages them to increase the total volume of transactions, irrespective of quality. The use of a
carry to incentivize curation is borrowed from the venture capital model. In addition to carried interest, venture
capital firms also charge management fees on the capital they invest on behalf of limited partners.
1

one between online investors and the intermediaries syndicating the deals. Intermediaries can
then leverage their reputation – often established offline over multiple years of activity as angel
investors–toarbitrageinvestmentopportunitiesandvouchforstartupsthathavehighpotential,
but that would otherwise struggle to raise capital online.
Thearrivaloftheseintermediaries, however, mayreinforcetheagglomerationofcapitalflows,
as most angel investors are based in top entrepreneurial hubs such as California2 and primarily
invest in their home region.
The objective of this paper is to explore the trade-offs the introduction of intermediaries in
equity crowdfunding markets entails, and identify some of the key frictions that prevent high
quality entrepreneurs from accessing capital online. We start by developing a simple theoretical
model to compare how investors and startups in top entrepreneurial hub regions versus non-
hub regions are affected by intermediaries, and then use novel data on capital flows and deal
performance from the leading US equity crowdfunding platform to test our predictions.
When investment opportunities are directly posted online and the crowd makes its own
investment decisions (as in reward-based crowdfunding), we find that non-hub regions severely
underperform in terms of capital attracted relative to their share of startup activity. Consistent
with information asymmetry being the culprit, this performance gap is substantially smaller for
non-hub startups that have high, observable signals of quality.3
The introduction of intermediaries (called syndicate leads on the platform) reverses this
trend, increasing capital flows to non-hub regions by 33%. While our main specification relies
on an event study around the months immediately preceding and following the launch of the
new feature (which was not pre-announced and can be therefore considered a natural experiment
on the existing crowd of investors), the result is robust to multiple empirical approaches and
alternative definitions of the relevant control group.4
2Inthepaper,hubsrefertogeographicregionswithahighconcentrationofstartupactivity. Empirically,inthe
hightechsoftwaresectorwestudy,Californiaisthemainhubregion. Thenextregionbystartupandinvestment
activity is New York, although this region is more similar in activity levels to the third one, Massachusetts, than
to California. In the data, we adopt a conservative approach and only classify California as a hub. Adding New
York (or even Massachusetts) to our definition of hub regions does not change our results.
3We build measures of observable startup quality based on the startups’ profiles on the platform. See Section
4 for more details.
4Our main specification controls for investor heterogeneity by introducing investor fixed-effects and focusing
2