NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXPECTATIONS WITH ENDOGENOUS INFORMATION ACQUISITION:
AN EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION
Andreas Fuster
Ricardo Perez-Truglia
Mirko Wiederholt
Basit Zafar
Working Paper 24767
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24767
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2018
We thank two anonymous referees, Rudi Bachmann, Christopher Carroll, Olivier Coibion (the editor),
Theresa Kuchler, Kristoffer Nimark, Luigi Pistaferri, Dan Silverman, Michael Weber, as well as participants
at numerous seminars and conferences for helpful comments. Felipe Montano Campos and Jacob French
provided superb research assistance. We thank the UCLA Ziman Center for Real Estate’s Rosalinde
and Arthur Gilbert Program in Real Estate, Finance and Urban Economics for funding. Fuster and
Zafar were employed at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York while much of this paper was written.
The views presented here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Swiss
National Bank, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Andreas Fuster, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, Mirko Wiederholt, and Basit Zafar. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Expectations with Endogenous Information Acquisition: An Experimental Investigation
Andreas Fuster, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, Mirko Wiederholt, and Basit Zafar
NBER Working Paper No. 24767
June 2018, Revised in September 2020
JEL No. C81,C93,D80,D83,D84,E27,E3
ABSTRACT
Information frictions play an important role in many theories of expectation formation. We use a
survey experiment to generate direct evidence on how people select, acquire and process
information. Participants can buy different information signals that could help them forecast
future national home prices. We elicit their willingness to pay for information, and introduce
exogenous variation in the cost of information. We find that participants put substantial value on
their preferred signal and, when acquired, incorporate the signal in their beliefs. However, they
disagree on which signal to buy. As a result, making information cheaper does not decrease the
cross-sectional dispersion of expectations. We further document that numeracy and the revealed
“taste” for accurate expectations are important correlates of heterogeneity in all stages of the
process. We provide a model with costly acquisition and processing of information, which can
match most of our empirical results.
Andreas Fuster Mirko Wiederholt
Swiss National Bank Professor of Economics
Boersenstrasse 15 Sciences Po, Paris
CH-8022 Zurich 28 rue des Saints Peres
Switzerland 75007 Paris
andreas.fuster@gmail.com France
Mirko.Wiederholt@gmail.com
Ricardo Perez-Truglia
Haas School of Business Basit Zafar
University of California, Berkeley Department of Economics
545 Student Services Building #1900 University of Michigan
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900 611 Tappan Street
and NBER Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109
ricardotruglia@berkeley.edu and NBER
basitak@gmail.com
A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24767

1 Introduction
Consumer expectations play a central role in modern macroeconomics and finance. As a result, a
growingliteraturestudiessurveydataonexpectations. Oneoftherobustfindingsinthisliteratureis
thelargeheterogeneityinconsumerexpectations(e.g.,Mankiw,Reis,andWolfers,2003;Coibion
andGorodnichenko,2012). Thisdisagreementisimportantforanumberofreasons. Heterogeneity
in expectations drives trade in asset markets (e.g., Hong and Stein, 2007), explains variation in
householdportfolios(Meeuwisetal.,2018;Giglioetal.,2019),reducestheeffectivenessofpolicy
announcements (Angeletos and Lian, 2018), and causes inefficiencies in allocations (Angeletos
and Pavan, 2009). For these reasons, the study of subjective expectations has increasingly gained
attentionfrompolicymakers(e.g.,Bernanke,2007).
The literature has explored various approaches to depart from full-information rational expec-
tations and generate such heterogeneity. In existing models, the heterogeneity in expectations
emerges at three different stages of belief formation: information selection, information acqui-
sition, and information processing. In early noisy rational expectations models of asset markets
(e.g.,GrossmanandStiglitz,1980)andinstickyinformationmodels(e.g.,MankiwandReis,2002;
Reis, 2006), heterogeneity in beliefs emerges because only some agents acquire information in a
given period. In other noisy rational expectations models, heterogeneity in beliefs arises because
agents who acquire information select different pieces of information (e.g., Van Nieuwerburgh
and Veldkamp, 2009) or agents are simply assumed to see different pieces of information (Lucas,
1972). Finally, there is a family of models where the heterogeneity in expectations emerges at the
information processing stage, because those who acquire the same information arrive at different
posteriors: theseincludemodelswithidiosyncraticnoiseinsignalsorheterogeneityinsignalpre-
cision (e.g., Woodford, 2003; Sims, 2003), with heterogeneity in behavioral biases (e.g., Bordalo
etal.,2019)orwithheterogeneousforecastingfunctions(e.g.,BrockandHommes,1997).
The goal of this paper is to use experimental methods to measure how each of these three
stages of belief formation give rise to heterogeneity in expectations. To this end, we conduct
1

an experiment in the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Survey of Consumer Expectations
(SCE). The SCE is conducted on a nationwide sample of households, broadly representative of
the U.S. population. In our experiment, respondents can select, acquire, and process information.
Moreover, we create exogenous variation in the information acquisition costs, which allows to
measuretheeffectsofthesecostsontheheterogeneityinexpectations.
The experimental design is inspired by the recent literature on information-provision experi-
mentsinsurveys. Forexample,Armantieretal. (2016),Cavallo,Cruces,andPerez-Truglia(2017),
Binder and Rodrigue (2018), and Coibion, Gorodnichenko, and Weber (2019) use this method to
study household inflation expectations, while Armona, Fuster, and Zafar (2019) and Roth and
Wohlfart (2019) apply it to home price expectations and GDP growth expectations, respectively.1
Thesestudiesprovidearandomsubsetofrespondentswithapieceofinformationandmeasurethe
corresponding effects on expectations. In the real world, however, individuals are rarely offered
hand-picked information by academics. Instead, individuals have to find the information on their
own, having to choose from multiple information sources and incurring acquisition costs. In our
experiment, we study a more realistic information acquisition environment, in which agents have
toacquiretheinformationatacostandhaveachoiceoftheinformationsourcestheywanttosee.
The main survey underlying our study was conducted in February 2017 as part of an annual
SCE special module on the topic of housing. While the experimental design can be applied to
many contexts, we provide an application to the context of home price expectations. This choice
is motivated by the fact that home price expectations play a prominent role in many accounts
of the housing boom that occurred during the mid-2000s in the United States (e.g., Shiller, 2005;
GlaeserandNathanson,2015;GennaioliandShleifer,2018;Kaplan,Mitman,andViolante,2019).
Furthermore,individuals’homepriceexpectationsmeasuredinsurveyshavebeenshowntobeas-
sociatedwithrealbehaviorsuchasbuyingormakinginvestmentsinahome(Armonaetal.,2019;
Baileyetal.,2018). Giventheprominenceofhousinginhouseholdportfolios,thesedecisionscan
1Coibion, Gorodnichenko, andKumar(2018)andCoibion, Gorodnichenko, andRopele(2019)studyfirms’ex-
pectations(andtheireffectonbehavior)inasimilarmanner.Theformerpaperalsoinvestigateswhichmacroeconomic
variablesfirmstrack,andhowfirmsacquireinformationabouteconomicconditions.
2