NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TERMINATION RISK AND AGENCY PROBLEMS:
EVIDENCE FROM THE NBA
Alma Cohen
Nadav Levy
Roy Sasson
Working Paper 24708
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24708
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2018
We would like to thank Lucian Bebchuk, Liran Einav, Yaniv Grinstein, Saul Lach, Yona
Rubinstein, Analia Schlosser, Charles C.Y. Wang, the editor and two anonymous referees, and
workshop participants at Harvard, Hebrew University, IDC, Tel Aviv University, and Virginia
University for helpful comments and conversations. Zvika Messing provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Alma Cohen, Nadav Levy, and Roy Sasson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Termination Risk and Agency Problems: Evidence from the NBA
Alma Cohen, Nadav Levy, and Roy Sasson
NBER Working Paper No. 24708
June 2018
JEL No. D20,J44,K00,L83
ABSTRACT
When organizational structures and contractual arrangements face agents with a significant risk
of termination in the short term, such agents may under-invest in projects whose results would be
realized only in the long term. We use NBA data to study how risk of termination in the short
term affects the decision of coaches. Because letting a rookie play produces long-term benefits on
which coaches with a shorter investment horizon might place lower weight, we hypothesize that
higher termination risk might lead to lower rookie participation. Consistent with this hypothesis,
we find that, during the period of the NBA’s 1999 collective bargaining agreement (CBA) and
controlling for the characteristics of rookies and their teams, higher termination risk was
associated with lower rookie participation and that this association was driven by important
games. We also find that the association does not exist for second-year players and that the
identified association disappeared when the 2005 CBA gave team owners stronger incentives to
monitor the performance of rookies and preclude their underuse.
Alma Cohen Roy Sasson
Harvard Law School Tel Aviv University
1525 Massachusetts Avenue sasson.roy@idc.ac.il
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
alcohen@law.harvard.edu
Nadav Levy
IDC Herzliya
nadavlevy3@gmail.com

I. Introduction
In many organizational and contractual settings, agents who are granted discretion in
decision making fear termination by the principal before the long-term consequences of their
decisions are fully realized. In such cases, these agents might engage in “short-termism,”
underinvesting in projects whose payoffs would be partly realized only in the long term.1 To
investigate this agency problem empirically, we use National Basketball Association (NBA) data
concerning decisions that coaches have made about whether to let rookies play in games.
The NBA setting provides us with abundant data for analysis:2 coach contracts, detailed
information about rookie participation decisions, a rich set of controls, variation in the relative
significance of short- and long-term payoffs, and numerous variables that influence the extent to
which principals leave decision making up to agents’ discretion. In the NBA context, because
NBA rookies are required to stay with the team for a significant period beyond their first season,
letting a rookie play instead of a veteran player provides the team with long-term benefits that go
beyond the current NBA season: it not only improves the rookie’s ability to play in the NBA
setting but also enables the team to gain information about the rookie that will be useful in future
contract decisions. Thus, choosing to include a rookie in a game, rather than a veteran player,
represents an investment in a long-term project that produces benefits beyond the current season.
After describing the institutional background and the dataset, we consider the relationship
between the allocation of playing time to rookies and the improvement in their performance. We
show that rookies improve significantly over the first two years when allocated more playing
time. Together with the finding that rookies are, on average, considerably less productive in their
first year than veterans on their teams playing in the same positions, this supports our premise
that playing the rookies can be thought of as a costly investment that can bear fruit in the future.
1 For models of agency problems that result when agents face termination risk or otherwise have short
time horizons, see Narayanan (1985); Stein (1988, 1989); Bebchuk and Stole (1993); Von Thadden
(1995); and Bolton, Scheinkman, and Xiong (2006). As we explain below, the setting that we analyze is
somewhat different from the settings analyzed in those models.
2 The rich datasets available for professional sports have been noticed by economists, and a significant
number of papers have conducted empirical economic analyses using them. See, e.g., Kahn (2000),
Chiappori et al. (2002), Duggan and Levitt (2002), Farmer et al. (2004), Garicano et al. (2005), Romer
(2006), Price and Wolfers (2010), Parson et al. (2011), Abramitzky et al. (2012), Kahane et al. (2013),
and Matvos (2014).
1

We then move to develop a simple stylized model to generate hypotheses for testing. In our
model, in any given game, the coach might have some private information about the value of
including the rookie, information to which the team owner (or the general manager acting on the
owner’s behalf) is not privy. To avoid using the rookie should that information indicate such use
to be undesirable, the owner might leave it up to the coach to decide whether to let the rookie
play, even when the owner recognizes that the coach’s decision might be somewhat biased
against inclusion. And when coaches are granted such discretion, a coach who faces a high
termination risk, and who therefore places less weight on the team’s performance beyond the
current season, can be expected (other things being equal) to use rookies less frequently.
We then test whether termination risk is indeed negatively associated with rookie
participation. Our analysis focuses on decisions made by NBA coaches over the five-year period
governed by the 1999 collective bargaining agreement (CBA). We first estimate the termination
risk faced by each coach prior to the first game he coached in the season by running Probit
regressions of whether that coach was eventually terminated on his characteristics and past
performance. Using these estimates, we find that, consistent with our hypothesis, coaches who
faced a higher risk of termination—and thus a smaller likelihood of being able to benefit from
the long-term consequences of giving rookies more playing experience—were associated with a
lower use of rookies to an extent that is both statistically significant and economically meaningful.
In identifying this association, we control for the characteristics and past performances of rookies
and their teams. We address potential concerns about endogeneity of termination risk by
including an exogenous variable (the number of years left on the coach’s contract) in our
estimation of termination risk.
We subsequently test additional hypotheses generated by our model concerning the
interaction between termination risk and game importance. The NBA data provide us with
substantial variation between regular-season games that were and were not important in terms of
affecting the odds of the team making the playoffs. Consistent with the prediction of our model
in this connection, we find that the association of termination risk and rookie participation is
particularly strong in important games; in such games, given the relative value of the coach’s
private information with respect to how including the rookie would affect the game’s outcome,
owners were less likely to intervene and instruct coaches to use rookies. In contrast, the
2