NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK RESOLUTION AND THE STRUCTURE OF GLOBAL BANKS
Patrick Bolton
Martin Oehmke
Working Paper 24737
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24737
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2018
For comments and suggestions, we thank Kartik Anand, David Arsenau, Arnaud Boot, Elena
Carletti, Douglas Diamond, Darrell Duffie, Wilson Ervin, Itay Goldstein, Charles Goodhart, Gary
Gorton, Martin Hellwig, Randy Kroszner, Frederic Malherbe, George Pennacchi, Caspar Siegert,
Martin Summer, Paul Tucker, Ansgar Walther, participants of the 2014 ESSET meetings in
Gerzensee, as well as seminar and conference participants at LSE, INSEAD, the London
Financial Intermediation Theory Network, Carnegie Mellon University, Yale SOM, Washington
University in St. Louis, Imperial College, Bocconi, Lausanne, Cambridge, Princeton, Arizona
State, the MPI for Research on Collective Goods, Warwick, Oxford, the 2016 Bundesbank Spring
Conference, the 5th ITAM Conference, the 2016 FIRS meetings, the 2016 SAFE Conference on
Regulating Financial Markets, the 2016 ESSFM meetings in Gerzensee, the 2016 FRIC
conference, University of Amsterdam, the Dutch National Bank, Queen Mary University, the
2016 Colorado Finance Summit, the 2017 AFA, DIW Berlin, the Bank of England, NYU Stern,
the Duke/UNC Corporate Finance Conference, the Bank of Italy, Stanford GSB, the 2017 Bank
of Portugal Conference, the Single Resolution Board, and the French Prudential Supervision and
Resolution Authority (ACPR). The authors thank Ran Shi for excellent research assistance.
Oehmke gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Paul Woolley Centre at LSE and the
ERC (Starting Grant 714567). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Patrick Bolton and Martin Oehmke. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Bank Resolution and the Structure of Global Banks
Patrick Bolton and Martin Oehmke
NBER Working Paper No. 24737
June 2018
JEL No. G01,G18,G21,G33
ABSTRACT
We study the resolution of global banks by national regulators. Single-point-of-entry (SPOE)
resolution, where loss-absorbing capital is shared across jurisdictions, is efficient but may not be
implementable. First, when expected transfers across jurisdictions are too asymmetric, national
regulators fail to set up SPOE resolution ex ante. Second, when required ex-post transfers are too
large, national regulators ring-fence assets instead of cooperating in SPOE resolution. In this
case, a multiple-point-of-entry (MPOE) resolution, where loss-absorbing capital is preassigned, is
more robust. Our analysis highlights a fundamental link between efficient bank resolution and the
operational structures and risks of global banks.
Patrick Bolton
Columbia Business School
804 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
pb2208@columbia.edu
Martin Oehmke
Department of Finance
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE UK
m.oehmke@lse.ac.uk

One of the main unresolved issues in financial regulation is how to deal with global financial banks
that are too big to fail. The collapse of Lehman Brothers demonstrated the immense costs of the failure of
such an institution, with devastating repercussions for the financial system and the broader economy. Yet
bailouts and public guarantees that would prevent such failures also involve costs, creating moral hazard
and incentives for financial institutions to grow ever larger and more complex. The proposed solution to
this dilemma is bank resolution. Both Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act in the U.S. and the Bank Recovery
and Resolution Directive (BRRD) in the E.U. call for novel but, as of yet, untested resolution mechanisms
for global systemically important banks (G-SIBs). The aim of these proposals is to end too big to fail by
providing a credible way to resolve and recapitalize failing G-SIBs with minimal disruption and without
taxpayer support.1
In this paper we analyze the key trade-offs that arise in cross-border resolution of global banks, taking
into account the political constraints faced by national regulators. We show that, although conducting a
single, global resolution for an entire multinational bank (a “single-point-of-entry” resolution) is efficient in
principle, it is not always compatible with the interests of national regulatory authorities, who may prefer
to ring-fence their national banking industries. In that situation, conducting (and planning for) separate
resolutions in different jurisdictions (a “multiple-point-of-entry” resolution) is more efficient. Overall, our
model highlights that credible G-SIB resolution is not “one size fits all.” Rather, resolution should take
into account a bank’s risk structure and operational complementarities across different jurisdictions.
The challenge in designing resolution mechanisms for G-SIBs is to adapt existing resolution procedures
for smaller (i.e., national or regional) banks to the resolution of much larger banks that operate across
multiple jurisdictions. Indeed, resolution under Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act is partially modeled after
the FDIC receivership procedure used to resolve smaller and medium-sized banks. A central element
of FDIC resolution is Purchase and Assumption (P&A), by which a healthy bank purchases assets and
assumes liabilities of the troubled bank. For a modest-sized bank, such a resolution and sale can usually
be completed over a weekend, such that operations can resume on the following Monday. In contrast, for
1For an overview of the key features of the resolution proposals in the U.S. and in the E.U., see Philippon and Salord
(2017).
1

a failing G-SIB such a swift transfer of assets and liabilities over the course of a weekend is typically not
feasible. G-SIBs are simply too large, and their balance sheets far too complex for a quick P&A to be an
option. In addition, the resolution of G-SIBs has an inherent cross-jurisdictional component that is not an
issue when the FDIC resolves a domestic bank.
The proposed solution to this challenge is to perform a G-SIB resolution through a liability-side re-
structuring of the failing institution (see FDIC and Bank of England (2012), Financial Stability Board
(FSB) (2014)). Specifically, troubled operating subsidiaries of a G-SIB are recapitalized by writing down
long-term liabilities known as TLAC (“total loss absorbing capital” in the form of equity and subordinated
long-termdebt)issuedbyanon-operatingholdingcompany. Crucially,recapitalizationviaanon-operating
holding company allows the G-SIB’s operating subsidiaries to remain open for business as usual during
the resolution and protects the operating subsidiaries’ runnable short-term liabilities, thereby preventing
destabilizing runs on the G-SIB’s operations.
Therehasbeenalivelydebateamongpolicymakersabouttwoalternativeresolutionmodels, illustrated
in Figure 1: Multiple-point-of-entry (MPOE) resolution, under which the global bank is split along ju-
risdictional lines and national regulators perform a separate resolution, drawing on loss-absorbing capital
and liquidity held separately by national holding companies in each jurisdiction, and single-point-of-entry
(SPOE) resolution, under which a global bank is resolved as a whole through a single global holding com-
pany that holds banking subsidiaries in multiple jurisdictions. The key difference is that under MPOE
loss-absorbing capital is not shared across jurisdictions and no cross-jurisdictional transfers occur, whereas
SPOE allows for the sharing of loss-absorbing capital and cross-jurisdictional transfers during resolution.
The contribution of our paper is to characterize the main trade-offs between MPOE and SPOE reso-
lution in the context of a simple model of global banks and national regulators. We first show that bank
resolutionthatisconductedexclusivelythroughaninterventionontheliabilityside—byimposinglosseson
equity or writing down debt issued by the financial institution’s holding company—has to go hand in hand
with a regulatory requirement for holding companies to issue a sufficient amount of equity or long-term
debt so as to guarantee sufficient loss-absorbing capacity. In our model, asymmetric information about
2