NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE PERSISTENT EFFECT OF INITIAL SUCCESS:
EVIDENCE FROM VENTURE CAPITAL
Ramana Nanda
Sampsa Samila
Olav Sorenson
Working Paper 24887
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24887
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2018
We thank Shai Bernstein, Michael Ewens, Joan Farre-Mensa, Will Goetzmann, Arthur Korteweg,
Christos Makridis, Aksel Mjos, David Robinson, Antoinette Schoar, Chris Stanton, Joel
Waldfogel, Ayako Yasuda, and seminar participants at Aalto University, Boston University, the
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Copenhagen Business School, ESMT, ESSEC, IE, IESE,
London Business School, the National University of Singapore, the NBER Summer Institute, the
University of Luxembourg, the University of Minnesota, and the VATT Institute for Economic
Research for helpful comments on earlier versions of this paper. We gratefully acknowledge
financial support from the Division of Research and Faculty Development at HBS, the Centre for
Law and Business at the National University of Singapore, and the Yale School of Management.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24887.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Ramana Nanda, Sampsa Samila, and Olav Sorenson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Persistent Effect of Initial Success: Evidence from Venture Capital
Ramana Nanda, Sampsa Samila, and Olav Sorenson
NBER Working Paper No. 24887
August 2018
JEL No. G24,M13
ABSTRACT
We use investment-level data to study performance persistence in venture capital (VC).
Consistent with prior studies, we find that each additional IPO among a VC firm's first ten
investments predicts as much as an 8% higher IPO rate on its subsequent investments, though this
effect erodes with time. In exploring its sources, we document several additional facts: successful
outcomes stem in large part from investing in the right places at the right times; VC firms do not
persist in their ability to choose the right places and times to invest; but early success does lead to
investing in later rounds and in larger syndicates. This pattern of results seems most consistent
with the idea that initial success improves access to deal flow. That preferential access raises the
quality of subsequent investments, perpetuating performance differences in initial investments.
Ramana Nanda Olav Sorenson
Harvard Business School Yale School of Management
Rock Center 317 olav.sorenson@yale.edu
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
rnanda@hbs.edu
Sampsa Samila
IESE Business School
Av Pearson 21
08034 Barcelona
Spain
SSamila@iese.edu

I. Introduction
One of the distinctive features of private equity as an asset class has been long-term per-
sistence in the relative performance of private equity partnerships. Kaplan and Schoar
(2005), for example, found correlations of nearly 0.5 between the returns of one fund and
the next within a given private equity firm. Among venture capital (VC) funds, they report
even higher levels of persistence, with correlations approaching 0.7 (see also, Phalippou and
Gottschalg, 2009; Robinson and Sensoy, 2013; Harris et al., 2014; Ewens and Rhodes-Kropf,
2015; Korteweg and Sørensen, 2017). By contrast, persistence has been almost non-existent
among asset managers operating in the public equity markets, such as mutual funds and
hedge funds (for reviews, see Ferson, 2010; Wermers, 2011).
The most common interpretation of this persistence has been that private equity fund
managers di↵er in their quality. Some managers, for example, may have a stronger ability
to distinguish better investments from worse ones. Or, they may di↵er in the degrees to
which they add value post-investment—for instance, by providing strategic advice to their
portfolio companies or by helping them to recruit able executives. Consistent with this
interpretation, even within venture capital partnerships, Ewens and Rhodes-Kropf (2015)
reported large and persistent di↵erences in investment performance across the individual
partners of those funds.
This inference of quality di↵erences across private equity investors, however, has been
only indirect. Although Ewens and Rhodes-Kropf (2015) documented persistence at the
level of the individual partner, they did not attempt to decompose the sources of that
individual-levelpersistence. Fund-levelstudies, moreover, havehadlimitedabilitytoaccount
for investment-level factors that influence performance. Persistence might, for example,
occur simply because managers focus their investments in particular regions and industries
(Sorenson and Stuart, 2001). If those segments di↵er in terms of their positions in long-run
cycles or in their levels of competition among private equity firms (e.g., Gompers and Lerner,
2000), then one could observe serial correlation due to inertia in the contexts in which firms
2

invest rather than because some venture capitalists prove better than others at selecting,
monitoring or advising their portfolio companies.
To gain greater insight into the sources of persistence, we shift the unit of analysis to the
individual investment, similar to Ewens and Rhodes-Kropf (2015). But whereas they do so
to estimate persistence at the partner level, we do so, in large part, to decompose the extent
to which persistence stems from specific target companies versus from investing in particular
industries and regions at particular points in time. Examining persistence in performance
at the individual investment level also allows us to include all investors over an extended
period of time, as opposed to considering only the subset of firms and time periods for which
fund-level returns have been available.
We focus our analysis on the venture capital segment of private equity for two reasons.
First, ithashadthehighestlevelsofperformancepersistence(KaplanandSchoar,2005;Har-
risetal.,2014). Second, ourshiftinunitofanalysisrequiresaninvestment-levelperformance
measure. Although information on investment-level – as opposed to fund-level – returns has
been available for select subsets of investors, one can determine for all startups whether they
went public or were acquired. Since these forms of investment exits produce nearly all of
the positive returns in venture capital (Cumming and MacIntosh, 2003; Cochrane, 2005),
the rates of these events within a particular VC fund correlate highly with fund returns
(Phalippou and Gottschalg, 2009).
Consistent with prior studies of returns at the fund-level, we find high levels of perfor-
mance persistence at the investment-level across VC firms. For example, a 10 percentage
point higher IPO rate among a VC firm’s first ten investments – that is, one additional IPO
– predicts a more than 1.6 percentage point higher IPO rate for all subsequent investments
by that firm, relative to a VC firm with one fewer IPO among its first 10 investments. Given
that fewer than one in five investments in our sample resulted in an IPO, that amounts to
an 8% higher likelihood of a public o↵ering over the baseline.
Year-state-industry-stage intercepts at the investment level absorb roughly half of this
3