NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HIGH-SKILL IMMIGRATION, INNOVATION, AND CREATIVE DESTRUCTION
Gaurav Khanna
Munseob Lee
Working Paper 24824
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24824
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2018, Revised August 2018
We are grateful to seminar participants at the NBER Immigration and Innovation Conferences
and the University of California – San Diego for valuable comments, and to Patricia Cortes and
Shulamit Kahn for insightful feedback. We thank Alireza Eshraghi and Olga Denislamova for
excellent research assistance, and the Center for Global Transformation for support. The
conclusions drawn from the Nielsen data are those of the researchers and do not reflect the views
of Nielsen. Nielsen is not responsible for, had no role in, and was not involved in analyzing and
preparing the results reported herein. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Gaurav Khanna and Munseob Lee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

High-Skill Immigration, Innovation, and Creative Destruction
Gaurav Khanna and Munseob Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 24824
July 2018, Revised August 2018
JEL No. D22,D24,F22,J61
ABSTRACT
Economists have identified product entry and exit as a primary channel through which innovation
impacts economic growth. In this paper, we document how high-skill immigration affects product
reallocation (entry and exit) at the firm level. Using data on H-1B Labor Condition Applications
(LCAs) matched to retail scanner data on products and Compustat data on firm characteristics, we
find that H-1B certification is associated with higher product reallocation and revenue growth. A
ten percent increase in the share of H-1B workers is associated with a two percent increase in
product reallocation rates – our measure of innovation. These results shed light on the economic
consequences of innovation by high-skill immigrant to the United States.
Gaurav Khanna
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92037
gauravk@ucsd.edu
Munseob Lee
University of California at San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive, #0519
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
munseoblee@ucsd.edu

1 Introduction
Recent political and academic discussions have shone a spotlight on issues related
to high-skill immigration. This discourse could have far reaching implications for
US policy, the profitability of firms, the welfare of workers, and the potential for
innovation in the economy as a whole. Yet, the effects of high-skill immigration on
receiving countries are theoretically ambiguous. On the one hand, skilled migrants
may increase the profitability and innovative capacity of the firm (Kerr and Lincoln,
2010) and raise wages of native workers who are complements in production (Peri
and Sparber, 2009). On the other hand, migrants may crowd out domestic workers
(Doran, Gelber and Isen, 2017) and lower the wages of close substitutes (Bound,
Braga, Golden and Khanna, 2015).
What has been missing so far from this discourse is a discussion about how mi-
grants may affect the product-mix produced by a firm and the innovation involved
in creative destruction. The entry and exit of products have long been seen as an
important determinant of firm-level innovation and Schumpeterian growth (Aghion,
Akcigit and Howitt, 2014). Hiring high-skill workers from abroad may have a mean-
ingful impact on such innovation, and this has implications not only for firm profits
but also for consumer welfare. For instance, hiring more engineers and programmers
from abroad, at perhaps a lower cost, allow firms to implement incremental innova-
tions that may lead to newer products on the market. In this paper we fill this gap by
studying the impact of H-1B worker applications, on firm-level product reallocation,
defined broadly as the entry of new products and the exit of outdated products.
We create a new data set by combining data on H-1B worker applications and
1

firm production. Our H-1B data consists of publicly-available Labor Condition Ap-
plications (LCAs).1 Our product level data from the Nielsen Retail Scanner Data is
combined with firm characteristics from the Compustat database. Together, a com-
bination of these datasets at the firm-by-year level between 2006 and 2015 allows us
to comprehensively examine the impact of wishing to hire foreign workers on firm
production and innovation.
Our analysis consists of a few different methods. We first describe the entry and
exit of products over the business cycle and across a firm’s baseline propensity to
hire H-1B workers.2 We find that product reallocation falls precipitously in times of
recession and rises in periods of economic recovery. Moreover, product reallocation
is strongly associated with the baseline propensity to hire H-1B workers: firms that
applied for H-1B workers in the first year of our LCA data are more likely to con-
sistently have high product reallocation rates over the business cycle. Indeed, this
association is invariant to a firm’s R&D expenditure, size, or revenue share. R&D
expenditures and revenues are no longer strong determinants of product entry and
exit after accounting for baseline propensities to hire H-1B workers.
We then use panel regressions, where we account for firm level characteristics
that are stable over time and for shocks that affect the economy widely with the
help of fixed effects. Our preferred specifications look at outcomes in the following
periodastheyarelesslikelytobeaffectedbycontemporaneousshocks, andwewould
expect that firm dynamics change with a lag. We show that an increase in product
1LCAs are filed with the Department of Labor when a firm wishes to hire H-1B workers, and a
single LCA may list many workers.
2Our baseline propensity is whether or not a firm applied to hire H-1B workers in the first year
of our LCA data (2000-1).
2