NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CONTRACT TERMS, EMPLOYMENT SHOCKS, AND DEFAULT IN CREDIT CARDS
Sara G. Castellanos
Diego Jiménez Hernández
Aprajit Mahajan
Eduardo Alcaraz Prous
Enrique Seira
Working Paper 24849
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24849
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2018, Revised April 2025
We thank Stephanie Bonds, Felipe Brugués, Arun Chandrashekhar, Pascaline Dupas, Liran
Einav, Marcel Fafchamps, Marco Gonzalez-Navarro, Dean Karlan, Asim Khwaja, Markus
Mobius, Melanie Morten, Mauricio Romero, Carlos Serrano, Sirenia Vazquez, and Jon Zinman
for their helpful comments. We thank Alan Elizondo, Carlos Serrano, David Jaume, Adalberto
González and Daniel Chiquiar for useful conversations. We thank Ana Aguilar and Alan
Elizondo for their support, and Luis Alberto Martinez Chigo and Nancy Flores Sosa for their
help with the social security data. We thank seminar participants at Banco de Mexico, the Central
Bank of Armenia, Columbia, ITAM, The Naval Postgraduate School, Stanford, UC Berkeley,
Yale, USC, UC Merced, BREAD (May 2018), UC Davis, Barcelona GSE Conference (June
2018), HKUST, UConn, Penn State and Harvard-MIT. We would like to thank Bernardo Garcia
Bulle, Roberto Gonzalez Tellez, Marco Medina, Alli Marney-Bell, Taegan Mullane, Abbie
Natkin, Ryan Perry, Eduardo Rivera, and Isaac Meza for their outstanding research assistance.
We thank the editor and the referees for their exceptionally constructive suggestions. Previous
versions of this paper were circulated under the titles “Financial Inclusion with Credit Cards in
Mexico” and “The Perils of Bank Lending and Financial Inclusion: Experimental Evidence from
Mexico.” The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research, Banco de México, the Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago or the Federal Reserve System. AEA RCT Registry Identifying Number:
AEARCTR–0003941. All errors are our own.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Sara G. Castellanos, Diego Jiménez Hernández, Aprajit Mahajan, Eduardo Alcaraz
Prous, and Enrique Seira. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Contract Terms, Employment Shocks, and Default in Credit Cards
Sara G. Castellanos, Diego Jiménez Hernández, Aprajit Mahajan, Eduardo Alcaraz Prous,
and Enrique Seira
NBER Working Paper No. 24849
July 2018, Revised April 2025
JEL No. D14, D18, D82, G20, G21
ABSTRACT
Regulatory concerns over a tension between expanding financial access and limiting default have
led to significant restrictions on contract terms in a number of countries, despite limited evidence on
their effectiveness. We use a large nation-wide RCT to examine new borrower responses to
changes in interest rates and minimum payments for a credit card that accounted for 15% of all first-
time formal loans in Mexico. Default rates were 19% over the 26 month experiment and a 30 pp
decrease in interest rates decreased default by 2.5 pp with no effects on the newest borrowers.
Doubling minimum payments increased default by 0.8 pp during the experiment but reduced it by 1
pp afterwards, possibly by reducing debt. Matching the experimental sample to their formal
employment histories we find that the effect of job separation—more common among new
borrowers—on default is seven times larger than the effect of the 30 pp interest rate change. We
provide a simple framework for interpreting the experimental results, and rationalize the smaller
contract term effects by their limited effects on cash flow rather than by differences in per-peso
impacts.
Sara G. Castellanos Eduardo Alcaraz Prous
Banco de México Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social
saragcastellanos@gmail.com eduardo.alcarazp@imss.gob.mx
Diego Jiménez Hernández Enrique Seira
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Michigan State University
diego.j.jimenez.h@gmail.com Department of Economics
seiraenr@msu.edu
Aprajit Mahajan
University of California, Berkeley
and NBER
aprajit@gmail.com

1 Introduction
Policymakersindevelopingcountriespursuetwogoalsoftenperceivedtobeintensionwitheachother.
Limiting credit market default is viewed as key to financial stability, while expanding formal credit to
under-served populations is seen as critical for growth and welfare. The tension arises because new
borrowers typically default at higher rates than established ones. This is particularly evident in policy
discussions about credit-card borrowing—the most common way for new borrowers to access formal
credit in many countries.1 Concerns over new borrower card default have led several countries (e.g.,
Canada,Chile,Mexico,Taiwan,Turkey,andIndonesia)tomandateminimumpaymentfloorsorinterest
rateceilings.2
Despite its role in expanding credit access and facing increased regulation, credit card borrowing
in developing countries remains relatively understudied. Perhaps as a result, policy discussions lack
a coherent theoretical underpinning and credible empirical evidence on the drivers of new borrower
default and the effectiveness of policy alternatives. For instance, interest rate regulations to limit card
default typically presume strategic considerations. However, adverse life events such as job loss are
common in such settings and are potentially important default triggers, but remain under-explored. In
partthisreflectsthedifficultyoflinkinginformationondefault,contractterms,andadverselife-events,
andisolatingexogenousvariationforallkeyvariablesonacommonsample.
Weaddresstheselimitationsbycomparingtheeffectsofcontracttermsandjoblossondefaultwithin
a large common sample of new card borrowers. First, by using a large nationwide experiment we find
that substantial changes in contract terms—decreasing credit card interest rates by 30 pp (67% of base-
line) and doubling minimum payments—had limited effects on default, far below expert predictions.
Second, we document frequent job loss among new borrowers and that plausibly exogenous job sepa-
ration events substantially increase default. Finally, a back-of-the-envelope calculation that normalizes
thethree“shocks”(contracttermchangesandjobloss)findsthatallthreehadsimilarper-pesoeffectson
default, so that the smaller effects of contract terms can be rationalized by their smaller effects on total
cashflow.
We examine a popular Mexican credit card (hereafter the “study card”) that was at the center of
national financial inclusion efforts and regulatory concerns. Issued by a large commercial bank (“Bank
A”)targetedspecificallyatborrowerswithlimitedornoformalcredithistories,thestudycardaccounted
forapproximately15%ofallfirst-timeformalsectorloanproductsinthecountryby2010. Defaultrates
werehigherforthenewestborrowers—borrowerswhohadbeenwiththebankfor6–11months(atthe
start of the experiment) defaulted at twice the rate of those who had been with the bank for at least
1InMexico,cardsarethefirstloantypefor74%ofallformalsectorborrowers.ThecorrespondingfiguresforPeru,Colombia,
andtheU.S.are83%,51%,and50%,respectively.SeeAppendixB.1fordetailsondatasources.
2Weemphasizeperceptionsastheymatterforpolicy. Inparticular,eventhoughhighdefaultratesmaybeoptimalfroma
welfareperspective(seee.g.,Garzetal.,2021),theregulatorymeasureswestudyproceedontheassumptionthattheyarenot.
See,e.g.,FinancialConductAuthority(2015)forminimumpaymentregulationsinMexicoandTaiwan. SeeBreen(2019)for
minimumpaymentfloorsinQuebec.Singaporemandatesminimumincomerequirementsandautomaticcreditsuspensionfor
anyborrowernotmakingtheirminimumpaymentfor60days. IntheUnitedStates,OfficeoftheControlleroftheCurrency
(2003)providedguidancetolenderstoensureminimumpaymentsweresethighenoughtoavoidnegativeamortization,with
Citigroup,J.P.MorganChase,BankofAmerica,andothersfollowingtheguidance(Kim,2005).SeealsoCuestaandSepulveda
(2023);Nelson(2025);Williams(2005).
1

two years (36% versus 18%). Such default rates among financially inexperienced populations attracted
regulatorattentionbecauseoftheirimplicationsbothforsystemicriskanddefaulters’subsequentaccess
toformalcredit(see,forinstance,thediscussionsinBancodeMexico,2008,2009,2010).3 Thisattention
led,mostprominently,tonationallegislationrestrictingcreditcardcontracttermsin2010.
The experiment allocated a large nationwide stratified random sample of 144,000 pre-existing study
card borrowers (hereafter “the study sample”) to 8 treatment arms that varied annual interest rates be-
tween15%,25%,35%,and45%,andmonthlyminimumpaymentsbetween5%and10%,for26months,
from March 2007 to May 2009. The experimental variation is substantially larger than typical policy
interventions, providing a strong test of contract terms’ potential for limiting default.4 The large sam-
ple size enables precise estimation of treatment effects across a range of contract terms and population
strata(inourempiricalresultsweusethreeasteriskstodenotesignificanceatthe0.001level). Thesam-
plingschemeensurestheexperimentalresultsarerepresentativeofthebank’spopulationofstudycard
customers (about 1.3 million). We follow participants for five years after the intervention ended and
examine their behavior across all formal financial institutions. In addition, we match the experimen-
tal sample to its monthly employment histories in the Mexican Social Security database (the Instituto
MexicanodelSeguroSocialorIMSS).
We document four main results. First, reducing the interest rate by 30 percentage points (pp) from
45% to 15% decreases default by 2.5 pp over the 26 month experiment (compared to a base default rate
of19%). Theimpliedelasticityof+0.20isconsiderablysmallerthanpreviouscomparableestimates(e.g.,
Adams et al., 2009; Karlan and Zinman, 2019) and far below expert predictions—Mexican central bank
regulators predicted a mean decrease of 8.6 pp and experts on the Social Science Prediction Platform
predictedameandecreaseof5pp. Thelargestratifiedexperimentallowsustopreciselyestimateeffects
for the newest borrowers, a population of considerable academic and policy interest, and our second
result is that the interest rate changes have no effect on default for the newest borrowers over the 26
monthexperiment.
Higherminimumpaymentsareanotherpotentialpolicytoolforlimitingdefault.5 Higherminimum
payments, however, have two opposing effects, and it is not clear a priori which one will dominate. On
the one hand, higher payments tighten short-run liquidity constraints by requiring higher payments
immediately,whichmayincreasecurrentdefault. Liquidityconstraintsmaybeparticularlyrelevantas,
at the start of the experiment, 73% of cardholders’ monthly payments were below 10% of the amount
due. Ontheotherhand,higherminimumpayments,ceterisparibus,reducedebtandmaydecreasedebt-
burden-drivendefaultinthelongerrun.
Ourthirdresultisthatdoublingtheminimumpaymentrequirementsdoesnotreducedefaultduring
3Similarconcernshavebeenraisedelsewhere.See,e.g.,BlackandMorgan(1999);Livshits(2022)fortheU.S.
4Policychangeshavebeenmuchsmaller—themandatedincreasesinminimumpaymentsinMexicowas1.5%,whileinterest
ratecapsconsideredinTurkeyandIndonesiainvolvedchangesofnomorethan5–10pp.See,e.g.,WebArchiveLinkforTurkey
andWebArchiveLinkforIndonesia.
5See,e.g.,Bar-Gill(2003);FinancialConductAuthority(2015);Rushton(2003);Warren(2007)andthiscircularfromtheMex-
icanCentralBank(https://goo.gl/MkYbVO).Asnotedearlier,MexicoandTaiwanmandateminimumpaymentrequirements
promptedbysucharguments.Suchprescriptionsfindsomesupportinmodelsoftime-inconsistentorunawareagents(DellaV-
ignaandMalmendier,2004;GabaixandLaibson,2006;HeidhuesandKo˝szegi,2016;HeidhuesandKo˝szegi,2010). Thereis
someevidencethattime-inconsistentpreferencesplayaroleincreditcarddebtaccumulation(Laibsonetal.,2003;Meierand
Sprenger,2010;ShuiandAusubel,2005)andthatminimumpaymentsserveasananchoringdevice(Stewart,2009).
2