NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CREDIT SUPPLY AND HOUSING SPECULATION
Atif Mian
Amir Sufi
Working Paper 24823
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24823
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2018, Revised April 2019
This research was supported by funding from the Julis Rabinowitz Center For Public Policy and
Finance at Princeton, and the Fama-Miller Center and Initiative on Global Markets at Chicago
Booth. We are especially grateful to Neil Bhutta, Nicola Cetorelli, Neale Mahoney, Stefan Nagel,
Stavros Peristiani, Tomasz Piskorski, Philipp Schnabl, Amit Seru, Anne Thompson, and Eric
Zwick for help with data access. We received helpful comments from John Griffin, Adam Guren,
Christopher Palmer, Andrei Shleifer, Paul Willen, Eric Zwick, and seminar participants at
Chicago Booth, DeNederlandscheBank, the European Central Bank, Harvard Business School,
John Hopkins University, Northwestern University, the NBER Corporate Finance, Real Estate,
and Monetary Economics meetings, and Princeton University. Nicolas Andreoulis, Tu Cao,
Sebastian Hanson, Michael Varley, and Hanbin Yang provided excellent research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Atif Mian and Amir Sufi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Credit Supply and Housing Speculation
Atif Mian and Amir Sufi
NBER Working Paper No. 24823
July 2018, Revised April 2019
JEL No. E03,E44,G01,G12,G2,G4,R21,R31
ABSTRACT
Speculation is a critical channel through which credit supply expansion affects the housing cycle.
The surge in private label mortgage securitization in 2003 fueled a large expansion in mortgage
credit supply by lenders financed with non-core deposits. Areas more exposed to these lenders
experienced a large relative rise in transaction volume driven by a small group of speculators, and
these areas simultaneously witnessed an amplified housing boom and bust. Consistent with the
importance of belief heterogeneity, house price growth expectations of marginal buyers rose
during the boom, while housing market pessimism among the general population increased.
Atif Mian
Princeton University
Bendheim Center For Finance
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
atif@princeton.edu
Amir Sufi
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
amir.sufi@chicagobooth.edu

The interaction between credit and speculation plays a leading role in the narrative of
financialcyclesadvancedbyscholarssuchasCharlesKindleberger(1978)andHymanMinsky
(1986). The Global Financial Crisis has led researchers to focus more on this narrative.
This study exploits a natural experiment centered on the rise of the private label mortgage
securitization market (the “PLS market”) in order to investigate the link between credit
supply expansion and housing speculation.
In the language of Kindleberger and Minsky, a boom and bust cycle in asset prices often
begins with a “displacement” such as financial innovation or financial liberalization that
expands credit to speculators. The speculators use leverage to bid for an asset, and such
bidding boosts the asset’s price. The increase in price brings in more speculators creating a
positive feedback between credit and speculation. This feedback effect generates “euphoria”
or “mania” in the market as prices and trading volume rise rapidly.
These dynamics imply that speculators are overly optimistic during the euphoric state
with many holding the asset purely on the belief that prices will continue to grow. Adam
Smith (1776) referred to this as “overtrading” where market-implied expectations are in
“error.” Consequently, the boom in credit and asset prices leads to a predictable bust.
Evidence from recent business cycle history is consistent with these ideas where housing
assetsinparticulararecritical. Forexample, growthinmortgagecreditisstronglycorrelated
with growth in house prices, and housing-related credit growth predicts financial crises and
a decline in GDP growth (e.g., Jorda` et al. (2016) and Mian et al. (2017)).
However, formally testing the details of the ideas in Kindleberger and Minsky remains
difficultforanumberofreasons. First, identifyingacreditsupplyshockishard. Itisdifficult
to isolate a financial shock that might trigger a speculative cycle. Second, tracing the cycle
of speculation requires granular data on transaction volume, prices, and the characteristics
of individual traders who come into the market due to credit expansion. Third, an important
element of the Kindleberger-Minsky narrative is the expectations of speculators, and how
these expectations differ from average or rational expectations. This necessitates data on
1

expectations both for speculators who trade the underlying asset and the broader population
who stays out of the market.
This study addresses these challenges by exploiting the global surge in shadow banking in
2003 that enabled lenders relying on non-core deposit financing to increase mortgage credit
supply more aggressively. Existing research shows how events in the late summer of 2003 led
to a sudden and large surge in the PLS market (e.g., Justiniano et al. (2017)). The sudden
acceleration of the PLS market created a natural experiment in which housing markets in
the United States that were more exposed to non-core deposit financed lenders (which we
refer to as non-core liability lenders, or “high NCL lenders”) experienced an immediate and
large relative rise in mortgage originations.
Section 1 discusses the background of the natural experiment and explains why exposure
to high NCL lenders provides a plausibly exogenous source of variation in mortgage credit
supplyexpansionacrosshousingmarkets. Therewasnodifferentialpre-trendinanyoutcome
variable in more exposed markets, and the relative rise in mortgage originations in more
exposed markets occurred exactly in the same months as the aggregate surge in the PLS
market. Furthermore, as in Khwaja and Mian (2008), confounding shocks can be absorbed
at a granular census-tract level to show that the relative rise in mortgage originations in
locations more exposed to high NCL lenders was not driven by spurious credit demand
shocks.
The empirical strategy uses administrative data from TransUnion to construct a new
individual-level data set of mortgage originations by both speculators and non-speculators.
Individuals buying a house are classified as speculators if they (a) buy multiple houses in
a short time period, (b) buy and sell a given house within one year, or (c) buy a house
when already having 2 or more first-lien mortgages on their balance sheet. The TransUnion
data also allows for an exploration of the age and credit score of the individuals buying
homes with a mortgage. In addition, data on average (population-wide) housing market
expectations at the MSA level from the Michigan Survey of Consumers are combined with
2