NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EYES WIDE SHUT? THE MORAL HAZARD OF MORTGAGE INSURERS DURING
THE HOUSING BOOM
Neil Bhutta
Benjamin J. Keys
Working Paper 24844
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24844
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2018
We thank Larry Cordell, Karen Dynan, Fernando Ferreira, Scott Frame, Joe Gyourko, Doug
McManus, Steve Oliner, Michael Palumbo, Ed Pinto, Todd Sinai, Nancy Wallace, representatives
from two mortgage insurance firms, and numerous seminar and conference participants for
helpful comments and suggestions. Jeremy Kirk provided outstanding research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Federal Reserve Board, its staff, or National Bureau of Economic Research. Any remaining errors
are our own.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Neil Bhutta and Benjamin J. Keys. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Eyes Wide Shut? The Moral Hazard of Mortgage Insurers during the Housing Boom
Neil Bhutta and Benjamin J. Keys
NBER Working Paper No. 24844
July 2018
JEL No. G21,G22,L10,L14
ABSTRACT
In the U.S. mortgage market, private mortgage insurance (PMI) is mandated for high-leverage
mortgages purchased by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to serve as a private market check on GSE
risk-taking. However, we document that PMI firms dramatically expanded insurance on high-
risk mortgages at the tail-end of the housing boom, contradicting the industry's own research
regarding house price risk. Using three detailed sources of mortgage and insurance data, we
examine PMI application denial rates, default rates on PMI-backed loans, and growth rates of
high-leverage lending around the GSE conforming loan limit, along with information extracted
from company, industry and regulatory filings and reports. We conclude that PMI behavior
during the housing boom in part reflects a "moral hazard" incentive inherent to insurance
companies in general to underprice risk and be undercapitalized. Our results suggest that rather
than providing discipline, private mortgage insurers facilitated GSE risk-taking.
Neil Bhutta
Federal Reserve Board
20th and C St N
Stop 149
Washington DC 20551
neil.bhutta@frb.gov
Benjamin J. Keys
Department of Real Estate
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
1461 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
benkeys@wharton.upenn.edu

2
“Mortgage insurers were designed to be review underwriters. Because they are in the
first loss position on insured mortgages, they are the second set of eyes looking at
potential loans to check and see if it is safe for both the investor and the borrower.”
–Mortgage Insurance Companies of America (MICA) 2008–2009 Factbook
I Introduction
In banking and financial markets, the government often plays a role as a guarantor to help ensure
market stability and confidence. One well-known example is federal deposit insurance. Another
example is in residential mortgage markets, where the government implicitly and explicitly guaran-
tees investments in certain mortgage-backed securities (MBS). While these guarantees can provide
essential countercyclical liquidity support, the presence of a guarantee can also blunt the incentives
of market participants to monitor intermediaries and accurately price risk. To help restore market
discipline, the government may require a significant involvement of private capital that does not
receive government protection.
Two giants of the U.S. mortgage market that have benefited from implicit government back-
ing are Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, collectively known as Government-Sponsored Enterprises,
or GSEs. The GSEs purchase loans from lenders, bundle them into MBS, and provide a credit
guarantee that protects investors against losses. Investors perceived the GSEs’ credit guarantee to
be as good as a government guarantee because of the tight link between the GSEs and the federal
government (Acharya, Richardson, Van Nieuwerburgh and White 2011). Given this guarantee,
investors had little incentive to monitor the GSEs or constrain profit-driven risk-taking. To help
overcome these incentive incompatibilities, Congress requires the GSEs to obtain a private market
“credit enhancement” for high-leverage mortgage loans.
The most common form of credit enhancement is private mortgage insurance, or PMI. Private
mortgage insurers partially cover the losses incurred from a mortgage default. When a high loan-
to-value (LTV > 80%) mortgage is securitized through Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac, PMI takes a
first-loss position in front of the GSEs. PMI companies are independent firms, and can set their
ownunderwritingstandardsandreviewloanspriortoorigination. IfPMIcompanieswereunwilling
to insure a high-LTV loan, it would be ineligible for purchase by the GSEs. The PMI industry
frequently touts its role in providing market discipline as a “second set of eyes,” as in the above

3
quote (MICA 2009).
In this paper we show that, rather than providing restraint, PMI companies facilitated a dra-
matic expansion of risky lending by the GSEs in 2007. Employing rarely used data on the universe
of PMI applications, along with loan-level data reported under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act
(HMDA) and from mortgage servicers, we document several troubling facts about PMI activity
during the housing boom. First, PMI issuance grew sharply — by nearly 50 percent — in 2007, at
the tail-end of the housing boom when fears of a housing downturn were elevated. This surge in
issuance pushed the fraction of home purchase loans covered by PMI to historic levels.
Second, PMIissuancegrewdisproportionatelyincitieswherethePMIindustry’sownpublished
research indicated the highest levels of housing risk. Moreover, PMI issuance grew disproportion-
atelyin2007intheriskiesttypesofloans,suchasthosewithzerodownpayment,andfortheriskiest
types of borrowers, with both low FICO scores and small down payments (high LTV ratios).
Third, we demonstrate that PMI growth in 2007 was closely connected to declines in “piggy-
back” lending — junior liens combined with standard 80 percent LTV first liens at the time of
origination. In 2005 and 2006, piggyback lending became heavily used, with these loans usually
going into private-label (non-GSE) MBS. The piggyback lending market dried up in late 2006,
indicative of other private participants being no longer willing to bear high-LTV risk. Indeed,
the PMI industry research noted above argued that areas with high concentrations of piggyback
loans were the places most likely to experience near-term house price corrections (Calhoun 2005).
Nonetheless, PMI growth occurred precisely when piggyback lending retrenched, and we document
a strong negative correlation at the neighborhood (census tract) level between PMI and piggyback
growth from 2006 to 2007.
Fourth, this sharp increase in risk exposure in 2007 was not associated with any change in
insurancepremiums. Basedonratesheetsobtainedfromthistimeperiod,weconfirmthatinsurance
premiums were based largely on LTV, with constant pricing within LTV bins across much of the
credit score distribution, and that prices based on leverage were essentially unchanged from 1996 to
2008. Notably, PMIfirmsdidnotpriceregionalrisk, despitetheindustry’sawarenessofsubstantial
differential likelihoods of house price declines across metro areas.
Rapid expansion in issuance at the height of the boom contributed to a dramatic collapse of