NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE RUN ON REPO AND THE FED'S RESPONSE
Gary Gorton
Toomas Laarits
Andrew Metrick
Working Paper 24866
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24866
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2018
For comments and suggestions we thank Natee Amornsiripanitch, Ben Bernanke, Bill English,
Darrell Duffie, Arun Gupta, Ben Hebert, Frank Keane, Trish Mosser, Dimitry Orlov, Manmohan
Singh, and seminar participants at Stanford, Columbia, and the Federal Reserve/Maryland Short-
Term Funding Markets Conference. We also thank some traders who wish to remain anonymous
for help in providing the haircut data used in this paper. The authors have no sources of funding
or relevant financial relationships to disclose. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Gary Gorton, Toomas Laarits, and Andrew Metrick. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Run on Repo and the Fed's Response
Gary Gorton, Toomas Laarits, and Andrew Metrick
NBER Working Paper No. 24866
July 2018
JEL No. E32,E44,E58,G01
ABSTRACT
The Financial Crisis began and accelerated in short-term money markets. One such market is the
multi-trillion dollar sale-and-repurchase (“repo”) market, where prices show strong reactions
during the crisis. The academic literature and policy community remain unsettled about the role
of repo runs, because detailed data on repo quantities is not available. We provide quantity
evidence of the run on repo through an examination of the collateral brought to emergency
liquidity facilities of the Federal Reserve. We show that the magnitude of repo discounts
(“haircuts”) on specific collateral is related to the likelihood of that collateral being brought to
Fed facilities.
Gary Gorton Andrew Metrick
Yale School of Management Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street 135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200 P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200 New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER and NBER
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu metrick@yale.edu
Toomas Laarits
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
toomas.laarits@yale.edu

1 Introduction
The panics of the Global Financial Crisis took place outside of the traditional banking system. The
largestinstitutionstofailornearlyfail—BearStearns,LehmanBrothers,AIG—werenottraditional
banks. Furthermore, the stress in the traditional-bank lending markets in late 2008 were preceded
by turmoil in lightly regulated short-term money markets: sale and repurchase agreements (repo),
asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP), structured investment vehicles (SIVs), collateralized debt
obligations (CDOs), and other acronymic products. These non-bank institutions and markets go
by a variety of names—shadow banking, market-based finance, securitized banking—but whatever
we call them the challenge is the same: we do not have anywhere near the data needed to fully
understand what happened.
This a major data gap, because an enormous new edifice of regulatory policy continues to be built
onhighlyincompleteinformation. Thisgapwillnoteasilybefilled: inmanycases,therawdatawas
simply not collected by anyone. Governments did not track—and in some cases stopped tracking—
someofthemarkets. Furthermore, sincemostofthesemarketsareoperatedover-the-counter, there
are no centralized exchanges with comprehensive coverage. What we are left with is a hodgepodge
of information from market makers, industry surveys, and government emergency programs. To
make any progress, researchers must carefully combine these various sources. In this paper, we
attack this problem by merging two unique data sets: first, information about the quantities of
specificcollateralusedinFederalReserveemergencyprogramsand, second, tradersuppliedhaircut
data on various categories of bonds. With this combined dataset, we provide important evidence
about the repo market, a major vector of crisis contagion.
Prior to the crisis, repo was a lightly regulated multi-trillion dollar market which funded nearly
half of the asset holdings by the major investment banks. In a repo contract a lender makes a
short term cash loan in exchange for collateral. The amount by which the loan is less than the
value of the collateral is called the haircut. For instance, a bond with $100 value and 10% haircut
will allow the borrower access to $90 in repo financing. An increase in the haircut for a type of
collateral, then, is economically equivalent to a reduction in the quantity of securitized borrowing
that can be done using a given amount of collateral. When repo contracts have short maturities,
such reductions in borrowing can look just like old-fashioned runs on banks. Gorton and Metrick
(2012) used evidence about haircut changes to infer such a “run on repo” during the crisis. But
haircuts represent only price evidence consistent with a run. In this paper, we document quantity
evidence of the run.
Repo is divided into two different markets: “tri-party repo” and “bilateral repo.” In tri-party
repo, a clearing bank stands between borrowers and lenders. Because the tri-party repo market is
dominated by regulated institutions, the data there is relatively complete.1 In contrast, bilateral
1See Copeland et al. (2010) for a discussion of the pre-crisis tri-party system.
2

repo is the home of hedge funds, many types of offshore institutions, and other unregulated cash
pools. A 2004 industry survey found that bilateral repo was about three times as large as tri-party
repo (see discussion in Gorton and Metrick (2015)). The situation is similar post-crisis. Baklanova
et al. (2017) study a cross-section of bilateral repo transactions in the first quarter of 2015. They
find that “...more than half the trades in terms of dollar volume involve a bank or a broker-dealer,
followed by hedge funds. The results differ from that of tri-party repo, where the money market
funds and cash reinvestment arms of securities lending agents are the largest participants.”
Krishnamurthy et al. (2014) perform a careful study of repo quantities in the tri-party market and
conclude that any runs were limited. However, the evidence in Gorton and Metrick (2015) shows
that extrapolating from the tri-party market does not allow any inference for bilateral repo—
thus leaving more than half of the market unknown. To study quantity evidence of a run on
bilateral repo we exploit data from the emergency lending facilities set up by the Federal Reserve.
These facilities allowed borrowers to bring collateral to the Fed in exchange for cash or Treasuries.
Consistent with a run on repo, we show that an increase in haircuts on a given type of collateral in
the repo market resulted in these assets being brought to the Fed as collateral against emergency
loans. In a difference-in-differences setting, we use changes in bilateral repo haircuts to explain
bank-collateral-level borrowing from three facilities—the Term Auction Facility (TAF), the Term
Securities Lending Facility (TSLF), and the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF). Our finding
is robust to including proxies for shocks to bank capital and counterparty risk.
Weorganizethepaperasfollows. InSection2wesummarizethemainfeaturesoftheFedemergency
lending facilities. Section 3 discusses lending data provided by the Fed, the bilateral haircut data,
and the merging of the two datasets. In Section 4 we present our empirical evidence: we show that
changes in haircuts on specific asset classes caused borrowers to take those assets to the facilities.
Section 5 concludes.
2 The Emergency Lending Facilities
During the 2007-2008 Financial Crisis the Federal Reserve introduced a number of temporary
emergency facilities to address pressures in various financial markets. At one point there were
nine temporary liquidity facilities in place.2 In this paper we focus on three important facilities—
the Term Auction Facility (TAF), the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF), and the Primary
Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF)—that allowed depository institutions or primary dealers to borrow
against collateral outside the usual discount window, and where detailed collateral data has been
made available by the Fed.
Table 1 and Figure 1 summarize the main characteristics of the three programs. The TSLF was a
2https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/markets/Forms of Fed Lending.pdf
3