NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FINANCIAL INCENTIVES AND EARNINGS OF DISABILITY INSURANCE RECIPIENTS:
EVIDENCE FROM A NOTCH DESIGN
Philippe Ruh
Stefan Staubli
Working Paper 24830
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24830
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2018
We thank David Autor, Janet Currie, Josef Falkinger, Johannes Kunz, Andrei Levchenko, Erzo
Luttmer, Lucija Muehlenbachs, Tobias Renkin, Andrea Weber, Rudolf Winter-Ebmer, Josef
Zweimüller, and seminar participants at HEC Montréal, the University of Calgary, the Vienna
University of Economics and Business, the University of Zurich, CIRANO Montreal, and the
2015 IZA/CEPR ESSLE for helpful comments. This research was supported by the Austrian
National Science Research Network "Labor and Welfare State" of the Austrian FWF, the
National Institute on Aging (R03AG045456), and the U.S. Social Security Administration
through grant #1 DRC12000002-03 to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the
SSA Disability Research Consortium. The findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of
the authors and do not represent the views of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or the
NBER. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Philippe Ruh and Stefan Staubli. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Incentives and Earnings of Disability Insurance Recipients: Evidence from a Notch
Design
Philippe Ruh and Stefan Staubli
NBER Working Paper No. 24830
July 2018
JEL No. H53,H55,J14,J21
ABSTRACT
Most countries reduce Disability Insurance (DI) benefits for beneficiaries earning above a
specified threshold. Such an earnings threshold generates a discontinuous increase in tax liability
—a notch—and creates an incentive to keep earnings below the threshold. Exploiting such a
notch in Austria, we provide transparent and credible identification of the effect of financial
incentives on DI beneficiaries’ earnings. Using rich administrative data, we document large and
sharp bunching at the earnings threshold. However, the elasticity driving these responses is small.
Our estimate suggests that relaxing the earnings threshold reduces fiscal cost only if program
entry is very inelastic.
Philippe Ruh
Department of Economics
University of Zurich
Schönberggasse 1
8001 Zurich
Switzerland
philippe.ruh@econ.uzh.ch
Stefan Staubli
Department of Economics
University of Calgary
2500 University Drive NW
Calgary, AB T2N 1N4
CANADA
and CEPR
and also NBER
sstaubli@ucalgary.ca

1 Introduction
Disability Insurance (DI) programs are among the largest social insurance programs. In OECD
countries, total expenditures on disability benefits account for approximately 2.5 percent of GDP
(OECD, 2010). In many DI programs, beneficiaries lose part or all of their benefits if earnings
exceed a substantial gainful activity (SGA) threshold. This policy induces a discontinuous increase
in the (implicit) tax liability—a notch—and creates an incentive for beneficiaries to keep their
earnings just below the SGA threshold to retain benefits. If bunching at the SGA threshold is
widespread, then policies that relax the notch could increase work effort among DI beneficiaries,
potentially improving their economic well-being and their autonomy while reducing dependency
on benefits.1 Yet, these policies could create unintended costs if they induce more individuals to
seek disability benefits. Despite numerous anecdotes on the work disincentives induced by the
SGA threshold, there is little empirical evidence on the impact of the SGA threshold, and financial
incentives in general, on the labor supply of beneficiaries.2
This paper helps to close this gap by investigating whether earnings thresholds induce DI reci-
pientstoadjusttheirlaborsupply. Ourestimationstrategyexploitsquasi-experimentalvariationin
the implicit tax on work in Austria’s DI program. Specifically, DI beneficiaries in Austria can earn
up to an SGA threshold of e439 per month (around USD 500) without losing benefits. However,
if monthly earnings exceed the SGA threshold by e1, then DI benefits are reduced by up to 50
percent in that month. This notch creates a strong incentive for many DI beneficiaries to bunch
on the low-earnings side of the SGA threshold. As shown by Saez (2010), the amount of bunching
can be used to estimate an elasticity of earnings with respect to the net-of-tax rate. However,
observed bunching might be attenuated if some individuals do not respond because of optimization
frictions such as adjustment costs and inattention. The structural earnings elasticity, the elasticity
absent frictions, is likely to be larger. Kleven and Waseem (2013) show that one advantage of a
1Manycountriesareconsideringorhaverecentlyimplementedpolicyreformsdesignedtoincreaseworkincentives
for DI recipients. For example, the U.S. is currently testing a benefit offset policy that reduces benefits by $1 for
every $2 of earnings above the SGA threshold, rather than fully suspend benefits. Switzerland tested a conditional
cashprogramthatofferedDIrecipientsacashpaymentiftheytakeuporexpandemploymentandreducedisability
benefits(seeBu¨tleretal.,2015,foranevaluationoftheprogram). OtherrecentexamplesincludetheUnitedKingdom
and Norway (see Kostol and Mogstad, 2014).
2Forexample,thearticle“DisabilityInsurance: NotWorking”inthemagazinetheEconomist (issuefromJanuary
24, 2015) provides anecdotal evidence for such behavior in the U.S. Social Security Disability Insurance. Empirical
evidence is provided by Schimmel et al. (2011); Weathers and Hemmeter (2011); Campolieti and Riddell (2012);
Kostol and Mogstad (2014) (discussed in detail below).
1

notch design, as opposed to a kink design, is the ability to estimate a structural elasticity because a
notch creates a region of strictly dominated choices on the high-earnings side of the SGA threshold.
In this range, beneficiaries can increase both total net income and leisure by moving to the SGA
threshold. Thus, we can use the number of people who locate in the dominated region to recover
the structural elasticity, because in a frictionless world this region should be empty.3
Two features make the SGA threshold in Austria advantageous for studying how earnings
respond to financial incentives. First, the increase in tax liability at the SGA threshold is salient
and large in magnitude. The average DI beneficiary loses around 10 percent of his or her total
after-taxincomeifearningsexceedtheSGAthresholdbye1. Havinglargevariationintaxliability
allows us to identify behavioral responses even if they are small. Detecting behavioral responses
would be more difficult in other contexts because earnings rules are typically more complex and
therefore less salient.4 Second, bunching below the SGA threshold can be difficult to detect in
administrative data, because earnings are measured at the annual level while the SGA threshold is
specified at the monthly level. Hence, recipients who bunch at the SGA threshold only for some
months of the year would not appear to bunch in annual data. In contrast, our administrative data
from social security and tax registers allow us to measure earnings and DI benefits at the monthly
level. Moreover, since sample sizes are large, we can graphically demonstrate bunching, providing
transparent evidence of the behavioral response.
A notch may also create behavioral responses along the extensive margin, i.e. the decision of
whether to participate in the labor force. We identify the causal impact of the SGA threshold
on the extensive margin decision by exploiting a policy change that relaxed earnings restrictions
significantly. Since the change in law affected only a subsect of DI beneficiaries, we can estimate
3Recentstudiesrelyingonnotchesinthebudgetsetexaminesuchdiversetopicsasearningsadjustmentstoincome
and payroll taxes (Kleven and Waseem 2013; Tazhitdinova 2017), automaker responses to fuel economy regulations
(SalleeandSlemrod2012;ItoandSallee2016),theimpactoftransfertaxesontherealestatemarket(Kopczukand
Munroe, 2015; Best and Kleven, 2016), the effect of tax credits on retirement savings and income (Ramnath, 2013),
thelaborsupplyeffectsofsocialsecurity(Brown,2013;ManoliandWeber,2016), andfirmresponsestostrictertax
enforcement (Almunia and Lopez Rodriguez, 2017). See Kleven (2016) for a review of the bunching approach and
the related literature. Our paper contributes to this literature by studying behavioral responses at a notch in the
disability benefit schedule.
4For example, beneficiaries in the public DI program in the U.S. can earn above the SGA for nine months (not
necessarily consecutive) over any five-year period. After exhausting the nine-months period, beneficiaries enter the
extended period of eligibility (EPE). If earnings are above the SGA threshold during the EPE, benefits are paid for
three additional months, but are suspended in full thereafter during each month that beneficiaries earn above SGA.
If earnings are above the SGA three years after entering the EPE, benefits are terminated. Abeler and Ja¨ger (2015)
provide evidence that individuals underreact to complex tax rules relative to less complex ones.
2