NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE COSTS OF MACROPRUDENTIAL POLICY
Björn Richter
Moritz Schularick
Ilhyock Shim
Working Paper 24989
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24989
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018
Schularick gratefully acknowledges support from the Thematic Fellowship Programme of the
Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research (HKIMR). We are grateful for Ozge Akinci, Claudio
Borio, Stijn Claessens, Leonardo Gambacorta, Boris Hofmann, Enisse Kharroubi, Catherine
Koch, Gianni Lombardo, Luiz Pereira da Silva, Hyun Song Shin, Nikola Tarashev, Silvana
Tenreyro, Kostas Tsatsaronis and an anonymous referee for their helpful suggestions. We thank
the participants in the NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2018, the Banque de
France 20th Central Bank Macro Modeling Workshop, the HKIMR seminar and the BIS internal
seminar for comments. We also thank Jimmy Shek and Jose Maria Vidal Pastor for their
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Bank for International Settlements or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Björn Richter, Moritz Schularick, and Ilhyock Shim. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Costs of Macroprudential Policy
Björn Richter, Moritz Schularick, and Ilhyock Shim
NBER Working Paper No. 24989
September 2018
JEL No. E58,G28
ABSTRACT
Central banks increasingly rely on macroprudential measures to manage the financial cycle.
However, the effects of such policies on the core objectives of monetary policy to stabilise output
and inflation are largely unknown. In this paper, we quantify the effects of changes in maximum
loan-to-value (LTV) ratios on output and inflation. We rely on a narrative identification approach
based on detailed reading of policy-makers’ objectives when implementing the measures. We
find that over a four year horizon, a 10 percentage point decrease in the maximum LTV ratio
leads to a 1.1% reduction in output. As a rule of thumb, the impact of a 10 percentage point LTV
tightening can be viewed as roughly comparable to that of a 25 basis point increase in the policy
rate. However, the effects are imprecisely estimated and the effect is only present in emerging
market economies. We also find that tightening LTV limits has larger economic effects than
loosening them. At the same time, we show that changes in maximum LTV ratios have
substantial effects on credit and house price growth. Using inverse propensity weights to
rerandomise LTV actions, we show that these effects are likely causal.
Björn Richter Ilhyock Shim
Institute for Macroeconomics and Econometrics Bank for International Settlements
University of Bonn Centralbahnplatz 2
Kaiserplatz, 7-9 4th floor 4002 Basel
53113, Bonn, Germany Switzerland
brichter@uni-bonn.de ilhyock.shim@bis.org
Moritz Schularick
University of Bonn
Department of Economics
Adenauerallee 24-42
53113 Bonn
Germany
and CEPR
moritz.schularick@uni-bonn.de

1 ntroduction
. I
How do macroprudential policies interact with the core objectives of monetary policy to
stabilise prices and output? As a response to the global financial crisis, central banks and
regulatorsacrosstheworldhaveincreasinglyreliedonmacroprudentialpoliciestomaintain
financial stability. A recent literature has shown that policy-makers can moderate credit and
asset price cycles using macroprudential instruments (e.g. Akinci and Olmstead-Rumsey
2018 2017 2016
( ), Bruno et al. ( ) and Kuttner and Shim ( )). This way, they can reduce negative
output tail risks emanating from the link between excess credit and costly financial crises
2012 2013
(Schularick and Taylor ( ) and Jorda` et al. ( )). However, there is very little empirical
evidence on how the use of such instruments affects the traditional objectives of monetary
policy, that is, output and inflation.
Inthispaper,weexploretheeffectsofmacroprudentialmeasuresonoutputandinflation
56
for a large cross-country panel of countries over more than two decades. Building on a
new dataset, we use a narrative approach in order to address identification challenges. Our
results show that macroprudential measures, specifically changes in the maximum loan-to-
value (LTV) ratio, do have modest and imprecisely estimated spillover effects on output and
10
inflation. In particular, we find that a percentage point reduction in the maximum LTV
11
ratio lowers output by about . % after four years. However, this effect is rather imprecisely
estimated. The near-term impact on the price level is in most specifications even smaller
and close to zero. The effect is more pronounced in emerging market economies (EMEs),
while the path of output is almost unaffected by LTV limit changes in the set of advanced
economies (AEs). In a back-of-the-envelope calculation, we compare the magnitude of this
2017
effect to estimates of GDP responses to monetary policy in Jorda` et al. ( ), which are
also based on a broad sample of countries. We find that the two-year response of GDP to a
10 26
percentage point reduction in the maximum LTV ratio can be compared to that of a
basis points increase in interest rates.
Importantly we also test for potential asymmetries and find that the output effect is
mainly driven by the negative effects of tightenings in maximum LTV ratios, and not by
higher output generated through loosening actions. We also assess the treatment effects of
LTV limit tightenings on financial variables using inverse propensity weighting and find
that credit and house prices fall after a tightening. Overall, these results imply that central
banks might be able to use macroprudential policies to dampen the financial cycle without
risking major interference with their core monetary policy objectives.
Macroprudential measures are not randomly assigned. In the ideal environment to
measure the effects of changes in LTV limits on output and inflation, the following three
1

conditions are satisfied: (i) LTV policy actions are exogenous with respect to current and
lagged real variables; (ii) such actions are uncorrelated with other shocks (e.g., monetary
policyacting atthesame time); and (iii)theyareunexpected. While theunsystematicnature
of macroprudential policies means they are typically unexpected, we clearly need to worry
about the exogeneity of the policy action. To address the exogeneity condition, we rely in
this paper on a novel hand-collected dataset detailing the intentions or stated objectives
of policy-makers when they change LTV limits. This approach is in the tradition of the
1963
narrative approach pioneered in Friedman and Schwartz ( ) and Romer and Romer
1989
( ). In a similar spirit to the narrative identification of monetary policy shocks, we
argue that macroprudential actions taken without reference to current or expected trends
in real output and inflation can be seen as exogenous with respect to price and output
stabilisation objectives of monetary policy. This new narrative measure therefore allows us
to establish the causal effects of macroprudential actions on economic activity and inflation.
Using a battery of tests, we confirm that there is indeed no systematic relationship between
changes in our narrative measure and real economic variables. To address the second
condition, we control for monetary policy shocks in all our specifications. To trace the
dynamic propagation of such exogenous policy interventions, we rely on local projections
2005
(Jorda` ( )).
Our identification approach requires detailed reading and understanding of the under-
lying motivations for macroprudential measures and the information set of policy-makers.
To keep the required information manageable, we focused on one specific tool that is
frequently used to tackle boom-bust cycles in credit and housing markets, namely, changes
in maximum LTV ratios. We compiled a comprehensive new dataset consisting of quarterly
56
observations of LTV actions in economies, building on the database developed by Shim
2013 92
et al. ( ). Our quarterly dataset contains changes in maximum LTV ratios and loan
prohibitions.
Almost all papers in the literature on measuring the effectiveness of macroprudential
actions employ dummy variables to measure macroprudential policies. Such variables
however do not capture the intensity of policy actions of the same type. For instance, a
10
decrease in the maximum LTV ratio by percentage points and a decrease in the ratio by
20
percentage points are treated equally. We use instead a numerical variable quantifying
the quarterly changes in the maximum LTV ratio. To our knowledge, this paper is the first
that constructs an intensity-adjusted LTV change variable, which considers not only the
change in the maximum LTV ratio in percentage points, but also accounts for the scope
of loans to which such a change is applied. This allows us to estimate the effect of a one
percentage point change in LTV limits as described above. We also assess the differences
2