NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FRICTIONAL INTERMEDIATION IN OVER-THE-COUNTER MARKETS
Julien Hugonnier
Benjamin Lester
Pierre-Olivier Weill
Working Paper 24956
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24956
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2018
This paper merges and extends three earlier working papers of ours, Hugonnier (2012),
Lester and Weill (2013), and Hugonnier, Lester, and Weill (2014). The present version is
dated August 13, 2018. We thank, for fruitful discussions and suggestions, Gadi Barlevy,
Julien Cujean, Jaksa Cvitanic, Darrell Duffie, Rudi Fahlenbrach, Mahyar Kargar, Shuo Liu,
Semyon Malamud, Thomas Mariotti, Artem Neklyudov, Ezra Oberfield, Remy Praz,
Guillaume Rocheteau, Mengbo Zhang, and seminar participants at the 2012 Gerzensee
workshop on Search and Matching in Financial Markets, the 2012 Bachelier workshop, the
2013 AFFI Congress, EPFL, the University of Lausanne, the Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia, the 2014 SaM Conference in Edinburgh, the 2014 conference on Recent
Advances in OTC Market Research in Paris, Royal Holloway, UCL, CREST, the 2014
KW25 Anniversary conference, the 2014 Summer Workshop on Money, Banking,
Payments and Finance at the Chicago Fed, the Fall 2014 SaM Conference in
Philadelphia, the Wharton macro lunch seminar, the University of Chicago, Yale University,
Carnegie Mellon University, Cornell University, the Desautels Faculty of Management at McGill
University, the McCombs School of Business at UT Austin, the Fall 2014 meeting of the Finance
Theory Group, UC Irvine, the Kellogg School of Management, UNC Kenan-Flagler Business
School, the 2015 Trading and post-trading conference at the Toulouse School of Economics, the
2016 SED Meeting in Toulouse, UC Riverside, UC Davis, Stanford University, Erasmus
University, University of Lugano, and EDHEC. The views expressed here are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia or the
Federal Reserve System. This project was started when Pierre-Olivier Weill was a visiting
professor at the Paris School of Economics, whose hospitality is gratefully acknowledged.
Financial support from the Swiss Finance Institute is gratefully acknowledged by Julien
Hugonnier. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Julien Hugonnier, Benjamin Lester, and Pierre-Olivier Weill. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Frictional Intermediation in Over-the-counter Markets
Julien Hugonnier, Benjamin Lester, and Pierre-Olivier Weill
NBER Working Paper No. 24956
August 2018
JEL No. G11,G12,G21
ABSTRACT
We extend Duffie, Garleanu, and Pedersen’s (2005) search-theoretic model of over-the-counter
asset markets, allowing for a decentralized inter-dealer market with arbitrary heterogeneity in
dealers’ valuations or inventory costs. We develop a solution technique that makes the model
fully tractable and allows us to derive, in closed form, theoretical formulas for key statistics
analyzed in empirical studies of the intermediation process in OTC market. A calibration to the
market for municipal securities reveals that the model can generate trading patterns and prices
that are quantitatively consistent with the data. We use the calibrated model to compare the gains
from trade that are realized in this frictional market with those from a hypothetical, frictionless
environment, and to distinguish between the quantitative implications of various types of
heterogeneity across dealers.
Julien Hugonnier Pierre-Olivier Weill
Ecole Polytechnnique Fédérale de Lausanne Department of Economics
Quartier UNIL Dorigny Extranef #212 University of California, Los Angeles
1015 Lausanne Switzerland Bunche Hall 8283
and Swiss Finance Institute Los Angeles, CA 90095
Julien.Hugonnier@epfl.ch and NBER
poweill@econ.ucla.edu
Benjamin Lester
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
10 Independence Mall
Philadelphia, PA 19106
Benjamin.Lester@phil.frb.org

1 Introduction
Recent empirical studies have uncovered detailed stylized facts about the intermediation
process in over-the-counter (OTC) markets.1 Notably, assets tend to be reallocated from
onecustomertoanotherthroughasequenceorchainofdealers,anddealersareheteroge-
neous with respect to their typical positions in these chains, the frequency and direction
withwhichtheytrade,andthepricesatwhichtheytransact. Moreover,thedetailsofthis
intermediation process—including the number and types of dealers that are involved
in chains—are related to important market outcomes, such as bid-ask spreads, trading
volume, and other measures of market quality or liquidity.2 These observations pose a
clear challenge to benchmark search-theoretic models of OTC markets, such as Duffie,
Gaˆrleanu, and Pedersen (2005) and Lagos and Rocheteau (2009), in which dealers are
homogenousandtheinter-dealermarketisfrictionless.
In this paper, we develop a search-theoretic framework that is capable of confronting
these facts, and yet tractable enough to provide clear insights into the underlying eco-
nomicforces,andintotheaggregateimplicationsforprices,allocation,andefficiency. As
in Duffie et al. (2005), we assume that there is a measure of customers who periodically
experience shocks that change their flow valuation for an asset, and that these customers
must search for a dealer with whom to trade. Our first key innovation is to model the
dealer sector as a decentralized market, where dealers periodically meet other dealers
who may be willing and able to trade. Our second key innovation is to allow for an
arbitrary, continuous distribution of dealers’ flow valuations (or, equivalently, inventory
costs). Taken together, these assumptions generate intermediation chains of stochastic
lengths and imply that, as in the data, dealers will differ with respect to their typical
position within a chain, the frequency and direction with which they trade, and their
contributiontotradingvolume.
1Examples of assets that trade in OTC markets include corporate and municipal bonds, asset-backed
securities, foreign exchange swaps, and fed funds, to name a few. OTC markets were traditionally
opaquebecausetradesareconductedviaprivate,bilateralnegotiations. Inrecentyears,severalregulatory
initiativesaimedatpromotingtransparencyincertainprominentOTCmarketshaveproducedhighquality,
transaction-level data. Examples include the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board (MSRB) in the
municipal securities market, and the Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine (TRACE) in the markets
forcorporatebondsandsecuritizedassets.
2See, for example, Li and Schu¨rhoff (2014), Hollifield, Neklyudov, and Spatt (2014), and Di Maggio,
Kermani,andSong(2017),amongothers.
1

While these innovations clearly generate a richer model, they also introduce some
significant technical hurdles, as the reservation values of customers and dealers solve a
system of dynamic programming equations for which the relevant state variable is an
infinite-dimensional object: the joint distributions of flow valuations and asset holdings
across the populations of customers and dealers. However, despite this greater com-
plexity, we are able to establish key properties of equilibrium trading patterns, which
allows for a parsimonious characterization of the equilibrium distributions. As a result,
themodelremainsfullytractable,whichoffersthreedistinctadvantages.
First,wecanreducethecharacterizationofequilibriumtoafixed-pointproblemovera
two-dimensionalendogenousvariable,whichcanbeusedtoderiveotherequilibriumob-
jects in closed-form. This allows us to establish existence of an equilibrium, and provide
sufficient conditions for uniqueness. We also derive necessary and sufficient conditions
fordealerstoactivelyintermediatetradesbetweencustomers. Theseintuitiveconditions
identify the role of preferences, meeting rates, and bargaining powers in explaining the
size of the dealer sector and, more generally, why the presence of intermediaries varies
acrossmarkets.
Second, we explicitly derive and analyze a number of model-implied statistics that
havedirectcounterpartsintheempiricalliteraturethatstudiestheintermediationprocess
in OTC markets. These derivations include the average time-to-trade for customers and
(alltypesof)dealers;thedistributionoverthelengthofintermediationchains;thevolume
of trade generated by customer-dealer and dealer-dealer trades; the concentration of
tradingvolumeacrossdealers;andtherelationshipbetweenintermediationchainlength
andthebid-askspreador“markup.” Usingthesederivations,wearguethatthemodelis
qualitativelyconsistentwithanumberofstylizedfacts.
Third,exploitingourclosed-formsolutions,wecalibratethemodelinasimple,trans-
parent fashion. We focus on the market for municipal securities because it shares many
fundamental features with our model, and the available micro-data offers a detailed
description of the prevailing intermediation process. Our calibration exactly matches
key targets in the data—including turnover, the average inventory duration of dealers,
theaveragelengthofintermediationchains,andtheaverageliquidityyieldspread—and
revealstherelativeimportanceofthearrivalratesofpreferencesshocks,tradingopportu-
nitiesbetweencustomersanddealers,andtradingopportunitieswithinthedealersector.
Italsogeneratespredictionsthatarequiteclosetoseveralnon-targetedmoments.
2