NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MEASURING BIAS IN CONSUMER LENDING
Will Dobbie
Andres Liberman
Daniel Paravisini
Vikram Pathania
Working Paper 24953
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24953
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2018
We are extremely grateful to the Lender for providing the data used in this analysis. We also
thank Leah Boustan, Hank Farber, Alex Mas, Crystal Yang, and numerous seminar participants
for helpful comments and suggestions. Emily Battaglia, Nicole Gandre, Jared Grogan, Bailey
Palmer, and James Reeves provided excellent research assistance. All errors and omissions are
ours alone. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Will Dobbie, Andres Liberman, Daniel Paravisini, and Vikram Pathania. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Measuring Bias in Consumer Lending
Will Dobbie, Andres Liberman, Daniel Paravisini, and Vikram Pathania
NBER Working Paper No. 24953
August 2018
JEL No. G41,J15,J16
ABSTRACT
This paper tests for bias in consumer lending decisions using administrative data from a high-cost
lender in the United Kingdom. We motivate our analysis using a simple model of bias in lending,
which predicts that profits should be identical for loan applicants from different groups at the
margin if loan examiners are unbiased. We identify the profitability of marginal loan applicants
by exploiting variation from the quasi-random assignment of loan examiners. We find significant
bias against both immigrant and older loan applicants when using the firm's preferred measure of
long-run profits. In contrast, there is no evidence of bias when using a short-run measure used to
evaluate examiner performance, suggesting that the bias in our setting is due to the misalignment
of firm and examiner incentives. We conclude by showing that a decision rule based on machine
learning predictions of long-run profitability can simultaneously increase profits and eliminate
bias.
Will Dobbie Daniel Paravisini
Industrial Relations Section Department of Finance
Louis A. Simpson International Bldg. London School of Economics
Princeton University Houghton Street
Princeton, NJ 08544-2098 London WC2A 2AE
and NBER d.paravisini@lse.ac.uk
wdobbie@princeton.edu
Vikram Pathania
Andres Liberman Department of Economics
New York University Stern School of Business University of Sussex Business School
KMC 9-53 Jubilee 270, University of Sussex
44 West Fourth Street Falmer, Brighton, BN1 9SL
New York, NY United Kingdom
10012 V.Pathania@sussex.ac.uk
aliberma@stern.nyu.edu

I. Introduction
There are large disparities in the availability and cost of credit within many developed countries. In
theUnitedStates, forexample, blackspayhigherinterestratesandaremorelikelytoberejectedfor
a mortgage compared to observably similar whites, even after accounting for observable differences
in credit history and earnings (e.g., Charles, and Hurst 2002, Bayer, Ferreira, and Ross 2017).
There are also large disparities in credit usage and interest rates by ethnicity and gender within
many European countries that cannot be explained by observable differences in creditworthiness
(e.g., Alesina, Lotti, and Mistrulli 2013, Deku, Kara, and Molyneux 2016).
These disparities have fueled concerns that lenders may be biased against minorities and women
due to prejudice or inaccurate stereotyping, which, in turn, has provided a rationale for a range of
policiesaimedatpreventingdiscriminatorylendingpracticessuchastheHomeMortgageDisclosure
Act in the United States and portions of the Equality Act of 2010 in the United Kingdom. Yet, the
observed disparities in credit availability and pricing could also be driven by omitted variable bias
or statistical discrimination on the part of lenders. For example, lenders may use variables that are
not observed by the econometrician that are correlated with both creditworthiness and ethnicity or
gender when making lending decisions, such as an applicant’s expected future income, leading to
omitted variable bias. Lenders may also be using observable group traits such as ethnicity orgender
to form accurate beliefs about the unobservable characteristics of different applicants, commonly
known as statistical discrimination (e.g., Phelps 1972, Arrow 1973).1
To distinguish between bias and these alternative explanations, Becker (1957, 1993) proposed
an “outcome test” that compares the success or failure of decisions across groups at the margin. In
the context of consumer lending, the outcome test is based on the idea that long-run profits to the
lender should be identical for marginal applicants from all groups if loan examiners are unbiased
1In both the United States and the United Kingdom, it is illegal for lenders to discriminate against minorities
or women, regardless of whether that discrimination is driven by bias or statistical discrimination. Lenders are,
however, allowed to use a wide range of variables that may not be observed by the econometrician when making
lendingdecisions,solongasthesevariableshavealegitimatebusinesspurposeanddonothaveadisparateimpacton
aprotectedclass. Inpractice, however, statisticaldiscriminationandomittedvariablebiasmaybeindistinguishable
from each other unless there is direct evidence that lenders used ethnicity or gender to make lending decisions. The
policy implications of bias and statistical discrimination are also very different. For example, bias stemming from
prejudice or inaccurate stereotyping may be best addressed by policies that increase competition or encourage the
employment of minority or female loan examiners (e.g., Becker 1957). In contrast, statistical discrimination is likely
bestaddressedthroughtheenforcementofexistinglawssuchastheEqualCreditOpportunityActortheFairHousing
Act in the United States or the Equality Act in the United Kingdom.
1

and the disparities across groups are solely due to omitted variables and statistical discrimination.
In contrast, marginal applicants from a targeted group (e.g., minorities) will yield higher profits
to the lender than marginal applicants from the non-targeted group (e.g., non-minorities) if loan
examiners are biased against the targeted group and these disparities cannot be fully explained by
omitted variables and statistical discrimination.
Estimating the profitability of marginal applicants and implementing the outcome test has been
complicated by three important issues. First, researchers rarely observe long-run profits, and inter-
mediate outcomes such as loan default may not provide an accurate measure of long-term profits
(e.g., Han 2004, Agarwal et al. 2015). Second, characteristics observable to the lender but not
the econometrician may be correlated with loan decisions, resulting in omitted variable bias when
estimating the profitability of marginal applicants from each group. Finally, and most importantly,
standard OLS estimates recover the profitability of the average applicant from each group, not the
marginal applicant as required by the outcome test (e.g., Ayres 2002). As a result, comparisons
based on OLS estimates will not recover the true level of bias in consumer lending decisions unless
oneiswillingtoassumethatthereisanidenticaldistributionofpotentialprofitabilityacrossgroups.
In this paper, we implement the Becker outcome test using detailed administrative data on loan
outcomes from a high-cost lender in the United Kingdom (hereafter, “the Lender”). This setting
offers an ideal laboratory to test for bias in consumer credit for at least three reasons. First, we
observedetaileddataoncashflowstoandfromtheLenderthatallowustoconstructindividual-level
measures of profitability. Second, the Lender’s loan examiners must make on-the-spot judgments
withonlythestandardcreditinformationandlimitedinteractionwithloanapplicants, makingtheir
decisions particularly prone to the kind of inaccurate stereotypes or categorical heuristics that can
lead to bias. Finally, as in most credit markets, the Lender’s loan examiners are evaluated using
a measure based on short-run default, not long-run profits, creating exactly the kind of agency
problems that can unintentionally lead examiners to discriminate against groups where short- and
long-run outcomes systematically diverge.
We identify the differences in profitability at the margin required for the Becker outcome test
using variation in the approval tendencies of quasi-randomly assigned loan examiners. The Lender
usesablindrotationsystemtoassignfirst-timeloanapplicantstoexaminersofthesamenationality,
effectively randomizing new applicants to examiners within each branch and nationality. Using the
2