NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTRAHOUSEHOLD CONSUMPTION ALLOCATION AND DEMAND FOR AGENCY:
A TRIPLE EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION
Uzma Afzal
Giovanna D'Adda
Marcel Fafchamps
Farah Said
Working Paper 24977
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24977
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2018
We thank Doug Bernheim, Muriel Niederle, Glenn Harrison, John Quiggin, Emily Breza,
Giacomo De Giorgi, Pedro Vicente, Catia Batista, James Berry, Silvia Prina, and Erlend Berg for
their useful comments. We also benefitted from comments from participants to the CIRPEE
Workshop on Social Identity and Social Interactions in Economics (Quebec City, April 2016),
and to the WZB "Field Days" Conference (Berlin, June 2016), as well as from seminar
participants at Stanford University, Georgia State University, the University of Oregon, and Nova
University in Lisbon. Funding for this study was provided by the International Growth Centre
(IGC) and by the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC). The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24977.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Uzma Afzal, Giovanna D'Adda, Marcel Fafchamps, and Farah Said. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Intrahousehold Consumption Allocation and Demand for Agency: A Triple Experimental
Investigation
Uzma Afzal, Giovanna D'Adda, Marcel Fafchamps, and Farah Said
NBER Working Paper No. 24977
August 2018
JEL No. D13,D91,O12
ABSTRACT
We conduct two lab experiments and one field experiment to investigate demand for consumption
agency in married couples. The evidence we uncover is consistent across all three experiments.
Subjects are often no better at guessing their spouse's preferences than those of a stranger, and
many subjects disregard what they believe or know about others' preferences when assigning
them a consumption bundle. This confers instrumental value to individual executive agency
within the household. We indeed find significant evidence of demand for agency in all three
experiments, and this demand varies with the cost and anticipated instrumental benefit of agency.
But subjects often make choices incompatible with pure instrumental motives – e.g., paying for
agency even when they know their partner assigned them their preferred choice. We also find
female subjects to be quite willing to exert agency even though, based on survey responses, they
have little executive agency within their household. We interpret this as suggestive of pent-up
demand for agency, and indeed we find that female demand for agency falls as a result of an
empowerment intervention.
Uzma Afzal Marcel Fafchamps
Lahore School of Economics Freeman Spogli Institute
Lahore Stanford University
Pakistan 616 Serra Street
uzmaafzal1@gmail.com Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
Giovanna D'Adda fafchamp@stanford.edu
Department of Economics, Management
and Quantitative Methods (DEMM) Farah Said
University of Milan Lahore School of Economics
Via Conservatorio 7 Lahore
20122 Milan Pakistan
Italy farahz3@gmail.com
giovanna.dadda@unimi.it

1 Introduction
Much of the economic literature on intrahousehold consumption takes allocative efficiency
between spouses as starting point. Without information on individual preferences over
consumption bundles, however, it is difficult to test consumption efficiency directly. The
collective model of the household (e.g., Chiappori 1997, Browning and Chiappori 1998)
circumvents this difficulty by testing consumption efficiency using cross-equation restric-
tions on demand functions. The test ultimately relies on the idea that efficiency can be
achieved by giving each spouse an individual budget they can spend as they like (e.g.,
Browning et al. 1994, 2010, 2013, 2014). Bargaining models of the household (e.g., McEl-
roy and Horney 1981, Lundberg and Polak 1996) put more structure on the way by which
a particular allocation of consumption is reached. By doing so they derive predictions
about what extraneous factors determine the allocation of consumption between house-
hold members.1 They assume bargaining to be efficient, which ultimately requires that
spouses are fully informed about each other’s preferences, and that agreements between
them are costlessly enforced.
Inpractice, thewaybywhichhouseholdsfunction departs fromtheorganizationstruc-
ture that inspires both types of models: financial and real assets often are owned jointly,
not individually; and consumption decisions are typically taken in a sequential and de-
centralized manner that opens the door to coordination issues. For instance, individuals
encounter opportunities to make a consumption choice for another household member
withoutnecessarilyknowingtheirpreferences. Thismayariseeitherbecausetheconsump-
tion good being offered is unfamiliar, the decision maker does not recall the preferences
of others, or these preferences have changed. Similar opportunities for miscoordination
occur within the household itself, e.g., someone prepares a family meal without knowing
whether it will be appreciated or not. It is also conceivable that the decision maker knows
the preferences of others but deliberately chooses to ignore them, either due to a pater-
nalistic motive (e.g., ‘this food is not good for you’), or out of disregards for others or a
desire to impose one’s will on them.
When other members of the household cannot be relied on to make decisions that
maximize collective welfare, individual members may seek to gain agency over household
consumption choices that affect them (e.g., Glennerster et al. 2018). To this effect, they
may secure control over individual sources of income and saving (e.g., Anderson and Ba-
land 2002), even if doing so is inefficent and involves dissimulation (e.g., Jakiela and Ozier
2015, Kebede et al. 2016). Alternatively, they may seek control over consumption pur-
chases and household production activities. The latter strategies are particular relevant
in less developed economies where households count many members engaged in a large
range of home production activities (e.g., Fafchamps and Quisumbing 2008), in addition
to having multiple sources of monetary income. Control over household decisions may
take various forms, such as executive agency – making a decision alone – and consultative
agency – being consulted on decisions made by others.
1E.g., distribution of assets upon divorce, control over household assets and finances, income earning
opportunities.
2

Unfortunately there is little or no literature investigating whether household members
know each other’s preferences, and whether they respect these preferences when making
consumption choices for others. There is also little evidence regarding the demand for
executive agency over own consumption within and outside the household. Others not
respecting your preferences creates an instrumental motive for wanting agency. People
mayalsovalueagencyforitsownsake, independentlyfrominstrumentalmotivations. One
possibility, discussed in the empowerment literature, is that individuals – e.g., women –
have a pent-up demand for agency originating in their repressed desire to make their own
choices.
The purpose of this paper is to offer new experimental evidence on these issues. We
test three main hypotheses: (1) household members know each other’s preferences over
individual consumption goods; (2) household members respect the preferences of others
when they are informed about them; and (3) individuals have a demand for agency, that
is: are they willing to pay for the certainty of getting the consumption bundle of their
choice; and does this demand increase with the risk of not getting one’s choice, i.e., is
demand for agency serving an instrumental motive.
We design an original experiment to test these hypotheses and we implement it in
three different ways with Pakistani couples who have been married for some time. We
find evidence against hypotheses 1 and 2: household members often do not know the pref-
erences of their spouse or other household members; and even when they are informed
about these preferences, they often choose to ignore them. We do find evidence of will-
ingness to pay for agency, but demand for agency responds only weakly to the risk of
not getting one’s preferred consumption bundle. This suggests that demand for agency is
not solely driven by an instrumental motive: some subjects seem to value agency for its
own sake. The fact that informed subjects often make inefficient consumption choices for
others similarly signals a demand for power, that is, a desire to make choices for others.
This paper is related to the existing literature in multiple ways. In addition to the
literature already mentioned, a number of papers have experimentally examined willing-
ness to pay for agency in games between spouses (e.g., Iversen et al. 2011, Jakiela and
Ozier 2015, Mani 2011). In these experiments, agency has instrumental benefits and these
studies do not focus on demand from pure agency. A related literature looks at preference
for agency in decision-making processes outside of the household. Results suggests that
individuals value their decision power beyond its instrumental value (Gu¨th and Weck-
Hannemann 1997, Fehr et al. 2013, Bartling et al. 2014, Owens et al. 2014). Individuals
have also been shown to prefer fair decision processes, over and above the fairness of the
allocation (Bolton et al. 2005).2 Our study is the first, to the best of our knowledge, to
experimentally look at preference for agency within and across households.
A large related literature looks at the efficiency of household decisions. Many papers,
relying on natural, field, and laboratory experiments, show that income pooling fails, a
situation that implies inefficient consumption choices (Duflo and Udry 2004, Kebede et
2More generally, a large literature on incentives and sanctions demonstrate the presence of control
aversion among some individuals (for an example, see Falk and Kosfeld, 2006).
3