NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TARGET SETTING AND ALLOCATIVE INEFFICIENCY IN LENDING:
EVIDENCE FROM TWO CHINESE BANKS
Yiming Cao
Raymond Fisman
Hui Lin
Yongxiang Wang
Working Paper 24961
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24961
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2018
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Yiming Cao, Raymond Fisman, Hui Lin, and Yongxiang Wang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Target setting and Allocative Inefficiency in Lending: Evidence from Two Chinese Banks
Yiming Cao, Raymond Fisman, Hui Lin, and Yongxiang Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 24961
August 2018
JEL No. G21,M52
ABSTRACT
We study the consequences of month-end lending incentives for Chinese bank managers. Using
data from two banks, one state-owned and the other partially privatized, we show a clear increase
in lending in the final days of each month, a result of both more loan issuance and higher value
per loan. We estimate that daily end-of-month lending is 95 percent higher in the last 5 days of
each month as a result of loan targets, with only a small amount plausibly attributable to shifting
loans forward from the following month. End-of-month loans are 2.1 percentage points (more
than 16 percent) more likely to be classified as bad in the years following issuance; a back-of-the-
envelope calculation suggests that the incremental loans made in order to hit targets are 26
percent more likely to eventually turn bad. Our work highlights the distortionary effects of target-
setting on capital allocation, in a context in which such concerns have risen to particular
prominence in recent years.
Yiming Cao Hui Lin
Boston University School of Business , Nanjing University
Department of Economics 22 Hankou Road
270 Bay State Road Nanjing
Boston, MA 02215 China
yiming@bu.edu linhui@nju.edu.cn
Raymond Fisman Yongxiang Wang
Department of Economics Marshall School of Business
Boston University University of Southern California
270 Bay State Road, 304A Los Angeles, CA 90089
Boston, MA 02215 Yongxiang.Wang@marshall.usc.edu
and NBER
rfisman@bu.edu

1 Introduction
Many organizations provide performance targets to motivate workers and managers. This
leads to a classic tradeoff – performance targets yield more effort, but possibly at the expense
of distortions to the type of effort. One commonly described concern involves intertemporal
shifts in the quality and quantity of effort in order to hit period-end targets.
While prior work has shown how target-setting by managers can distort employee effort
or productivity across time, there is no obvious notion of efficiency that one may relate to the
resultant distortion: Oyer (1998), for example, shows how year-end targets lead to differences
over the calendar cycle in the booking of sales revenues, but this does not necessarily imply
efficiency and/or welfare costs.
In this paper, we study the loan portfolios of two large Chinese banks during the years
1997 - 2010. At the time, Chinese banks were reported to use month- and quarter-end loan
quotas to motivate branch mangers, making it an apt setting to explore the effects of target-
setting incentives on managerial decisions. Further, our focus on banking yields a natural
measure of the efficiency consequences of targeting, since we may measure (ex post) loan
quality as well as quantity.
Our results are as follows: using two distinct data sets – one aggregated to the city
level and the other at the level of the individual loan – we show that lending increases (via
both more loans and larger loan sizes) as the final day of the month approaches, consistent
with branch managers’ need to hit month-end targets. This pattern is distinct from any
day-of-week or month-of-year effects, and is invariant to a wide range of robustness tests,
including controls for national holidays, as well as the inclusion of branch × month fixed
effects. Consistent with Oyer (1998), we also find a lower rate of lending at the beginning of
each month, though the shortfall does not come close to offsetting the end-of-period increase.
As one easily interpretable measure of the month-end effect, the probability that a branch
makes a loan in the last 5 days of the month is 65 percent higher than the loan probability
for a date in the middle of the month, while the loan probability in the first 5 days of the
month is about 25 percent lower than mid-month. We also find that loans issued in the 5
days of the month are, on average, 15 percent larger than those issued mid-month, leading
to an overall end-of-month lending increase of about 95 percent.
This pattern suggests that branch managers may not simply be shifting loans forward
in time but rather lowering end-of-month lending standards to meet their targets. We verify
that this is the case using our loan-level data, which includes information on loan quality, to
show that a month-end loan is more than 2.1 percentage points (16 percent) more likely to
be classified eventually as a bad loan.
1

Overall, our results indicate that the loan quantity targets set by the Chinese banks we
study lead to distortions in the credit market. We present a back-of-the-envelope calculation
which suggests that the effect size is large, with month-end targets resulting in the range
of 4.5 billion dollars’ (RMB 28 billion) worth of additional loan defaults by Chinese banks
annually.
Most directly, our paper builds on the small body of research which studies empirically
the effects of target setting in organizations. In particular, our work is related to Oyer (1998),
which looks at the consequences of sales targets on the timing of revenues (and also contract
prices) for U.S. manufacturing firms. Our work is also related to the recent work of Liebman
and Mahoney (2017) on year-end budget effects in U.S. government procurement. In a rather
distinct setting, their findings parallel our own — they find that a much larger fraction of
I.T. contracts are awarded at the end of the fiscal year, and that contracts awarded at
year’s end perform much more poorly. Our paper — which we see as complementary to
these earlier efforts — has a number of distinctive elements. In contrast to Oyer (1998),
we are better equipped to explore the efficiency consequences of period-end targeting. The
work of Liebman and Mahoney (2017) does not examine targeting as an incentive tool, but
rather the distortions resulting from “use-it-or-lose-it” budgeting. Further, their analysis is
for public sector budgeting, whereas we examine the behavioral responses of managers in a
pair of banks, one of which is partially privatized, for which profit motives should, at least
in theory, lead to efficiency-enhancing incentives.1
More broadly, our work connects to the vast literature on the distortionary effects of
performance incentives which spans a range of social scientific disciplines. Within economics,
this work is grounded in the foundational theoretical contributions of, for example, Baker
(1992), H¨olmstrom (1979), and Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991), while empirical applications
have considered an array of settings in a range of organizational types. The results have
been mixed, with some papers finding that target-setting improves performance without
discernable side-effects on other dimensions of performance (e.g., Propper et al. (2010)),
while others find that incentives lead to distortions in behavior and/or reporting of results
(e.g., Gulati et al. (2016)).
In the next section, we provide a simple model to capture the essentials of end-of-month
lending incentives faced by bank managers, to highlight the intuition behind our results: a
forward-looking branch manager who faces monthly quantity incentives will lower his lending
standards as month’s end approaches. We describe the setting and the two distinct data sets
1Indeed, one might argue that to the extent that public sector procurement in the U.S. is
captured by special interests, end-of-year budgeting with minimal oversight may be in the best
interests of bidders.
2