NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AN ANATOMY OF U.S. FIRMS SEEKING TRADEMARK REGISTRATION
Emin M. Dinlersoz
Nathan Goldschlag
Amanda Myers
Nikolas Zolas
Working Paper 25038
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25038
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018
Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau and the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. All
results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential data are disclosed. The authors would
like to thank Carol Corrado, Jonathan Haskel, Daniel Sichel, and Javier Miranda — the
organizers of the 2017 CRIW Conference on Measuring and Accounting for Innovation in the
21st Century, conference participants, and especially the discussant, Mark Roberts, for helpful
comments and suggestions. Veronika Penciakova provided expert research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Emin M. Dinlersoz, Nathan Goldschlag, Amanda Myers, and Nikolas Zolas. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

An Anatomy of U.S. Firms Seeking Trademark Registration
Emin M. Dinlersoz, Nathan Goldschlag, Amanda Myers, and Nikolas Zolas
NBER Working Paper No. 25038
September 2018
JEL No. D22,L10,L21,L25,M30,O34
ABSTRACT
This paper reports on the construction of a new dataset that combines data on trademark
applications and registrations from the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office with data on firms from
the U.S. Census Bureau. The resulting dataset allows tracking of various activity related to
trademark use and protection over the life-cycle of firms, such as the first application for a
trademark registration, the first use of a trademark, and the renewal, assignment, and cancellation
of trademark registrations. Facts about firm-level trademark activity are documented, including
the incidence and timing of trademark registration filings over the firm life-cycle and the
connection between firm characteristics and trademark applications. We also explore the relation
of trademark application filing to firm employment and revenue growth, and to firm innovative
activity as measured by R&D and patents.
Emin M. Dinlersoz Amanda Myers
Center for Economic Studies U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
U.S. Census Bureau 600 Dulany Street
4600 Silver Hill Road Alexandria, VA 22314
Washington, DC 20233 USA
emin.m.dinlersoz@census.gov amanda.myers@uspto.gov
Nathan Goldschlag Nikolas Zolas
U.S. Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies
Nathan.Goldschlag@census.gov U.S. Census Bureau
4600 Silver Hill Road
Washington, DC 20233
nikolas.j.zolas@census.gov

1 Introduction
Attracting consumers and retaining them as loyal customers is critical for a firm’s survival and
growth. Among the many ways of building and protecting a loyal customer base, trademarks
are unique. By protecting a firm’s intangible assets, trademarks can reduce consumer search
and switching costs, lower the expense of introducing and marketing new products, and generate
brand awareness and loyalty. While trademarks generally facilitate establishing and enhancing
goodwill, they may not always be directly linked to a particular attribute of the firm. Good-
will can be generated through investment in consistent quality, exceptional customer service, a
distinctive portfolio of products, or a unique service or innovation that makes a firm stand out.
The fact that not all firms file to register trademarks, despite the relatively low cost of doing so,
suggests that certain firms stand to benefit more from trademark registration than others.1
Theory contends that firms use trademarks to appropriate the returns from investments in
goodwill. Firmsarethereforemorelikelytoselectintotrademarkregistrationwhenthereturnsto
reputation, product quality, and scale and scope expansion are high.2 Likewise, when innovative
activity complements goodwill, by enhancing product or service quality and inducing customer
loyalty, firms have more motivation to protect accumulated and anticipated goodwill with a
trademark registration. The benefits derived from using a trademark can, in turn, affect firm
performanceandproductivity. Whenfirmssuccessfullyleveragetrademarkstodifferentiategoods
or services and insulate themselves from copying and competition by registering trademarks,
they can achieve faster growth. At the same time, the price elasticity of demand for firms with
trademarks can be lower, leading to higher markups. Maintaining higher markups, in turn,
may intensify firms’ advertising and marketing activities or foster further investment in quality
enhancementandprocessorproductinnovation. Consequently,protectionoftrademarksthrough
registration can have long-term consequences for a firm’s competitive position in the market as
well as the industry concentration.
While theory suggests trademarks can play a critical role in firm dynamics and innovation,
empirical research regarding which firms in the United States use trademarks and the benefits
they thereby derive is relatively sparse, especially when compared to other intellectual property
such as patenting. The small but growing body of empirical literature on trademarks relies
1One rationale for why not all firms file to register trademarks is provided by Landes and Posner (1988)
pp.271-272: If trademarks signal consistent quality, quality may be costly to maintain, and can be verified by
consumers after purchase. Hence, only the firms that can afford to provide such consistent quality will tend to
seek trademark registration.
2See,e.g.,LandesandPosner(1987,1988)andEconomides(1988)fortheoreticalargumentsontheconnection
between trademarks and consumer behavior. For recent models of firm dynamics under costly and gradual
customer acquisition, see Dinlersoz and Yorukoglu (2012) and Gourio and Rudanko (2014).
1

primarily on application and registration data from other countries, particularly the United
Kingdom, Australia, and France. Such firm-level studies generally find trademark filing and/or
registration to be correlated with product differentiation, marketing, and innovation, though
resultsvarybyindustry. Thepriorliteraturealsofindsapositiverelationshipbetweentrademark
registration and firm market value, productivity, and survival, indicating that the private value
of trademarks to firm is positive, though there is yet no clear conclusion regarding their social
value. Still, most firm-level research to date relies on datasets of large, publicly-traded firms,
which casts doubt on the applicability of results to the population of firms that seek trademark
registration.
Onemajorobstacletoempirical analysisof trademarkusebyfirmsintheUnitedStatesisthe
lack of comprehensive data on firm-level trademark activity. Recently, however, there has been
substantial progress on this front. The United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO)
has made available trademark data that covers nearly 7 million trademark applications for the
period 1870-2015. The USPTOTrademarkCase Files Dataset (TCFD) is a remarkable synthesis
of various trademark activity by firms.3 It contains detailed information on applications for
trademark registration, as well as the commercial use, renewal, assignment, and cancellation of
registeredtrademarks. ItidentifiesthedatesanapplicationisfiledwiththeUSPTOandproceeds
to registration, and in what product categories or classes of goods and services are covered by a
registration. However, theTCFDhaslittletocontributeregardingthecharacteristicsofthefirms
that seek trademark registration and when exactly in their life-cycle they do so. It is, therefore,
not possible to uncover how trademark filing is related to firm characteristics and dynamics with
the TCFD alone.
This paper reports on the construction of a new dataset that combines the TCFD with firm-
level micro data at the U.S. Census Bureau. The dataset fills a void in the literature by linking
trademark activity with firm characteristics, performance, and dynamics in the United States.
It provides information on the incidence and timing of trademark filing and registration over
the life-cycle of a firm and, thus, opens several research possibilities. The trademark-firm linked
data can be used to explore not only what kind of firms seek to register trademarks, but also
when they do so, and how trademark filing is related to firm dynamics, such as entry, survival,
employment and revenue growth, and R&D and patenting intensity. This paper provides a first
lookattheconnectionbetweentrademarkfilingandbroader measuresof firmoutcomesbasedon
the constructed data. An objective of this initial analysis is to explore some of the selection and
treatment effects associated with seeking federal trademark registration in terms of firm growth
and innovation.
3See Graham, Hancock, Marco and Myers (2016) for details on the construction and features of the USPTO
Trademark Case Files Dataset.
2