NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DIVERGING TRENDS IN NATIONAL AND LOCAL CONCENTRATION
Esteban Rossi-Hansberg
Pierre-Daniel Sarte
Nicholas Trachter
Working Paper 25066
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25066
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of
the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. We thank Eric LaRose and Sara Ho for outstanding research assistance.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25066.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, Pierre-Daniel Sarte, and Nicholas Trachter. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Diverging Trends in National and Local Concentration
Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, Pierre-Daniel Sarte, and Nicholas Trachter
NBER Working Paper No. 25066
September 2018
JEL No. E23,L11,R12
ABSTRACT
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of
the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond or the Federal Reserve System. We thank Eric LaRose
and Sara Ho for outstanding research assistance.Using U.S. NETS data, we present evidence that
the positive trend observed in national product-market concentration between 1990 and 2014
becomes a negative trend when we focus on measures of local concentration. We document
diverging trends for several geographic definitions of local markets. SIC 8 industries with
diverging trends are pervasive across sectors. In these industries, top firms have contributed to the
amplification of both trends. When a top firm opens a plant, local concentration declines and
remains lower for at least 7 years. Our findings, therefore, reconcile the increasing national role
of large firms with falling local concentration, and a likely more competitive local environment.
Esteban Rossi-Hansberg Nicholas Trachter
Princeton University Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
Department of Economics 701 E Byrd Street
289 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building Richmond, VA 23219
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021 Nicholas.Trachter@rich.frb.org
and CEPR
and also NBER
erossi@princeton.edu
Pierre-Daniel Sarte
Research Department.
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
PO Box 27622
Richmond, VA 23261
pierre.sarte@rich.frb.org

Diverging Trends in National and Local Concentration∗
Esteban Rossi-Hansberg Pierre-Daniel Sarte
Princeton University Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
Nicholas Trachter
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
September 12, 2018
Abstract
Using U.S. NETS data, we present evidence that the positive trend observed in national product-market
concentrationbetween1990and2014becomesanegative trendwhenwefocusonmeasuresoflocal concentration.
We document diverging trends for several geographic definitions of local markets. SIC 8 industries with diverging
trends are pervasive across sectors. In these industries, top firms have contributed to the amplification of both
trends. When a top firm opens a plant, local concentration declines and remains lower for at least 7 years. Our
findings,therefore,reconciletheincreasingnationalroleoflargefirmswithfallinglocalconcentration,andalikely
more competitive local environment.
1 Introduction
Most product markets are local. The reason is simply that the transportation of goods and people is costly so firms
set up production plants, distribution centers, and stores close to customers. In turn, individuals locate in areas
wheretheycanobtainthegoodstheydesire. AcoffeeshoporrestaurantinManhattandoesnotcompetewithsimilar
establishments in Seattle, and probably not even in Brooklyn. The wedge in prices created by the inconvenience
and monetary cost of buying a product far away from the desired consumption point shields companies in different
locations from direct competition. Of course the size of these costs, and therefore the geographic extent of the
market, varies by product. Markets are also product-specific. Producers of a particular product are shielded from
competition by producers of distinct but related goods and services to the degree that their consumption requires
households to move away from their ideal variety.
Much has been written recently about the increase in national market concentration observed over the last two
decades, and the role that large national firms have played in driving this trend. The evidence for the rise in
∗Rossi-Hansberg: erossi@princeton.edu. Sarte: pdgs4frbr@gmail.com. Trachter: trachter@gmail.com. Theviewsexpressedhereinare
thoseoftheauthorsanddonotnecessarilyrepresenttheviewsoftheFederalReserveBankofRichmondortheFederalReserveSystem.
We thank Eric LaRose and Sara Ho for outstanding research assistance.
1

concentration is uncontroversial; the share of the largest firms and the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index, among other
measuresofconcentration,haveincreasedconsistentlyinmostsectorssince1990.1 Anarrativehasemergedwhereby
this increase in national concentration is perceived as the cause of lower product-market competition. This fall in
competition is then viewed as the culprit of other apparent trends, such as rising markups and market power (De
Loecker and Eeckhout, 2017), the increasing profits of large firms (Barkai, 2017), declining labor market dynamism
and firm entry (Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin and Miranda, 2017), and a declining labor share (Autor, Dorn, Katz,
Patterson, and Van Reenen, 2017). All of these trends, and in particular those related to concentration, markups,
and profits, point to the notion that market power has been increasing. While the empirical robustness and validity
of some of these trends has been contested in recent work, the rise in national market concentration remains as their
main empirical foundation.2
In this short paper, we document four main facts regarding national and local product-market concentration in
theU.S.economybetween1990and2014.3 WemakeuseoftheNationalEstablishmentTimeSeries(NETS)dataset
which covers the universe of U.S. firms and their plants.4 The dataset includes sales and employment numbers for
all plants at different levels of geographical and industrial disaggregation down to the SIC 8 product code.
Our first fact is that the observed positive trend in market concentration at the national level has been accom-
panied by a corresponding negative trend in average local market concentration. We measure concentration using
the Herfindahl-Hirschman index (HHI), but our findings hold for a variety of statistics. We observe an increase in
concentration at the national level overall across the vast majority of sectors and industries, but a fall in concen-
tration when it is measured at the CBSA, County, or Zip code levels.5 The narrower the geographic definition, the
faster the decline in local concentration. This is meaningful because the relevant definition of concentration from
which to infer changes in competition is, in most sectors, local and not national.
The second fact shows that local concentration is falling across SIC 8 industries that together account for
77% of employment and 70% of sales. Furthermore, conditioning on industries where national concentration is
rising, industries where local concentration has declined account for the majority of employment overall (70% of
employment and 65% of sales) across all major sectors. The presence of these diverging trends is always large but
1A 2016 report by the Council of Economic Advisers, for instance, finds that the national revenue share of
the top 50 firms has increased across most NAICS sectors between 1997 and 2012.The report can be found at
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/page/files/20160414 cea competition issue brief.pdf. Guti´errez and Philippon
(2017) show that this increase in U.S.-wide market concentration is not uniform across all sectors and has been most pronounced in
non-manufacturingsectors. Barkai(2017),andAutor,Dorn,Katz,Patterson,andVanReenen(2017),findthatthenationalsalesshare
of top firms has also been rising since 1997 and, in fact, helps explain the decline in the labor share over the same period.
2While rising market concentration at the national level is relatively undisputed, the evidence regarding markups is more mixed. De
Loecker and Eeckhout (2017) show evidence of rising markups since the 1980s among publicly traded firms. Hall (2018) finds similarly
increasing markups at the sectoral level using KLEMS productivity data. However, Traina (2018) points out that the evidence on
markupsdependscruciallyonthemeasurementofvariablecosts. Whenvariablecostsincludemarketingandmanagementcosts,aswell
asotherindirectcostsofproduction,markupshavebeenrelativelyflatsincethemid-1980s. Similarly,KarabarbounisandNeiman(2018)
find generally flat markups over time when also accounting for selling, general, and administrative expenses. Anderson, Rebelo, and
Wong(2018)focusontheretailsectorandfindstablemarkupssince1979usingscannerdataonthepriceoftransactionsandmeasuring
marginal costs as replacement costs at the store level. Edmond, Midrigan and Xu (2018) show that when weighted by costs rather than
sales, as implied by the microfoundations they lay out, aggreate markups have increased only modestly.
3See Neumark, Zhang and Wall (2006), or Barnatchez, Crane and Decker (2017) for a thorough discussion of the advantages and
disadvantages of this data source relative to U.S. Census data.
4Throughoutthepaperweinterchangeablyusethetermsplantandestablishment. Wealsotreatfirmandenterpriseassynonymous.
5In the main text, we focus mostly on ZIP codes as our geographic definition of a local market. The appendix presents results with
other geographic units.
2