NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHAT MATTERS TO INDIVIDUAL INVESTORS? EVIDENCE FROM THE HORSE’S
MOUTH
James J. Choi
Adriana Z. Robertson
Working Paper 25019
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25019
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018, Revised February 2020
We thank Ravi Bansal, Nicholas Barberis, Sebastien Betermier, Hector Calvo Pardo, John
Campbell, Raj Chetty, Joao Cocco, Lorenzo Garlappi, Richard Evans, Vincent Glode, William
Goetzmann, Luigi Guiso, Jonathan Ingersoll, Ravi Jagannathan, Marcin Kacperczyk, Panu
Kalmi, Raymond Kan, Alina Lerman, Tobias Moskowitz, Stefan Nagel, Monika Piazzesi,
Jonathan Reuter, Thomas Rietz, Harvey Rosen, Robert Shiller, Tao Shu, Paolo Sodini, Matthew
Spiegel, Adam Szeidl, Richard Thaler, Selale Tuzel, Raman Uppal, Annette Vissing-Jørgensen,
Jessica Wachter, Stephen Wu, Amir Yaron, Jianfeng Yu, and seminar participants at the
American Finance Association Annual Meeting, Canadian Economic Association Annual
Conference, CRC Workshop on Individual Heterogeneity, Baruch, Baylor, CEPR Household
Finance Workshop, Cornell, Drexel, FIRS Conference, FSU SunTrust Beach Conference,
Helsinki Finance Summit on Investor Behavior, University of Miami, NBER Behavioral Finance
Meeting, NYU, USC, and Yale for their comments. All shortcomings in the survey and analysis
are our own. The authors have no relevant or material financial interests related to the research in
this paper. No organization had the right to review this paper prior to publication. IRB approval
was obtained from Yale University. This research was supported by a Whitebox Advisors
research grant administered through the Yale International Center for Finance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by James J. Choi and Adriana Z. Robertson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What Matters to Individual Investors? Evidence from the Horse’s Mouth
James J. Choi and Adriana Z. Robertson
NBER Working Paper No. 25019
September 2018, Revised February 2020
JEL No. D14,G11
ABSTRACT
We survey a representative sample of U.S. individuals about how well leading academic theories
describe their financial beliefs and decisions. We find substantial support for many factors
hypothesized to affect portfolio equity share, particularly background risk, investment horizon,
rare disasters, transactional factors, and fixed costs of stock market participation. Individuals tend
to believe that past mutual fund performance is a good signal of stock-picking skill, actively
managed funds do not suffer from diseconomies of scale, value stocks are safer and do not have
higher expected returns, and high-momentum stocks are riskier and do have higher expected
returns.
James J. Choi
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Avenue
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
james.choi@yale.edu
Adriana Z. Robertson
University of Toronto, Faculty of Law
78 Queen's Park
Toronto, ON, M5S 2C5
adriana.robertson@utoronto.ca
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25019

The finance literature offers no shortage of theories about investor motivations and beliefs, which
translate into choices that in aggregate determine asset prices. However, testing these theories with
observational data has been difficult. Finding empirical variation in a hypothesized factor that is
incontrovertibly uncorrelated with potentially relevant unobserved variables is often impossible.
If we instead evaluate models based primarily on their ability to match endogenous moments in
the data, we run up against the difficulty that predictions of competing models are often similar or
identical (Fama (1970), Cochrane (2017), Kozak, Nagel, and Santosh (2018)).1
In this paper, we take a different approach: we ask a nationally representative sample of
1,013 U.S. individuals in the RAND American Life Panel how well leading academic theories
describe the way they decided what fraction of their portfolio to invest in equities, their beliefs
about actively managed mutual funds, and their beliefs about the cross-section of individual stock
returns. Our questions aim to test key assumptions of leading theories about investor motivations
and beliefs more directly than the usual method of trying to infer the validity of these assumptions
by examining downstream outcomes. Because we test a wide range of theories on the same sample
using the same research design, it is easier to make apples-to-apples comparisons of different
theories. High-wealth investors constitute only a small fraction of our sample, so our results are
more informative about individual choices and beliefs than asset prices.2
We find substantial support for many of the factors that have been hypothesized to affect
portfolio equity share. Forty-eight percent of employed respondents say that the amount of time
left until their retirement is a very or extremely important factor in determining the current
percentage of their investible financial assets held in stocks, and 36% of all respondents say the
same about the amount of time left until a significant nonretirement expense. Background risks
such as health risk (47% of all respondents), labor income risk (42% of employed respondents),
and home value risk (29% of homeowners) are frequently rated as very or extremely important.
Many people say that discomfort with the market is a very or extremely important determinant of
their equity share, citing lack of trust in market participants (37% of all respondents), lack of
knowledge about how to invest (36% of all respondents), and lack of a trustworthy adviser (31%
1 Distinguishing between models that are observationally equivalent in existing data can be important because they
may have different welfare or policy implications. For example, knowing that the stock market’s expected returns
vary because of irrational cashflow forecasts instead of rational time-varying risk aversion would have profound
implications.
2 Bender et al. (2019) administer a survey similar to that in this paper on a sample of wealthy individuals.
1

of all respondents). Transactional considerations that have received scant attention in the academic
literature—needing to have enough cash on hand to pay for routine expenses (47% of all
respondents) and concern that stocks take too long to convert to cash in an emergency (29% of all
respondents)—are salient. Personal experience of living through stock market returns and personal
experience investing in the stock market are rated as very or extremely important by 27% and 26%
of respondents, respectively. Nonparticipation in the stock market is frequently driven by the fixed
costs of participation (49% of nonparticipants) and not liking to think about one’s finances (37%
of nonparticipants).
Moving to motives coming from representative-agent asset pricing models, we find
particularly strong support for rare disaster theories, with 45% of all respondents describing
concern about economic disasters as a very or extremely important factor. However, there is also
significant evidence for the importance of long-run aggregate consumption growth risk (30%),
long-run aggregate consumption growth volatility risk (26%), consumption composition risk
(29%), loss aversion (28%), internal habit (27%), and ambiguity/parameter uncertainty (27%).
Consumption commitments, which can be a microfoundation for a representative agent who has
external habit utility, garner significant support as well (36%). The stock market’s
contemporaneous return covariance with the marginal utility of money—the fundamental
consideration in many modern asset pricing and portfolio choice theories—is rated as very or
extremely important by 35% of respondents. Similar numbers describe return covariance with
contemporaneous aggregate consumption growth (30%), with contemporaneous aggregate
consumption growth volatility shocks (29%), and with their own marginal utility of consumption
(29%) as very or extremely important.
Although many factors appear to determine portfolio equity shares, the importance of each
factor is not distributed haphazardly within an individual. Among the 34 factors that were rated by
every respondent, only six principal components suffice to explain 54% of the variance in whether
they were rated as very or extremely important. These components can be roughly interpreted as
corresponding to 1) neoclassical asset pricing factors, 2) factors related to return predictability and
retirement savings plan defaults, 3) factors related to consumption needs, habit, and human capital,
4) factors related to discomfort with the market, 5) factors related to advice, and 6) factors related
to personal experience.
2