NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE SUBSIDY TO INFRASTRUCTURE AS AN ASSET CLASS
Aleksandar Andonov
Roman Kräussl
Joshua Rauh
Working Paper 25045
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25045
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018
We are grateful to seminar, workshop and conference participants at the NBER Economics of Infrastructure
Meeting and at the SACRS Program for Public Investment Management for helpful comments and
suggestions.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25045.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Aleksandar Andonov, Roman Kräussl, and Joshua Rauh. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Subsidy to Infrastructure as an Asset Class
Aleksandar Andonov, Roman Kräussl, and Joshua Rauh
NBER Working Paper No. 25045
September 2018
JEL No. G11,G23,G28,H54,H75
ABSTRACT
We investigate the characteristics of infrastructure as an asset class from an investment
perspective of a limited partner. While non U.S. institutional investors gain exposure to
infrastructure assets through a mix of direct investments and private fund vehicles, U.S. investors
predominantly invest in infrastructure through private funds. We find that the stream of cash
flows delivered by private infrastructure funds to institutional investors is very similar to that
delivered by other types of private equity, as reflected by the frequency and amounts of net cash
flows. U.S. public pension funds perform worse than other institutional investors in their
infrastructure fund investments, although they are exposed to underlying deals with very similar
project stage, concession terms, ownership structure, industry, and geographical location. By
selecting funds that invest in projects with poor financial performance, U.S. public pension funds
have created an implicit subsidy to infrastructure as an asset class, which we estimate within the
range of $730 million to $3.16 billion per year depending on the benchmark.
Aleksandar Andonov Joshua Rauh
University of Amsterdam Graduate School of Business
Amsterdam Business School Stanford University
Plantage Muidergracht 12 Stanford, CA 94305
1018 TV Amsterdam and Hoover Institution
Netherlands and also NBER
a.andonov@uva.nl rauh@stanford.edu
Roman Kräussl
Luxembourg School of Finance
University of Luxembourg
6, rue Richard Coudenhove-Kalergi
1359 Luxembourg
Luxembourg
roman.kraussl@uni.lu

I. Introduction
An adequate supply of infrastructure is an essential ingredient for competitiveness and long
run potential growth in any economy (Fernald, 1999; Roller and Waverman, 2001; Esfahani and
Ramı́rez, 2003; Donaldson, 2018). The public and private stock of infrastructure plays a critical
role in enhancing the productivity of people and firms by lowering the costs of combining different
productive inputs, accessing markets, and increasing mobility and competition. International
organizations such as the OECD and World Bank have called attention to an acute need for new
or modernized infrastructure and pointed to a disparity between this need and the current level of
infrastructure investment.1 This globally increasing gap between the demand for infrastructure
investment and the provision of resources has led to calls for greater recourse to private capital in
the infrastructure sector.
Institutional investors, such as pension funds, insurance companies and sovereign wealth
funds, are becoming increasingly active alongside governments in the provision of capital to
infrastructure funds and projects. The financial industry presents infrastructure as a new alternative
asset class – in contrast to standard assets such as equities and bonds and established alternative
assets such as buyout, venture capital and real estate – which would deliver new sources of stable
return and better diversification of risk.2 In the last two decades, public and private investors have
expressed growing interest in real assets that were perceived as more transparent and stable than
complex products presented to them, with a more direct connection to underlying value. Further,
infrastructure investments may offer a wide range of social and political benefits in their respective
regions (Castells and Solé-Ollé, 2005; Cadot, Röller and Stephan, 2006).
The stated value proposition of infrastructure as an investment is generally that it has
attractive financial attributes such as strong returns, a low sensitivity to swings in the business
cycle, little correlation with equity markets, long-term stable and predictable cash flows, inflation
hedging properties, and low default rates. Based on their economic and financial characteristics,
1 According to estimates of the Infrastructure 2030 OECD study, the need for infrastructure investments amounts to
$60 trillion by 2030, or 3.5% annually of global GDP. The World Bank’s Global Infrastructure Outlook forecasts a
global infrastructure investment need of $94 trillion by 2040, and a $15 trillion gap between that need and projected
infrastructure investment under current trends.
2 For example, according to Deutsche Bank Asset Management (2017), “Infrastructure offers relatively low long-term
cash flow volatility compared with other asset classes and can also provide attractive, inflation-hedged total returns.”
J.P. Morgan Asset Management (2017) bases its case for infrastructure on “benefits of diversification, inflation
protection, and yield, along with a strong focus on environmental, social, and governance (ESG) principles.”
2

infrastructure investments are supposed to offer investors long-term, low-risk, inflation-protected
and a-cyclical returns. As such, they would be a natural fit with long-lasting, often inflation-linked
pension liabilities (see Della Croce, 2012). Infrastructure has thus been marketed as a useful
alternative asset for public pension funds.3
Public pension investors also share this view. For example, according to the California
Public Employees' Retirement System (CalPERS) website as of August 2018: “Infrastructure
targets stable, defensive investments within the water, energy, waste, transportation, technology,
and communications sectors.”4 But do the infrastructure investments that public pension funds and
other institutional investors make live up to this promise? One challenge to answering this question
has been the difficulty of assembling data series of unlisted infrastructure investments that include
data on fund cash flows and fundamental risk properties of the underlying assets in these funds.
In this paper, we study the risk and return characteristics of infrastructure investments in a
sample covering 640 institutional investors, who each invest on average in five infrastructure funds
over the period of 1991–2016. Through these fund placements and direct investments in
infrastructure assets, each institutional investor gains exposure to an average of 65 underlying
infrastructure deals, whose properties we directly observe. The majority of investments in our
sample are made through closed private infrastructure funds that have a private equity type
structure.5
We find that closed infrastructure funds, the primary vehicle used by U.S. institutional
investors, deliver very similar payout profiles to traditional buyout private equity funds.
Specifically, we find a similar frequency of capital calls and distributions over time, as well as
similar amounts. Infrastructure funds do not provide more stable cash flows to institutional
investors than private equity funds. As is the case with buyout and venture funds, closed
infrastructure funds also have a finite life of approximately 10–12 years and must sell assets in
3 According to Deutsche Bank Asset Management (2017), “The cash flows of infrastructure assets with inherently
long lives and strong intrinsic value, can provide a good match for the long-term liabilities of certain investors, such
as pension funds for example.”
4 Appendix 1 contains similar statements made by other U.S. public pension funds.
5 U.S. investors in particular predominantly invest in infrastructure through closed infrastructure funds, while non U.S.
institutional investors gain exposure to infrastructure assets through a mix of direct investments and fund vehicles.
For example, only 3 out of 98 U.S. public pension funds in our sample make direct investments, while 33 out of 100
non U.S. public pension funds in our sample have direct investments. In total, the 3 U.S. public pension funds hold 13
direct deals, while the 33 non U.S. public pension funds hold 248 direct deals.
3