NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MACROPRUDENTIAL POLICY WITH LEAKAGES
Julien Bengui
Javier Bianchi
Working Paper 25048
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25048
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018
For useful comments and suggestions, we thank Yan Bai, Frédéric Boissay, Marcel Fratzscher,
Olivier Jeanne, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Michael Klein, Alessandro Rebucci, and Alp Simsek, as
well as conference/seminar participants at the IMF, Einaudi Institute, Laval, UQAM, NBER-
CRBT Conference on Monetary Policy and Financial Stability in Emerging Markets, 2015 SED,
Barcelona GSE Summer Workshop on International Capital Flows, the Concluding Conference
of the ESCB’s Macro-prudential Research Network, the 2015 Canadian Macroeconomic Study
Group Annual Meeting, and the IMF 2015 Annual Research Conference. An earlier version of
this paper circulated under the title “Capital Flow Management When Capital Controls Leak.”
We are grateful to the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada for funding
this research under grant 430-2016-00995. We thank Louphou Coulibaly, Wontae Han, and Yanis
Sbih for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Julien Bengui and Javier Bianchi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Macroprudential Policy with Leakages
Julien Bengui and Javier Bianchi
NBER Working Paper No. 25048
September 2018
JEL No. E0,F0,F3,F32,F34
ABSTRACT
The outreach of macroprudential policies is likely limited in practice by imperfect regulation
enforcement, whether due to shadow banking, regulatory arbitrage, or other regulation
circumvention schemes. We study how such concerns affect the design of optimal regulatory
policy in a workhorse model in which pecuniary externalities call for macroprudential taxes on
debt, but with the addition of a novel constraint that financial regulators lack the ability to enforce
taxes on a subset of agents. While regulated agents reduce risk taking in response to debt taxes,
unregulated agents react to the safer environment by taking on more risk. These leakages
undermine the effectiveness of macruprudential taxes but do not necessarily call for weaker
interventions. A quantitative analysis of the model suggests that aggregate welfare gains and
reductions in the severity and frequency of financial crises remain, on average, largely unaffected
by even significant leakages.
Julien Bengui
Département de sciences économiques
Université de Montréal
C.P. 6128, succursale Centre-ville
Montréal QC H3C 3J7
Canada
julien.bengui@umontreal.ca
Javier Bianchi
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55401
and NBER
javieribianchi@gmail.com

1 Introduction
Macroprudentialregulationhasemergedasacentralelementofthepost-financialcrisisdominant
policy paradigm, in which the management of credit cycles has been elevated to the rank of first-
order policy concerns. Central to this view is the notion that curbing credit booms reduces
financial sector vulnerabilities to future reversals in financial conditions. The effectiveness of
macroprudential regulation, however, is not being taken for granted and has been the subject of
a growing empirical literature (see, e.g., Cerutti, Claessens and Laeven, 2017). A common policy
concern is that such new regulation could be bypassed and have unintended consequences.1
A number of important conceptual questions arise against this backdrop: Is the scope for
macroprudential policy significantly altered by the possibility of leakages? Does macroprudential
policy remain desirable in the presence of leakages? How is the optimal design of regulation
altered by the presence of leakages? The theoretical literature on macroprudential policy has so
far abstracted from the practically relevant issue of imperfect regulation enforcement, and thus
a proper framework to address these questions is lacking. Our goal in this paper is to fill this
gap by providing a theoretical model suited to tackle these issues.
In line with the emerging policy paradigm and an established theoretical literature on the
topic (e.g., Lorenzoni 2008), we adopt a framework in which inefficient private borrowing deci-
sions generate excessive financial fragility. In our theory, a pecuniary externality resulting from
frictions in financial markets makes macroprudential policy desirable, yet the introduction of
such policy endogenously leads to increased risk taking by a shadow sector endowed with the
ability to bypass regulation. These unintended spillover effects in turn feed into the economy’s
exposure to financial crises, limiting the effectiveness of macroprudential policy and altering its
optimal design.
Our framework builds on Bianchi (2011)’s model of macroprudential policy, in which a pecu-
niary externality generates overborrowing and excessive exposure to financial crises. We extend
this workhorse model by adding a shadow sector that is able to circumvent regulation. The
macroprudential authority is able to curb risk taking within a narrow (regulated) sector, but has
to internalize the (unregulated) shadow sector’s destabilizing response to its actions.
We start our analysis with a tractable three-period model. In the model, agents initially make
a borrowing decision and are then subject to income shocks in the intermediate period while
facing a collateral constraint that limits their ability to smooth consumption. The presence of
a market price in the collateral constraint implies that the higher the aggregate leverage chosen
in the initial period, the larger the contraction in the borrowing capacity in the intermediate
period for all households. This pecuniary externality and the associated financial amplification
1 Empirical studies analyzing such leakages in macroprudential policies include Magud et al. (2011), Aiyar,
Calomiris and Wieladek (2014), Klein (2012), Jim´enez, Ongena, Peydr´o and Saurina (2012), Forbes, Fratzscher
and Straub (2013), Dassatti and Peydr´o (2013), and Ahnert, Forbes and Reinhardt (2018).
1

effects are not internalized by private households, providing a rationale for a macroprudential
policy aimed at limiting private leverage. Different from existing models, however, we assume
that macroprudential regulation can only be enforced on a subset of the population. As a result,
a macroprudential policy seeking to make regulated agents internalize the pecuniary externality
creates a safer environment and has the unintended consequence of encouraging higher borrowing
by unregulated agents. These spillovers undermine the effectiveness of macroprudential policy
and increase the economy’s exposure to financial crises.
We show that despite destabilizing spillover effects on the unregulated sphere, a small macro-
prudential tax on regulated agents is always strictly welfare improving for all agents. Going
beyond a perturbation argument, we derive an explicit formula for the optimal macroprudential
tax. Relative to the standard Pigouvian tax expression familiar from the literature, accounting
for leakages yields two new elements. One reflects the weaker influence of the financial regulator
onto the price of collateral due to the unregulated sector partially offsetting the regulated sector’s
response to the regulation. The second one reflects the regulator’s higher valuation of relaxing
future collateral constraints resulting from the unregulated sector’s higher exposure to financial
crises. Taken together, these two effects imply an ambiguous effect of leakages on the size of
optimal macroprudential taxes.
We then turn to an infinite horizon model to pursue a quantitative analysis. In the infinite
horizon context, leakages further give rise to a time inconsistency problem. To see why, suppose
agents expect loose regulation in the future. This expectation generates a perception of a riskier
environment, whichinducesunregulatedagentstotakelessrisktoday, narrowingthegapbetween
the borrowing choices of regulated and unregulated agents. Interestingly, this channel works
despite unregulated agents not being directly subject to regulation. Given our goal of evaluating
the extent to which leakages undermine the effectiveness of regulation, we find it useful to focus
on a discretionary regime in which a regulator has limited ability to exploit the disciplining
effect just described. We thus consider a government that sets optimal regulation sequentially
and without commitment, and we focus on Markov-perfect equilibria. We then calibrate our
infinite horizon model to match the features of emerging market crises and experiment with
degrees of leakages ranging from 0 to 50% of agents making up the unregulated sphere of the
economy.
Themaintakeawayfromourquantitativeanalysisisthatevensubjecttosignificantleakages,
macroprudentialpolicyremainshighlyeffectiveanddesirable. Tooffsettheincreaseinborrowing
bytheunregulatedsector,theplannerinduceseventighterregulationontheregulatedsector,and
this results in aggregate levels of borrowing that are comparable to the constrained-efficient allo-
cation. Average welfare gains are also surprisingly stable with respect to leakages. Nonetheless,
the welfare gains are spread unevenly in the economy, with the lion’s share going to unregulated
agents. Intuitively, while the financial stability benefits of macroprudential policy are partially
2