NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PERCEPTION OF HOUSE PRICE RISK AND HOMEOWNERSHIP
Manuel Adelino
Antoinette Schoar
Felipe Severino
Working Paper 25090
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25090
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018
We thank Steven Deggendorf at Fannie Mae for access to the survey data used in this paper. We
also thank Andrea Eisfeldt, Andreas Fuster, Charlie Nathanson (discussant), Christopher Palmer,
Judie Ricks (discussant), Basit Zafar (discussant), Eric Zwick (discussant) as well as seminar
participants at the Third CFPB Research Conference on Consumer Finance, NBER Real Estate
(Summer 2018), NYU (Stern), Oxford (Saïd), SITE Summer Workshop on Financial Regulation,
Yale/RFS “Financial Crisis Ten Years Afterwards” conference and the WFA 2018 for comments.
Zaki Dernaoui and Jiantao Huang provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Manuel Adelino, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Perception of House Price Risk and Homeownership
Manuel Adelino, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino
NBER Working Paper No. 25090
September 2018
JEL No. G01,G4
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the importance of household perceptions of house price risk in explaining
homeownership choice. While a majority of US households (71%) believes that housing is a
“safe” investment, renters are much more likely to perceive housing as risky. Risk perceptions
vary across demographic groups, but significant differences persist after controlling for
observables, such as income, savings, or location. Current housing decisions and future intentions
to buy versus rent are strongly correlated with perceptions of house price risk. Households’
exposure to housing risk due to financial constraints, expected mobility or labor income risk
affect the decision to buy versus rent but do not mitigate the impact of risk perceptions on
housing choices. Finally, we show that all households update their beliefs about the riskiness of
housing in response to past (local) house price changes, but renters are much slower to update
than owners. Since renters’ decisions to buy are especially sensitive to their perception of house
price risk, it might explain their delayed entry into home ownership during a house price run-up
and even prolong the housing cycle.
Manuel Adelino Felipe Severino
Fuqua School of Business Tuck School of Business
Duke University Dartmouth College
100 Fuqua Drive 100 Tuck Hall
Durham, NC 27708 Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER felipe.severino@tuck.dartmouth.edu
manuel.adelino@duke.edu
Antoinette Schoar
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-638
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
aschoar@mit.edu

There is growing consensus that beliefs play an important role in explaining house price dynamics
and the recent housing boom and bust cycles. Several influential studies have highlighted the
importance of beliefs in explaining key stylized facts of the housing market: House prices display
significant momentum (going back to the seminal paper by Case and Shiller (1989); or Guren
(2016)), have mean reversion at longer horizons (Cutler, Poterba and Summers (1991) or Glaeser
(2013)), excess variance relative to fundamentals (Glaeser, Gyourko and Saiz (2008), Head,
Lloyd-Ellis and Sun (2014)), and finally that households seem to extrapolate price expectations
from past changes in house prices (Case and Shiller (2003) or Case et al (2012).1
The existing empirical literature on belief formation about house prices has focused predominantly
on how households form expectations about average returns but has paid much less attention to
the second moment of returns, households’ perceptions of house price risk. Yet many models of
portfolio choice highlight that housing risk is a key input in the household optimization problem
and the decision about whether to buy or rent (Heaton and Lucas (2000), Campbell and Cocco
(2003), or Cocco (2005)). They emphasize the special status of housing risk due to the non-
divisibility and illiquidity of this asset. This paucity of prior analysis about risk perceptions of
housing is largely driven by lack of available data.
In this paper we aim to complement the existing literature on house price expectations. We
document the importance that household perceptions of house price risk play in explaining housing
choices and intentions to buy versus rent and how these risk perceptions interact with expectations.
The results are based on a new, nationally representative housing survey of more than 50,000
households between 2010 and 2016 from Fannie Mae. We first show in the cross-section that there
are significant differences in how households perceive the riskiness of an investment in housing.
Older and richer people are significantly less likely to perceive housing as risky relative to younger
and lower income respondents, and more educated people also see housing as less risky, but even
conditioning on household characteristics there are significant differences in the perception of
house price risk.
1 For the role of expectations in the recent crisis see for example Gerardi, Lehnert, Sherlund and Willen (2009),
Glaeser, Gottlieb and Gyourko (2013), Shiller (2013), Gennaioli, Shleifer and Vishny (2015), Adelino, Schoar and
Severino (2016, 2017)).
2

We can allay concerns that households’ answers about housing risk are driven by differences in
(risk) preference parameters, since perceptions of housing risk are not correlated with households’
views of the riskiness of other securities such as stocks, mutual funds or bonds. In fact, a large
majority of households (about 71%) view an investment in housing as safe (consistent with a high
share found across cities in Case and Shiller (2003)). Even shortly after the financial crisis in 2011,
66% of households perceived housing as safe. In contrast, only 18% of respondents consider stocks
a safe investment, and 55% of respondents consider (government and corporate) bonds safe. If
household weighted these risk assessments by their underlying risk preferences, we should see
more alignment in the rank ordering of the different securities within households. In addition, we
show that answers about the perception of housing risk are not just a proxy for one-year or 5-year
ahead mean house price expectations.
Second, this heterogeneity in risk perceptions across the population translates into differences in
revealed housing choices: People who perceive housing as risky are much more likely (about 12
percent) to be renters than owners, even conditional on their geographic location (including zip
code fixed effects), income, level of savings and future job prospects. The difference in risk
perception between renters and homeowners is about 13-14 percentage points, or about 20 percent
of the mean share who consider housing safe. Here again, we do not find differences in the risk
assessment of renters and owners towards stocks or bonds. We also show that demographic
characteristics like income, age, job stability are all strongly correlated with the choice to rent
versus buy, as would be predicted by theory, but controlling for these demographic characteristics
does not change the coefficient on housing risk.
Earlier papers have also highlighted that a household’s time horizon in a location should affect the
trade-off between house price versus rental price risk, see Sinai and Souleles (2005). To address
this question, we look at factors that influence horizon such as labor income risk and expected
mobility. We find that these factors have a direct effect on the decision to rent versus own, e.g.
households who plan to move soon are more likely to rent. But these are largely orthogonal to the
role of risk perceptions on past housing choice. In addition, we find that the perception of house
price risk is correlated with local house price volatility but not with rental price volatility. Taken
3