NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHY HAVE NEGATIVE NOMINAL INTEREST RATES HAD SUCH A SMALL
EFFECT ON BANK PERFORMANCE? CROSS COUNTRY EVIDENCE
Jose A. Lopez
Andrew K. Rose
Mark M. Spiegel
Working Paper 25004
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25004
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018
Lopez is Vice President, Financial Institutions Supervision, Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco (jose.a.lopez@sf.frb.org); Rose is B.T. Rocca Jr. Professor, Haas School of Business,
University of California, Berkeley, ABFER senior fellow, CEPR research fellow, and NBER
research associate (arose@haas.berkeley.edu); Spiegel is Vice President, Economic Research,
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco (mark.spiegel@SF.frb.org). Rebecca Regan and Ben
Shapiro provided research assistance. For comments, we thank Joshua Aizenman, Arindam
Banik, Stijn Claessens, Leonardo Gambacorta, Bob McCauley, Frank Packer, Yuri Sasaki, Hyun
Song Shin, Yosuke Takeda, and seminar participants at the BIS and USC. The views expressed
below do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Jose A. Lopez, Andrew K. Rose, and Mark M. Spiegel. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Why Have Negative Nominal Interest Rates Had Such a Small Effect on Bank Performance?
Cross Country Evidence
Jose A. Lopez, Andrew K. Rose, and Mark M. Spiegel
NBER Working Paper No. 25004
September 2018
JEL No. E43,G21
ABSTRACT
We examine the effect of negative nominal interest rates on bank profitability and behavior using
a cross-country panel of over 5,100 banks in 27 countries. Our data set includes annual
observations for Japanese and European banks between 2010 and 2016, which covers all
advanced economies that have experienced negative nominal rates, including currency union
members as well as both fixed and floating exchange rates countries. When we compare negative
nominal interest rates with low positive rates, banks experience losses in interest income that are
almost exactly offset by savings on deposit expenses and gains in non-interest income, including
capital gains on securities and fees. We find heterogeneous effects of negative rates: banks from
regimes with floating exchange rates, small banks, and banks with low deposit ratios drive most
of our results. Low-deposit banks have enjoyed particularly striking gains in non-interest income,
likely from capital gains on securities. There have only been modest differences between high
and low deposit-ratio banks’ changes in interest expenses; high deposit banks do not seem
disproportionately vulnerable to negative rates. Banks also responded to negative rates by
increasing lending activity, and raising the share of deposit funding. Overall, our results indicate
surprisingly benign implications of negative rates for commercial banks thus far.
Jose A. Lopez Mark M. Spiegel
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Financial Institutions Supervision 101 Market Street
jose.a.lopez@sf.frb.org San Francisco, CA 94105
mark.spiegel@sf.frb.org
Andrew K. Rose
Haas School of Business Administration
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and CEPR
and also NBER
arose@haas.berkeley.edu

1. Introduction
Low interest rates around the world due to accommodative monetary policy regimes
have been a source of concern for the banking industry for some time. In the immediate wake
of the global financial crisis of 2007-09, policy rates in several advanced economies fell to levels
close to the so-called “zero lower bound.” This interest rate environment has raised concerns
that nominal deposit rates could not fall below zero without eroding banks’ customer bases.
Accordingly, many viewed the low interest rate environment as an obstacle to bank profitability
due to narrowing interest rate margins [e.g. Jobst and Lin (2016)]. This claim has been
confirmed empirically in the literature; for example, Borio, et al (2017) found that bank
profitability is reduced at low rates of interest and that the sensitivity of profitability to rate
reductions is enhanced as interest rates fall. Moreover, Borio and Gambacorta (2017) found
that bank lending becomes less responsive to reductions in policy rates as they approach zero,
suggesting that the financial channel of the monetary transmission mechanism is weaker as
interest rates approach zero.1
In any case, monetary policies in a substantial number of countries have, in fact, broken
through zero, and now have negative policy rates.2 Any arguments made for a weak monetary
transmission mechanism at low positive rates (due to the adverse implications for bank
profitability) should apply even more forcefully to negative nominal interest rates, as
1 Reductions in short-term interest rates have been shown to affect the characteristics of both borrowers [e.g.
Bernanke and Gertler (1995)] and lenders [e.g. Kashyap and Stein (2000)], inducing increased lending activity [e.g.
Bernanke and Blinder (1992) and Jiménez, et al (2012)].
2 See Arteta, et al (2017) for a discussion of the motivation of central banks to move interest rates below the zero-
lower bound.
1

adjustments in deposit rates hit a hard stop at the zero bound. In practice, banks have been
generally unwilling to charge negative nominal interest rates on deposits, especially for smaller
customers. Eggertson, et al (2017) make this argument and provide a theoretical foundation
for the special role of negative rates in disrupting the financial monetary transmission channel.
Their empirical evidence is based on aggregate data from five countries and the euro area as
well as bank-level data from Sweden. Rostagno, et al (2016) found that movements into
negative rates may induce lending by making it costlier for banks to hoard cash.
Several studies, reviewed below, have examined the implications of negative interest
rates for bank profitability and behavior; almost all use bank-level data for an individual country
or currency. Most studies conclude that responses at the bank level have mitigated the adverse
effect of negative rates on bank profitability and lending. Specifically, some banks have been
adept at increasing non-interest income (such as through increased fees), while others have
adjusted funding allocations to rely less on deposits. The nature of adjustments taken by any
individual bank depends on both its business model and size, as both influence a bank’s reliance
on deposit funding as opposed to more market-based wholesale funding.
A challenge with any study that relies on the experience of a single economy is that the
move to negative rates reflects prevailing economic conditions. This endogeneity makes it
difficult to identify any change in bank profitability and/or behavior that stems solely from
negative rates. In this paper, we move towards partially addressing this challenge by
considering a panel of cross-country data. Since different economies move to negative rates at
different times, this feature of the panel allows us to include fixed time effects to control for
responses to global conditions. Many have argued that global financial shocks – particularly
2