NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MARKETING MUTUAL FUNDS
Nikolai Roussanov
Hongxun Ruan
Yanhao Wei
Working Paper 25056
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25056
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018
We benefited from comments and suggestions by Eduardo Azevedo, Tony Cookson, Mark Egan,
Rich Evans, Joao Gomes, Marcin Kacperczyk, Ron Kaniel, Juhani Linnainmaa, Dmitry Livdan,
Gregor Matvos, Igor Makarov, David Musto, Stijn van Nieuwerburgh, Amit Seru, Jesse Shapiro,
Clemens Sialm, Kent Smetters, Rob Stambaugh, Luke Taylor, Jessica Wachter, and Eric
Zitzewitz, as well as audiences at ANU, BU, John Cochrane’s Birthday Conference at Hoover,
ESSFM Gerzensee, GSU CEAR Conference, LBS, LSE, Marketing Science Conference 2017,
MIT Sloan, RCFS Nassau Conference, SFS Cavalcade North America 2018, UBC Winter
Conference, UT Dallas, University of Sydney, and Wharton. Authors are listed in alphabetical
order. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Nikolai Roussanov, Hongxun Ruan, and Yanhao Wei. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Marketing Mutual Funds
Nikolai Roussanov, Hongxun Ruan, and Yanhao Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 25056
September 2018
JEL No. D14,D83,G11,G23,G28,M3
ABSTRACT
Marketing and distribution expenses are responsible for about a third of the cost of active
management in the mutual fund industry. We develop and estimate a structural model of
mutual fund marketing with learning about unobserved skill and costly investor search. Our
estimates suggest that marketing is nearly as important as performance and fees for
determining fund size. Eliminating marketing substantially improves welfare, as capital
shifts towards cheaper funds and competition decreases fees. Average alpha increases as
active funds shrink, and capital allocation becomes more closely aligned with manager skill
net of fees. Declining investor search costs over time imply a reduction in marketing
expenses and management fees as well as a shift towards passive investing, as observed
empirically.
Nikolai Roussanov Yanhao Wei
University of Pennsylvania University of Southern California
The Wharton School Marshall School of Business
Finance Department Marketing Department
2400 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall 701 Exposition Blvd, HOH 306
3620 Locust Walk Los Angeles, CA 90089
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367 yanhaowe@usc.edu
and NBER
nroussan@wharton.upenn.edu
Hongxun Ruan
Peking University
Guanghua School of Management
Finance Department
Beijing, China
hongxunruan@gsm.pku.edu.cn

1 Introduction
In 2015, U.S. mutual fund industry managed a total of $16 trillion of investor assets, generating
fee revenue on the order of $100 billion.1 Historically, about one third of this revenue has
been designated as expenditures associated with marketing, largely consisting of sales loads and
distribution costs (known as 12b-1 fees). Positive relationship between funds’ marketing efforts
and investor flows is well-documented (e.g., Sirri and Tufano 1998, Barber, Odean, and Zhang
2005,Gallaher,Kaniel,andStarks2006,ReuterandZitzewitz2006,Bergstresser,Chalmers,and
Tufano2009,ChalmersandReuter2012,Christoffersen,Evans,andMusto2013). Yetmarketing
expenses contribute substantially to total fund costs, thus reducing returns earned by investors
for a given level of fund manager’s skill. Is marketing a purely wasteful rat race, or does it help
imperfectly informed investors find attractive investment opportunities more easily?2 Does it
enable capital to flow towards more skilled managers or, instead, distort allocation of assets by
channeling them towards underperforming funds?
We start with a benchmark model based on Berk and Green (2004), which describes allo-
cation of assets to mutual funds by rational investors in a frictionless market. By estimating
the model, we document substantial differences between such an efficient allocation and the ob-
served distribution of fund size. The vast majority of funds are “too big” relative to the model
and deliver substantially negative abnormal returns to investors, while the top decile of funds,
based on the Bayesian forecast of skill net of fees, are actually smaller than is “efficient,” and
thus are able to outperform.3 To explain these differences, we introduce information frictions
by generalizing the framework developed by Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004) in the context of
index funds. We allow funds’ marketing activities, as well as exogenous characteristics that
capture funds’ “brand value,” to affect their inclusion in the investors’ information sets. In our
setting, both the expense ratios (fees paid by investors) and the marketing/distribution costs
(components of these fees related to broker compensation) are endogenous choices of each fund.
By estimating our structural model we find that marketing expenses are nearly as important as
price (i.e., expense ratio) or performance (i.e., the Bayesian estimate of manager skill based on
historical returns) for explaining the observed variation in fund size. Even though marketing
in our model is informative, and indeed complementary with fund skill, counterfactual analysis
indicates that it reduces welfare due to the positional arms race that it entails.
Following Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004), we model impediments to optimal allocation of
1Berk and Green (2004), Chen, Hong, Huang, and Kubik (2004), Pollet and Wilson (2008), Pástor and
Stambaugh(2012), BerkandvanBinsbergen(2015), Pástor, StambaughandTaylor(2015), amongothers, focus
ontherelationshipbetweenmutualfundsize,performance,andfees. Understandinginvestordemandfor(active)
asset management is central to a broader debate about the size and value added of the finance industry as a
whole, e.g. French (2008), Cochrane (2013), Greenwood and Scharfstein (2013), Malkiel (2013), Philippon and
Reshef (2013), Gennaioli, Shleifer and Vishny (2014), and Philippon (2015).
2For example, Stigler (1961) argued that advertising serves to reduce information costs for consumers, thus
helpingreducepricedispersion. Whilecommissions/kickbackstofinancialintermediariesconstituteamuchlarger
portion of mutual fund marketing expenses than does advertising, it might seem reasonable to extend his classic
logic to this more general notion of marketing, whereby it lowers effective search costs for imperfectly informed
investors. In contrast, Mullainathan, Schwartzstein and Shleifer (2008) interpret empirical patterns of mutual
fund advertising using a model of marketing that is purely persuasive, rather than informative.
3Following Jensen (1968), the bulk of empirical evidence of performance persistence among mutual funds
indicates that consistent underperformance is much more prevalent than outperformance - e.g. Hendricks, Patel
and Zeckhauser (1993), Brown and Goetzmann (1995), Carhart (1997).
1

capital to mutual funds as a search friction, whereby investors randomly sample and evaluate
funds until deciding to invest in one of the funds drawn. Heterogeneity in search costs faced
by investors captures the wide variation in financial sophistication (and perhaps even cognitive
ability) required to consider and analyze the different investment alternatives. This approach
is intuitive, at least when applied to retail investors: the task of choosing among thousands of
funds can be daunting even for the most sophisticated individuals, and far more so for those
lacking even basic financial literacy.4 Mutual fund performance is determined by managerial
skill as well as decreasing returns to scale. Investors care about funds’ expected performance
and expense ratios, but must learn about latent fund skill from past performance. Hence, our
model nests Berk and Green (2004) as a limiting special case where search costs go to zero.
Our key innovation is allowing mutual funds to influence the likelihood of being observed by
investors through costly marketing (e.g., via broker commissions). Thus, mutual funds choose
theirexpenseratiosandmarketingexpenses,whichincreaseafund’sprobabilityofbeingsampled
but decrease its profit margin.
We estimate our structural model using data on well-diversified U.S. domestic equity mutual
funds. Our estimation results reveal sizable information frictions in the mutual fund market.
The average investor implicitly incurs a cost of 39 basis points to “sample” an additional mutual
fund. This friction’s magnitude is about 2/3 of the mean annual gross alpha in our sample. The
largemagnitudeoftheestimatedsearchcostisamanifestationoftheassetmisallocationproblem
that we document. The intuition is simple: high search costs prevent investors from sampling
more funds. Less intensive search leads to an inferior allocation, as many investors are forced to
“settle”forhigh-cost, low-skillfunds, sinceitistoocostlyforthemtosearchfurther(inpractice,
this could mean investors who lack financial sophistication following a broker’s recommendation
without questioning it, consulting other sources, etc.). In comparison, Hortaçsu and Syverson
(2004) estimate the mean search cost for an average investor of S&P 500 index fund between 11
and 20 basis points. This difference should not be surprising since it is far easier for investors
to evaluate index funds (which are essentially identical in terms of the returns they deliver, at
least before fees) than actively managed funds. It is also possible that the index fund market is
dominated by more sophisticated investors (i.e., those who know to look for relatively low-cost
passive funds). Our higher estimated search cost indicates that asset misallocation problem is
more severe in the mutual fund industry as a whole (including both active funds and passive
index funds) than it is within the narrow confines of the S&P 500 index fund sector.
In order to verify that our estimates are not overly influenced by the assumption of verti-
cal differentiation that we adopt from Berk and Green (2004) – that is, the assumption that
investors only care about the fund’s (expected) abnormal return and expense ratio and there
is no heterogeneity across investors – we estimate an extended model that allows for horizon-
tal differentiation. Specifically, we consider the possibility that different investors pursue funds
that follow different investment “styles” or factors. Accordingly, in the model, we allow some
investors to only sample funds from a particular Morningstar Style Box. We find that allowing
4Indeed,Bronnenberg,Dubé,GentzkowandShapiro(2015)findthatinformedretailconsumersarelesslikely
topaythebrandpremiumthatisassociatedwithheavily-marketedproducts. Inthemutualfundcontext, Choi,
Laibson and Madrian (2010) show experimentally that financial literacy helps investors avoid high-cost index
funds.
2