NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MACROPRUDENTIAL FX REGULATIONS:
SHIFTING THE SNOWBANKS OF FX VULNERABILITY?
Toni Ahnert
Kristin Forbes
Christian Friedrich
Dennis Reinhardt
Working Paper 25083
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25083
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018
The views in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of any
institution with which they are affiliated. We would like to thank Jason Allen, Ricardo Correa,
Jeffrey Frankel, Glenn Hoggarth, Patrick Honohan, Matias Ossandon Busch, Ian Marsh, Brad
Setser, Frank Smets, Livio Stracca, and participants at the AEA 2018 meetings in Philadelphia,
the Global Linkages conference in Dublin, the NBER conference on Capital Flows, Currency
Wars and Monetary Policy in Cambridge, the Emerging Markets Group Workshop on
International Capital Flows: Drivers and Policy Responses in London, the annual conference of
the Canadian Economics Association in Montreal, and the IBEFA summer meeting in Vancouver
for valuable comments. Further thanks to Matthew Cormier, Min Jae Kim, Duncan Whyte, and
Sanjana Bhatnagar for outstanding research assistance and to Jérôme Vandenbussche, Ursula
Vogel and Enrica Detragiache for sharing their data. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Toni Ahnert, Kristin Forbes, Christian Friedrich, and Dennis Reinhardt. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Macroprudential FX Regulations: Shifting the Snowbanks of FX Vulnerability?
Toni Ahnert, Kristin Forbes, Christian Friedrich, and Dennis Reinhardt
NBER Working Paper No. 25083
September 2018
JEL No. F32,F34,G15,G21,G28
ABSTRACT
Can macroprudential foreign exchange (FX) regulations on banks reduce the financial and
macroeconomic vulnerabilities created by borrowing in foreign currency? To evaluate the
effectiveness and unintended consequences of macroprudential FX regulations, we develop a
parsimonious model of bank and market lending in domestic and foreign currency and derive four
predictions. We confirm these predictions using a rich dataset of macroprudential FX regulations.
These empirical tests show that FX regulations:(1) are effective in terms of reducing borrowing in
foreign currency by banks; (2) have the unintended consequence of simultaneously causing firms
to increase FX debt issuance; (3) reduce the sensitivity of banks to exchange rate movements, but
(4) are less effective at reducing the sensitivity of corporates and the broader financial market to
exchange rate movements. As a result, FX regulations on banks appear to be successful in
mitigating the vulnerability of banks to exchange rate movements and the global financial cycle,
but partially shift the snowbank of FX vulnerability to other sectors.
Toni Ahnert Christian Friedrich
Financial Studies Division Bank of Canada
Bank of Canada 234 Laurier Avenue West
234 Wellington St Ottawa, Ontario, K1AOG9
Ottawa, Ontario, K1A 0G9 Canada
CANADA cfriedrich@bankofcanada.ca
tahnert@bankofcanada.ca
Dennis Reinhardt
Kristin Forbes Bank of England,
MIT Sloan School of Management Threadneedle Street
100 Main Street, E62-416 London EC2R 8AH
Cambridge, MA 02142 dennis.reinhardt@bankofengland.co.uk
and CEPR
and also NBER
kjforbes@mit.edu

I. Introduction
The global financial crisis has prompted renewed interest in tools to reduce
macroeconomic and financial vulnerabilities, strengthen financial systems, and improve
country resilience. A key component of this strategy is greater use of macroprudential tools —
such as countercyclical capital buffers, tighter reserve ratios, leverage ratios, and restrictions
on loan-to-value and debt-to-income ratios. Several papers have analyzed the use and
effectiveness of many of these tools.1One type of tool, macroprudential foreign exchange (FX)
regulations, however, has received less attention, despite the long-standing research
documenting the vulnerabilities associated with currency mismatch.
This paper seeks to fill this gap. It provides a detailed assessment of macroprudential
regulations on the use of foreign currencies by banks, including theoretical predictions of how
they could work and then empirical assessments of their direct and unintended consequences
using a rich new dataset. We find that macroprudential FX policies are effective in
accomplishing their primary goal of reducing bank exposure to foreign currency risk. But do
they simply shift the risk elsewhere—similar to “shifting a snowbank” (a pile of snow) from
one place to another? We find some evidence of a “shifting snowbank” effect, as reduced FX
lending from banks causes some firms to increase FX debt issuance to investors. This shifting
is only partial, however, so that aggregate exposure to FX debt declines. Our results also show
that these FX regulations reduce the sensitivity of banks to currency movements, but are less
successful at reducing the sensitivity of the corporate sector and the broader economy. As a
result, although macroprudential FX regulations can substantially improve the resilience of
the banking sector to the global financial cycle, the benefits to the broader economy may be
more moderate, as some vulnerability shifts to other sectors that may be less informed and
make less efficient lending choices.
Exposure to foreign currency borrowing and currency mismatch has been a habitual
concern, especially in emerging markets. Foreign currency exposure can increase a country’s
vulnerability to sudden stops, currency depreciations, and financial and banking crises, as well
as limit the ability of the exchange rate and monetary policy to respond to shocks (Rey, 2013).
Despite these concerns, foreign currency exposure has continued to increase—especially in
the corporate and household sector.2 For example, over our sample period from the mid-
1Cerutti et al. (2015) and Forbes (2018) are recent surveys of this extensive literature.
2 See Acharya et al. (2015), Bruno and Shin (2016), Chui et al. (2014, 2016), and Du and Schreger (2016).
1

1990s through end-2014, total FX borrowing in international debt securities and bank loans
more than tripled to about $12 trillion USD. FX borrowing has continued to grow since the
2008 crisis—with cross-border FX borrowing in international debt securities and FX loans
increasing by around $2.5 trillion USD between 2009 and 2015—a sharp contrast to almost
no change in comparable cross-border borrowing in local currency over the same period.
Concerns about the macroeconomic and financial risks related to FX exposure have increased
interest in using macroprudential FX regulations.
Evaluating the effects of macroprudential FX measures has been challenging, however,
partly due to insufficient data linked to the limited experience with these tools until recently,
and partly due to identification challenges related to macroprudential regulations being
introduced as a response to financial and macroeconomic developments.3 An evaluation
should assess not only the direct effects of these measures on the intended sector of the
economy (such as banks), but also any spillovers or leakages as firms, banks, and other entities
respond to the regulations. These types of unintended consequences have been highlighted in
analyses of other types of macroprudential regulations and capital controls.4 If these leakages
and substitution effects occur, can these macroprudential policies achieve their primary goal
of reducing aggregate country vulnerability to currency risk?
This paper attempts to tackle these challenges in an assessment of the direct and indirect
effects of macroprudential FX regulations on banks and the broader economy. We develop a
parsimonious model of bank versus market lending, building on the seminal work of
Holmstrom and Tirole (1997), but adding the dimension that lending and borrowing is also
differentiated between domestic and foreign currencies. Domestic firms seek funding from
lenders, but have private information about their productivity. Banks can screen firms at a
cost and identify unproductive, low-productivity, and high-productivity firms, while market
investors can only lend indiscriminately. Funding in foreign currency is cheaper than in
domestic currency, but subject to exchange rate risk. When the domestic currency depreciates,
low-productivity firms and their associated banks default. Macroprudential FX regulation
increases banks’ cost of funding in foreign currency (if the regulation is a liability-side
measure) or the equilibrium lending rate to firms (if an asset-side measure). Banks stop
3 Papers which include some discussion of macroprudential FX regulations as part of their broader analyses of
macroprudential tools are: Nier et al. (2011), Cerutti et al. (2015), Vandenbussche et al. (2015), and Avdjiev et al.
(2016b). Two papers which focus on FX regulations are De Crescenzio et al. (2017) and Aguirre and Repetto (2017),
but neither consider the leakages, broader effects on the economy, or sensitivity to currency movements.
4 See Agénor and da Silva (2017) for a recent survey.
2