NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
NON-MONETARY NEWS IN CENTRAL BANK COMMUNICATION
Anna Cieslak
Andreas Schrimpf
Working Paper 25032
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25032
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018
We thank Manuel Adelino, Ryan Banerjee, Ravi Bansal, Tim Bollerslev, Jordi Gali, Refet
Gurkaynak, Sam Hanson, Tim Kroencke, Michael McMahon, Chris Neely, Hyun Shin, Roland
Straub, Viktor Todorov, Brian Weller, Ken West, and seminar participants at the NBER
International Seminar on Macroeconomics (ISoM) and the Bank for International Settlements for
their valuable comments. We thank Zhongtian Chen, Hao Pang, Tania Romero, and Song Xiao
for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Anna Cieslak and Andreas Schrimpf. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Non-Monetary News in Central Bank Communication
Anna Cieslak and Andreas Schrimpf
NBER Working Paper No. 25032
September 2018
JEL No. E43,E58,G12,G14
ABSTRACT
We quantify the importance of non-monetary news in central bank communication. Using
evidence from four major central banks and a comprehensive classification of events, we
decompose news conveyed by central banks into news about monetary policy, economic growth,
and separately, shocks to risk premia. Our approach exploits high-frequency comovement of
stocks and interest rates combined with monotonicity restrictions across the yield curve. We find
significant differences in news composition depending on the communication channel used by
central banks. Non-monetary news prevails in about 40% of policy decision announcements by
the Fed and the ECB, and this fraction is even higher for communications that provide context to
policy decisions such as press conferences. We show that non-monetary news accounts for a
significant part of financial markets' reaction during the financial crisis and in the early recovery,
while monetary shocks gain importance since 2013.
Anna Cieslak
Duke University
The Fuqua School of Business
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
anna.cieslak@duke.edu
Andreas Schrimpf
Bank for International Settlements
Centralbahnplatz 2 4002
Basel
Switzerland
Andreas.Schrimpf@bis.org
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25032

The relevance of central bank communication has risen significantly over the past decade
as policy goals and associated operations have become more complex. Constrained by the
effective lower bound on policy rates, major central banks have resorted to unconventional
measures. Communicating these policies poses a challenge, as evidenced by the rise in the
verbosity of central bank statements. New empirical methods are needed to quantify the
effects of monetary policy, especially when monetary shocks can be confounded by other
information.
This paper proposes a new approach to analyze the information content of central bank
communication. Drawing on the joint dynamics of government bond yields with equity
returnsaroundcentralbankreleases, wequantifytheimportanceofdifferenteconomicshocks
thatdrive theresponse offinancial markets topolicycommunication. Specifically, weclassify
the information revealed by central banks into monetary policy, economic growth, and risk
premium shocks. By the latter, we mean news that affects investors’ risk valuations (via
changes in risk appetite or sentiment) separately from changes in economic fundamentals.
Ourapproachtodissecting thenewscontentofcentralbankcommunicationexploitsboththe
direction of the comovement between stocks and yield as well as the effect of news across the
maturity dimension of the yield curve. We build our intuition using a stylized macro-finance
model that delivers the following predictions. A conventional monetary policy shock affects
the real rateand induces a negative comovement of stocks and yields that is stronger at short
maturities. Both growth and risk premium shocks induce a positive comovement of stocks
and yields. However, their effects differ in the maturity dimension. Growth shocks have a
greater bearing on the short-to-intermediate segment, whereas risk premium shocks affect
more the long segment of the yield curve. While the effects of growth and monetary policy
shocks are standard, the positive comovement of stocks and yields via the risk premium
channel arises when nominal bonds hedge bad economic times. We derive restrictions on
the joint dynamics of macroeconomic factors, monetary policy and asset prices necessary to
support this intuition, and argue that these restrictions plausibly hold true during the period
of our analysis.
To gauge the comovement of stocks with the entire yield curve, we introduce the notion of
the term-structure of stock-yield covariances, i.e., covariances of stock returns with changes
in yields of different maturities. We rely on high-frequency data to construct the term
structures of covariances at the level of a single event. The sign and the maturity pattern
of those covariances allows us to determine the dominant piece of economic news revealed
by central banks across a variety of communications beyond just monetary policy decision
statements.
2

To this end, we compile a novel database of time-stamped monetary policy events by the
four main central banks—the Federal Reserve (Fed), the European Central Bank (ECB),
the Bank of England (BOE) and the Bank of Japan (BOJ)—spanning the period from
the late 1990s through the end of 2017. We classify events on several dimensions. At the
basic level, we distinguish events by types of communication tools, most importantly (i)
statements of monetary policy decisions, (ii) press conferences, (ii) releases of minutes of
the policy meeting and, in the case of the BOE, inflation reports. We further introduce a
classification of unconventional policy interventions, e.g., distinguishing between the phases
of asset purchase programs. We additionally characterize announcements by whether they
are accompanied by changes in explicit forward guidance.
As the key result, we show that the non-monetary component—i.e., news about economic
activity and shocks to risk premia—dominates more than half of communication events.
We find significant differences in the news composition across communication tools and
over time. Monetary news prevails in the announcements of monetary policy decisions.
News about economic growth, instead, is the dominant piece of information gleaned by
market participants during press conferences and other communication events whose aim
is to explain the context of policy decisions. Risk premium shocks exert substantial non-
linear effects on asset prices, and their importance increases with the implementation of
unconventional monetary policies.
For example, focusing only on scheduled announcements by the Federal Open Market Com-
mittee (FOMC), we find negative stock-yield comovement for 60% of events, consistent with
the monetary policy channel; however, the remaining 40% suggest a non-trivial role of non-
monetary news as well. This distinction becomes even more pertinent to understanding
the news conveyed at the central bank press conferences. As one prominent example, press
conferences by the ECB transmit non-monetary content in about 65% of the cases, with
growth and risk premium news carrying the largest weight in terms of economic significance.
Importantly, we find that although many of the unconventional policy announcements have
a significant non-monetary content, forward guidance works as a powerful monetary policy
shock.
We document that the news content of central bank announcements varies significantly over
time. Studying the period of the financial crisis and its aftermath, we uncover a break in the
composition of central bank news that occurs around mid-2013. Specifically, non-monetary
news drives communication in the period from 2008 through mid-2013, while from mid-2013
through the end of our sample in 2017 the role of monetary news gains prominence. We
associate this shift with the market’s anticipation and then the actual announcements of the
exit from policy accommodation.
3