NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IMMIGRANTS, LABOR MARKET DYNAMICS AND ADJUSTMENT TO SHOCKS
IN THE EURO AREA
Gaetano Basso
Francesco D'Amuri
Giovanni Peri
Working Paper 25091
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25091
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018
Prepared for the The Central Bank of Ireland (CBI) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
Conference “Euro at 20”, and for the IMF Economic Review. We thank Alan Barrett, Olivier
Blanchard, Emine Boz, Matteo Bugamelli, Giovanni dell’Ariccia, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas,
Mathias Hoffmann, Philip Lane, Juri Marcucci, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, Doug Miller,
Marianna Riggi, Paolo Sestito, Luigi Federico Signorini and the IMF Economic Review guest
editors Philippe Martin and Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan for their comments on a previous draft. The
views expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of Italy. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Gaetano Basso, Francesco D'Amuri, and Giovanni Peri. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Immigrants, Labor Market Dynamics and Adjustment to Shocks in the Euro Area
Gaetano Basso, Francesco D'Amuri, and Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 25091
September 2018
JEL No. E32,F22,F66,J6
ABSTRACT
We analyze the role of labor mobility in cushioning labor demand shocks in the Euro Area. We
find that foreign born workers’ mobility is strongly cyclical, while this is not the case for natives.
Foreigners’ higher population to employment elasticity reduces the variation of overall
employment rates over the business cycle: thanks to them, the impact of a one standard deviation
change in employment on employment rates decreases by 6 per cent at the country level and by 7
per cent at the regional level. Additionally, we compare Euro Area mobility to that of another
currency union, the US. We find that the population to employment elasticity estimated for
foreign-born persons is similar in the Euro Area and the US, while EA natives are definitely less
mobile across countries than US natives are across states in response to labor demand shocks.
This last result confirms that in the Euro Area there is room for improving country specific
shocks absorption through higher labor mobility. It also suggests that immigration helped labor
market adjustments.
Gaetano Basso Giovanni Peri
Directorate General for Economics, Department of Economics
Statistics and Research University of California, Davis
Bank of Italy One Shields Avenue
Via Nazionale 91 Davis, CA 95616
00184 Rome and NBER
Italy gperi@ucdavis.edu
gaetano.basso@bancaditalia.it
Francesco D'Amuri
Directorate General for Economics,
Statistics and Research
Bank of Italy
Via Nazionale 91
00184, Rome
Italy
francesco.damuri@bancaditalia.it

1.Introduction
Labor mobility is one of the channels through which country specific asymmetric shocks are
absorbed in a currency area without generating large divergence in local unemployment rates
(Fahri and Werning, 2014). Wage and price flexibility at the local level, counter-cyclical fiscal
transfers (Mundell, 1961) and risk sharing through banking and capital market unions (Hoffmann,
2018) are other possible smoothing mechanisms.
In this article, we focus in particular on the Euro Area (EA), the subgroup of European Union
countries that adopted the Euro as a common currency; like all European Union members, EA
countries enjoy free movements of goods, services, capital and people within the EU as stated by
EU treaties. All individuals legally residing in an EU country can thus move freely within the EU
borders. Nevertheless, the mobility of European residents remains limited (Decressin and Fatas
1995; Obstfeld and Peri, 1998; Beyer and Smets, 2015; Arpaia et al. 2016). This can reduce the
ability to absorb country specific shocks with small unemployment effects in the Euro Area relative
to currency areas whose residents have a higher propensity to migrate since labour markets are
better integrated (e.g., the United States).
Since the beginning of the Euro, in 1999, the share of immigrants, defined as foreign-born
population, in the EA has grown from about 4.5 to almost 9 per cent of the population. In some
countries, it has reached levels larger than the US, a country with a much longer immigration
history. The largest part of the increase was driven by immigrants from outside Europe. The fast
growth of this group has often been associated with the rise of anti-immigrant political
movements (see Barone et al. (2016), Edo et al. (2017) and Halla et al. (2017), among others).
In spite of popular opposition to immigration, most academic studies show that immigrants have
several features that could help EA labor markets and local economies. First, usually immigrants
tend to be more mobile than natives are and they respond more actively to local labor market
conditions by moving (as first pointed out by Borjas, 2001). This feature provides a potential buffer
of workers with a high propensity to move that can attenuate the wage and non-employment
consequences of local shocks on native workers (as found by Cadena and Kovak, 2016 for the US).
Second, several studies focusing on less educated immigrants show that they take manual and
unskilled jobs encouraging native workers to move to opportunities, stimulating geographical and
occupational mobility and upgrading their job skills. This mechanism contributes to labor market
mobility and flexibility, which in the long-run may benefit employment and wages of natives, or at
least attenuate potential competition effects from immigrants.1
1 D’Amuri and Peri (2014) show this mechanism for the EU before the Great Recession; Foged and Peri (2016) show
this mechanism at work in Denmark; Basso, Peri and Rahman (2017) show that, due to their specialization, migrants
can “push” natives in the intermediate part of the wage distribution reducing polarization of the labor market for
natives.
2

Existing studies analyze these mechanisms in country-specific contexts, and most of the attention
has been focused on long-run wage and employment effects of immigration. Using information on
birthplace of workers for the euro area countries from the European Labor Force Survey 2007-
2016, we analyze less explored but very important aspects of labor market adjustments in Europe
in the short and medium run.
First, exploiting the different intensity of labor demand expansions and contractions, during the
Great Recession/sovereign debt crisis period in different EA countries, we document how natives
and foreign-born mobility varies with country-specific employment variations. To extend and
interpret these results, and test their robustness, we also carry out the same analysis at the region
level. We first estimate the elasticity of population changes to employment downturns and
upturns. This simple coefficient illustrates how mobility of people across regions and countries
offsets the unbalances across labor markets, reducing the variation of employment rates across
them. We then test whether foreign-born individuals are more mobile than natives, as found in
the US, and whether this elasticity differs between EU-born (residing outside of their country of
birth) and extra-EU born workers. To identify more cleanly a response of population to labor
demand shocks we also construct a proxy for sector-driven local shocks, in the form of a “Bartik”
or shift-share index that should proxy sector-productivity-driven demand shocks. We track the
response to those using them as instrumental variables for employment changes. We further
analyze whether the response to negative demand shocks is different from that to positive shocks
and whether this elasticity is different if these shocks are unusually large.
In the second part of the analysis, we test whether immigration played a role as a shock absorber
in the area. To do this, we exploit pre-existing differences (as of year 2006) in the presence of
foreign-born workers across EA regions and we test whether natives’ employment and population
changes are more insulated from labor demand shocks in areas with a pre-existing larger share of
foreign workers who act as a “buffer”. Finally, using similar data and approach, we compare main
results obtained for the Euro Area with those obtained for the US during the same period.
Compared to the previous literature, we extend and complement the most recent papers of Beyer
and Smets (2015), Arpaia et al. (2016) and Dao et al. (2018), which are based on the seminal works
of Blanchard and Katz (1992), Decressin and Fatás (1995) and Obstfeld and Peri (1998), in two
important ways. First, by looking at the most recent period, we include all the Euro Area countries
and we encompass in the period of analysis the Great Recession and the sovereign debt crisis
period. Second, and most importantly, we distinguish between natives and foreign-born mobility
and we analyze further the role of foreign born in absorbing asymmetric shock. When possible, we
disentangle the mobility of EU-born from that of non-EU-born in order to understand whether the
contribution of migration in smoothing employment shocks comes from movement of people
from outside the EU.
We find that, while mobility of foreign-born responds to local economic conditions, this is not the
case for natives, whose migration responses are smaller and less reactive to the employment
3