NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GLOBAL TRENDS IN INTEREST RATES
Marco Del Negro
Domenico Giannone
Marc P. Giannoni
Andrea Tambalotti
Working Paper 25039
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25039
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018
We are grateful to Carlo Favero, Stefano Neri, and Ken West for their thoughtful feedback, to
Ozge Akinci, Giancarlo Corsetti, Stefano Eusepi, Paolo Pesenti, and several other New York Fed
economists for very helpful suggestions, and to Brandyn Bok for outstanding research assistance.
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
position of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Dallas, the Federal Reserve System, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Marco Del Negro, Domenico Giannone, Marc P. Giannoni, and Andrea Tambalotti.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Global Trends in Interest Rates
Marco Del Negro, Domenico Giannone, Marc P. Giannoni, and Andrea Tambalotti
NBER Working Paper No. 25039
September 2018
JEL No. E43,E44,F31,G12
ABSTRACT
The trend in the world real interest rate for safe and liquid assets fluctuated close to 2 percent for
more than a century, but has dropped significantly over the past three decades. This decline has
been common among advanced economies, as trends in real interest rates across countries have
converged over this period. It was driven by an increase in the convenience yield for safety and
liquidity and by lower global economic growth.
Marco Del Negro Marc P. Giannoni
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas
Research and Statistics Group Research Department
33 Liberty Street, 3rd Floor 2200 N Pearl St.
New York, NY 10045 Dallas, TX 75201
marco.delnegro@ny.frb.org United States
mpgiannoni@gmail.com
Domenico Giannone
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Andrea Tambalotti
Research and Statistics Group Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street, 3rd Floor Research and Statistics Group
New York, NY 10045 33 Liberty Street, 3rd Floor
dgiannon2@gmail.com New York, NY 10045
a.tambalotti@gmail.com
An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25039

1
1 Introduction
Ten years after the most acute phase of the financial crisis, the world economy remains
mired in a low-interest-rate environment. At the time of this writing, the nominal yields on
ten-year government bonds are below 3 percent in the United States, a bit above 1 percent
in the U.K., around 40 basis points in Germany, and essentially zero in Japan. How unusual
is this situation from a historical perspective? What role do global factors play in depressing
interest rates? Does this phenomenon reflect only headwinds still emanating from the global
financial crisis that will eventually dissipate, or is it connected to secular developments that
partly predate the Great Recession?
To address these questions, we study the joint dynamics of short- and long-term interest
rates, inflation, and consumption for seven now-advanced economies since 1870. We do so
through a flexible time-series model—a vector autoregression (VAR) with common trends.
This econometric tool allows us to use economic theory to model and interpret the long-run
relationships across variables, while remaining agnostic on whether these restrictions hold at
otherfrequencies. Forexample, theabsenceofarbitrageopportunitiesinthelong-runimplies
that we can interpret the estimated common trend in real interest rates across countries as
the trend in the world real interest rate. The same theoretical framework also suggests a
decomposition of this trend into some of its potential drivers, such as global consumption
growth.
The interest rates in our data set are on either government securities or close substitutes,
which are relatively safe and liquid compared to other privately issued assets. Therefore, we
allow the convenience yield for safety and liquidity offered by these “safe” assets to play a
role in driving the international cross section of returns. To measure this convenience yield,
the empirical analysis also includes Moody’s Baa corporate bond yield for the United States,
as in Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012). Under certain assumptions, which we
will discuss, this information is sufficient to capture the long-run effect of convenience on
the world interest rate. This approach is similar to the one we pursued in Del Negro et al.
(2017), though that paper focused only on U.S. data over a much shorter sample.
Four main results emerge from our empirical analysis. First, the estimated trend in the
world real interest rate is stable around values a bit below 2 percent through the 1940s. It
risesgraduallyafterWorldWarII,toapeakcloseto2.5percentaround1980, butithasbeen
declining ever since, dipping to about 0.5 percent in 2016, the last available year of data.
The exact level of this trend is surrounded by substantial uncertainty, but the drop over the

2
last few decades is precisely estimated. A decline of this magnitude is unprecedented in our
sample. It did not even occur during the Great Depression in the 1930s.
Second, the trend in the world interest rate since the late 1970s essentially coincides
with that of the U.S. In other words, the U.S. trend is the global trend over the past four
decades. In fact, this has been increasingly the case for almost all other countries in our
sample: idiosyncratic trends have been vanishing since the late 1970s. This convergence
in cross-country interest rates is arguably the result of growing integration in international
asset markets.1
Third, the trend decline in the world real interest rate over the last few decades is driven
to a significant extent by an increase in convenience yields, which points to a growing imbal-
ance between the global demand for safety and liquidity and its supply. This contribution
is especially concentrated in the period since the mid-1990s, supporting the view that the
Asian financial crisis of 1997 and the Russian default in 1998, with the ensuing collapse of
LTCM, were key turning points in the emergence of global imbalances (e.g., Bernanke, 2005;
Bernanke et al., 2011; Caballero and Krishnamurthy, 2009; Caballero, 2010; Caballero and
Farhi, 2014; Caballero et al., 2015; Gourinchas and Rey, 2016; Hall, 2016; Caballero et al.,
2017; Caballero, 2018).
Fourth, a global decline in the growth rate of per-capita consumption, possibly linked to
demographic shifts, is a further notable factor pushing global real rates lower. Its contribu-
tion is comparable in magnitude to that of the convenience yield since 1980, but only about
half as important over the last twenty years (and less precisely estimated).
An important implication of these findings is that the persistent macroeconomic head-
winds emanating from the financial crisis, including the effects of the extraordinary policies
that were put in place to combat it, are far from being the only cause of the low-interest-rate
environment. Longer-standing secular forces connected with a decline in economic growth
since the early 1980s and the rise of convenience yields since the late 1990s also appear to
be crucial culprits, even though these trends might have been exacerbated by the crisis. In
fact, Caballero (2018) observes that the causality might run the other way, from the global
safe asset imbalances that emerged in the late 1990s, depressing safe returns, to the financial
fragility and macroeconomic turbulence that have afflicted the world economy since then.
1Our finding of a “global trend” in real interest rates overshadowing country-specific trends presents
interesting similarities with the findings of recent literature that emphasizes the emergence of a “global
cycle”—or global factor—explaining a very large share of the variance in returns of risky assets around the
world (e.g., Miranda-Agrippino and Rey, 2015; Gerko and Rey, 2017).