NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHEN DOES PRODUCT LIABILITY RISK CHILL INNOVATION? EVIDENCE
FROM MEDICAL IMPLANTS
Alberto Galasso
Hong Luo
Working Paper 25068
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25068
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018
We thank Philippe Aghion, James Dana, Michael Frakes, Matt Grennan, Deepak Hegde, Curtis
Huttenhower, Arti Rai, Kathryn Spier, Ross Schmucki, Martin Watzinger, Rosemarie Ziedonis
and seminar participants at Columbia Business School, the University of Toronto, the Innovation
conference at the London School of Economics, the IFN Stockholm Entrepreneurship and
Innovation conference, the 2018 ASSA annual meeting in Philadelphia, and the Duke Empirical
Health Law conference for helpful comments. Madeleine Rawling, Taro Tan, Melanie Vig,
Esther Yan, Louise Yu, and Darya Zotova provided excellent research assistance. We are grateful
for financial support from the Michael Lee-Chin Family Institute for Corporate Citizenship at the
University of Toronto and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Alberto Galasso and Hong Luo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

When does Product Liability Risk Chill Innovation? Evidence from Medical Implants
Alberto Galasso and Hong Luo
NBER Working Paper No. 25068
September 2018
JEL No. K13,O31,O32,O34
ABSTRACT
Liability laws designed to compensate for harms caused by defective products may also affect
innovation. We examine this issue by exploiting a major quasi-exogenous increase in liability risk
faced by US suppliers of polymers used to manufacture medical implants. Difference-in-
differences analyses show that this surge in suppliers’ liability risk had a large and negative
impact on downstream innovation in medical implants, but it had no significant effect on
upstream polymer patenting. Our findings suggest that liability risk can percolate throughout a
vertical chain and may have a significant chilling effect on downstream innovation.
Alberto Galasso
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
alberto.galasso@rotman.utoronto.ca
Hong Luo
Harvard University
Morgan Hall 241
Soldiers Field Road
Boston, MA 02163
hluo@hbs.edu

1 Introduction
The relationship between risk, uncertainty and investments is fundamental to understanding economic
growth (interalia, seeBernanke, 1983; Bloom, 2009; Fernandez-Villaverde et al. 2015). A major source
of risk faced by firms arises from product liability laws that are designed to protect customers from
defective or dangerous products (Jarrell and Peltzman, 1985; Hay and Spier, 2005). In 2016, product
liability cases accounted for roughly 70 percent of the personal injury civil cases filed in US district
courts. These cases often make the headlines because of their large damage awards. For example,
General Motors recently paid about $2.5 billion in penalties and settlements in cases involving faulty
ignition switches linked to 124 deaths and 275 injuries. Recently, advances in fields such as artificial
intelligenceandsophisticatedrobotics(e.g.,driverlesscars,robot-assistedsurgeries,androbotcaregivers
for the elderly and disabled) have rekindled lively policy debates over whether existing liability systems
constrain technological progress and present an opportunity to redesign liability rules.1
In an influential book examining more than 100 industries across major trading nations, Porter
(1990) recommends “a systematic overhaul of the U.S. product liability system," arguing that in the
U.S., “product liability is so extreme and uncertain as to retard innovation." This idea that liability is
high and has a negative effect on firms’ willingness to develop new technologies is common in the legal
literature(e.g.,Huber,1989; ParchomovskyandStein,2008;Priest,2011); hasshapedhigh-profilelegal
cases (e.g., the 2007 Riegel v. Medtronic Supreme Court case); and often underlies the arguments by
proponents of tort reforms.2
Despite its intuitive appeal, this widely-adopted negative view does not seem to find support in the
scarceempiricalevidencelinkingliabilityriskandinnovation. Ifanything,thetwolarge-sampleempirical
studies examining this issue–Viscusi and Moore (1993) and Galasso and Luo (2017)–show that, on
average,higherliabilityriskinduceshigherR&Dspendingandmorepatenting. Theoreticalframeworks
in both studies show that the impact of liability risk on innovation depends on the characteristics of
1Indeed, in February 2017, the European Parliament adopted–by a large majority–a resolution containing recom-
mendationsforEU-widelegislationtoregulate“sophisticatedrobots,bots,androidsandothermanifestationsofartificial
intelligence"andtoestablishlegislativeinstrumentsrelatedtotheliabilityfortheiractions(EuropeanParliament,2017).
2Forexample,inAugust2017,theAmericanTortReformAssociation(ATRA)filedanamicusbriefintheMassachusetts
case of Rafferty vs. Merck, arguing that excessive liability risk “would substantially disrupt innovators’ ability to invest
in furtherinnovation and theirincentiveto innovate."
2

the technologies and the economic environment. In particular, while liability risk may chill innovation
due to higher costs, it may also incentivize the development of risk-mitigating technologies and safer
product designs that reduce the likelihood of injuries.
While the theoretical ambiguity and the general lack of empirical support suggest that wholesale
scaling back of the liability system may not be the appropriate policy, a natural question arises: Are
there conditionsunder whichthe productliability systemislikely to generate unintended, negative effects
on innovation? Identification and examination of such conditions can offer useful information to policy
makers. This paper provides new insights in this direction by characterizing and empirically analyzing
an environment in which an increase in liability risk had a substantial negative effect on innovation.
Specifically, exploiting a quasi-exogenous surge in liability risk that affected medical implants in the
early1990s,weshowthatwhenlarge, commonsuppliersfacehighuncertaintyaboutliability,theresult
may be a large decline in downstream innovation.
Implants aremedical devices placed inside or on the surfaceof the body, such as replacement joints,
intraocular lenses, fixation devices, and heart valves. The implantable device market is large and
innovative and accounts for roughly 25 percent of total medical device sales (Lind, 2017), 20 percent
of medical device patenting, and about 60 percent of Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Class III
device applications.3 Medical implants are manufactured using biomaterials that are direct or modified
applicationsofcommonmaterialssuchasmetals,polymersandceramics. Theserawmaterialsareoften
produced by large companies that supply to a wide range of sectors in the economy. During the 1970s
and 1980s, large firms, such as DuPont and Dow Chemicals, were the dominant suppliers of polymers
and silicone used in many implants, including prostheses, body tissues, pacemakers, and heart valves
(Aronoff, 1995). The standard policy for these large companies was to not withhold materials from
the medical sector and to warn device producers that suppliers were not responsible for testing and
determining the safety of implants (Feder, 1994; Kerouac, 2001).
In the late 1980s, a series of unexpected and widespread problems arose with temporomandibular
joint (TMJ) jaw implants and silicone breast implants. Vitek, the leading producer of TMJ implants
3Class-III devices are devices used to support or sustain human life; devices of substantial importance in preventing
impairmentofhuman health;ordevices thatpresenta potential,unreasonable risk ofillnessorinjury.
3