NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANKING ON THE BOOM, TRIPPED BY THE BUST:
BANKS AND THE WORLD WAR I AGRICULTURAL PRICE SHOCK
Matthew S. Jaremski
David C. Wheelock
Working Paper 25159
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25159
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2018, Revised June 2019
The authors thank Lee Alston, Mark Carlson, Matteo Crosignani, Chris Hanes and participants in
the 2018 Cliometrics conference, Central New York Economic History Conference, Economic
History Association Annual Meetings, and NBER Summer Institute for comments on earlier
versions of this paper. Views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily official
positions of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Matthew S. Jaremski and David C. Wheelock. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Banking on the Boom, Tripped by the Bust: Banks and the World War I Agricultural Price
Shock
Matthew S. Jaremski and David C. Wheelock
NBER Working Paper No. 25159
October 2018, Revised June 2019
JEL No. E58,N21,N22
ABSTRACT
How do banks respond to asset booms? This paper examines i) how U.S. banks responded to the
World War I farmland boom; ii) the impact of regulation; and iii) how bank closures exacerbated
the post-war bust. The boom encouraged new bank formation and balance sheet expansion
(especially by new banks). Deposit insurance amplified the impact of rising crop prices on bank
portfolios, while higher minimum capital requirements dampened the effects. Banks that
responded most aggressively to the asset boom had a higher probability of closing in the bust, and
counties with more bank closures experienced larger declines in land prices.
Matthew S. Jaremski
Utah State University
Department of Economics and Finance
3565 Old Main Hill
Logan, UT 84322
and NBER
matthew.jaremski@usu.edu
David C. Wheelock
Research Division
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
P.O. Box 442
St. Louis, MO 63166-0442
david.c.wheelock@stls.frb.org

1. Introduction
Asset price booms and busts are often intertwined with lending booms and busts.
Although possibly triggered by a fundamental shock, rising asset prices can stimulate lending
and increased leverage, which in turn causes asset prices to rise further, generating more lending,
and so on. Similarly, falling asset prices can force debt contraction and deleveraging that
reinforce the decline in asset prices. Large declines in asset prices can be disruptive, especially
when preceded by rapid credit growth or involve highly-leveraged assets such as real estate (e.g.,
Kindleberger 1978; Minsky 1986; Borio and Lowe 2002; Eichengreen and Mitchener 2004;
Reinhart and Rogoff 2009; Schularick and Taylor 2012).1 The interrelationship between asset
prices and lending booms thus raises important questions, including how various regulations and
policies might affect the vulnerability of the banking system to asset price shocks, and how bank
lending and instability can exacerbate asset price movements.
Many studies have investigated these questions in the context of the U.S. house price
boom of the early-to-mid 2000s and financial crisis of 2008-09. For example, researchers have
highlighted the outsized role of the “shadow” banking system in supplying credit that fueled the
boom (e.g., Loutskina and Strahan 2009; Mian and Sufi 2009), while others focused on credit
demand (e.g., Glaeser et al. 2012; Dell’Ariccia et al. 2012). Still other studies have examined the
impact of the financial crisis and bank distress on economic activity during and after the crisis
(e.g., Campello et al. 2010; Ivashina and Scharfstein 2010; Chodorow-Reich 2014; Gertler and
Gilchrist 2018). However, the complexity of modern financial systems, which include banks
with international operations and off-balance sheet activities as well as shadow banks and other
forms of intermediation, can obscure fundamental relationships. Thus, detailed examinations of
episodes when such factors were not in play can be especially useful for identifying key
relationships between asset booms and the banking system, as well as the effects of different
policies that are hard to discern in more complex environments.
This paper studies the interplay of bank lending and asset prices in the boom-bust cycle
affecting U.S. agricultural land prices during and after World War I. Unlike the recent U.S.
house price boom, where the underlying shock or set of shocks that triggered the boom has
proved difficult to identify conclusively, the farmland boom of the 1910s had a clearly
1 Theoretical descriptions of how credit cycles can amplify real shocks include Rajan (1994), Kiyotaki and Moore
(1997), Geanakoplos (2010), and Nuňo and Thomas (2017).
1

identifiable trigger.2 The wartime collapse of European agriculture drove commodity prices
sharply higher and constituted an external demand shock that sparked the boom in U.S. farmland
prices. However, the boom was short-lived. European production bounced back quickly when
the war ended, driving down crop prices and land values in the United States, and initiating a
wave of farm foreclosures and bank failures in the early 1920s (Alston 1983; Alston, et al. 1994).
The historical episode is particularly advantageous for studying the interrelationships
between lending and asset price booms and busts because bank lending at the time was decidedly
local. Federal law prohibited interstate branch banking, and most states either prohibited or
severely restricted branching within their borders. Moreover, with the automobile still in its
infancy and paved roads almost nonexistent in rural areas, it would have been impractical for
most farmers to obtain services from a bank located more than a few miles from their home.
Thus, the balance sheet information we observe for individual banks reflects their lending to
local farmers, and we can approximate local income shocks using detailed information about
crop production in a bank’s county.3 Specifically, we calculate a county-specific farm output
price shock by applying the annual nation-wide price changes of 11 major crops to the county
output shares of each crop before the war. This provides exogenous variation both across time
and within a state to identify the effects of the price shock.
In two important studies of the episode, Rajan and Ramcharan (2015a, 2016) find that
counties with more banks experienced larger increases in farmland prices and mortgage debt
during the boom and suffered larger price declines and more bank failures during the bust.
Whereas Rajan and Ramcharan examine the effects of credit availability (as reflected in the
number of banks present in a county) and bank suspensions on county-level land prices, here we
use biennial balance sheet data for individual banks in 18 agricultural states for 1908-20 to
examine how the price shock affected i) the establishment of new banks, ii) bank portfolio
decisions, and iii) the determinants of bank closures when farm prices and incomes ultimately
collapsed. The bank-level data enable us to test whether state banking policies amplified or
dampened the impact of asset price shocks on the banking system, and to use an instrumental
2 Studies attribute the U.S. housing boom to, among other things, loose monetary policy (Taylor 2010), a savings
“glut” and heightened demand for safe U.S. financial assets (Bernanke 2005), a bubble (Case and Shiller 2003), and
financial market innovations including securitization of subprime mortgages (Loutskina and Strahan 2009; Mian and
Sufi 2009).
3 The county is a reasonable approximation of the area constituting a rural banking market at the time. Most
empirical studies define banking markets at the MSA or rural county level even in modern times.
2