NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE IMPACT OF CONSUMER CREDIT ACCESS ON UNEMPLOYMENT
Kyle F. Herkenhoff
Working Paper 25187
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25187
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2018
I would like to thank Gary Hansen, Lee Ohanian, and Pierre-Olivier Weill for their guidance and
support. I would like to thank Andy Atkeson, Manuel Amador, Yves Balasko, Hugo Hopenhayn,
Erik Hurst, Tim Kehoe, John Kennes, Ricardo Lagos, Ellen McGrattan, Seth Neumuller, Guido
Menzio, Casey Mulligan, Ana Luisa Pessoa Araujo, Fabrizio Perri, Ed Prescott, Andrea Raffo,
Guillaume Rocheteau, Jim Schmitz, Robert Shimer, and Nancy Stokey for useful comments. This
paper was funded This paper was partly written at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis and
the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. I am especially grateful for their hospitality. This research
was supported by the National Science Foundation (Award No. SES-1824422) and the UCLA
Ziman Center for Real Estate. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Kyle F. Herkenhoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Impact of Consumer Credit Access on Unemployment
Kyle F. Herkenhoff
NBER Working Paper No. 25187
October 2018
JEL No. E2,E24,J01,J24,J6,J64
ABSTRACT
Unemployed households' access to unsecured revolving credit more than tripled over the last
three decades. This paper analyzes how both cyclical fluctuations and trend increases in credit
access impact the business cycle. The main quantitative result is that credit expansions and
contractions have contributed to moderately deeper and more protracted recessions over the last
40 years. As more individuals obtained credit from 1977 to 2010, cyclical credit fluctuations
affected a larger share of the population and became more important determinants of employment
dynamics. Even though business cycles are more volatile, newborns strictly prefer to live in the
economy with growing, but fluctuating, access to credit markets.
Kyle F. Herkenhoff
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
kyle.herkenhoff@gmail.com

The Impact of Consumer Credit Access on
Unemployment∗
Kyle F. Herkenhoff†
University of Minnesota
August 18, 2018
Abstract
Unemployedhouseholds’accesstounsecuredrevolvingcreditmorethantripledover
the last three decades. This paper analyzes how both cyclical fluctuations and trend
increases in credit access impact the business cycle. The main quantitative result is
that credit expansions and contractions have contributed to moderately deeper and
more protracted recessions over the last 40 years. As more individuals obtained credit
from 1977 to 2010, cyclical credit fluctuations affected a larger share of the population
and became more important determinants of employment dynamics. Even though
business cycles are more volatile, newborns strictly prefer to live in the economy with
growing, but fluctuating, access to credit markets.
The fraction of unemployed households with access to unsecured revolving credit (e.g.
credit cards) increased from 13% in 1977 to 45% in 2010. Such access to credit is quanti-
tatively important for the unemployed. Low asset unemployed households replace approxi-
mately 15% of lost income through unsecured borrowing (Sullivan [2008]) while nearly 40%
∗IwouldliketothankGaryHansen,LeeOhanian,andPierre-OlivierWeillfortheirguidanceandsupport.
I would like to thank Andy Atkeson, Manuel Amador, Yves Balasko, Hugo Hopenhayn, Erik Hurst, Tim
Kehoe,JohnKennes,RicardoLagos,EllenMcGrattan,SethNeumuller,GuidoMenzio,CaseyMulligan,Ana
LuisaPessoaAraujo,FabrizioPerri,EdPrescott,AndreaRaffo,GuillaumeRocheteau,JimSchmitz,Robert
Shimer, and Nancy Stokey for useful comments. This paper was funded This paper was partly written
at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis and the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. I am especially
grateful for their hospitality. This research was supported by the National Science Foundation (Award No.
SES-1824422) and the UCLA Ziman Center for Real Estate.
†Correspondence: kfh@umn.edu
1

of households self-report defaulting on non-mortgage payments in response to job loss (Hurd
and Rohwedder [2010]). Moreover, recent work by Herkenhoff, Phillips, and Cohen-Cole
[2015] has shown that the ability to borrow significantly prolongs unemployment durations
and raises replacement wages. At the same time that self-insurance opportunities expanded
through credit markets, employment recoveries slowed (Bachmann [2009]). Although a large
literature including Ljungqvist and Sargent [1998] examines the impact of unemployment
benefit duration and replacement rates on employment incentives and economic recoveries,
the macroeconomic effects of credit access on households’ job finding behavior remains an
open question. In this paper, I theoretically and quantitatively examine how growth and
fluctuations in households’ access to credit markets since the 1970s have affected the way
employment evolves over the business cycle.
To address this question, the paper develops a general equilibrium search and matching
model with defaultable debt. Relative to existing defaultable debt models such as Chat-
terjee, Corbae, Nakajima, and R´ıos-Rull [2007], Livshits, MacGee, and Tertilt [2007], and
Nakajima and R´ıos-Rull [2014], the framework generates interactions between heterogeneous
employment outcomes and heterogeneous credit histories. The model allows me to measure
how consumer credit growth and fluctuations have affected employment recoveries and wel-
fare from 1977 to 2012 in the United States. There are three main results. First, credit
expansions and contractions have contributed to moderately deeper and more protracted re-
cessions over the last 40 years. As more individuals obtained credit access from 1977 to 2010,
credit fluctuations affected a larger share of the population and became more important de-
terminants of employment dynamics. Second, even though business cycles are more volatile,
newborn agents are willing to give up a positive amount of lifetime consumption in order to
live in the economy in which credit is stochastically expanding to 2010 levels of credit, as
opposed to the economy with fixed 1977 levels of credit. And finally, in the absence of pro-
cyclical credit fluctuations, slow-moving trend credit growth may actually dampen business
cycle dynamics.
There are two opposing forces generating these results. When credit access expands in
the short run, before households adjust their saving behavior, this acts like a safety net and
households optimally search for better-paying but harder-to-find jobs knowing that if the
job search fails they can use credit to smooth consumption. If credit grows coming out of a
recession,thismayleadtoelevatedunemploymentintheshortrunandaslowerrecovery; this
is what I call the expansion effect of credit. On the other hand, if households have a larger
but constant level of credit access, they may actually respond less to productivity changes.
The reason is that with greater long-run levels of credit access, more individuals dissave and
2