NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CONNECTING TO POWER:
POLITICAL CONNECTIONS, INNOVATION, AND FIRM DYNAMICS
Ufuk Akcigit
Salomé Baslandze
Francesca Lotti
Working Paper 25136
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25136
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2018
We thank Marco Chiurato, Salvatore Di Novo, and Marta Prato for excellent research assistance and
our discussants Stefania Albanesi, Serdar Dinc, Stuart Graham, and Matteo Maggiori, for very constructive
comments. We thank seminar and conference participants at the University of Chicago, MIT, Harvard,
Penn State, NYU, ASSA Meetings, Richmond Fed, Georgetown University, Institute for Fiscal Studies,
Harvard Business School, World Bank, Brandeis University, Tufts University, University College
London, University of Maryland, EIEF, Bank of Italy, SKEMA Business School, CEPR Symposium,
Philadelphia Fed, College de France, Banque de France, Turkish Central Bank, IESE, St. Louis Fed,
University of Toronto Rotman, New York Fed, Atlanta Fed, INSEAD, University of Zurich, Munich
Summer Institute, SED Mexico, INPS, NBER Entrepreneurship meeting, NBER Political Economy
meeting, NBER Productivity lunch meeting for very helpful feedback and discussions. For providing
invaluable support with the data access, we thank the research division of the Social Security Institute
of Italy (INPS), especially Massimo Antichi, Mariella Cozzolino, Edoardo Di Porto, and Paolo Naticchioni.
The views expressed by the authors do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of Italy, INPS, the
Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Ufuk Akcigit, Salomé Baslandze, and Francesca Lotti. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Connecting to Power: Political Connections, Innovation, and Firm Dynamics
Ufuk Akcigit, Salomé Baslandze, and Francesca Lotti
NBER Working Paper No. 25136
October 2018, Revised April 2020
JEL No. D70,O3,O4
ABSTRACT
How do political connections affect firm dynamics, innovation, and creative destruction? To answer
this question, we build a firm dynamics model, where we allow firms to invest in innovation and/or
political connection to advance their productivity and to overcome certain market frictions. Our model
generates a number of theoretical testable predictions and highlights a new interaction between static
gains and dynamic losses from rent-seeking in aggregate productivity. We test the predictions of our
model using a brand-new dataset on Italian firms and their workers, spanning the period from 1993
to 2014, where we merge: (i) firm-level balance sheet data; (ii) social security data on the universe
of workers; (iii) patent data from the European Patent Office; (iv) the national registry of local politicians;
and (v) detailed data on local elections in Italy. We find that firm-level political connections are widespread,
especially among large firms, and that industries with a larger share of politically connected firms
feature worse firm dynamics. We identify a leadership paradox: when compared to their competitors,
market leaders are much more likely to be politically connected, but much less likely to innovate. In
addition, political connections relate to a higher rate of survival, as well as growth in employment
and revenue, but not in productivity – a result that we also confirm using a regression discontinuity
design.
Ufuk Akcigit Francesca Lotti
Department of Economics Structural Economic Analysis Department
University of Chicago Bank of Italy
1126 East 59th Street via Nazionale 91, 00184 Rome (IT)
Saieh Hall, Office 403 francesca.lotti@bancaditalia.it
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
uakcigit@uchicago.edu
Salomé Baslandze
Einaudi Institue for Economics and Finance (EIEF)
Via Sallustiana 62
Rome 00187
Italy
salome.baslandze@eief.it

onnecting to ower olitical onnections nnovation and irm ynamics
C P : P C , I , F D
“There are public officials who, instead of serving the interests of the community, put them-
selves at the service of private individuals. It’s a devastating situation: those firms that have
political and administrative support, thanks to the “good” friend, manage to obtain illicit
benefits, while honest companies look astonished at what happens."
Carmelo Zuccaro, Chief Prosecutor of Catania1
La Sicilia, May 3rd, 2018
1 Introduction
In May 2018, Mr. Carmelo Zuccaro, the chief prosecutor of the Sicilian port city of Catania, uttered
the above quote during his press conference on the “Black Job” operation against the misconduct
of local politicians. This quote succinctly demonstrates how some firms can secure preferential
treatment in the market, thanks in no small part to their connections to local politicians. How
widespreadare suchconnectionsto localpoliticians, and howdo theyaffectfirm dynamics, market
competition, innovation, and the overall productivity process in the economy? This paper studies
these questions, both theoretically and empirically.
Agrowingbodyofliteraturearguesthatfactorreallocationfromlessproductivetomoreproduc-
tive firms is an important source of productivity growth (e.g., Bartelsman and Doms, 2000; Foster
et al., 2001, 2006). Similarly, innovation-based endogenous growth models (e.g., Grossman and
Helpman,1991;AghionandHowitt,1992)assertthattheprocessofcreativedestruction,wherebyun-
productive incumbents are replaced by innovative new entrants, is the key ingredient for economic
growth. These models assume that it is sufficient for an entrepreneur to innovate the most superior
product or production technology to seamlessly replace an incumbent firm, and thus become the
new market leader. However, many examples, such as the one in the opening paragraph, illustrate
that there might be more to it than that. Political connections can help some firms dominate a
market, even if they do not necessarily introduce a more superior product or process.
Our analysis begins with a theoretical investigation of how political connections could influence
an economy’s business dynamism, new firm creation, factor reallocation, and innovation. To orga-
nize our thoughts, we build an illustrative Schumpeterian creative destruction model where firms
face regulatory burdens.2 As in Restuccia and Rogerson (2008); Hsieh and Klenow (2009); Garicano
et al. (2016), we model these regulatory burdens as wedges in the production process of a firm that
may be alleviated by connecting with politicians, but those connections are costly. The static prob-
lem implies a threshold rule of firm size, above which firms find it profitable to incur the cost of
connectionstolowertheburdenofregulations–hencelargerfirms(marketleaders)aremorelikely
to be politically connected. We also discover that firms that become connected enjoy temporarily
higher employment and sales growth but have lower labor productivity growth. However, in a dy-
namic perspective, industries that have politically connected incumbents face lower entry by new
firms. Intuitively, new firms need to compete with incumbents not only in productivity, but they
also need to overcome the regulatory or bureaucratic burden, to which the connected incumbent is
1https://www.lasicilia.it/news/cronaca/157854/il-procuratore-zuccaro-ci-sono-funzionari-pubblici-al-servizio-di-privati.html
2Foranextensiveevidenceonhighregulatory/bureaucraticburdenandpoliticalconnectionsinItaly,seeSection4.2.
1

onnecting to ower olitical onnections nnovation and irm ynamics
C P : P C , I , F D
already immune. An additional amplification comes from the fact that incumbents anticipate this
dynamic effect and strategically choose to become politically connected to preempt competition.
Themodelhighlightstheimportantcontrastingfacetsoffirm-levelconnectionsfortheaggregate
economy. Statically, connections may be beneficial in overcoming certain market frictions; however,
they may also bring dynamic losses, since the incumbents’ connections give them an unfair ad-
vantage over other market participants. In this way, while political connections might be desirable
for static considerations, they distort competition and firm dynamics, resulting in markets that are
dominated by older and larger firms with low innovation and productivity growth. This interplay
is at the heart of both our empirical and theoretical constructs.
Thesecondpartofthepaperisdevotedtothestudyofthesetheoreticalideasusingabrand-new
micro-level confidential data, focusing on Italian firms and politicians from 1993 to 2014. There are
three main reasons for this. First, as hinted by our opening story, there is ample anecdotal evidence
for the link between political power and the corporate sector in Italy. Perhaps the largest manifesta-
tion of this presumption is the historical episode of Mani Pulite (“Clean Hands”) – an investigation
intoahugepoliticalscandal,whicheventuallyuncoveredadensenetworkofcorruptionandbribery
throughout Italy in the early 1990s.
Second, to rigorously study all the channels through which political connections affect firm
dynamics,weneedaverydetailed,large-scalemicrodatasetonfirmsandtheirpoliticalconnections.
To this end, we construct a new dataset for the Italian economy, spanning the entire period of 1993-
2014, wherein we merge: (i) firm-level balance sheet data; (ii) social security data on the universe
of workers; (iii) patent data from the European Patent Office; (iv) the national registry of local
politicians; and (v) detailed data on local elections in Italy. We define a firm as being politically
connected at time t if the firm employs at least one local politician at time t. The nature of this data
allows us to exploit rich heterogeneity in the type of connection – based on the level or rank of a
position, or the party affiliation of a politician employed. Our unique, five-way data match allows
us to examine at the micro level how firms change their competition strategy as they gain market
power, or what firm-level outcomes are associated with (or implied by) political connections. In
addition, we study how factor reallocation among incumbents and new firms is affected by the
presence of political connections.
Third, the Italian economy has been performing poorly, particularly in terms of productivity
growth, since the 1990s (see, for instance, Bugamelli and Lotti, 2018). While many reasons could
be at play for low and stalling aggregate productivity, we try to shed some light on the aggregate
implications of firm-level political connections through their effect on firm dynamics, innovation
incentives, and competition.
The focus on local politicians – at the municipal, provincial, and regional level – is also a dis-
tinctive feature of our analysis relative to most of the empirical literature that looks at high-profile
connections. Indeed, local-level connections are much more pervasive and usually harder to iden-
tify. In addition, local politicians hold extensive power: among other duties, they have authority
over and responsibility for the provision of local public goods and services; administrative author-
ity over the issuing of various permits and licenses; and are responsible for the majority of the
2