NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE IN SOCIAL LEARNING
Arun G. Chandrasekhar
Benjamin Golub
He Yang
Working Paper 25169
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25169
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2018
We thank Ran Abramitzky, Nageeb Ali, Marcella Alsan, Abhijit Banerjee, Emily Breza, Leo
Bursztyn, Gabriel Carroll, Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas, Georgy Egorov, Greg Fischer, Alex
Frankel, Maitreesh Ghatak, Rema Hanna, Matthew O. Jackson, Navin Kartik, Asim Khwaja,
Scott Kominers, Michael Kremer, Horacio Larreguy, Jeremy Magruder, Ted Miguel, Melanie
Morten, Kaivan Munshi, Ben Olken, Juan Ortner, Andrei Shleifer, Charlie Sprenger, Rob
Townsend, Nils Wernerfelt, Juan Pablo Xandri, Leeat Yariv, as well as participants at the
Berkeley Development Seminar, the MIT/Harvard Development Seminar, the Princeton
Behavioral Seminar, the Chicago Booth Micro Seminar, the LSE CEP-STICERD Applications
Seminar, the Stanford Junior Faculty Workshop, the Coalition Theory Network Workshop, and
the Workshop on Information and Social Economics at Caltech. We are grateful to Linh To for a
very helpful detailed reading of an earlier draft. Financial support from the NSF under grants
SES-1156182 and SES-1559469, SCID at SIEPR, and IRiSS is gratefully acknowledged. We
thank Alokik Mishra, Devika Lakhote, Tithee Mukhopadhyay, Gowri Nagraj, Jimmy Narang,
Aneesha Parvathaneni, and Vedika Vyas for their excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Arun G. Chandrasekhar, Benjamin Golub, and He Yang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Signaling, Shame, and Silence in Social Learning
Arun G. Chandrasekhar, Benjamin Golub, and He Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 25169
October 2018
JEL No. D02,D03,D8,D83,D85,D91,O1,O12,O17,Z13
ABSTRACT
We examine how a social stigma of seeking information can inhibit learning. Consider a Seeker
of uncertain ability who can learn about a task from an Advisor. If higher-ability Seekers need
information less, then a Seeker concerned about reputation may refrain from asking to avoid
signaling low ability. Separately, low-ability individuals may feel inhibited even if their ability is
known and there is nothing to signal, an effect we term shame. Signaling and shame constitute an
overall stigma of seeking information. We distinguish between the constituent parts of stigma in a
simple model and then perform an experiment with treatments designed to detect both effects.
Seekers have three days to retrieve information from paired Advisors in a field setting. The first
arm varies whether needing information is correlated with ability; the second varies whether a
Seeker's ability is revealed to the paired Advisor, irrespective of the seeking decision. We find
that low-ability individuals do face large stigma inhibitions: there is a 55% decline in the
probability of seeking when the need for information is correlated with cognitive ability. The
second arm allows us to assess the contributions of signaling and shame, and, under structural
assumptions, to estimate their relative magnitudes. We find signaling to be the dominant force
overall. The shame effect is particularly pronounced among socially close pairs (in terms of
network distance and caste co-membership) whereas signaling concerns dominate for more
distant pairs.
Arun G. Chandrasekhar He Yang
Department of Economics Harvard University
Stanford University 1805 Cambridge St
579 Serra Mall Stanford, Cambridge, MA 02138
CA 94305 heyang.um@gmail.com
and NBER
arungc@stanford.edu
Benjamin Golub
Harvard University
Littauer Center, 308
1805 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
ben.golub@gmail.com

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE 1
1. Introduction
Even a fool, when he holdeth his peace, is counted wise; and he that shutteth
his lips is esteemed as a man of understanding.
Proverbs 17:28
Information and advice from others can be crucial in making people aware of opportunities
and guiding them to better choices—at work, in financial decisions, and in many other
situations (Duflo and Saez, 2003; Jensen, 2010; Cole and Fernando, 2014). Indeed, various
interventions and policies—especially in environments where formal information channels
are missing or unsuited to people’s needs—seek to leverage social learning in order to spread
information widely.1 An important consideration is that to learn something, a person often
needs to ask. This action of asking for or seeking information, in turn, is endogenous and
may be inefficiently inhibited.2
We surveyed 122 villagers in rural Karnataka, India about their social learning practices
and what inhibitions they face. We focused on several topics: financial products, farming
practices, and health decisions. First, the survey revealed that active learning was consider-
ably less common than passive learning: 49% reported actively asking friends in their village
for information on these topics; meanwhile, 95% reported hearing such information without
asking from friends3 and 90% from media sources (newspapers, TV, and Internet sources).
Second, and more importantly, we found that 88% of the time, respondents reported that
they felt a limit on the number of times they could approach a member of their community
for information; in 64% of these cases, they reported that the cause of their reluctance was
a desire not to appear uninformed or weak. These responses suggest that people trade off
the value of seeking information against concerns about their image, and that there may be
a social stigma of asking questions.
Anessentialfeatureofsuchaninhibitionisthatitinvolvesothers’beliefsabouttheasker—
for instance, whether he is a competent, self-sufficient, or hardworking person. There are two
mechanisms by which the prospect of bad assessments may inhibit people—a distinction that
goes back at least to Goffman’s (1963) seminal study of social stigma. One mechanism—a
signaling concern—is about managing others’ beliefs. For instance, a pupil concerned about
how others perceive him may be reluctant to ask a teacher or a peer basic questions about
an assignment, fearing that this person could infer that the pupil is slow or lazy.4 But
1Examples in the context of economic development include financial and agricultural extension (Conley and
Udry, 2010; Banerjee et al., 2013; Beaman et al., 2018).
2For modeling of other endogenous decisions that enable information flow, see Niehaus (2011), Acemoglu
et al. (2014), Galeotti et al. (2013), and Calvo-Armengol et al. (2015).
3E.g., in conversations initiated by others, or by hearing others’ conversations.
4See B´enabou and Tirole (2006) for a seminal model of signaling in a variety of contexts, with an emphasis
on self-signaling. The effects of signaling in an educational context have recently been studied by Bursztyn
et al. (2016).

SIGNALING, SHAME, AND SILENCE 2
there is another way stigma can inhibit interaction, which is not about managing beliefs but
managing interactions in view of compromised beliefs. To illustrate, the pupil in the example
may simply dislike interacting with those who have a negative assessment of him, no matter
how this assessment came about. In particular, such feelings can occur even when signaling
concerns are irrelevant, because a bad attribute (such as a pupil’s ignorance) is apparent to
the potential Advisor irrespective of his seeking decision. We may call this type of inhibition
shame. Signaling and shame can both stigmatize the asking of questions. Moreover, their
effects depend in subtle ways on the distribution of ability (or other prized attributes) across
a population, and people’s assessment of others on those dimensions.5
In this paper, we focus on two questions. First, does a stigma of asking questions mean-
ingfully inhibit learning? How does it compare with frictions arising from other salient
social boundaries in the community, such as caste? Second, what are the roles and magni-
tudes of the constituent parts of stigma? Understanding which forces matter—and in which
relationships—is especially valuable in understanding how stigma reacts to changes in pol-
icy. Strategic signaling concerns can be alleviated by reducing information asymmetries—for
instance, by facilitating interaction between people who know each other’s abilities well, or
even by revealing that someone is in need of information. Shame and related obstacles, on
the other hand, could be worsened by such an intervention.
In Section 2 we present a model of a decision about whether to seek advice, which is
designed to distinguish the two components of stigma introduced above and study their
distinct but overlapping effects. In the model, a Seeker (he) is deciding whether to ask a
question of an Advisor (she), who may be uncertain about the Seeker’s ability. The Seeker
cares about (i) the instrumental payoff of getting advice, which may depend on his own
ability; (ii) a reputational payoff based on the Advisor’s belief about his ability, which is
affected by his seeking decision because of (i); and, finally, (iii) an interaction payoff arising
from the social interaction in which the advice is sought, which also depends on the Advisor’s
assessment of the Seeker’s ability. The reputational payoff creates signaling concerns while
(iii) brings in the possibility of what we have called a shame effect. We use the model to
derive predictions about the behavioral consequences of the signaling and shame effects.
The model shows that the two effects are very different in how they operate, and how they
depend on priors and information. The signaling effect will not be present if information
5Goffman’s (1963) discussion of the two forces distinguishes the situation of the “discreditable,” who is
inhibited by the possibility of revealing a bad attribute, and the “discredited,” who is inhibited by the
knowledge that is already possessed by those he may interact with; see also his analysis of self-presentation
and “face” in Goffman (1959, 1967). In naming shame, we are guided by psychological studies of the self-
conscious emotions, which define shame as involving “negative feelings about the stable, global self, (‘I’m a
dumb person’),” (Lewis, 1971; Tracy and Robins, 2007), concern about being judged as deficient, and social
withdrawal and concealment of the defective self (Lindsay-Hartz, 1984; Wong and Tsai, 2007). We discuss
these connections further in Section 2.2.