NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CROSS-SECTIONAL SKEWNESS
Simon Oh
Jessica A. Wachter
Working Paper 25113
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25113
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018
We thank Hendrik Bessembinder, John Campbell, Marco Grotteria, Nishad Kapadia, Yapai
Zhang, and seminar participants at the Wharton School for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Simon Oh and Jessica A. Wachter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Cross-sectional Skewness
Simon Oh and Jessica A. Wachter
NBER Working Paper No. 25113
September 2018
JEL No. G12
ABSTRACT
This paper evaluates skewness in the cross-section of stock returns in light of predictions from a
well-known class of models. Cross-sectional skewness in monthly returns far exceeds what the
standard lognormal model of returns would predict. However, skewness in long-run returns
substantially understates what the lognormal model would predict. Nonstationary share dynamics
imply a breakdown in the distinction between market and idiosyncratic risk in the lognormal
model. We present an alternative model that matches the skewness in the data and implies
stationary wealth shares. In this model, idiosyncratic risk is the primary driver of growth in the
economy.
Simon Oh
University of Chicago
sangmino@chicagobooth.edu
Jessica A. Wachter
Department of Finance
2300 SH-DH
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
jwachter@wharton.upenn.edu

1 Introduction
Underlying the cross-section of stock returns is a universe of heterogeneous entities com-
monly referred to as firms. What is the most useful approach to modeling these firms?
For the aggregate market, there is a wide consensus concerning the form a model needs
to take to be a plausible account of the data. While there are important differences,
quantitatively successful models tend to feature a stochastic discount factor with station-
ary growth rates and permanent shocks, combined with aggregate cash flows that, too,
have stationary growth rates and permanent shocks.1 No such consensus exists for the
cross-section.
In this paper we argue that two types of cross-sectional skewness are important for
addressing the question of how to model the cross-section. These are the skewness in
short-term returns and the skewness in long-term returns. We argue that it is useful to
consider both types of skewness together, since explanations for one type of skewness
potentially lead to problems for the other type.
We start with a simple model for stock returns to illustrate the puzzle. Because
the literature has focused on the lognormal distribution, we assume asset returns have a
common lognormal shock and an idiosyncratic shock. This model is consistent with an
equilibrium where agents have constant relative risk aversion and dividends also feature
a common and idiosyncratic shock.
We calibrate this model to the CRSP universe on stock returns. Despite the fact that
the lognormal model implies return skewness, we find that the degree of skewness implied
by the model is far less than monthly cross-sectional skewness in the data. On the other
hand, there is a sense in which the model predicts too much skewness. While long-term
growth in market capitalizations and cumulative returns is highly skewed in the data, we
show that it is even more skewed in the model. The model implies that, relatively quickly,
one firm takes over the entire economy. This causes a problem for definitions of market
risk and idiosyncratic risks. We show that this result is robust to idiosyncratic risk that
1See, for example, Bansal and Yaron (2004), Campbell and Cochrane (1999), Wachter (2013).
1

decreases in market size, and firm payout that policies that change based on the life cycle,
both features that are present in the data.
We then present an alternative model based on the binomial distribution, and on
shocks that are additive for individual firms but growing with the economy. In con-
trast to the lognormal model, the binomial model implies stationary dividend shares and
substantial cross-sectional skewness. It also implies decreasing standard deviation as a
function of size, and increasing payout through the life cycle. We show that this model
also implies a role for idiosyncratic risk in the aggregate economy.
Our paper relates to recent work by Bessembinder (2017), who shows that most stocks
underperform Treasury bills most of the time, thereby highlighting the importance of
skewness in the data. He also notes the high degree of skewness in market capitalizations.
Perhaps surprisingly, we show that the underperformance of most stocks in the data does
not pose a challenge to the lognormal model, while monthly and long-horizon skewness
do.
Our work also relates to the research on power laws and firm values (Axtell, 2001;
Gabaix, 2009) in that the same mechanism that generates the power law (independent,
permanent shocks to growth rates) lies behind our results on long-run returns. Like
Gabaix (2011), who focuses on GDP, we show how idiosyncratic volatility can play a role
in aggregate outcomes through a failure of diversification.
Since Fama (1965) established that stock returns did not approximate a normal dis-
tribution, the literature has examined the empirical linkages between this skewness and
expected returns. The initial focus was on co-skewness (Harvey and Siddique, 2000;
Dittmar, 2002), while more recent papers examine idiosyncratic skewness as well (Bali
et al., 2011; Boyer et al., 2010; Kapadia, 2006). Others work measures ex ante skewness
through options (Chang et al., 2013; Conrad et al., 2013). The focus of these papers is
on the measurement of conditional skewness for a particular stock at a given point in
time. This is a difficult measurement problem. In this paper, by contrast, we focus on the
degree of unconditional skewness relative to various benchmark hypotheses on the return
2