NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
U.S. MONETARY POLICY AND EMERGING MARKET CREDIT CYCLES
Falk Bräuning
Victoria Ivashina
Working Paper 25185
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25185
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2018
We are grateful for detailed feedback from Olivier Darmouni (discussant), José Fillat, Linda
Goldberg, Gita Gopinath, ebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Ralf Meisenzahl (discussant), Joe Peek,
Vincenzo Quadrini (discussant), and Jesse Schreger. We thank participants at the 2018 AFA
Meetings, European Central Bank’s Credit, Banking and Monetary Policy Conference, West
Coast Workshop on International Finance, World Bank-ASBA Long-Term Lending Conference
and seminar series at Bocconi University, Central Bank of Italy, the Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, George Washington University, MIT, Temple
University, and University of New Hampshire for helpful comments. We are also grateful to Eric
Swanson for sharing data on monetary policy shocks. Finally, we thank Kovid Puria for excellent
research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, the Federal Reserve System, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25185.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Falk Bräuning and Victoria Ivashina. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

U.S. Monetary Policy and Emerging Market Credit Cycles
Falk Bräuning and Victoria Ivashina
NBER Working Paper No. 25185
October 2018
JEL No. E52,F34,F44,G21
ABSTRACT
Foreign banks’ lending to firms in emerging market economies (EMEs) is large and denominated
predominantly in U.S. dollars. This creates a direct connection between U.S. monetary policy and
EME credit cycles. We estimate that over a typical U.S. monetary easing cycle, EME borrowers
experience a 32-percentage-point greater increase in the volume of loans issued by foreign banks
than do borrowers from developed markets, followed by a fast credit contraction of a similar
magnitude upon reversal of the U.S. monetary policy stance. This result is robust across different
geographies and industries, and holds for U.S. and non-U.S. lenders, including those with little
direct exposure to the U.S. economy. EME local lenders do not offset the foreign bank capital
flows, and U.S. monetary policy affects credit conditions for EME firms, both at the extensive
and intensive margin. Consistent with a risk-driven credit-supply adjustment, we show that the
spillover is stronger for riskier EMEs, and, within countries, for higher-risk firms.
Falk Bräuning
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
600 Atlantic Avenue
Boston, MA 02210
Falk.Braeuning@bos.frb.org
Victoria Ivashina
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 233
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
vivashina@hbs.edu

1. Introduction
For emerging market economies (EMEs), foreign bank loans are by far the most important
category of cross-border capital flows, and they are denominated primarily in U.S. dollars. As of
2015, International Monetary Fund (IMF) data indicate that loans represent about half of all
external liabilities of emerging market countries. By comparison, foreign bond and equity portfolio
investments combined represent only about 20 percent. Much of the foreign lending comes from
banks headquartered in developed economies: Bank for International Settlements (BIS) data show
that roughly a third of all external liabilities of emerging market countries are held by U.S.,
European, and Japanese banks. Moreover, the volume of these claims has nearly doubled since the
onset of the global financial crisis, reaching about $7 trillion in 2016. Consistent with the general
dominance of the U.S. dollar in international trade (e.g., Goldberg and Tille 2008; Gopinath 2016)
and finance (e.g., Shin 2012), we document that over 80 percent of the cross-border loans to EMEs
are denominated in U.S. dollars.1 This dollarization of cross-border credit prevails over time and
across different geographic regions and industries.
Given the economic significance of U.S. dollar lending by global banks to EME firms, U.S.
monetary policy plays an important role as a “push factor” for the credit cycles in these economies
through its impact on U.S. interest rates. In particular, by setting the federal funds rate, U.S.
monetary policy sets the short end of the dollar yield curve, thereby crucially affecting the supply
of credit through banks’ dollar funding cost (e.g., Bernanke and Gertler 1995). Moreover, U.S.
monetary policy influences the yields on longer-term dollar investments due to the expectation
hypothesis and direct measures that affect the slope of the yield curve (such as unconventional
monetary policy). Fig. 1 illustrates the basic correlation between cross-border loans to EMEs and
1 Throughout the paper, we use the BIS country classification when referring to “EMEs.”

U.S. federal funds rate from 1980 through 2015. The significant correlation—tightening/easing of
U.S. monetary policy is associated with contraction/expansion in cross-border credit to EMEs—
holds in levels and in changes.
[FIGURE 1]
The aggregate results in Fig. 1, while suggestive, could also be explained by relative changes
in investment opportunities around the world or by compositional shifts in the investor base in a
given country. Instead, in this paper, we use micro data: DealScan data on global syndicated loan
issuance covering corporate lending to firms from a wide range of countries, including 119 EMEs,
between 1990:Q1 and 2016:Q3. Consistent with the previous literature for individual EMEs—e.g.,
Ioannidou et al. (2015) evidence for Bolivia, Morais et al. (2017) evidence for Mexico, Baskaya
et al. (2017) evidence for Turkey—we find that U.S. monetary policy easing is associated with a
general increase in cross-border loan volumes by global banks. Importantly, we show that easing
U.S. monetary policy leads to a large and significant differential increase in cross-border loan
volume to EME borrowers, by the same global bank, in the same quarter, net of borrower fixed
effects. This differential effect amounts to larger lending volumes of about 2 percentage points per
25-basis-point decrease in the U.S. federal funds rate. During a typical monetary easing/tightening
cycle in our sample period, the federal funds target rate is adjusted by about 4 percentage points.
Given our estimates, this would amount to an additional increase/decline in loan volumes to
emerging market borrowers of a sizable 32 percentage points. More generally, when we look at
the underlying country-level macroeconomic variables instead of an EME indicator, we find that
cross-border bank flows to higher-yielding markets (e.g., higher GDP growth, higher interest rate
spread) are more sensitive to changes in U.S. monetary policy.
2