NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO FIRE SALES CREATE EXTERNALITIES?
Sergey Chernenko
Adi Sunderam
Working Paper 25104
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25104
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018
We are grateful to Carter Anthony, Jules van Binsbergen, Charles Calomiris, Jaewon Choi,
Lauren Cohen, Andrew Ellul, Robin Greenwood, Sam Hanson, Johan Hombert, Zoran Ivkovic,
Marcin Kacperczyk, Xuewen Liu, Toby Moskowitz, Stefano Rossi, Alexi Savov, Jeremy Stein,
Rene Stulz, Robert Turley, Jeff Wang, Zhi Wang, Michael Weisbach, Russ Wermers, Yao Zeng,
and seminar participants at Yale University and the SEC for helpful comments and suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Sergey Chernenko and Adi Sunderam. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Fire Sales Create Externalities?
Sergey Chernenko and Adi Sunderam
NBER Working Paper No. 25104
September 2018
JEL No. G11,G12,G18,G23
ABSTRACT
We develop three novel measures of how much of the price impact of their trading different
mutual funds internalize. We show that mutual funds that internalize more of their price impact
hold larger cash buffers and use these buffers more aggressively to accommodate inflows and
outflows. As a result, stocks held by these funds have lower volatility, and flows out of these
funds have smaller spillover effects on other funds holding the same securities. Our results
provide evidence of meaningful fire sale externalities in the mutual fund industry.
Sergey Chernenko
Krannert School of Management
Purdue University
403 W. State Street
West Lafayette, IN 47907
schernen@purdue.edu
Adi Sunderam
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 359
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
asunderam@hbs.edu
An internet appendix is available at 0
https://www.dropbox.com/s/cvrjtg3jhh46lwh/fireSalesInternetAppendix.pdf?dl=0

Fire sales are at the center of our understanding of financial stability problems in securities
markets. Instability arises because there are spillover effects: forced sales by one market
participant tighten constraints on others and thereby lead to further forced sales (e.g., Geanakoplos,
2009; Stein, 2012). For instance, redemptions from an open-end mutual fund can force sales of the
fund’s portfolio securities. These sales depress security prices, hurting the performance of other
funds holding the same securities and thus stimulating redemptions at these funds through the
performance-flow relationship. These redemptions lead to further sales, amplifying the initial
shock. The key conceptual feature of such amplification cycles is that they can generate
externalities: if funds internalized the effect of their sales on other funds, they would change their
flow management policies to dampen the feedback effects that arise from their forced trading.
A large empirical literature documents the existence of some of the main ingredients of the
fire sales mechanism. In instances when forced sales happen, they can result in depressed security
prices (e.g., Coval and Stafford, 2007; Ellul, Jotikasthira and Lundblad, 2011; Greenwood and
Thesmar, 2011; Merrill et. al., 2012; Hau and Lai, 2017; Choi and Shin, 2018). Furthermore, in
these instances, there can be spillovers: depressed prices created by one fund’s sales can affect
other funds holding the same securities (Lou, 2012; Falato et. al., 2016).
However, the empirical literature has yet to directly address the main conceptual question
about fire sales: is there an externality? In other words, would funds act differently if they cared
more about the spillover effects of their trading? This need not be the case – if spillovers are
infrequent or mild, individual funds will act the same whether they care about other funds or not.
Although the question of whether there are externalities has important implications for both our
conceptual understanding of fire sales and for the regulation of asset managers, it cannot be
answered from the existing literature.
In this paper, we take on this empirical challenge and provide evidence that mutual funds
do indeed manage their flows differently when they care more about the impact of their trading on
other funds. We construct three novel, theoretically motivated measures of how much of the price
impact of their trading different mutual funds are likely to internalize. We then relate these
measures to funds’ liquidity management policies, the volatility of the securities they hold, and the
spillover effects they impose on each other. We find that funds that internalize more of the price
impact of their trading, which we refer to as high internalization funds, do behave differently from
1

those that do not, suggesting that there are indeed meaningful fire sale externalities in the mutual
fund industry.
We begin by writing down a simple model of funds choosing optimal cash buffers and flow
management policies. The model motivates our empirical tests, which we implement by
introducing three new empirical measures of internalization of price impact. These measures are
based on a fund’s incentive to care about the performance of other funds. The first measure
leverages the fact that many portfolio managers manage multiple funds, and therefore care about
the adverse price pressure that trading by one of their funds exerts on their other funds. Our second
measure exploits the idea that a fund may be cautious about exerting price impact when it would
adversely affect other funds managed by the same investment adviser.1 Our third measure is
similar to the second one, but excludes funds managed by the same portfolio manager to focus on
incentives at the investment adviser level. Throughout our analysis, we use all three internalization
measures, with all three delivering similar results.
To test the predictions of our model, we use SEC form N-SAR filings to build a novel data
set on the cash holdings of open-end domestic equity mutual funds over the 1994 – 2016 period.
Our first main result concerns how a fund’s management of the inflows and outflows it receives
varies with its internalization. We find that high internalization funds use their cash buffers more
aggressively to accommodate flows. The economic magnitudes are significant. Going from the
25th to 75th percentile of internalization is associated with being 50% more aggressive in using
cash to accommodate fund flows. The magnitude of the effect of internalization is similar to the
impact of asset liquidity on flow management. Our evidence suggests that there are significant
price impact externalities: when a fund internalizes more of the price impact of its trading on other
funds, it follows a different strategy for accommodating inflows and outflows.
These results are robust to a variety of controls for alternative explanations. Specifically,
we provide evidence that our results cannot be explained by asset liquidity, market timing, fund
strategy, variation in investor clienteles across funds, or manager characteristics.
To further rule out alternative explanations, we use variation in internalization driven by
two types of structural changes: one at the portfolio manager and one at the investment adviser
1 Throughout the paper, the phrase “investment adviser” refers to the firm providing investment management services
to the fund, while the phrase “portfolio managers” refers to employees of the investment adviser who are actually
managing the fund.
2