NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TURNOVER LIQUIDITY AND THE TRANSMISSION OF MONETARY POLICY
Ricardo Lagos
Shengxing Zhang
Working Paper 25106
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25106
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018
Lagos is thankful for the support from the C.V. Starr Center for Applied Economics at NYU, and
for the hospitality of Princeton University, University College London, the University of
Minnesota, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research. Zhang is thankful for the support from the Centre for Macroeconomics at LSE, the
British Academy/Leverhulme Small Research Grant, and for the hospitality of the University of
Pennsylvania and New York Fed. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis or the Federal Reserve System.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25106.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Ricardo Lagos and Shengxing Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Turnover Liquidity and the Transmission of Monetary Policy
Ricardo Lagos and Shengxing Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 25106
September 2018
JEL No. D83,E52,G12
ABSTRACT
We provide empirical evidence of a novel liquidity-based transmission mechanism through which
monetary policy influences asset markets, develop a model of this mechanism, and assess the
ability of the quantitative theory to match the evidence.
Ricardo Lagos
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West Fourth Street
New York, NY 10014
and NBER
ricardo.lagos@nyu.edu
Shengxing Zhang
Department of Economics
London School of Economics
oo7zsx@gmail.com
An online appendix is available at https://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25106/

1 Introduction
In most modern economies, central banks implement monetary policy indirectly, by interven-
ing in certain financial markets (e.g., in the United States, the federal funds market and the
market for treasury securities). The underlying idea is that the effects of those interventions
on asset prices are transmitted to the rest of the economy to help achieve the ultimate policy
objectives. Thus, the transmission mechanism of monetary policy to asset prices is important
for understanding how monetary policy actually operates.
In this paper, we conduct an empirical, theoretical, and quantitative study of the effects of
monetary policy on financial markets in general and the equity market in particular. We make
three contributions. First, we provide original empirical evidence of a novel channel through
which monetary policy influences financial markets: tight money increases the opportunity
cost of holding the nominal assets used routinely to settle financial transactions (e.g., bank
reserves, money balances), making these payment instruments scarcer. In turn, this scarcity
reduces the resalability of financial assets, and this increased illiquidity leads to a reduction in
price. We label this mechanism the turnover-liquidity (transmission) mechanism (of monetary
policy). Second, to gain a deeper understanding of this mechanism, we develop a theory of
trade in financial over-the-counter (OTC) markets (that nests the competitive benchmark as
a special case) in which money is used as a medium of exchange in financial transactions.
The model shows how the details of the market microstructure and the quantity of money
shape the performance of financial markets (e.g., as gauged by standard measures of market
liquidity), contribute to the determination of asset prices (e.g., through the resale option value
of assets), and—consistent with the evidence we document—offer a liquidity-based explanation
for the negative correlation between real stock returns and unexpected increases in the nominal
interest rate that is used to implement monetary policy. Third, we bring the theory to the
data. We calibrate a generalized version of the basic model and use it to conduct quantitative
theoretical exercises designed to assess the ability of the theory to match the empirical effects
of monetary policy on asset prices, both on policy announcement days and at longer horizons.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the basic model. It
considers a setting in which a financial asset that yields a dividend flow of consumption goods
(e.g., an equity or a real bond) is demanded by investors who have time-varying heterogeneous
valuationsforthedividend. Toachievethegainsfromtradethatarisefromtheirheterogeneous
2

valuations, investors participate in a bilateral market with random search that is intermediated
by specialized dealers who have access to a competitive interdealer market. In the dealer-
intermediated bilateral market, which has many of the stylized features of a typical OTC
market structure but also nests the perfectly competitive market structure as a special case,
investors and dealers seek to trade the financial asset using money as a means of payment.
Periodically, dealers and investors are also able to rebalance their portfolios in a conventional
Walrasian market. Equilibrium is characterized in Section 3. Section 4 presents the main
implications of the theory. Asset prices and conventional measures of financial liquidity (e.g.,
spreads, trade volume, and dealer supply of immediacy) are determined by the (real) quantity
ofmoneyandthedetailsofthemicrostructurewheretheassettrades(e.g., thedegreeofmarket
powerofdealersandtheeasewithwhichinvestorsfindcounterparties). Generically,assetprices
in the monetary economy exhibit a speculative premium whose size varies systematically with
the market microstructure and the monetary policy stance. For example, a high anticipated
opportunity cost of holding money reduces equilibrium real balances and distorts the asset
allocation by causing too many assets to remain in the hands of investors with relatively low
valuations, which depresses real asset prices.
Section 5 is empirical. In it we revisit the finding, documented in previous empirical work,
that surprise increases in the nominal policy rate cause sizable reductions in real stock returns
on announcement days of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). A 1 basis point
unexpected increase in the policy rate causes a decrease of between 5 and 11 basis points in
the stock market return on the day of the policy announcement. In addition, this section
contains two new empirical findings. First, we document that episodes of unexpected policy
tightening are also associated with large and persistent declines in stock turnover. Second, we
find evidence that the magnitude of the reduction in return caused by the policy tightening is
significantly larger for stocks that are normally traded more actively, e.g., stocks with higher
turnover rates. For example, in response to an unexpected increase in the policy rate, the
announcement-day decline in the return of a stock in the 95th percentile of turnover rates is
about 2.5 times larger than that of a stock in the 5th percentile. The empirical evidence in this
section suggests a mechanism whereby monetary policy affects asset prices through a reduction
in turnover liquidity.
In Section 6 we formulate, calibrate, and simulate a generalized version of the basic model
and use it to assess the ability of the theory to fit the empirical evidence on the effects of
3