NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LARGE BANKS AND SMALL FIRM LENDING
Vitaly M. Bord
Victoria Ivashina
Ryan D. Taliaferro
Working Paper 25184
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25184
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2018
We are grateful for the helpful comments made by Tomasz Piskorski, Kristle Romero Cortes
(discussant), Jeremy Stein, Andrew Winton and participants at the American Finance Association
(AFA) and European Finance Association (EFA) annual meetings, and seminar participants at the
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and Harvard Business School brown bag seminars. Baker
Library Research Services provided assistance with data collection for this project. Data on
deposit rates come from RateWatch. The opinions in this paper are the authors’ own and do not
necessarily reflect those of Acadian Asset Management or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. This paper is not investment advice.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25184.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Vitaly M. Bord, Victoria Ivashina, and Ryan D. Taliaferro. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Large Banks and Small Firm Lending
Vitaly M. Bord, Victoria Ivashina, and Ryan D. Taliaferro
NBER Working Paper No. 25184
October 2018
JEL No. G21
ABSTRACT
We show that since 2007, there was a large and persistent shift in the composition of lenders to
small firms. Large banks impacted by the real estate prices collapse systematically contracted
their credit to all small firms throughout the U.S.. However, healthy banks expanded their
operations and entered new banking markets. The market share gain of these banks was a
standard deviation above the long-run historical market share growth and persists for years
following the financial crisis. Despite this offsetting expansion, the net effect of the contraction in
credit was negative, with lower aggregate credit and deposits growth, and lower entrepreneurial
activity through 2015.
Vitaly M. Bord Ryan D. Taliaferro
Harvard University Acadian Asset Management
vbord@hbs.edu 260 Franklin Street
Boston, MA 02110
Victoria Ivashina RTaliaferro@Acadian-Asset.com
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 233
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
vivashina@hbs.edu

1. Introduction
This paper documents a significant and persistent withdrawal of large US banks from small
business lending following the Great Financial Crisis. Because large, geographically dispersed
banks provide an increasing amount of credit around the world, this withdrawal has dire
consequences for small borrowers. However, the full effect on the credit supply to these firms is
partially mitigated, as other banks opportunistically expanded their market share.1 Importantly,
we show that significant changes in the composition of credit providers to small firms persist
nearly ten years following the initial shock, driven by merger and acquisition activity which
allowed banks to consolidate and make permanent the opportunistic expansion in small business
lending origination. These persistent changes result in a decrease in concentration of the small
business lending industry, at a time when the overall U.S. banking industry is becoming more
concentrated.
Much has been written, particularly in the popular press, regarding the increasing concentration
of the US banking industry.2 The left Panel of Figure 1 illustrates the well-cited facts: the top
banks own a large percentage of all the assets in the industry, and this share has increased during
and after the financial crisis. For example, the share of the top 5 banks increased from 33% in
2006 to 42% in 2015, while the share of the top 6-20 banks experienced a more modest increase
from 17% in 2006 to 20% in 2015. By contrast, as the right panel of Figure 1 shows, the
concentration of small business lending origination has stayed the same for the top 5 banks—at
32%—and decreased slightly from 24% to 22% for the top 6-20 banks.3 Thus, the persistent credit
supply effects we describe below result in major changes in the composition and concentration of
small business lending.
To isolate the credit supply effect, we exploit the fact that not all geographical areas were
exposed to the 2006-2007 decline in real estate prices. Larger banks tend to be more geographically
diversified, and leading up to the crisis, many of these banks operated in areas that had different
real estate price evolution. Exposure to losses in one geographical area constitutes a shock to a
1 In normal times, competition for borrowers is hindered by adverse selection, but when banks experience a negative
shock, the information gap is reduced, facilitating lender substitution (Dell’Ariccia and Marquez, 2004; Darmouni,
2016).
2 For example, “5 biggest banks now own almost half the industry”, CNBC, April 15, 2015.
3 The concentration in small business lending is lower than in assets because larger banks tend to devote a lower
percentage of their assets to small business lending, as we discuss below.

bank’s aggregate activities (Peek and Rosengren 1997; Chava and Purnanandam, 2011; Schnabl,
2012 among others). Thus, for our main results, we consider geographically diversified (“large”)
banks with exposure to the real estate shock at the aggregate level, and examine their small
business lending activity in counties that did not experience a significant drop in real estate prices.
We benchmark these results against other large banks that were not exposed to real estate shocks
in their portfolio; the latter, though also geographically dispersed, tend to be banks that are
significantly smaller in size.
The core identifying assumption in the analysis is that small business lending is comparable
across different banks. This assumption is similar to the one underlying within-borrower analysis
that is typically used to identify the effects of credit supply shocks in countries with a centralized
credit registry. In Khwaja and Mian (2005) and in much of the literature that builds on this work,
there is no comparison of bank characteristics, and aggregate statistics indicate substantial
heterogeneity in the bank sample. However, in these studies, the banks are assumed to be
comparable in their decisions to lend to the same firm. Similarly, we assume that banks are
comparable in making small business loans in a given county. To strengthen the cross-bank
comparison, the main control sample of banks includes other geographically diversified banks that
did not have exposure to real estate bust. In addition, we show that the findings are generalizable
to comparing the largest banks to small, local banks in unaffected areas.
Our data on small business lending come from the Federal Reserve’s Community
Reinvestment Act (CRA) dataset and cover the period between 2005 and 2015. The advantage of
these data is that they provide information about loan origination to US small businesses (loans
smaller than $1 million in size) at the county level for all deposit-gathering institutions except
small community banks. Notably, small firms tend to borrow from banks and do so locally (e.g.,
Petersen and Rajan, 2002; Liberti and Mian, 2009; Agarwal and Hauswald, 2010). So, while the
CRA data do not identify individual borrowers, it is feasible to assess the overall economic impact
on small creditors using county-level information.
The economic magnitudes are substantial: in unaffected counties—those that do not fall into
the top quartile of real estate depreciation between June 2006 and December 2007—large banks
exposed to the real estate, on average, cut their small business lending by 25.2 percentage points
more, from 2006 to 2008, that similar healthy banks. Over this period, healthy large banks
increased their lending to small firms, even as exposed banks slashed their lending. It was not until
2