NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW IMPORTANT IS PRICE VARIATION BETWEEN HEALTH INSURERS?
Stuart V. Craig
Keith Marzilli Ericson
Amanda Starc
Working Paper 25190
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25190
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2018
We thank Buqu Gao for excellent research assistance. We thank Kim Geissler for excellent
assistance with the data. We appreciate helpful comments from Zack Cooper, David Dranove, Tal
Gross, Kate Ho, Vivian Ho, Jon Kolstad, Kurt Lavetti, Tim Layton, Ellie Prager, Jim Rebitzer,
Mark Shepard, Justin Sydnor as well as seminar participants at iHEA, AEAs, and ASHEcon. We
acknowledge funding from Boston University Internal Research Funds. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25190.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Stuart V. Craig, Keith Marzilli Ericson, and Amanda Starc. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Important Is Price Variation Between Health Insurers?
Stuart V. Craig, Keith Marzilli Ericson, and Amanda Starc
NBER Working Paper No. 25190
October 2018
JEL No. D4,I11,I13,L11,L4
ABSTRACT
Prices negotiated between payers and providers affect a health insurance contract's value via
enrollees' cost-sharing and self-insured employers' costs. However, price variation across payers
is hard to observe. We measure negotiated prices for hospital-payer pairs in Massachusetts and
characterize price variation. Between-payer price variation is similar in magnitude to between-
hospital price variation. Administrative-services-only contracts, in which insurers do not bear
risk, have higher prices. We model negotiation incentives and show that contractual form and
demand responsiveness to negotiated prices are important determinants of negotiated prices.
Stuart V. Craig Amanda Starc
The Wharton School Kellogg School of Management
The University of Pennsylvania Northwestern University
3641 Locust Walk 2001 Sheridan Road
Philadelphia, PA 19104 Evanston, IL 60208
stuart.v.craig@gmail.com and NBER
amanda.starc@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Keith Marzilli Ericson
Boston University
Questrom School of Business
595 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
kericson@bu.edu

How Important Is Price Variation Between Health
Insurers?
Stuart V Craig, Keith Marzilli Ericson, Amanda Starc∗
October 15, 2018
Abstract
Prices negotiated between payers and providers affect a health insurance contract’s
valueviaenrollees’cost-sharingandself-insuredemployers’costs. However, pricevaria-
tionacrosspayersisdifficulttoobserve. Wemeasurenegotiatedpricesforhospital-payer
pairsinMassachusettsandcharacterizepricevariation. Between-payerpricevariationis
similar in magnitude to between-hospital price variation. Administrative-services-only
contracts, in which insurers do not bear risk, have higher prices. We model negotiation
incentives and show that contractual form and demand responsiveness to negotiated
prices are important determinants of negotiated prices.
1 Introduction
High health care costs are a major public policy concern. Higher quantities and prices both
contribute to the United States’ uniquely high costs relative to other countries (Garber and
Skinner 2008, Cutler and Ly 2011). Furthermore, price variation across settings, providers,
and regions has received substantial media and policy attention. Prices for the same service
vary substantially between geographic markets and between providers in a given geographic
market (Cooper et al., forthcoming). While the recent literature has focused on between-
provider variation, negotiated prices may vary across insurers as well. In this paper, we
∗Craig: Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania. Ericson: Questrom School of Business, Boston
University and NBER. Starc: Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University and NBER. We
thank Buqu Gaofor excellent research assistance. We thank Kim Geissler for excellent assistance with the
data. We appreciate helpful comments from Zack Cooper, David Dranove, Tal Gross, Kate Ho, Vivian Ho,
Jon Kolstad, Kurt Lavetti, Tim Layton, Ellie Prager, Jim Rebitzer, Mark Shepard, Justin Sydnor as well as
seminar participants at iHEA, AEAs, and ASHEcon.
1

provide new descriptive evidence for the role of insurers and payers in setting negotiated
prices. We explore the size of price variation between insurers, how contracting incentives
affect these prices, and consequences for individuals and self-insured employers.
We document variation in prices paid to the same provider for the same service using
data from the Massachusetts All-Payer Claims Database (APCD). We examine negotiated
payments for five well-defined services (knee and hip replacements, vaginal and cesarean
deliveries, and MRIs), in addition to overall price levels for all inpatient care. Between-
payer price variation is similar in magnitude to between-provider price variation. Across our
five clinical cohorts, the standard deviation in prices across hospitals, controlling for payer,
ranges from 17-31 percent of the mean. In comparison, the standard deviation in prices
across payers, controlling for hospitals, ranges from 16-28 percent of the mean. The most
expensive major payer is about 13% more expensive on average than the cheapest major
payer in our sample. For comparison, the highest-priced hospital system in our data is 27%
more expensive than the average of other hospitals.
Examining variation in prices between payers at the same provider largely eliminates
quality differences as a potential explanation. Differences in bargaining between payers may
reflect underlying differences in enrollees’ demand for providers across payers, the ability of
payers to steer enrollees to specific hospitals, or bargaining ability. In our data, differences in
underlying enrollee demand across payers are unlikely to explain price differences, as demo-
graphic characteristics (e.g., income) and distance to nearby hospitals are relatively balanced
acrosspayers. Finally, onemightalsobeconcernedthatpricedifferentialsacrosspayerscould
reflect differences in underlying severity and inputs used to treat patients. Examining MRI
prices allows us to isolate a homogeneous procedure where even the “chargemaster” rate (list
price) is the same across payers within a provider.
Variation in negotiated provider prices is important for at least two distinct reasons.
First, consumers bear part of those costs in the form of out-of-pocket spending. Second,
higher provider prices translate into higher costs for self-insured employers and, potentially,
2