NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BEYOND THE BALANCE SHEET MODEL OF BANKING:
IMPLICATIONS FOR BANK REGULATION AND MONETARY POLICY
Greg Buchak
Gregor Matvos
Tomasz Piskorski
Amit Seru
Working Paper 25149
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25149
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESERACH
This paper was 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2018, Revised July 2022
This paper was previously titled “The Limits of Shadow Banks”. Buchak is at Stanford Graduate
School of Business (GSB), Matvos is at Northwestern University and the National Bureau of Economic
Research (NBER), Piskorski is at Columbia GSB and NBER, and Seru is at Stanford GSB, the Hoover
Institution, the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research (SIEPR), and NBER. We thank the
National Science Foundation (Award 1628895) for financial support. We thank Sumit Agarwal, Adrien
Auclert, Anat Admati, Matteo Benetton, John Cochrane, Dean Corbae, Ramona Dagostino, Anthony
DeFusco, Peter DeMarzo, Darell Duffie, Andrea Eisfeldt, Mark Egan, Neil Esho, Andreas Fuster, Paul
Goldsmith-Pinkham, Itay Goldstein, Ben Hebert, Erik Hurst, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Debbie Lucas,
Chris Mayer, Guillermo Ordonez, Chris Palmer, Karen Pence, Tarun Ramodarai, Alexi Savov, Antoinette
Schoar, David Scharfstein, Hyun Shin, Jeremy Stein, Johannes Stroebel, Amir Sufi, Adi Sunderam,
Joe Vavra, Arlene Wong, and seminar participants at AQR, Bank for International Settlements,
Columbia GSB, European Central Bank, Harvard Business School, Hoover Institution, Housing
Finance Policy Center, Indian School of Business, MIT Sloan, Stanford GSB, Yale University, UCLA,
University of Texas at Austin, Washington University in St. Louis, Boston College, UNC, University of
Rochester, Kellogg School of Management, University of Illinois at Urbana Champagne, and
participants at ASSA meetings (Econometric Society), Kellogg Housing and Macroeconomics
Conference, Midwest Finance Association Conference, NBER Monetary Economics, NBER Summer
Institute, Wharton Conference on Liquidity and Financial Fragility, Stanford Institute of Theoretical
Economics Financial Regulation Conference, Office for Financial Research Financial Stability
Conference, FDIC Financial Technology Conference, Summer Real Estate Symposium, Central Bank
Research Association annual meeting, and the San Francisco Federal Reserve Conference on
Advances in Financial Research for helpful comments. We also thank Susan Cherry,
Monica Clodius, Sam Liu, and Yilan Zheng for outstanding research assistance. First
Version: February 2018. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Greg Buchak, Gregor Matvos, Tomasz Piskorski, and Amit Seru. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Beyond the Balance Sheet Model of Banking: Implications for Bank Regulation and Monetary
Policy
Greg Buchak, Gregor Matvos, Tomasz Piskorski, and Amit Seru
NBER Working Paper No. 25149
October 2018, Revised July 2022
JEL No. G2,L5
ABSTRACT
Bank balance sheet lending is commonly viewed as the predominant form of lending. We
document and study two margins of adjustment that are usually absent from this view using
microdata in the$10 trillion U.S. residential mortgage market. We first document the limits of the
shadow bank substitution margin: shadow banks substitute for traditional—deposit-taking—
banks in loans which are easily sold, but are limited from activities requiring on-balance-sheet
financing. We then document the balance sheet retention margin: banks switch between
traditional balance sheet lending and selling loans based on their balance sheet strength, behaving
more like shadow banks following negative shocks. Motivated by this evidence, we build and
estimate a workhorse structural model of the financial intermediation sector. Banks and shadow
banks compete for borrowers. Banks face regulatory constraints but benefit from the ability to
engage in balance sheet lending. Critically, departing from prior literature, banks can also choose
to access the securitization market like shadow banks. To evaluate distributional consequences,
we model a rich demand system with income and house price differences across borrowers. The
model is identified using spatial pricing policies of government-sponsored entities and bunching
at the regulatory threshold. We study the quantitative consequences of several policies on lending
volume and pricing, bank stability, and the distribution of consumer surplus across rich and poor
households. Both margins we identify significantly shape policy responses, accounting for more
than $500 billion in lending volume across counterfactuals. Secondary market disruptions such as
quantitative easing have significantly larger impacts on lending and redistribution than capital
requirement changes once we account for these margins. We conclude that a regulatory policy
analysis of the intermediation sector must incorporate the intricate industrial organization of the
credit market and the equilibrium interaction of banks and shadow banks.
Greg Buchak Tomasz Piskorski
Graduate School of Business Columbia Business School
Stanford University 3022 Broadway
655 Knight Way Uris Hall 810
Stanford, CA 94305b New York, NY 10027
buchak@stanford.edu and NBER
tp2252@columbia.edu
Gregor Matvos
Kellogg School of Management Amit Seru
Northwestern University Stanford Graduate School of Business
2211 Campus Drive Stanford University
Global Hub 4361 655 Knight Way
Evanston IL, 60208 and NBER
and NBER aseru@stanford.edu
gregor.matvos@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Beyond the Balance Sheet Model of Banking:
Implications for Bank Regulation and Monetary Policy
Greg Buchak, Gregor Matvos, Tomasz Piskorski, and Amit Seru*
This Version: JULY 2022
Bank balance sheet lending is commonly viewed as the predominant form of lending. We document and study
two margins of adjustment that are usually absent from this view using microdata in the $10 trillion U.S.
residential mortgage market. We first document the limits of the shadow bank substitution margin: shadow banks
substitute for traditional—deposit-taking—banks in loans which are easily sold, but are limited from activities
requiring on-balance-sheet financing. We then document the balance sheet retention margin: banks switch
between traditional balance sheet lending and selling loans based on their balance sheet strength, behaving more
like shadow banks following negative shocks. Motivated by this evidence, we build and estimate a workhorse
structural model of the financial intermediation sector. Banks and shadow banks compete for borrowers. Banks
face regulatory constraints but benefit from the ability to engage in balance sheet lending. Critically, departing
from prior literature, banks can also choose to access the securitization market like shadow banks. To evaluate
distributional consequences, we model a rich demand system with income and house price differences across
borrowers. The model is identified using spatial pricing policies of government-sponsored entities and bunching
at the regulatory threshold. We study the quantitative consequences of several policies on lending volume and
pricing, bank stability, and the distribution of consumer surplus across rich and poor households. Both margins
we identify significantly shape policy responses, accounting for more than $500 billion in lending volume across
counterfactuals. Secondary market disruptions such as quantitative easing have significantly larger impacts on
lending and redistribution than capital requirement changes once we account for these margins. We conclude
that a regulatory policy analysis of the intermediation sector must incorporate the intricate industrial organization
of the credit market and the equilibrium interaction of banks and shadow banks.
Keywords: Shadow Banks, Balance Sheet Capacity, Market Segmentation, Capital Requirements, Lending,
Mortgages, GSEs, Unconventional Monetary Policy
__________________________
* This paper was previously titled “The Limits of Shadow Banks”. Buchak is at Stanford Graduate School of Business
(GSB), Matvos is at Northwestern University and the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), Piskorski is at
Columbia GSB and NBER, and Seru is at Stanford GSB, the Hoover Institution, the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy
Research (SIEPR), and NBER. We thank the National Science Foundation (Award 1628895) for financial support. We thank
Sumit Agarwal, Adrien Auclert, Anat Admati, Matteo Benetton, John Cochrane, Dean Corbae, Ramona Dagostino, Anthony
DeFusco, Peter DeMarzo, Darell Duffie, Andrea Eisfeldt, Mark Egan, Neil Esho, Andreas Fuster, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham,
Itay Goldstein, Ben Hebert, Erik Hurst, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Debbie Lucas, Chris Mayer, Guillermo Ordonez, Chris
Palmer, Karen Pence, Tarun Ramodarai, Alexi Savov, Antoinette Schoar, David Scharfstein, Hyun Shin, Jeremy Stein,
Johannes Stroebel, Amir Sufi, Adi Sunderam, Joe Vavra, Arlene Wong, and seminar participants at AQR, Bank for
International Settlements, Columbia GSB, European Central Bank, Harvard Business School, Hoover Institution, Housing
Finance Policy Center, Indian School of Business, MIT Sloan, Stanford GSB, Yale University, UCLA, University of Texas
at Austin, Washington University in St. Louis, Boston College, UNC, University of Rochester, Kellogg School of
Management, University of Illinois at Urbana Champagne, and participants at ASSA meetings (Econometric Society),
Kellogg Housing and Macroeconomics Conference, Midwest Finance Association Conference, NBER Monetary
Economics, NBER Summer Institute, Wharton Conference on Liquidity and Financial Fragility, Stanford Institute of
Theoretical Economics Financial Regulation Conference, Office for Financial Research Financial Stability Conference,
FDIC Financial Technology Conference, Summer Real Estate Symposium, Central Bank Research Association annual
meeting, and the San Francisco Federal Reserve Conference on Advances in Financial Research for helpful comments. We
also thank Susan Cherry, Monica Clodius, Sam Liu, and Yilan Zheng for outstanding research assistance. First Version:
February 2018.

Section I: Introduction
Policymakers and researchers have long viewed balance sheet lending by deposit-taking
institutions—traditional banks—as the predominant way loans are supplied to households and firms
(Sunderam 2015). Under this view, banks use deposits to extend loans, which they hold on their
balance sheet until repayment or default. Therefore, traditional banks have been the main focus of
regulation and supervision in financial intermediation. The bank balance sheet view omits two
important aspects of modern financial intermediation.
First, a substantial share of financial activity has migrated to the less regulated shadow banking
sector.1 For instance, following the increase in bank regulation after the 2008 financial crisis, the
share of shadow bank loan origination more than doubled in the $10 trillion U.S. residential mortgage
market. Shadow banks now account for the majority of new mortgage originations (Buchak et al.
2018). Financial intermediation regulation therefore needs to account for this “shadow bank
migration margin” of adjustment in the supply of financial intermediation.2 In this paper, we
document the shadow bank migration margin primarily for activities which do not require on-balance-
sheet financing. Banks, by virtue of deposit financing, retain an advantage in balance-sheet intensive
activities. In other words, differences in financing result in market segmentation.
Second, banks themselves sell over 50% of the originated loans instead of holding them on their
balance sheet (see Buchak et al. 2018, Irani et al. 2018, Seru 2019). We document a new margin of
adjustment by traditional banks, which we call the “balance sheet retention margin.” When faced
with shocks, traditional banks adjust their business models, switching from on-balance-sheet lending
to off-balance-sheet lending. The two sets of facts we document suggest that the allocation of
intermediation activity and risks between banks and shadow banks is determined by the industrial
organization of financial intermediation as well as the changing business models of banks. We then
build a workhorse structural model of the financial intermediation sector and demonstrate that these
margins of adjustment are central to understanding consequences of policies such as capital
requirements and monetary policy.
We explore the interaction of banks and shadow banks in two main residential mortgage market
segments in the U.S.—the conforming market and the jumbo market—for two broad reasons. First,
these two segments account for the vast majority of the $19.5 trillion3 residential mortgages originated
during our sample period (Beraja et al. 2019; Wong 2018; Palmer 2015). Second, the institutional
difference between these segments allows us to study the role of balance sheet capacity. Originating
conforming mortgages does not require as much balance sheet capacity since these loans are eligible
for purchase by Government-Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs). Jumbo mortgages, on the other hand,
1 See Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2013); Ordonez (2018); and Moreira and Savov (2017) for models of shadow
banking, and Greenwood and Scharfstein (2013) and Adrian and Ashcraft (2016) for a comprehensive review.
2 For instance, the banking regulation proposal of the Minneapolis Federal Reserve, the “Minneapolis Plan,” discusses
taxing activity that migrates to shadow banking following higher capital requirements:
https://www.minneapolisfed.org/publications/special-studies/endingtbtf/final-proposal/summary-of-the-minneapolis-
plan-to-end-too-big-to-fail.
3 Mortgage Bankers Association estimates for 1–4 unit family homes [accessed August 12, 2019]
https://www.mba.org/Documents/Research/Historical%20Mortgage%20Origination%20Estimates.xlsx.
1