NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
NEGATIVE INTEREST RATE POLICY AND THE YIELD CURVE
Jing Cynthia Wu
Fan Dora Xia
Working Paper 25180
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25180
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2018
We thank Drew Creal, Felix Geiger, Jim Hamilton, Wolfgang Lemke, Monika Piazzesi, Eric
Swanson, and seminar and conference participants at Northwestern Kellogg School of
Management, 10th Annual Conference of the Society for Financial Econometrics, AFA Annual
Meeting, the Federal Reserve Board's conference on "Developments in Empirical Monetary
Economics," Barcelona GSE Summer Forum, 7th Term Structure Workshop at Bundesbank
Bank, University of Oxford, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, European Central Bank, UCSD Rady
School of Management, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Texas A&M University,
Tilburg University, Banque de France, Tinbergen Institute, University of Copenhagen, National
Bank of Belgium, Universite Catholique de Louvain, Bank of Canada, and BIS Asian office for
helpful suggestions. Cynthia Wu gratefully acknowledges ˝financial support from the James S.
Kemper Foundation Faculty Scholar at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. This
article was formerly titled "Time-Varying Lower Bound of Interest Rates in Europe." The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily the views of the BIS.
Correspondence: cynthia.wu@nd.edu, dora.xia@bis.org. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Jing Cynthia Wu and Fan Dora Xia. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Negative Interest Rate Policy and the Yield Curve
Jing Cynthia Wu and Fan Dora Xia
NBER Working Paper No. 25180
October 2018
JEL No. E43,E52
ABSTRACT
We evaluate the implications of the ECB's negative interest rate policy (NIRP) on the yield curve.
To capture various shapes of the short end of the yield curve induced by the NIRP, we introduce
two policy indicators, which summarize the immediate and longer-horizon future monetary
policy stances. We find the four NIRP events lowered the short term interest rate by the same
amount. The impact is dampened at longer maturities for the first two event dates due to lack of
forward guidance. In contrast, in the last two dates, forward guidance drives the largest effects in
two years.
Jing Cynthia Wu
Department of Economics
3060 Jenkins Nanovic Hall
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
cynthia.wu@nd.edu
Fan Dora Xia
Bank for International Settlements
Centralbahnpl. 2
4002 Basel
Switzerland
dora.xia@bis.org

1 Introduction
The effective lower bound (ELB) of nominal interest rates is one of the most discussed
economic issues of the past decade. The negative interest rate policy (NIRP) is among the
latest additions to unconventional monetary policy toolkits, in the hopes of providing further
stimulus to the economies that face the ELB. For example, in June 2017, the deposit rate of
the Swiss National Bank was at a record low of -0.75%, while the European Central Bank’s
(ECB) deposit facility rate was -0.4%. The total volume of outstanding bonds with negative
interest rates reached its peak at 15 trillion dollars in 2016.
As an emerging policy tool, it is important for policy makers and economists to under-
stand its implications. The first question is what is the NIRP’s impact on the yield curve?
Second, what are economic agents’ perceptions of this policy and how do they form expec-
tations? Third, because the zero lower bound (ZLB) is no longer binding, the NIRP creates
richer shapes for the short end of the yield curve. How do we accommodate them when we
model the term structure of interest rates? Understanding these questions is important to
European countries and Japan, which are currently implementing the NIRP. Such an under-
standing is also potentially important for the US economy, for which the NIRP remains a
future option if large negative shocks hit the economy.
Weproposeanewshadowratetermstructuremodel(SRTSM)toaddressthesequestions,
and we focus on the Euro area. At the ELB, the short end of the yield curve displays three
different shapes. The first case is flat, similar to what we see in the US data when the ZLB
prevails but without the NIRP. Second, the yield curve could be downward sloping when
agents expect future cuts of the policy rate due to the NIRP. Third, on some days, it is
initially flat in the very short end and then downward sloping, implying market participants
expectnoimmediateactionfromthecentralbank,buttheythinktheoverallfuturemonetary
policy is expansionary. To capture these shapes, we introduce two policy indicators: one for
the immediate monetary policy stance, and the other for the future monetary policy stance
at longer horizons. We model the discrete movement of the ECB’s deposit facility rate at
2

the ELB with a simple and intuitive regime-switching model conditioning on the two policy
indicators. Our model is able to capture the three different shapes at the short end of the
yield curve that we see in the data. We then build the dynamics of the deposit rate into
an SRTSM using the Black (1995) framework, where the short term interest rate is the
maximum of the non-positive deposit rate and a shadow interest rate.
We use our model to extract the market’s expectations on the NIRP. Overall, expecta-
tions of financial market participants from our model agree with economists’ expectations
from the Bloomberg survey. Importantly, our model has the advantage over the Bloomberg
survey because we can extract the market’s expectations further into the future, whereas the
Bloomberg surveys are collected only one week before monetary policy meetings. We find
the June 2014 and December 2015 cuts were expected the month before, and the September
2014 cut was entirely unanticipated. Most interestingly, the March 2016 cut was expected 4
months before the actual cut.
We then evaluate the NIRP’s policy implications on the yield curve. For the four event
dates, the ECB lowered the deposit rate by 10 basis points, which lowered the short end of
the yield curve by the same amount. While the impact is dampened at longer maturities for
the first two dates, the NIRP caused a humped shape change of the yield curve for the last
two. We further decompose the NIRP into the rate cut itself and forward guidance. We find
for the first two dates, the NIRP worked through the rate cut itself. For the later two dates,
forward guidance became a significant part of the story, and it was the reason that drives
the humped shape.
We assess the risk premium associated with the NIRP. We first measure it as the dif-
ference between the risk-neutral and real world conditional expectations. We find most of
the time, the risk premium of the NIRP is positive or close to zero, which means agents
typically associate a rate cut with an expansionary monetary policy. One exception is four
months before the March 2016 cut, when the difference between the risk-neutral and physical
expectations was almost -10 basis points. Our interpretation is that agents took a cut in
3