NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GOING THE EXTRA MILE:
DISTANT LENDING AND CREDIT CYCLES
João Granja
Christian Leuz
Raghuram Rajan
Working Paper 25196
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25196
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2018, Revised May 2021
We thank Ray Ball, Jan Bouwens, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia (discussant), Florian Heider
(discussant), Anil Kashyap, Randall Kroszner, Stefan Nagel, Steven Ongena (discussant), Amit
Seru, Doug Skinner, Philipp Schnabl (discussant), Eric So, Wei Xiong (editor), Anastasia
Zakolyukina, Luigi Zingales, two anonymous reviewers and an associate editor, as well as the
workshop participants at the 2020 AFA meetings, Chicago Booth, CUHK, European Finance
Association Annual Meeting, Harvard Business School, Erasmus University, University of Hong
Kong, Labex ReFi, Paris, 8th MoFir Banking Workshop, NBER Corporate Finance, New York
University, University of Amsterdam, University of British Columbia, Universidade do Minho,
the University of Pennsylvania, and the University of Toronto for their helpful comments and
suggestions. We thank Fabian Nagel and Igor Kuznetsov for excellent research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by João Granja, Christian Leuz, and Raghuram Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Going the Extra Mile: Distant Lending and Credit Cycles
João Granja, Christian Leuz, and Raghuram Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 25196
October 2018, Revised May 2021
JEL No. E32,E44,G01,G18,G21,G32,L14
ABSTRACT
The average distance of U.S. banks from their small corporate borrowers increased before the
global financial crisis, especially for banks in competitive counties. Small distant loans are harder
to make, so loan quality deteriorated. Surprisingly, such lending intensified as the Fed raised
interest rates from 2004. Why? We show banks’ responses to higher rates led to bank deposits
shifting into competitive counties. Short-horizon bank management recycled these inflows into
risky loans to distant uncompetitive counties. Thus, rate hikes, competition, and managerial short-
termism explain why inflows ‘burned a hole’ in banks’ pockets and, more generally, increased
risky lending.
João Granja Raghuram Rajan
Booth School of Business Booth School of Business
University of Chicago University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637-1610 Chicago, IL 60637
joaogranja@chicagobooth.edu and NBER
raghuram.rajan@ChicagoBooth.edu
Christian Leuz
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637-1610
and NBER
cleuz@chicagobooth.edu

Descriptions of financial frenzies suggest lenders abandon caution in the midst of a boom and
become more aggressive (or careless) in their lending (see, e.g., Aliber and Kindleberger, 2017;
MinskyandKaufman,2008). Anumberofstudies(e.g.,GiannettiandLaeven,2012;Maddaloniand
Peydr´o,2010;MianandSufi,2009;Lisowsky,Minnis,andSutherland,2017;RajanandRamcharan,
2015) show that lenders’ credit standards are procyclical. However, not all expansions turn into
frenzies, lenders do not become uniformly exuberant in a frenzy across all regions or sectors in a
country, and not all lenders within each region behave in the same way. This paper examines the
bank lending boom and bust in the financial crisis of 2007-2009, trying to understand why lending
took off when it did, where it was most pronounced, and what characterized the banks that were
most prone to it.
Weexaminetheseissuesusingasimpleandaccessibleproxyforrisktaking—theextenttowhich
lendersarewillingtoexpandtheirloanportfoliobylendingtosmallborrowersatagreaterphysical
distance from their branches. A large theoretical and empirical literature suggests that banks add
value through their special ability to screen and monitor loans based on the private information
they collect about current and prospective clients (e.g., Diamond, 1984, 1991; James, 1987). This
ability to produce information about hard to evaluate credits has historically been based on close
interactions between bankers and potential borrowers (e.g., Berger and Udell, 1995; Liberti and
Petersen,2019;PetersenandRajan,1994). AsStein(2002)suggests, “soft”informationsuchasthe
firmness of a borrower’s handshake, the cleanliness of her premises, or her punctuality in meetings
mightallrevealvaluableinformationaboutthelikelihoodofrepayment. PetersenandRajan(2002)
show, however, that the adoption of information and credit scoring technologies in the 1980s and
1990s brought fundamental changes to banks’ business models. Slowly but steadily, information
and communication technologies allowed lenders to substitute somewhat for local interactions in
lending to small businesses. Hence, the average distance between banks and their borrowers grew
steadily as these technologies improved.
Yet, at any point in time, available technologies determine the limits of the area within which
a bank can lend safely. If a bank stretches to lend beyond these limits, it will screen and monitor
the borrower less effectively and, thus, take on more credit risk. Therefore, a faster-than-trend
expansion of the average lending distance is either evidence of a rapid improvement of technology
or suggestive of increased bank risk taking. If it reflects risk taking and not simply more rapid
innovation, we should see that the more distant loans, especially those made during a boom, are
associatedwithhigherdefaultrates. Arapiddropinaveragedistanceinthebustshouldalsofollow
such risk taking as banks become more conservative in lending.
One key contribution of this paper is to establish that in the episode we examine, an above-
trend increase in lending distance is indeed a manifestation of, and a valid proxy for, risk taking.
Thereafter, we examine the circumstances in which such risk taking is exacerbated. Finally, we
suggest an explanation of when, where, and by which banks risk is taken, and offer evidence
supporting this explanation.
Our analysis uses data on small business loans originated in the United States over the last two
2

decades. Specifically, we use the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) dataset, which stratifies the
annual volume of loans originated by banks with total assets above $1 billion by the county of the
loan recipient. We combine the CRA dataset with the Summary of Deposits (SOD) dataset, which
provides information on the branch networks of all commercial banks operating in the U.S. This
combination allows us to compute measures of the physical distance between the county of loan
recipients and the closest branch of their bank lender.1
We find that the long-run trend toward greater average distances between banks and their
borrowers, initially documented by Petersen and Rajan (2002), persists in the past 20 years. Im-
portantly, however, we uncover a significant cyclical component in the evolution of lending dis-
tances. Distances widen considerably in boom periods and then shorten again during the ensuing
downturns. Between 2004 and 2007, banks increased their average distances from 175 miles to 350
miles. These distances, however, quickly slipped back to approximately 200 miles following the
2008 financial crisis.
This cyclical pattern in lending distances is observed after the inclusion of (borrower) county-
year fixed effects and bank fixed effects. As the former accounts for loan demand in a county at a
point in time, the results imply that, in booms, distant banks increase their lending to borrowers
in a county relative to nearby banks, and do so more than in down years. Put differently, the
results cannot be explained by differences in loan demand growth across counties. Since we also
correct for bank-specific effects, it cannot be explained by changes in the composition of lenders in
the economy over the cycle. Distance cyclicality also exists when we examine other points of the
lending-distance distribution, such as the median. We further confirm that the effect can be seen
in banks of different size classes. To address the concern that changes in the nature of borrowers or
loans over the cycle may drive the results, we show the effect also exists within a specific borrower
sector.
The next step is to establish that distant lending in the boom is, on average, riskier and hence
amounts to additional risk taking by the banks. Towards this end, we use the Small Business
Administration (SBA) loan-level dataset of government-guaranteed loans, which contains informa-
tion on ex-post defaults or charge-offs (as we unfortunately do not have default data for small
business loans in the CRA dataset). We find that distant loans are significantly more likely to be
charged-off relative to other loans issued by banks closer to their borrowers in the same county
during the same years. This sensitivity of charge-offs to distance is more pronounced for loans
originated in the pre-crisis boom years. Specifically, a one-percent increase in lending distance in
2006 and 2007 is associated with an increase in the charge-off probability that is between two and
three times larger than that of a similar increase in lending distances in 2003. Furthermore, we
find little evidence that banks obtain compensation through higher interest rates for the additional
risks of lending at a greater distance. Our results suggest that, if anything, the sensitivity of loan
interest rates to distance declines in the pre-crisis boom period.
1Recent papers on lending distance use either cross-sectional surveys (e.g., Brevoort and Wolken, 2008; Petersen
and Rajan, 2002) or proprietary datasets obtained from a single financial institution (e.g., Agarwal and Ben-David,
2014; Agarwal and Hauswald, 2010).
3