NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHEN FAIR ISN'T FAIR:
UNDERSTANDING CHOICE REVERSALS INVOLVING SOCIAL PREFERENCES
James Andreoni
Deniz Aydin
Blake Barton
B. Douglas Bernheim
Jeffrey Naecker
Working Paper 25257
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25257
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018
We would like to thank participants at the 2015 SITE Psychology and Economics Workshop, the 2016
AEA meetings, the 2016 New England Experimental Economics Workshop, the 2016 Early Career
Behavioral Economics conference, the 2017 Economic Science Association meetings, the Tenth Maastricht
Behavioral and Experimental Economics Symposium, and seminars at Columbia, Texas A&M, Cornell,
University of Southern California, Emory, Claremont Graduate University, University of Connecticut,
Yale, Bocconi, WBZ Berlin, University of Lyon, University of Zurich, Chapman University, University
of San Diego, the RAND Institute, Santa Clara University, and Caltech for helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by James Andreoni, Deniz Aydin, Blake Barton, B. Douglas Bernheim, and Jeffrey Naecker.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

When Fair Isn't Fair: Understanding Choice Reversals Involving Social Preferences
James Andreoni, Deniz Aydin, Blake Barton, B. Douglas Bernheim, and Jeffrey Naecker
NBER Working Paper No. 25257
November 2018, Revised July 2019
JEL No. D03,D63
ABSTRACT
In settings with uncertainty, tension exists between ex ante and ex post notions of fairness (e.g., equal
opportunity versus equal outcomes). In a laboratory experiment, the most common behavioral pattern
is for subjects to select the ex ante fair alternative ex ante, and switch to the ex post fair alternative
ex post. One potential explanation embraces consequentialism and construes the reversals as manifestations
of time inconsistency. Another abandons consequentialism in favor of deontological (rule-based) ethics,
and thereby avoids the implication that revisions imply inconsistency. We test between these explanations
by examining contingent planning and the demand for commitment. While the population appears
to be heterogeneous, our findings suggest that the most common attitude toward fairness involves
a time-consistent preference for applying naive deontological rules.
James Andreoni B.Douglas Bernheim
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego Stanford University
9500 Gilman Drive Stanford, CA 94305-6072
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508 and NBER
and NBER bernheim@stanford.edu
andreoni@ucsd.edu
Jeffrey Naecker
Deniz Aydin Department of Economics
Olin Business School Wesleyan University
Washington University in St. Louis jnaecker@wesleyan.edu
1 Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130
daydin@wustl.edu
Blake Barton
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
blakeabarton@gmail.com

1 Introduction
Suppose that twenty lottery tickets will be divided between two equally deserving households, A
and B. Ten of the tickets are red and ten are blue. One of the twenty will be chosen at random,
and the household holding it will win a cash prize. Household A already holds all the red tickets,
but has done nothing to earn them. Your task is to allocate the blue tickets. How would you divide
them up? Most people express a strict preference for giving all ten blue tickets to household B in
order to even out the chances of winning, presumably in the interest of fairness.
Now suppose that, after assigning all ten blue tickets to B, you learn that the winning ticket is
blue. You are then given a chance to reallocate the blue tickets. What would you do? As we show,
most people express a strict preference for reallocating the blue tickets equally between A and B,
again to even out the chances of winning.
Inourexperience, thechoicepatternjustdescribedstrikesmostpeopleaseminentlyreasonable,
at least initially. However, if one adopts a consequentialist perspective on decision making as is
standard throughout economics, these choices violate the principle of time consistency. From this
perspective,theobjectiveofinitiallyallocatingallblueticketstoB istoensurethateachhousehold
has a 50% chance of winning the prize prior to the resolution of pertinent uncertainty (ex ante).
However, inlightofthesubsequentrevision, A’sex ante chancesofwinningare75%: thereisa50%
chance that A wins because the winning ticket is red, and a 25% chance that A wins because the
decision maker reallocates tickets after learning that the winning ticket is blue. Thus, the revision
is inconsistent with a consequentialist interpretation of the ex ante objective.
The current paper has two main objectives. First, we document the types of choice reversals
described above in a laboratory experiment. Indeed, we show that the single most common behav-
ioral pattern is for subjects to select the ex ante fair alternative ex ante (that is, before learning
the color of the winning ticket), and switch to the ex post fair alternative ex post (that is, after
learning the color of the winning ticket). This pattern does not diminish with experience, and the
preferences of most subjects are strict. Second, we attempt to distinguish between two classes of
potential explanations. One embraces consequentialism and construes the reversals as manifesta-
tions of time inconsistency. This inconsistency arises naturally from the tension between ex ante
andexpostperspectivesonfairness: iftheexanteperspectiveiscompellingexanteandtheexpost
perspective is compelling ex post, then a decision maker may shift from the first to the second as
events evolve. The other class of explanations rejects consequentialism along with the notion that
revisions imply inconsistency. Instead, it depicts decision makers as having time-consistent pref-
erences for applying simple (and arguably naive) deontological principles (rule-based ethics), even
though a consequentialist would deem their implications time-inconsistent. A rule that prescribes
egalitarian treatment of indistinguishable parties will likewise produce ex ante fair allocations for
actions executed ex ante, and ex post fair allocation for actions executed ex post.
1

Weemploytwostrategiestodistinguishbetweentheseexplanations. First,weassessthedemand
for commitment among decision makers who have observed their proclivity to switch. In the
preceding example, if the decision maker is a time-consistent consequentialist, she will recognize
that her ex post choices will shift A’s ex ante odds of winning to 75%, and will therefore seek to
remove opportunities for revision. In contrast, if she has a time-consistent preference for applying a
simple deontological rule requiring egalitarianism, she will exhibit an aversion to any commitment
that would preclude her from responding ethically. For example, she will preserve the flexibility
to reallocate the blue tickets equally upon learning that the winning ticket is blue. Our second
strategy is to examine contingent planning. Instead of allowing decision makers to revise their
choices ex post, we require them to specify contingent plans for their revisions ex ante. Under
the hypothesis of time-inconsistent consequentialism, the decision-maker will choose a plan that
is ex ante fair accounting for the revision. In contrast, under our hypothesis concerning naive
deontological ethics, she will specify that “live tickets” should be reallocated equally ex post.
Our data on the demand for commitment require careful interpretation. Roughly 40% of our
subjects strictly prefer commitment to flexibility, while roughly 30% prefer flexibility to commit-
ment. Taken at face value, this finding suggests that time-inconsistent consequentialists are a
bit more numerous than those who practice simple deontological ethics. However, the observed
preference for commitment likely overstates the prevalence of time-inconsistent consequentialists.
Subjects who are prone to exhibit the characteristic choice pattern (switching from ex ante to ex
post equalizing allocations) also disproportionately manifest a preference for retaining flexibility
overmakingcommitments. Conversely,apreferenceforcommitmentismostprevalentamongthose
who are least likely to switch, which suggests that many of those who choose commitment do so to
avoid the annoyance of having to submit their preferences twice, rather than to preempt revisions.
Our analysis of contingent planning corroborates these inferences: many subjects choose an initial
allocation that is ex ante fair, but instruct us to reallocate their tickets evenly if it turns out that
the winning ticket is one of theirs. These results support our main conclusion: the most com-
mon attitude toward fairness involves a time-consistent preference for applying naive deontological
principles, even though a consequentialist would deem their implications time-inconsistent.
Our findings have important practical implications. Even when people agree about the impor-
tance of fairness, they may disagree as to what constitutes a fair decision. An important dimension
of disagreement concerns the question of whether a fair society should pursue equality of opportu-
nityorequalityofoutcomes. Thosewhofavorstandardsbasedonequalityoforiginalopportunities
tend to view fairness from an ex ante perspective. They tolerate even highly unequal outcomes
provided all parties had comparable shots at success. In contrast, those who favor standards based
on equality of updated opportunities or outcomes tend to think about fairness from an ex post per-
spective. Differences of opinion concerning the relative importance of these principles can produce
2