NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IDENTIFYING PRICE INFORMATIVENESS
Eduardo Dávila
Cecilia Parlatore
Working Paper 25210
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25210
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018
We would like to thank Ricardo Caballero, Jennifer Carpenter, John Campbell, Ian Dew-Becker,
Darrell Duffie, Emmanuel Farhi, Itay Goldstein, Joel Hasbrouck, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Ben
Lester, Stephen Morris, Stefan Nagel, Guillermo Ordoñez, Michael Sockin, David Thesmar, Aleh
Tsyvinski, Kathy Yuan, Wei Xiong, and Toni Whited, as well as seminar participants at SITE,
Michigan Ross, and BYU for helpful comments and discussions. We are especially thankful to
Alexi Savov for extended conversations on the topic of this paper, as well as for sharing code and
data. Luke Min provided outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Eduardo Dávila and Cecilia Parlatore. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Identifying Price Informativeness
Eduardo Dávila and Cecilia Parlatore
NBER Working Paper No. 25210
November 2018
JEL No. D82,D83,G14
ABSTRACT
We show that outcomes (parameter estimates and R-squareds) of regressions of prices on
fundamentals allow us to recover exact measures of the ability of asset prices to aggregate
dispersed information. Formally, we show how to recover absolute and relative price
informativeness in dynamic environments with rich heterogeneity across investors (regarding
signals, private trading needs, or preferences), minimal distributional assumptions, multiple risky
assets, and allowing for stationary and non-stationary asset payoffs. We implement our
methodology empirically, finding stock-specific measures of price informativeness for U.S.
stocks. We find a right-skewed distribution of price informativeness, measured in the form of the
Kalman gain used by an external observer that conditions its posterior belief on the asset price.
The recovered mean and median are 0.05 and 0.02 respectively. We find that price
informativeness is higher for stocks with higher market capitalization and higher trading volume.
Eduardo Dávila
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
edavila@stern.nyu.edu
Cecilia Parlatore
NYU Stern
Department of Finance
44 W 4th street suite 9-87
New York, NY, 10012
cparlato@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
Financial markets play an important role by aggregating dispersed information about the
fundamentalsoftheeconomy. Bypoolingdifferentsourcesofinformation,assetpricesactasapublic
signal to any external observer, potentially influencing individual decisions. This view, uncontested
withineconomicsandtracedbacktoHayek(1945),hasfacedsignificantchallengeswhentranslatingits
theoreticalfindingstomoreappliedsettingsbecausemeasuringtheinformationalcontentofpricesis
not an easy task.1 In particular, one may be interested in understanding whether different markets
aggregate dispersed information to different degrees. However, without direct measures of the
informationalcontentofprices(priceinformativeness),howcanoneknowwhichmarketsarebetterat
aggregatinginformation?
In this paper, we develop a methodology that allows us to recover exact stock-specific measures
of price informativeness. Formally, we show that the outcomes (parameters and R-squareds) of
linear regressions of prices on fundamentals are sufficient to identify absolute and relative price
informativeness within a large class of linear asset demand models that feature rich heterogeneity
across investors (regarding signals, private trading needs, or preferences) and minimal distributional
assumptions.2
Throughout the paper, we formally define and study two measures of the informational content
of prices: absolute and relative price informativeness. Absolute price informativeness measures the
amount of information contained in the price for an investor who only learns about an asset’s payoff
from the price. We formally define absolute price informativeness as the precision of the unbiased
signalabouttheinnovationtothefundamentalrevealedbyassetprices. Relativepriceinformativeness
measures the informational content of prices relative to the total amount of uncertainty about the
asset’s payoff. Formally, relative price informativeness corresponds to the ratio between absolute
price informativeness and the precision of the innovation to the fundamental, which measures the
underlying source of uncertainty. This measure captures how much can be learned from the price
relativetothetotalamountthatcanbelearned.
The main contribution of this paper is methodological. For illustration, let us describe how
price informativeness can be recovered. In a stationary environment, consider running the following
regressionrelatingtheex-dividendpriceatwhichanassetistradedinperiod t, p ,totheassetpayoff
t
toberealizedattheendofperiodt,θ ,anditscontemporarypayoff,θ ,
t+1 t
p = β +β θ +β θ +ε . (R0)
t 0 1 t 2 t+1 t
1Hayek (1945) highlights the relevance of price informativeness as follows: “The economic problem of society is (...)
ratheraproblemofhowtosecurethebestuseofresourcesknowntoanyofthemembersofsociety,forendswhoserelative
importanceonlytheseindividualsknow. Or, toputitbriefly, itisaproblemoftheutilizationofknowledgewhichisnot
giventoanyoneinitstotality.”
2Giventhatlinearassetdemandscanbeinterpretedasanapproximationtomoregeneralmodels,oneshouldexpectour
resultstobevalidmorebroadlyinanapproximatesense.
2

The equilibrium relation that supports Regression R0 provides the foundation for our procedure
β2
to identify price informativeness. We show that 2 exactly corresponds to absolute price
Var[εt]
informativeness,thatis,totheprecisionoftheunbiasedsignalabouttheinnovationtothefundamental
containedinassetprices. Westructurallymaptheerrortermε tothenoisecomponentofassetprices,
t
andweshowhowitcanarisefromdifferentprimitiveassumptions(e.g. randomheterogeneouspriors,
multipleriskyassets,unlearnablecomponentofthefundamental,etc.).
We also show that the difference between the R-squared of Regression R0 and the R-squared
of an identical regression that does not include θ can be directly mapped to relative price
t+1
informativeness. Formally,weshowthatacorrectedincrementalR-squaredbetweenbothregressions
exactly determines relative price informativeness. Under Gaussian primitives, we also show that
the same difference directly determines the Kalman gain that an external observer attributes to
the innovation to the fundamental when forming a posterior about the future payoff of the asset.
Importantly, our results are not only qualitative, but they provide exact measures of informativeness.
Forinstance,findingaKalmangainofK = 0.2impliesthatanexternalobserverweighstheinformation
containedinthepriceby20%relativetohisprior.
It is worth highlighting that our identification procedure does not make parametric assumptions
regarding the underlying source of noise and does not require that investors form beliefs using
Bayesianupdating. Wealsodiscussindetailhowourresultsrelatetoalternativemeasuresthatrelate
to price informativeness, like the posterior variance of the fundamental or forecasting price efficiency
measures.
Although we derive our identification results without the need to fully specify the model
primitives, we explicitly develop a fully microfounded dynamic model of trading in Section 4 of
the paper. In the context of this model, we provide a new identification result that allows us to
recover, using aggregate information, the precision of investors’ private signals and the volatility of
the aggregate component of investors trading needs (noise). To our knowledge, this result provides
the first methodology that transparently recovers the precision of investors’ signals precision in REE
models. ItalsoprovidesadirectmethodologytocapturetheamountofnoisetradinginREEmodels.
Wesystematicallyextendourmethodologytomoregeneralenvironments. Inparticular,weshow
how to adapt our methodology to allow for unit-roots in the process followed by the fundamental.
Whenallowingfornon-stationarypayoffs,weshowhowtoimplementourresultsindifferenceform.
Wealsoextendourresultstoincludemultipleriskyassets,andpayoffswithlearnableandunlearnable
components. Inallscenarios,ourmethodologyremainsvalidtoanswerthequestionofhowmuchan
external observer can learn from the price. These extensions highlight that the exact interpretation of
the noise term depends on the exact assumptions of the model. Throughout the paper, we discuss at
lengththerationalebehindourmeasuresofinformativeness,andhowtheexerciseofidentifyingprice
informativenessisdistinctfromexploringpredictabilityrelations.
After describing the methodology, we proceed to implement our results empirically, recovering
3