NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PARTISAN PROFESSIONALS:
EVIDENCE FROM CREDIT RATING ANALYSTS
Elisabeth Kempf
Margarita Tsoutsoura
Working Paper 25292
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25292
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018
We thank Pat Akey, John Barrios, Marianne Bertrand, Kimberly Cornaggia (discussant), Steve
Davis, Carola Frydman (discussant), Jiekun Huang (discussant), Emir Kamenica, Anil Kashyap,
Stefan Lewellen (discussant), Raghuram Rajan, David Schoenherr (discussant), Jesse Shapiro,
Chester Spatt, Laura Starks (discussant), Amir Sufi, Vikrant Vig, and seminar participants at
Aalto University, Bocconi University, Chicago Booth, Cornell University, Dartmouth College,
the 2018 FRA Conference, Imperial College, the 2019 NBER Corporate Finance Summer
Institute, MIT Sloan, New York Fed, the 2019 Political Economy of Finance Conference, Rice
University, Stockholm School of Economics, the 2019 UNC/Duke Corporate Finance
Conference, University of Illinois at Chicago, University of Luxembourg, University of
Minnesota Carlson, University of Rochester, UVA Darden, Vanderbilt University, and Yale
University for valuable comments. Kempf gratefully acknowledges financial support from the
James S. Kemper Foundation, the Initiative on Global Markets, and the Fama-Miller Center for
Research in Finance at the University of Chicago, Booth School of Business. We thank Yu Gao,
Dong Ryeol Lee, Tianshu Lyu, Michael Schwartz, and Pan Yingru for excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Elisabeth Kempf and Margarita Tsoutsoura. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Partisan Professionals: Evidence from Credit Rating Analysts
Elisabeth Kempf and Margarita Tsoutsoura
NBER Working Paper No. 25292
November 2018, Revised June 2020
JEL No. G14,G24,G41
ABSTRACT
Partisan perception affects the actions of professionals in the financial sector. Using a novel
dataset linking credit rating analysts to party affiliations from voter records, we show that
analysts who are not affiliated with the U.S. president's party downward-adjust corporate credit
ratings more frequently. By comparing analysts with different party affiliations covering the same
firm in the same quarter, we ensure that differences in firm fundamentals cannot explain the
results. We also find a sharp divergence in the rating actions of Democratic and Republican
analysts around the 2016 presidential election. Our results show analysts' partisan perception has
sizable price effects on rated firms and may influence firms' investment policies.
Elisabeth Kempf
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
elisabeth.kempf@chicagobooth.edu
Margarita Tsoutsoura
SC Johnson College of Business
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
tsoutsoura@cornell.edu

1 Introduction
Recent evidence suggests a large increase in polarization across political parties in the U.S.
(e.g., Iyengar, Sood, and Lelkes (2012); Mason (2013); Lott and Hassett (2014); Mason
(2015); Gentzkow (2016); Boxell, Gentzkow, and Shapiro (2017)). In particular, voters
have an increased tendency to view the economy through a “partisan perceptual screen;”1
that is, their assessment and interpretation of economic conditions and economic policies
depend on whether the White House is occupied by the party they support (e.g., Bartels
(2002); Gaines, Kuklinski, Quirk, Peyton, and Verkuilen (2007); Gerber and Huber (2009);
Curtin (2016); Mian, Sufi, and Khoshkhou (2018)).
To understand how partisan perceptions may affect the U.S. economy, establishing
whether and when they translate into differences in the behavior of economic agents is
important. Whereas researchers have documented partisan bias in households’ assessment
of future economic conditions, evidence on actual economic behavior is mixed.2 More-
over, the extent to which partisan perception influences the economic expectations and
actions of individuals with greater economic sophistication, and in high-stake professional
environments, has remained an open question.3
Weaimtofillthisgapbyinvestigatingwhetherpartisanperceptionaffectstheactionsof
an important set of professionals in the financial sector: credit rating analysts. Focusing on
credit analysts provides an interesting setting, because their expertise and career concerns
shouldreducetheeffectofpartisanperception(e.g., Gentzkow, Glaeser, andGoldin(2006);
HongandKacperczyk(2010)). Atthesametime, anyeffectofpartisanperceptiononcredit
rating actions is likely to have implications for firms’ cost of financing (Fracassi, Petry, and
Tate (2016)), as well as their financial policy and investment decisions (Chernenko and
Sunderam (2011); Begley (2015); Almeida, Cunha, Ferreira, and Restrepo (2017)).
To identify the effect of partisan perception, we test whether the rating actions of
credit analysts depend on their political alignment with the U.S. president. This test
poses a number of empirical challenges. First, it requires observable actions at the level
of the individual analyst. Second, analysts need to be linked to information about their
1Campbell, Converse, Miller, and Stokes (1960) introduced the idea of the partisan perceptual screen;
“Identification with a party raises a perceptual screen through which the individual tends to see what is
favorable to his partisan orientation” (Campbell, Converse, Miller, and Stokes (1960), p. 133). In this
paper, we use “partisan perceptual screen,” “partisan perception,” and “partisan bias” interchangeably.
2Whereas Makridis (2019) documents a significant effect of partisan bias on household spending, Mc-
Grath (2017) and Mian, Sufi, and Khoshkhou (2018) find no significant effect. Focusing on households’
investment decisions, Meeuwis, Parker, Schoar, and Simester (2018) show political affiliation affects port-
folio choice around the U.S. election of November 2016.
3Notable exceptions are Jelveh, Kogut, and Naidu (2018), who document partisan bias in economic
research, and Posner (2008), McKenzie (2012), and Chen (2019), who document partisan bias among
judges.
1

political affiliation. Third, it requires comparing the actions of analysts with different
political affiliations on the same task and in the same information environment. Fourth,
we need to separate the effect of political alignment with the president from time-invariant
characteristics of Democratic and Republican analysts.
To address these challenges, we compile a novel hand-collected dataset that links credit
rating analysts to the ratings they issue, as well as to information on party affiliation from
voter registration records. Our sample consists of 557 corporate credit analysts with non-
missing information on their party affiliation, working at Fitch, Moody’s, and Standard
and Poor’s (S&P) between 2000 and 2018. These analysts cover a total of 1,984 U.S. firms.
By comparing rating actions of analysts who rate the same firm at the same point in time,
we ensure our results cannot be driven by differences in the fundamentals of rated firms
(i.e., we can compare analysts on the same “task”).
We find partisan perception affects credit ratings. Analysts who are not affiliated with
the president’s party are more likely to adjust ratings downward, relative to other analysts
covering the same firm at the same point in time. Specifically, analysts who are not
affiliated with the president’s party downward-adjust ratings more by 0.013 notches per
quarter. This effect corresponds to 11.4% relative to the average absolute quarterly rating
adjustment and is therefore economically sizable. Over a four-year presidency (i.e., 16
quarters), these estimates imply analysts who are misaligned with the president downward-
adjust the rating of the average firm by 0.21 (=0.0134 × 16) notches more than aligned
analysts. This amount corresponds to a one-notch rating downgrade (e.g., A to A–) of
approximately one out of every five firms. Overall, the effect of partisan perception that
we document is comparable to other non-fundamental factors influencing rating agencies’
information production identified in the literature, such as the effect of competition or the
home-bias effect.
Our empirical strategy ensures this result cannot be explained by several potential con-
founding factors. Most importantly, following Fracassi, Petry, and Tate (2016), we control
for non-random matching of analysts to firms by including firm × quarter fixed effects in
the regressions. Thus, we can rule out the possibility that Democratic analysts rate firms
that tend to do well under the policies of Democratic presidents. Our empirical strategy
also allows us to control for differences in rating methodologies across rating agencies via
agency × quarter fixed effects. Finally, we control for unobserved time-invariant differ-
ences across analysts with different party affiliations via party-affiliation fixed effects. In
other words, we focus on how the behavior of analysts changes depending on whether
their preferred party is in power, as opposed to static differences between Democratic and
Republican analysts.
2