NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HETEROGENEITY IN EXPECTATIONS, RISK TOLERANCE, AND HOUSEHOLD STOCK SHARES:
THE ATTENUATION PUZZLE
John Ameriks
Gábor Kézdi
Minjoon Lee
Matthew D. Shapiro
Working Paper 25269
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25269
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018
This research is supported by a program project grant from the National Institute on Aging P01-
AG026571. The Vanguard Group Inc. supported the data collection through the VRI (Vanguard
Research Initiative). Vanguard’s Client Insight Group and IPSOS SA were responsible for
implementing the VRI survey and provided substantial input into its design. Andrew Caplin is a
co-principal investigator of the VRI. We gratefully acknowledge his collaboration. The design of
the VRI benefited from the collaboration and assistance of Joseph Briggs, Wandi Bruine de
Bruin, Alycia Chin, Mi Luo, Brooke Helppie McFall, Ann Rodgers, and Christopher Tonetti as
part of the program project, from Annette Bonner (Vanguard), and Wendy O’Connell (IPSOS
SA). We are grateful to Stefan Nagel and Isacco Piccioni for comments on an earlier draft. The
views expressed here are those of the authors and not those of their respective institutions. For
documentation of the VRI, including a dynamic link to the survey instrument, see http://ebp-
projects.isr.umich.edu/VRI/. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by John Ameriks, Gábor Kézdi, Minjoon Lee, and Matthew D. Shapiro. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Heterogeneity in Expectations, Risk Tolerance, and Household Stock Shares: The Attenuation
Puzzle
John Ameriks, Gábor Kézdi, Minjoon Lee, and Matthew D. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 25269
November 2018
JEL No. C83,D81,D84,G11
ABSTRACT
This paper jointly estimates the relationship between stock share and expectations and risk
preferences. The survey allows individual-level, quantitative estimates of risk tolerance and of the
perceived mean and variance of stock returns. These estimates have economically and statistically
significant association for the distribution of stock shares with relative magnitudes in proportion
with the predictions of theories. Incorporating survey measurement error in the estimation model
increases the estimated associations twofold, but they are still substantially attenuated being only
about 5 percent of what benchmark finance theories predict. Because of the careful attention in
the estimation to measurement error, the attenuation likely arises from economic behavior rather
than errors in variables.
John Ameriks Minjoon Lee
The Vanguard Group, Inc. Department of Economics
PO Box 2600, MS V36 Carleton University
Valley Forge PA 19482 Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6
john_ameriks@vanguard.com Canada
minjoon.lee@carleton.ca
Gábor Kézdi
Survey Research Center Matthew D. Shapiro
Univeristy of Michigan Department of Economics
Ann Arbor, MI 48109 University of Michigan
gabor.kezdi@gmail.com 611 Tappan St
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
shapiro@umich.edu
Documentation and survey instrument is available at http://ebp-projects.isr.umich.edu/VRI/
An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25269

The source of heterogeneity in portfolio choices is an important question for household finance
(Campbell, 2006). Theories, such as consumption CAPM, predict that the share of risky assets
should be positively related to their expected returns, negatively related to their risk, and
positively related to investors’ risk tolerance. These theories also have quantitative implications
for the magnitudes of those relations. This paper assesses those implications by estimating how
heterogeneity in preferences and beliefs explain heterogeneity in household portfolios.
In this paper we take a systematic attempt at quantitatively evaluating the implications of
benchmark financial theories by using better data and more careful statistical modeling. We build
a structural maximum likelihood model to estimate jointly quantitative measures of risk tolerance
and the perceived mean and variance of stock returns from high-quality survey data while taking
survey measurement error into account. We estimate their association with household stock
shares at the intensive margin. Our approach is made possible by new data on portfolio
composition for a large enough sample of stockholding households, combined with appropriate
measures of preferences and beliefs. Our data set was created by the Vanguard Research
Initiative (VRI) that combines administrative account data and survey responses for a large
sample of Vanguard account holders. The VRI has multiple features that make it especially well-
suited for estimation of the sources of heterogeneity in stock holdings.
Section I summarizes related literature and discusses how our approach improves upon
previous analyses. Section II describes the VRI sample and the measurements of assets and
stock share. Section III describes how we measure preferences and beliefs. To get individual-
specific estimates of preference parameters, we use a modification of the Barsky, Juster,
Kimball, and Shapiro (1997) approach of eliciting risk tolerance from hypothetical gambles over
permanent income. To get individual-specific estimates of the moments of the perceived

distribution of returns, we use both the Manski (2004) approach of eliciting points in the CDF of
perceived returns together with individuals’ estimates of expected returns.
Survey measures of preferences have considerable external validity (i.e., that preference
parameters explain a wide range of behaviors) and internal validity (i.e., test-retest validation and
consistence across different measures). See Barsky, Juster, Kimball, and Shapiro (1997),
Kimball, Sahm, and Shapiro (2008), Ameriks, Caplin, Laufer, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2011),
Dohmen, Falk, Huffman and Sunde (2010), Dohmen, Falk, Huffman, Sunde, Schupp, and
Wagner (2011), and Josef, Richter, Samanez-Larkin, Wagner, Hertwig, and Mata (2016) for
evidence both of external and internal validity. Recent evidence suggests survey measures of risk
preferences show more stability than measures based on small-stakes lottery experiments
(Lönnqvist, Verkasalo, Walkowitz and Wichardt, 2015). Similarly, probabilistic measures of
expectations have predictive validity (Hurd, 2009). See Manski (2017) for a summary of
progresses made in eliciting subjective expectations on macroeconomic variables including
equity returns. Carroll (2017) also stresses the role of expectations in explaining macroeconomic
fluctuations and hence the importance of correctly measuring them and understanding their
formation. This paper is the first attempt to measure both preferences and expectations and to use
them jointly to explain portfolio choices.
Like many survey measures, preference and expectations are subject to response error.
This paper uses a unified procedure accounting for response error to produce unbiased estimates
of the subjective variables for both preferences and beliefs. Section IV combines these estimates
to explain the cross-section of stock shares. We find that the stock share is positively related to
the individuals’ perceived expected stock returns, is negatively related to their perceived
standard deviation of the returns, and is positively related to their risk tolerance. These
2