NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHAT ARE THE CONSEQUENCES OF GLOBAL BANKING FOR THE INTERNATIONAL
TRANSMISSION OF SHOCKS? A QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS
José L. Fillat
Stefania Garetto
Arthur V. Smith
Working Paper 25203
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25203
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2018
We are grateful to Andrew Bernard, Nicola Cetorelli, Jean-Edouard Colliard, Enrique Martinez-
Garcia, Linda Goldberg, Victoria Ivashina, Andrei Levchenko, Friederike Niepmann, Joe Peek,
Katheryn Russ, Jeremy Stein, and seminar participants at many institutions for helpful comments.
We also thank Martin Goetz for invaluable input at the initial stages of this project. Andrew
Barton, Kovid Puria, and Marco Sammon provided excellent research assistance. The views
expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by José L. Fillat, Stefania Garetto, and Arthur V. Smith. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What are the Consequences of Global Banking for the International Transmission of Shocks?
A Quantitative Analysis
José L. Fillat, Stefania Garetto, and Arthur V. Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 25203
October 2018
JEL No. F12,F23,F36,G21
ABSTRACT
The global financial crisis of 2008 was followed by a wave of regulatory reforms that affected
large banks, especially those with a global presence. These reforms were reactive to the crisis.In
this paper we propose a structural model of global banking that can be used proactively to
perform counterfactual analysis on the effects of alternative regulatory policies. The structure of
the model mimics the US regulatory framework and highlights the rganizational choices that
banks face when entering a foreign market: branching versus subsidiarization. When calibrated to
match moments from a sample of European banks, the model is able to replicate the response of
the US banking sector to the European sovereign debt crisis. Our counterfactual analysis suggests
that pervasive subsidiarization, higher capital requirements, or ad hoc monetary policy
interventions would have mitigated the effects of the crisis on US lending.
José L. Fillat Arthur V. Smith
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Department of Economics
Research Department Boston University
Boston, MA 02210 270 Bay State Road
jose.fillat@bos.frb.org Boston MA 02215
avsmith@bu.edu
Stefania Garetto
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
garettos@bu.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25203

What are the consequences of global banking for the international
transmission of shocks? A quantitative analysis∗
Jos´e L. Fillat† Stefania Garetto‡ Arthur V. Smith§
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Boston U., CEPR, and NBER Boston U.
October 19, 2018
Abstract
The globalfinancialcrisisof2008wasfollowedbya waveofregulatoryreformsthataffected
large banks, especially those with a global presence. These reforms were reactive to the crisis.
In this paper we propose a structural model of global banking that can be used proactively to
perform counterfactual analysis on the effects of alternative regulatory policies. The structure
ofthemodelmimicstheUSregulatoryframeworkandhighlightstheorganizationalchoicesthat
banks face when enteringa foreignmarket: branchingversussubsidiarization. When calibrated
tomatchmomentsfromasampleofEuropeanbanks,themodelisabletoreplicatetheresponse
of the US banking sector to the European sovereign debt crisis. Our counterfactual analysis
suggeststhatpervasivesubsidiarization,highercapitalrequirements,oradhocmonetarypolicy
interventions would have mitigated the effects of the crisis on US lending.
Keywords: global banks, banking regulation, shock transmission.
JEL Classification: F12, F23, F36, G21
∗We are grateful to Andrew Bernard, Nicola Cetorelli, Jean-Edouard Colliard, Enrique Martinez-Garc´ıa, Linda
Goldberg, Victoria Ivashina, Andrei Levchenko, Friederike Niepmann, Joe Peek, Katheryn Russ, Jeremy Stein, and
seminar participants at many institutions for helpful comments. We also thank Martin G¨otz for invaluable input
at the initial stages of this project. Andrew Barton, Kovid Puria, and Marco Sammon provided excellent research
assistance.
†Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 600 Atlantic Avenue,Boston MA 02210. E-mail: Jose.Fillat@bos.frb.org. The
views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston or Federal ReserveSystem.
‡DepartmentofEconomics,BostonUniversity,270BayStateRoad,Boston,MA02215. E-mail: garettos@bu.edu.
§DepartmentofEconomics,BostonUniversity,270BayStateRoad,Boston,MA02215. E-mail: avsmith@bu.edu.

1 Introduction
The 2008 global financial crisis and—more recently—the European sovereign debt crisis have
spurred debates among academics and policymakers about the regulation of large, systemically
important banks. Most of the institutions under scrutiny are multinational banks, with operations
in multiple countries, raising concerns about contagion and shock transmission. Arguably, regula-
tory reformsshouldbenotonly reactive tocrises, butalsodesigned ex-ante to reducethelikelihood
and limit the severity of such crises.
In this paper, we inform the design of multinational banking regulation by developing a quanti-
tative structural model of global banking, and by using it to evaluate the effects of counterfactual
policies. We focus our analysis on global banks because they are often the largest players in the
countries where they operate: as noted by Goldberg (2009), the sheer size of foreign banking insti-
tutions and their involvement with the real economy makes them important vehicles for the global
transmission of shocks. For example, the Japanese banking crisis in the early 1990s had a substan-
tial effect on credit supply in the United States, as many US branches and subsidiaries of Japanese
banks closed down following the shock in their home country. The European sovereign debt crisis
also had rippling effects in the US credit markets, mostly due to the fragility of foreign branches’
funding, as our empirical analysis shows below. Several empirical studies have explored the role of
multinational banks in the transmission of shocks across countries.1 Our paper contributes to this
literature in two ways. First, while prior contributions have overlooked the importance of a bank’s
mode of operations, our model provides a microfoundation for the bank’s decision of whether and
how to enter a foreign market—through branches or subsidiaries. We find that this differentiation
is of first-order importance to understanding the effects of financial crises. Second, while most of
the existing work has been conducted using reduced-form analysis, our quantitative model enables
us to study the consequences of potential regulatory changes via counterfactual analysis.
The model we develop is designed to describe the institutional details of the banking industry
and to be consistent with a number of stylized facts from US bank-level data. For this reason,
our analysis focuses on the two most prominent forms of foreign banking institutions in the United
States: branches and subsidiaries. Current US bank regulations treat foreign-owned branches and
subsidiaries differently, so the activities that a branch and a subsidiary are allowed to undertake
differ: for example, while subsidiaries are separately capitalized, branches do not raise independent
1See most notably Cetorelli and Goldberg (2011,2012a,b).
1