NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BENCHMARK REGULATION OF MULTIPRODUCT FIRMS:
AN APPLICATION TO THE RAIL INDUSTRY
Wesley W. Wilson
Frank A. Wolak
Working Paper 25268
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25268
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018
This paper evolved from the authors' participation in a National Academy of Sciences (NAS)
panel review of regulation in the railroad industry, Modernizing Freight Rail Regulation (2015),
National Academies Press, Washington, DC. The other panel members provided a number of
invaluable comments throughout the process. These are: Richard Schmalensee, Ken Boyer, Jerry
Ellig, José A. Gómez-Ibáñez, Anne Goodchild, and Thomas Menzies. In addition, earlier versions
of this paper have been presented to the Association of Transport, Trade, and Service Studies,
Railroad-Shipper Transportation Advisory Council, the Advanced Workshop in Regulation and
Competition. The authors gratefully acknowledge comments and discussions that emanated from
these audiences. We thank Kevin Henrickson for research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Wesley W. Wilson and Frank A. Wolak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Benchmark Regulation of Multiproduct Firms: An Application to the Rail Industry
Wesley W. Wilson and Frank A. Wolak
NBER Working Paper No. 25268
November 2018
JEL No. L5,L9,L92
ABSTRACT
A number of formerly regulated multiproduct industries have a transitional or permanent residual
regulatory mandate to protect consumers from "excessive" prices. The legislation that deregulated
most rail rates contains a statutory mandate for the regulator to protect shippers from "excessive"
prices. Fulfilling this mandate has been challenging because of the cost and administrative burden
to shippers in obtaining regulatory relief. Moreover, as argued by Wilson and Wolak (2016), the
existing rate relief mechanism is based on a cost concept that does not reflect the actual
incremental cost of a shipment and it does not adequately address the question of what constitutes
an "excessive" rate for a multiproduct firm with significant common costs. This paper analyzes a
benchmark price approach to identifying "excessive" prices in multiproduct industries subject to
residual price regulation. Our empirical analyses demonstrate how the mechanism can be used to
fulfill the statutory mandate to protect shippers from "excessive" prices at substantially lower
cost, with less administrative burden, and without significant adverse consequences for the long-
term financial viability of the railroads.
Wesley W. Wilson
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
wwilson@uoregon.edu
Frank A. Wolak
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
wolak@zia.stanford.edu

1. Introduction
A number of formerly regulated multiproduct industries have a transitional or permanent
residual regulatory mandate to protect consumers from ”excessive” prices. The Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) is required to ensure that all wholesale electricity
prices are ”just and and reasonable” and ”not unduly discriminatory or preferential,” even
in parts of the United States with bid-based short-term markets for wholesale electricity.
FERC has a similar regulatory mandate for natural gas transportation despite the fact that
prices for most natural gas movements are set through bilateral negotiations between the
pipeline owner and purchaser of wholesale natural gas. In the aftermath of the Airline
Deregulation Act of 1978, the Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB) had a transitional mandate
to ensure that airfares were not ”unjust and unreasonable.” The Staggers Act of 1980, which
partially deregulated the railroad industry, imposes a regulatory mandate on the Surface
Transportation Board (STB), the industry regulator that replaced the Interstate Commerce
Commission (ICC), to protect captive shippers from excessive prices.
These regulatory mandates have proven challenging to enforce to the satisfaction of the
parties involved because of the conceptual difficulty in defining a ”just and reasonable” price
for a multiproduct firm with substantial economies to scope in production. Gaskins (2008)
argues that this residual regulatory challenge in the railroad industry ”still has not been
solved to everyone’s satisfaction after 150 years of effort.” (Gaskins (2008), p. 1). The
essential challenge is that a railroad provides thousands of varieties of shipments, depending
on the product and distance shipped, and both the incremental cost of a shipment and
marginal cost of shipping an additional ton exclude the vast majority of the railroad’s total
cost of production.1 This implies that setting each shipment price equal to either the average
incremental cost of the shipment or the marginal cost of shipping an additional ton of that
product would not recover sufficient revenue for the railroad to cover its annual costs.
Consequently, in order to recover its total cost of production, the railroad must charge
prices above the average incremental cost and the marginal cost of shipping an additional
ton for a substantial fraction, if not all, of its shipments. A major goal of the Staggers Act
was to grant railroads the freedom to do this, subject to protecting captive shippers from
”excessive” prices. The large number of products sold by railroads and the large share of
common costs in the railroad’s total cost of production imply that even if the railroad’s
multiproduct cost function was known with certainty, this would not make the job of setting
the threshold for an excessive price any easier. As Wilson and Wolak (2016) note, it would
only change the regulator’s problem from one of determining the value of an excessive price
1Costsnotcausedbyamovementormovinganadditionaltonincludethecostofthetrack,rollingstock,
management salaries and benefits, and the vast majority of labor costs.
1

a shipment to determining the value of an excessive markup over the average incremental
cost or marginal cost of a shipment.
Thetotalwelfare-maximizingRamsey-pricingsolutionofsettingthemarkupovermarginal
cost for each shipment proportional to the inverse of the elasticity of the demand for the
shipment flies in the face of Staggers Act mandate to protect captive shippers. By defini-
tion, captive shippers have no other economically viable alternative but the railroad for their
shipment and for that reason have a small elasticity of demand for the shipment. This logic
rules out a solution that places a significant burden for common cost recovery on captive
shippers, as would be the case under Ramsey pricing.2
This paper analyzes an alternative approach to determining whether the price charged by
multiproduct firm is ”excessive” that does not require knowledge of the multiproduct firm’s
cost function or the elasticity of demand of individual products. Our methodology relies on
a set of circumstances that is increasingly prevalent in many formerly regulated industries,
the existence of a large sample of ”competitive prices” for products along with the observable
characteristics of each of these products. We use this sample to nonparametrically estimate
the conditional distribution of competitive prices given product characteristics and then
use this conditional distribution to construct a benchmark price based on the observable
characteristics of a shipment suspected of having an ”excessive” price. If the actual price
exceeds this benchmark price, then price of the shipment could be deemed ”excessive” and
therefore worthy of further regulatory scrutiny.
There are two important considerations in setting the value of a benchmark price for a
shipment. First is the probability of false positives–competitive prices that are incorrectly
found to exceed the benchmark. Second is the possibility of false negatives–non-competitive
pricesthatareincorrectlyfoundnottoexceedthebenchmarkprice. Weinvestigatethisissue
with a Monte Carlo study where we first estimate the conditional distribution of competitive
prices given shipment characteristics on data simulated from ”competitive markets” and
then apply our competitive benchmark methodology using this estimated distributed to
data simulated from a mixture of ”competitive and non-competitive markets.”
Similar to the case of statistical hypothesis testing, a rule for setting the benchmark price
that minimizes the sum of squares of misclassification errors argues in favor of approach that
requires overwhelming statistical evidence against a price being the result of a competitive
market before it is deemed ”excessive.” Our Monte Carlo results finds that setting the value
of the benchmark price between the upper 5 percent and upper 1 percent of the conditional
2For the case of zero cross-price elasticities of demand for the products sold by the multiproduct firm,
Ramsey pricing implies setting the highest markups over marginal cost for products with the smallest (in
absolute value) own-price elasticity of demand. This logic implies that captive shippers would face the
highest markups over marginal cost under Ramsey pricing.
2