NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE DYNAMICS OF DISAGREEMENT
Kent Daniel
Alexander Klos
Simon Rottke
Working Paper 25346
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25346
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2018, Revised August 2022
We thank Nick Barberis, John Campbell, Jie Cao, Tolga Caskurlu, Alex Chinco, Lauren Cohen,
Robin Greenwood, Alexander Hillert, David Hirshleifer, Heiko Jacobs, Ravi Jagannathan,
Lawrence Jin, Urooj Khan, Sven Klingler, Dong Lou, Stefan Nagel, Andreas Neuhierl, Florian
Peters, Mitchell Petersen, Jeff Pontiff, Adam Reed, Tano Santos, Andrei Shleifer, Valeri
Sokolovski, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, Sheridan Titman, Luis Viceira, Tuomo Vuolteenaho, Ed
van Wesep, Greg Weitzner, Wei Xiong, and two anonymous referees for helpful comments, as
well as Zahi Ben-David, Sam Hanson, and Byoung Hwang for helpful insights about the short-
interest data. We appreciate the feedback from seminar and conference participants at the Miami
Behavioral Finance Conference, NBER Spring Meeting, American Finance Association,
European Finance Association, Cavalcade Asia-Pacific, Oxford Man Quantitative Finance
Seminar, Paris December Finance Meeting, German Finance Association, Amsterdam, Brandeis,
Columbia, Copenhagen, Hannover, HEC Montréal, HU Berlin, Kiel, Lausanne, LBS, LSE,
Maryland, Münster, Notre Dame, Oxford, Rochester, Stockholm, UCLA,Washington, WashU,
AQR, Arrowstreet, Barclays, Institutional Assets, Martingale Asset Management, and the Society
of Quantitative Analysts.Financial support from the German Research Foundation (grant
KL2365/3-1) is gratefully acknowledged. All remaining errors are our own. The paper subsumes
our older work circulated under the titles “Overconfidence, Information Diffusion, and
Mispricing Persistence,” “Overpriced Winners,” and “Betting Against Winners.” The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25346.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Kent Daniel, Alexander Klos, and Simon Rottke. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Dynamics of Disagreement
Kent Daniel, Alexander Klos, and Simon Rottke
NBER Working Paper No. 25346
December 2018, Revised August 2022
JEL No. G0,G12,G4
ABSTRACT
We infer how the estimates of firm value by “optimists” and “pessimists” evolve in response to
information shocks by examining returns and disagreement measures for portfolios of short-sale
constrained stocks which have experienced large gains or large losses. Our analysis suggests the
presence of two groups, one of which overreacts to new information and remains biased over
about five years, and a second group which underreacts and whose expectations are unbiased
after about one year. Our results have implications for the belief dynamics that underly the
momentum and long-term reversal effect.
Kent Daniel Simon Rottke
Graduate School of Business University of Amsterdam
Columbia University Finance Group
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 101 Plantage Muidergracht 12
New York, NY 10027 1018 TV Amsterdam
and NBER Netherlands
kd2371@columbia.edu simon.rottke@uva.nl
Alexander Klos
QBER - Institute for Quantitative Business and Eco
Heinrich-Hecht-Platz 9
24118 Kiel, Germany
alexander.klos@qber.uni-kiel.de
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25346

In the last several decades, financial economists have begun to carefully examine the
consequences of disagreement or differences of opinion. In part, this attention has been
motivated by the large trading volumes in securities markets, which are difficult to explain
without large levels of and changes in disagreement (see, e.g., Hong and Stein, 2007). In this
paper, we measure how the distribution of beliefs about security values evolves over time in
response to information shocks. That is, we examine the dynamics of disagreement.
When opinions differ regarding the value of a security, and investors can costlessly short-
sell that security, the security price will reveal only the weighted mean of the distribution of
beliefs, and nothing about the dispersion of agents’ beliefs. However, if a security becomes
hard to borrow, then the price will reflect only the beliefs of the most optimistic agents
(Miller, 1977). Moreover, as we show here, using the cost of borrowing we can learn about
the dispersion of beliefs.
For example, consider a constant absolute risk aversion (CARA)-normal framework with
˜
a single security that will pay an uncertain liquidating dividend D in one period. For
simplicity, assume the risk-free rate is zero and that risk aversion is small (so that we can
ignorerisk-premia). Mostimportantly, assumeonlyafixednumberofsharesareavailablefor
lending,andanyshareslentandsoldcannotberehypothecated. Ifafrictionlessmarketexists
for lending these shares, the cost of borrowing will be the cost that matches this (inelastic)
supply with demand from pessimists who wish to borrow the shares for the purpose of short
selling.
In this setting, if there is no disagreement the price will equal the expected liquidating
dividend (P = E[D ˜ ]) and the short interest and the marginal lending fee will both be zero.
However, what if there is disagreement? First, assume there are two masses of investors A
and B of equal measure and with equal risk aversion who disagree about the expected payoff.
Specifically, assume E [D ˜ ] = $30 and E [D ˜ ] = $20, where E [·] denotes the expectation of
A B i
an investor of type i. If the number of shares available for borrowing is large, the security
price will be the average of E [D ˜ ] and E [D ˜ ]: $25. Note also that if a “wisdom of crowds”
A B
1

effect is at work, meaning that the average across agents’ expectations is “rational” (i.e., that
E [D ˜ ] = 0.5·E [D ˜ ]+0.5·E [D ˜ ] = $25), then the expectation of the security price-change
R A B
over the period will be zero (since P = E [D ˜ ]).
R
However, according to Miller’s (1977) intuition, when the number of shares available for
borrowing is small the price will reflect primarily the views of the most optimistic agents. In
this example, as the number of shares available for borrowing approaches zero, the security
price will approach E [D ˜ ] = $30. Also, the borrow cost will approach the difference in the
A
agents’ valuations (E [D ˜ ] − E [D ˜ ] = $10): the pessimistic agents in B will be willing to
A B
pay up to $10 to short a share they view as being overvalued by $10. Here, the rational
expectation of the security price-change will be -$5, so the optimistic agents in A earn a per-
share expected payoff of -$5. However, the pessimistic agents (in B) who short the security
also earn an expected payoff per share of -$5; they benefit from the $5/share expected
price decline but are required to pay the $10/share borrow cost. Thus, an observer can
unambiguously infer the beliefs of both the optimists and pessimists from the price and the
borrowing cost of the constrained stock.1
The objective of this paper is to extend this intuition to a multi-period setting and bring
it to the data. Specifically, we examine the returns to portfolios of securities which have
experienced either a large positive or a large negative price shock, presumably as a result
of the arrival of new information about the security’s future payoffs. Moreover, motivated
by the above toy model, we examine the returns of these portfolios both when the securities
in the portfolios are unconstrained, i.e., when they can be borrowed at low cost, and when
borrowing is costly. Consistent with the above example, this allows us to make inferences
about how the distribution of beliefs of market participants evolves over time in response to
these shocks.
1Inmorecomplicatedsettings,thelinksbetweenoptimists’beliefsandpricesaswellaspessimists’beliefs
and lending fees are not as direct as in our simple two-type example. Risk-aversion, indirect short selling
costs (other than lending fees), and dynamics complicate matters. However, the claim that prices of heavily
constrainedstocksaresetbyoptimistsisfairlygeneral. Similarly,higherborrowingfeeswillproxyforhigher
belief dispersion even in more general settings with a continuous distribution of beliefs. In such a setting,
the borrow cost will reflect the difference in beliefs between the marginal buyer and the marginal seller.
2