NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CHARACTERISTICS OF MUTUAL FUND PORTFOLIOS:
WHERE ARE THE VALUE FUNDS?
Martin Lettau
Sydney C. Ludvigson
Paulo Manoel
Working Paper 25381
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25381
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2018, Revised February 2021
We thank Ian Dew-Becker, Kent Daniel, Ken French, Ananth Madhaven, Michael Weber, and
seminar participants at BlackRock, NYU-Stern, UC Berkeley, UC Irvine, the Joint Berkeley-
Stanford Seminar, and the 2018 FMA conference for helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25381.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Martin Lettau, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Paulo Manoel. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Characteristics of Mutual Fund Portfolios: Where Are the Value Funds?
Martin Lettau, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Paulo Manoel
NBER Working Paper No. 25381
December 2018, Revised February 2021
JEL No. G11,G12,G2
ABSTRACT
This paper provides a comprehensive analysis of portfolios of active mutual funds and ETFs
through the lens of risk (anomaly) factors. We show that these funds do not systematically tilt
their portfolios towards profitable factors, such as high book-to-market (BM) ratios, high
momentum, small size, high profitability, and low investment growth. Strikingly, there are almost
no high-BM funds in our sample while there are many low-BM “growth” funds. Portfolios of
“growth” funds are concentrated in low BM-stocks but “value” funds hold stocks across the
entire BM spectrum. In fact, most “value” funds hold a higher proportion of their portfolios in
low-BM (“growth”) stocks than in high-BM (“value”) stocks. While there are some micro/small/
mid-cap funds, the vast majority of mutual funds hold very large stocks. But the distributions of
mutual fund momentum, profitability, and investment growth are concentrated around market
average with little variation across funds. The characteristics distributions of ETFs and hedge
funds do not differ significantly from those of mutual funds. We conclude that the characteristics
of mutual fund portfolios raise a number of questions about why funds do not exploit well-known
return premia and how their portfolio choices affect asset prices in equilibrium.
Martin Lettau Paulo Manoel
Haas School of Business University of California at Berkeley
University of California, Berkeley 545 S Student Services Building, #1900
545 Student Services Bldg. #1900 Berkeley, CA 94720
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900 paulombfm@berkeley.edu
and CEPR
and also NBER
lettau@haas.berkeley.edu
Sydney C. Ludvigson
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10002
and NBER
sydney.ludvigson@nyu.edu

1. Introduction
Since the seminal study by Jensen (1968), most of the research on active mutual funds has been
abouttheirperformanceandtherelatedissuewhetherfundmanagershaveskillornot. Somerecent
examples include Fama and French (2010), Berk and van Binsbergen (2015), Cremers and Petajisto
(2009), Kacperczyk, Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp (2014), Pástor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2015), and
many more. The composition and characteristics of mutual fund portfolios have received far less
attention.1 The goal of this paper is to fill this gap in the literature and provide a comprehensive
analysis of the cross-sectional distribution of portfolio holdings of active domestic equity mutual
funds and ETFs through the lens of characteristics that are associated with return premia, such as
the three “classic” size, value, and momentum anomalies.2
StudyingthecompositionandcharacteristicsofmutualfundandETFportfoliosisinterestingfor
several reasons. First, we ask to what extent characteristics that are associated with return premia
are reflected in portfolios of mutual funds and ETF. To what extent do active fund managers exploit
these factor premia? If there are limits to arbitrage, do active funds contribute to the existence of
these anomalies or do they overweight underpriced stocks?
Second, notions, such as “growth” and “value”, are to some degree vague and have no precise,
universallyaccepteddefinitions. Howarethesetermsasusedinthemutualfundindustryrelatedto
thecorrespondingdefinitionsinacademicresearch? Forexample,theevidenceofthevaluepremium
in the academic literature is based on portfolio sorts of price-multiples, in particular the book-to-
market ratio. Do “value” and “growth” funds hold predominantly stocks with high and low book-
to-market ratios, respectively? If not, what are the key characteristics of portfolios of “value” and
“growth” funds and how are they related to returns?
Finally, what set of strategies is available to retail investors via active funds? The literature on
mutual funds typically takes the universe of funds as given. However, the set of funds in existence
is an endogenous object subject to demand and supply. What are the market forces that determine
the set of funds that are available to investors?3 This paper takes a first step in answering these
questionsbyestablishingacomprehensivesetofstylizedfactsaboutthecharacteristicsofportfolios
of mutual funds, ETFs and, to a limited degree, hedge funds.
Wefindthat(most)mutualfundsdonotsystematicallyexploitreturnpremiaofwell-knownrisk/
anomalyfactors. Infact,formostfactors,mutualfundstargetthelow-returnlegoflong/shortfactor
portfoliosratherthanthehigh-returnleg. Thisbiasispresentinmostprice-multiplesandisespecially
strongforthebook-to-market(BM)ratio. The“value”premiumdefinedasthereturnspreadofstocks
with high and low book-to-market ratios is one of the most well-known and robust stylized facts in
theassetpricingliterature. Yet,BMratiosofmutualfunds,ETFs,andhedgefundsaretiltedtowards
1OnerecentexceptionisPástor, Stambaugh, andTaylor(2020)whostudytherelationshipbetweenliquidityandfund
characteristics,inparticulartheoptimalchoiceofstocksofdifferentsize.
2Thereisanongoingdebatewhetherfactorpremiaareduetoriskorbehavioralbiases. Weremainagnosticaboutthe
underlyingsourceoffactorpremia.
3BerkandGreen(2004)studyhowdemandandsupplyaffectflowsperformanceacrossfundsbuttheytakethesetof
fundsthatareavailabletoinvestorsasgiven.
1

low BM values rather than high BM ratios.
This result is illustrated in Figure 1, which shows histograms4 of the distribution of book-to-
market ratios of mutual funds. The plot is based on the following methodology, described in more
detail below. In each quarter, we assign stocks a BM score based on quintile sorts, so that stocks
in the lowest/highest quintile have scores of 1 and 5, respectively. Then we compute BM scores of
mutual funds as the portfolio-weighted average of the BM scores of stocks that are held by the fund.
Hence,afundsthatonlyinvestsinstocksinthelowest/highestBMquintileshaveBMscoresof1and
5, respectively, while a score of “3” corresponds to a fund holding stocks that are on average in the
middle BM quintile.
The book-to-market distribution of all 2,993 active equity mutual funds in our sample is plotted
in Figure 1 (in bold red). The share of mutual funds with BM scores between 1 and 2, 2 and 3, etc.
are indicated at the bottom of the figure. The vertical lines represent the BM scores of the CRSP-VW
index, and the two components of HML, i.e. the high BM portfolio H and the low BM portfolio L as
benchmarks. ThefigureshowsthatthedistributionofmutualfundsisheavilytiltedtowardslowBM
values. 33% of all mutual funds have a BM score between 1 and 2 and a further 54% between 2 and
3. On the other hand, 13% of funds have a moderately high BM score between 3 and 4, but only 7 of
almost3,000fundshaveaBMscoreabove4. Thereareonly20fundswithBMscoresaslowasthatof
the L portfolio (with a BM score of 1.3), there are 131 funds with BM scores below 1.5 and 983 funds
below 2. In contrast, there are essentially no mutual funds with a book-to-market ratio close to that
oftheHportfolio. Inthissense,highBM“value”fundsaremissingfromtheUSequitymarket. Toput
this differently, an investor can easily find “growth” mutual funds that are similar to the L portfolio,
but it is virtually impossible to use mutual funds to mimic the “value” portfolio H.
Figure 1: Distribution of Book-to-Market Ratios of Mutual Funds
All Growth Value
1.2
L CRSPVW H
0.9
0.6
0.3
0.0
33% 54% 13% 0%
1 2 3 4 5
BM score
Notes: SeeFigure3.
4Strictlyspeaking,weareplottingestimatedkerneldensitiesofhistograms.
2