NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LOW INFLATION: HIGH DEFAULT RISK AND HIGH EQUITY VALUATIONS
Harjoat S. Bhamra
Christian Dorion
Alexandre Jeanneret
Michael Weber
Working Paper 25317
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25317
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018
We are grateful for comments and suggestions from Hui Chen, Pierre Collin-Dufresne
(discussant), Jens Hilscher, Erica Li (discussant), Philippe Mueller (discussant), Francisco
Palomino (discussant), Monika Piazzesi, Carolin Pflueger (discussant), Andrea Tamoni
(discussant), Lukas Schmid (discussant), Gustavo Schwenkler (discussant), Min Wei (discussant),
and participants at the 2017 Adam Smith Asset Pricing, 2017 HEC-McGill Winter Finance
Workshop, 2017 BoCFRBSF-SFU Conference, 2017 SAFE Asset Pricing Workshop, 2017
Conference on Corporate Policies and Asset Prices, 2017 Society for Economic Dynamics, 2018
Cavalcade, 2018 WFA, 2018 EFA, 2018 NFA, BIS, ESSEC, Federal Reserve Board, HEC
Lausanne, HEC Montréal, McGill, University of Lugano, University of Neuchâtel, University of
Maryland, and University of Paris-Dauphine. A previous version of this paper circulated under
the title Deflation, Sticky Leverage and Asset Prices. We thank Xiao Yin for excellent research
assistance. The authors acknowledge the financial support from Imperial College, HEC Montréal
and the HEC Montréal Foundation, Chicago Booth, and the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council (SSHRC). All errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Christian Dorion and Alexandre Jeanneret acknowledge financial support from SSHRC and the
HEC Foundation.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Harjoat S. Bhamra, Christian Dorion, Alexandre Jeanneret, and Michael Weber. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Low Inflation: High Default Risk AND High Equity Valuations
Harjoat S. Bhamra, Christian Dorion, Alexandre Jeanneret, and Michael Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 25317
November 2018
JEL No. E44,G12,G32,G33
ABSTRACT
We develop an asset-pricing model with endogenous corporate policies that explains how
inflation jointly impacts real asset prices and corporate default risk. Our model includes two
empirically grounded nominal frictions: fixed nominal coupons and sticky profitability. Taken
together, these two frictions result in higher real equity prices and credit spreads when inflation
falls. An increase in inflation has opposite effects, but with smaller magnitudes. In the cross
section, the model predicts the negative impact of inflation on real equity values is stronger for
low leverage firms. We find empirical support for the model predictions.
Harjoat S. Bhamra Alexandre Jeanneret
Imperial College London HEC Montreal
United Kingdom 3000, ch de la Cote-Ste-Catherine
and CEPR Montreal H3T 2A7
h.bhamra@imperial.ac.uk Canada
alexandre.jeanneret@hec.ca
Christian Dorion
HEC Montreal Michael Weber
3000 Cote-Sainte-Catherine Booth School of Business
Department of finance University of Chicago
Montreal, Canada H3T 2A7 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
christian.dorion@hec.ca Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
michael.weber@chicagobooth.edu

1 Introduction
Corporate defaults spike during times of low expected inflation. But so do firms’ equity valuations,
despite increased default risk. Figure 1 documents these two stylized facts for the U.S. over the period
1970Q2–2016Q4. Panel A illustrates the strong negative relation between expected inflation and the
number of quarterly defaults in the U.S., whereas Panel B shows a similar negative relation between
expected inflation and price-dividend ratios.
The existing literature has overlooked the connection between these two empirical facts and exam-
ined them separately. One branch of the literature focuses on the link between expected inflation and
credit spreads. See, for example, Bhamra, Fisher, and Kuehn (2011), Kang and Pflueger (2015), or
Gomes, Jermann, and Schmid (2016), in which lower expected inflation reduces the nominal risk-free
rate, therebyincreasingfirms’indebtedness, andnominalexpectedgrowthrates–botheffectsincrease
default risk. A second branch of the literature investigates the link between expected inflation and
equity values. See, for example, Modigliani and Cohn (1979), Feldstein et al. (1980), Ritter and Warr
(2002), Sharpe (2002), and Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004).1 A common explanation for the link
between inflation and equity prices is money illusion: Investors discount real cash flows with nominal
discount rates.2 In contrast to the literature, we propose a unified treatment of the empirical facts.
We do so by asking how shareholders can rationally value stocks more favorably during periods of low
expected inflation, despite facing greater bankruptcy risk.
We construct a dynamic asset-pricing model with endogenous corporate financing decisions to
explain these puzzling observations. We model firms that issue nominal debt and equity. Our frame-
work provides asset-pricing predictions from a corporate finance perspective, whereby firms’ financing
and default policies are endogenous. We consider a representative agent with Epstein-Zin-Weil pref-
erences.3 The economy switches randomly between expansion or recession, creating intertemporal
macroeconomic risk. A two-state Markov regime-switching model with parameter estimates based on
quarterly U.S. consumption data over the period 1970Q2-2016Q4 determines the switches between
real states. We also introduce three expected inflation states (low, moderate, and high) via a sec-
ond, independent Markov regime-switching process that matches the one-year mean inflation forecast
from the Survey of Professional Forecasters. We refer to fluctuations in the expected inflation rate as
nominal risk, which is distinct from real macroeconomic risk.
1See also Lintner (1975), Bodie (1976), Fama and Schwert (1977), Miller, Jeffrey, and Mandelker (1976), Nelson
(1976),Fama(1981),Schwert(1981),GeskeandRoll(1983),Gultekin(1983),Solnik(1983),Pindycketal.(1984),Kaul
(1987), Pearce and Roley (1988), Kaul and Seyhun (1990), Boudoukh and Richardson (1993), and Bekaert and Wang
(2010).
2Alternative explanations are the non-neutrality of inflation and the existence of an inflation risk premium. We
describe the relevant literature in more detail below.
3OurworkbuildsonBhamra,Kuehn,andStrebulaev(2010a,b)andChen(2010),whoanalyzefirms’capital-structure
and default decisions, as well as levered asset prices, in a consumption-based model with changing macroeconomic
conditions.
1

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0 2 4 6 8 10
Expected inflation
retrauq
rep
stluafed
fo
rebmuN
100
80
60
40
20
0
0 2 4 6 8 10
Expected inflation
oitar
dnedivid-ecirP
Figure 1: Defaults, stock valuation, and inflation in the U.S.
Thisfigureillustratestherelationbetweenexpectedinflation,defaultrisk,andstockvaluation. PanelAreports
the number of quarterly defaults of firms domiciled in the U.S. with debt rated by Moody’s. Panel B displays
the price-dividend ratio, computed as the value-weighted CRSP price index in the last month of the quarter
divided by the sum of dividends paid in the last 12 months. Defaults are obtained from Moody’s Default and
Recovery Database. Expected inflation is the one-year-ahead inflation forecast from the Survey of Professional
Forecasters. The sample spans the period 1970Q2-2016Q4.
Our model contains two key frictions, both of which act as nominal rigidities. First, firms keep
their nominal debt coupons fixed. This stickiness of leverage means changes in inflation impact real
asset prices via shifts in the real values of debt coupons. Second, price stickiness implies nominal
cash flow growth is sticky in the short run, and so expected nominal cash-flow growth changes less
than one-for-one with changes in expected inflation. In the model, nominal cash-flow growth equals
expected real cash-flow growth plus a multiple smaller than one of expected inflation. We denote this
friction as sticky cash flows and find strong empirical support for this nominal rigidity in U.S. data.4
We show these two empirically motivated nominal frictions are sufficient to explain the stylized facts
in Figure 1, but we do not aim to micro found the existence of these frictions in the current paper.
Thetwofrictionsweintroduceimplychangesinexpectedinflationimpactbothrealcorporatedebt
and equity prices. Our model is able to rationalize both high credit spreads and equity values during
periods of low expected inflation. The model makes additional cross-sectional implications, which the
data support.
In the model, a fall in expected inflation affects credit spreads through distinct channels. First,
a lower nominal cash-flow growth rate increases a firm’s risk-neutral default probability, which raises
4We provide direct evidence on the stickiness of profits below. Nominal price rigidities are the leading explanation
of the real effects of monetary policy. For example, menu-cost models generate a band of inaction, rationalizing price
non-adjustmenttoshocks(see,e.g.,Mankiw(1985)andBallandMankiw(1994)). Ontheempiricalside,ampleevidence
confirmsthestickinessofoutputprices(see,e.g.,NakamuraandSteinsson(2008)andGorodnichenkoandWeber(2016)).
2