NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MONEY MARKETS, COLLATERAL AND MONETARY POLICY
Fiorella De Fiore
Marie Hoerova
Ciaran Rogers
Harald Uhlig
Working Paper 25319
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25319
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018, Revised March 2024
We would like to thank Saki Bigio, Stefano Corradin, Nicolas Crouzet, Matthias Kaldorf, Peter
Karadi, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, John Leahy, Enrique Mendoza, Giorgio Primiceri, Vìctor Rìos Rull,
Pedro Teles, our discussants Juliane Begenau, Nicolas Caramp, Ikeda Daisuke, Luigi Paciello,
Farzad Saidi, Saverio Simonelli and Ivan Werning, and seminar participants in numerous
conferences and universities for useful comments and discussions. We are grateful to Johannes
Pöschl, Luca Rossi, Maksim Bondarenko, Pablo Herrero Marco, and Catalina Cozariuc for
research assistance. The previous version of the paper was circulated under the title “The
Macroeconomic Impact of Money Market Disruptions.” The views expressed here are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank for International Settlements, the
Eurosystem, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Fiorella De Fiore, Marie Hoerova, Ciaran Rogers, and Harald Uhlig. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Money Markets, Collateral and Monetary Policy
Fiorella De Fiore, Marie Hoerova, Ciaran Rogers, and Harald Uhlig
NBER Working Paper No. 25319
November 2018, Revised March 2024
JEL No. E44,E58
ABSTRACT
During the financial and sovereign debt crises, euro area interbank money markets underwent
dramatic changes: the share of unsecured borrowing declined throughout the euro area, while
private market haircuts on sovereign bonds and bank borrowing from the European Central Bank
increased in the South. We construct a quantitative general equilibrium model to evaluate the
macroeconomic impact of these developments and the associated policy response. Our model
features heterogeneous banks and sovereign bonds, secured and unsecured money markets, and a
central bank. We compare a benchmark policy—the central bank providing collateralized lending
to banks at haircuts lower than the market—to an alternative policy that maintains a constant
central bank balance sheet. We show that the fall in output, investment, and capital would have
been twice as high under the alternative policy. More generally, the model allows the analysis of
monetary policy tools beyond interest rate policies and quantitative easing.
Fiorella De Fiore Ciaran Rogers
Monetary and Economic Department Institute for International Economics Studies
Bank for International Settlements Stockholm University
Switzerland Stockholm, Stoc 11353
and CEPR Sweden
Fiorella.DeFiore@bis.org ciaran.rogers@iies.su.se
Marie Hoerova Harald Uhlig
European Central Bank Dept. of Economics
Sonnemannstrasse 20 University of Chicago
D-60314 Frankfurt am Main 1126 E 59th Street
Europe Chicago, IL 60637
marie.hoerova@ecb.int and CEPR
and also NBER
huhlig@uchicago.edu

1 INTRODUCTION
During the financial and sovereign debt crises, euro area interbank money markets underwent
dramatic changes. Using a novel dataset surveying interbank money market activity, we em-
phasize four main observations. First, the share of unsecured interbank borrowing declined
overthisperiodthroughouttheeuroarea,withbankssubstitutingtowardsecuredtransactions.
Second, with the onset of the sovereign debt crisis in 2010, market haircuts on Southern gov-
ernment bonds increased substantially, while the European Central Bank (ECB) kept haircuts
nearly unchanged throughout, creating a “haircut gap” between private market and ECB hair-
cuts. Third, bank borrowing from the ECB increased eight-fold in Southern regions. Fourth,
household deposits at banks remained stable.
As our main contribution, we construct and analyze a quantitative general equilibrium
model to understand these developments, the policies employed by the central bank, and their
impact on the overall economy. Our model features heterogeneous banks and heterogeneous
government bonds, interbank money markets for both secured and unsecured credit, and a
central bank that can conduct open market operations and lend to banks against collateral.
We use the model to clarify the role of different interbank market frictions and to quantify the
impact of central bank responses compared to a counterfactual scenario of no intervention.
In the model, there are two regions, the “North” and the “South,” each with its own gov-
ernment bonds, but one common central bank. Each period in the model is subdivided into
a morning and an afternoon. In the morning, banks choose their assets (loans, bonds, and
money) and liabilities (central bank funding and deposits), subject to a leverage constraint as
proposed by Gertler and Karadi (2011) and Gertler and Kiyotaki (2011). Banks are randomly
selected to only hold Northern government bonds or Southern government bonds. Central
bank funding must be backed by bond collateral and is subject to a haircut imposed by the
central bank. Deposit funding is uncollateralized but exposes banks to idiosyncratic liquidity
shocks in the afternoon, as formulated by Bianchi and Bigio (2022). These liquidity shocks
can be managed by borrowing or lending in private interbank money markets. Banks face an
exogenous probability of being “connected,” defined as the ability to borrow in the unsecured
market in the afternoon. The remaining “unconnected” banks need to satisfy possible with-
drawals either by holding sufficient reserves or by posting bonds as collateral in the secured
market. Collateralizedborrowingissubjecttoahaircut, withhaircutsintheprivateafternoon
1

market being potentially different in the North than in the South and, in turn, different from
morning haircuts set by the central bank.
We argue that we need all key ingredients of the model to understand the observed devel-
opments in the euro area money markets. We show how reduced versions without the morning
leverageconstraintand/ortheafternoonliquiditymanagementconstraintwillfailatthattask.
With all the key ingredients in place, frictions can arise in different places, making the analysis
particularly challenging. Five inequality constraints on banks emerge as crucial: the “morn-
ing” leverage constraint, a collateral constraint vis-a-vis the central bank, and three short-sale
constraints. We show that one cannot a priori require any of these constraints to bind or to
be slack. On the contrary, each of these may turn on or off, and each can be crucial for the
macroeconomic outcomes as we traverse the parameter space and different monetary policies.
We provide the calculus for the bank’s decision problem, weighing the various trade-offs. We
illuminate the inner workings of the model using steady-state comparative statics while solv-
ing the dynamic calibrated model numerically, using techniques in Dynare allowing for these
constraints to become occasionally binding.
In order to match the developments documented in Section 2, we impose the condition
that the probability that a bank is connected gradually and permanently falls from 42% to
around 10%, while the haircuts on Southern bonds rise temporarily from 3% to 25%.1 For
the central bank, we compare the benchmark “collateralized credit operations” policy or CO
policyofkeeping thecentralbankhaircutunchangedat3%to acounterfactualandalternative
“constant balance-sheet policy” or CB policy, where the central bank haircut is 100%, ruling
out bank-borrowing from the central bank.
We demonstrate that the two policies do not differ much in terms of their impact on the
economy in the case of the change in the share of secured lending but they induce significantly
different responses from the rise in private market haircuts. In particular, the fall in output,
investment, and capital would have been twice as high under the constant balance-sheet policy
compared to the benchmark. There is a rich set of interactions, which we highlight and
illuminate in our analysis.
More generally, the analysis here shows that interbank money market frictions matter,
and central bank policy tools beyond interest rate setting or quantitative easing can have
1Agentscorrectlyforeseetheseexogenouschangesinprobabilitiesandhaircuts. Whileitwouldbeintriguing
toprovidedeeperfoundationsandlinkthemto,say,sovereigndefaultrisks,doingsowouldexceedthescopeof
the already rich analysis presented here.
2