NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEPOSIT SPREADS AND THE WELFARE COST OF INFLATION
Pablo Kurlat
Working Paper 25385
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25385
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2018
I am grateful to Adrien Auclert, William Barnett, Sebastian Di Tella, Javier Garcia Cicco, Ester
Faia, Ryan Mattson, Daniel Paravisini and Isaac Sorkin for helpful comments. Ricardo de la O
Flores provided outstanding research assistance. Correspondence: Department of Economics,
Stanford University. 579 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA, 94305. Email: pkurlat@stanford.edu The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Pablo Kurlat. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Deposit Spreads and the Welfare Cost of Inflation
Pablo Kurlat
NBER Working Paper No. 25385
December 2018
JEL No. D43,E31,E41,G21
ABSTRACT
Since bank deposits and currency are substitutes and banks have monopoly power, higher
nominal interest rates lead to higher deposit spreads. This raises the cost of transaction services,
increases bank profits and attracts entry into the banking sector. Taking these effects into account,
a one percentage point increase in inflation has a welfare cost of 0.086% of GDP, 6.9 times
higher than traditional estimates.
Pablo Kurlat
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
pkurlat@stanford.edu

The welfare cost of inflation is a longstanding concern of monetary economics, and the
recent debate about raising the inflation target lends it renewed relevance. One reason that
inflation is costly is that, other things being equal, higher inflation induces households to
reduce their money balances, forgoing some of the convenience of carrying money to conduct
transactions. A standard method for measuring the magnitude of this cost, proposed by
Bailey (1956) and pursued by Lucas (2000) and Ireland (2009) among others, is to measure
the area under the money demand curve. This is valid as long as money does not pay interest
and is costless to create. In this paper I propose and quantify a model that makes it possible
to extend this calculation to the case where bank-created money pays interest, there are
fixed costs to operating a bank, and the banking industry responds to changes in interest
rates.
The model is a variant of Drechsler et al. (2017). Households value the transaction
services of currency and several types of bank deposits, which are imperfect substitutes. The
opportunity cost of holding currency is the nominal interest rate; the opportunity cost of
holding a bank deposit is the deposit spread: the difference between the market interest rate
and the deposit interest rate. Banks have a fixed cost of operating but zero marginal cost
of issuing deposits, and have some degree of monopoly power to set deposit spreads. Under
constant elasticity of substitution, equilibrium spreads depend positively and linearly on the
nominal interest rate.
I assume that there is free entry into the banking industry. An increase in deposit spreads
raises bank profits, attracting entry until profits are diluted back to equal fixed costs. The
increase in the real amount of resources dedicated to fixed costs is part of the welfare cost
of higher inflation.
I estimate the parameters of the model using using a detailed database on deposit rates. I
firstdocument, usingtimeseriesvariation, thattherelationshipbetweentheinterestrateand
deposit rates is indeed positive and close to linear. I then estimate the elasticity of demand
for deposits using geographic cross sectional variation in market shares of the largest banks.
Together with data on monetary aggregates, this makes it possible to construct an aggregate
measureofmoneyandestimateitsdemandelasticity. Finally,Imeasuretheelasticityofbank
profits with respect to bank concentration using cross sectional variation in the exposure of
local markets to bank mergers. Together, these estimates make it possible to quantify the
model.
I use the model to compute the welfare cost of a permanent increase in the inflation rate
by one percentage point (raising nominal interest rates from 2.5% to 3.5%) and find it to be
2

0.086% of GDP, which is 6.9 times higher than one finds using the approach in Lucas (2000)
and Ireland (2009). A factor of 1.9 results from constructing a monetary aggregate in the
way the model suggests, while the rest of the difference comes from taking into account the
resources dedicated to additional bank costs.
1 The Model
1.1 The Environment
The model is based on Drechsler et al. (2017). There is a representative household with
preferences
η
1 η−1
u(y,m) = y + βηm η (1)
η −1
where y is consumption and m is transaction services from money holdings. The monetary
aggregate m is a nested CES aggregate of real currency c and bank deposits d, with elasticity
of substitution (cid:15):
(cid:104) (cid:105) (cid:15)
m = α 1 (cid:15) c (cid:15)− (cid:15) 1 +(1−α) 1 (cid:15) d (cid:15)− (cid:15) 1 (cid:15)−1 (2)
Deposits are a CES aggregate of deposits d from N different banks, with elasticity of
n
substitution σ:
(cid:32) (cid:33) σ
N σ−1
(cid:88) 1 σ−1
d = µσd σ (3)
n n
n=1
Deposits at bank n are themselves a CES aggregate of J different types of deposits d , with
jn
elasticity of substitution (cid:15) :
d
(cid:34) (cid:35) (cid:15)d
(cid:88) J 1 (cid:15)d−1 (cid:15)d−1
d ≡ α(cid:15)dd (cid:15)d (4)
n j jn
j=1
When I quantify the model, I set J = 2; d represents checking accounts and d
1n 2n
represents savings accounts at bank n, both of which provide some amount of transaction
services.1 The nested structure embodies the assumption that bank customers purchase
banking services in bundles and competition across banks takes place at the level of the
bundle rather than at the level of the individual deposit type.2
1I also re-do the calculations for J =3, where d represents small time deposits.
3n
2Amel and Starr-McCluer (2002) and Amel et al. (2008) report that about 73% and 60% of checking and
savings deposit accounts respectively are held by households at their primary institution.
3