NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FIRM LEVERAGE AND REGIONAL BUSINESS CYCLES
Xavier Giroud
Holger M. Mueller
Working Paper 25325
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25325
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2018
We thank Eduardo Dávila, Itamar Drechsler, Shan Ge, Mark Gertler, Adam Guren, Theresa
Kuchler, Simone Lenzu, Andres Liberman, Max Maksimovic, Thomas Philippon, Alexi Savov,
Moritz Schularick, Jeremy Stein, Johannes Stroebel, Amir Sufi, Emil Verner, and seminar
participants at NYU, Columbia, Penn, and Maryland for helpful comments. Any opinions and
conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views
of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential
information is disclosed. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Xavier Giroud and Holger M. Mueller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Firm Leverage and Regional Business Cycles
Xavier Giroud and Holger M. Mueller
NBER Working Paper No. 25325
December 2018
JEL No. E24,E32,G32
ABSTRACT
This paper shows that buildups in firm leverage predict subsequent declines in aggregate regional
employment. Using confidential establishment-level data from the U.S. Census Bureau, we
exploit regional heterogeneity in leverage buildups by large U.S. publicly listed firms, which are
widely spread across U.S. regions. For a given region, our results show that increases in firms’
borrowing are associated with “boom-bust” cycles: employment grows in the short run but
declines in the medium run. Across regions, our results imply that regions with larger buildups in
firm leverage exhibit stronger short-run growth, but also stronger medium-run declines, in
aggregate regional employment. We obtain similar results if we condition on national recessions–
regions with larger buildups in firm leverage prior to a recession experience larger employment
losses during the recession. When comparing regional firm and household leverage growth, we
find qualitatively similar patterns for both. Finally, we find that regions whose firm leverage
growth comoves more strongly also exhibit stronger comovement in their regional business
cycles.
Xavier Giroud
Columbia Business School
Finance Division
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 806
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
xavier.giroud@gsb.columbia.edu
Holger M. Mueller
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street
Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
hmueller@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
Large U.S. firms are widely spread across regions. During the 1976—2011 period, the
average U.S. publicly listed firm owned establishments in 32.3 counties, 19.9 MSAs, and
8.1 states. When these large firms increase their borrowing, regions are differentially
impacted. As this paper shows, regions with larger buildups in leverage by U.S. publicly
listed firms exhibit stronger aggregate regional employment growth in the short run.
However, this employment growth is only temporary. In the medium run, regions with
larger buildups in leverage by U.S. publicly listed firms experience stronger declines in
aggregate regional employment. For a given region, this implies that increases in firms’
borrowing are associated with “boom-bust” cycles: employment grows in the short run
but declines in the medium run. Across regions, our results imply that regions with
larger buildups in firm leverage experience stronger short-run growth, but also stronger
medium-run declines, in aggregate regional employment.
Our study informs the debate about the role of credit growth. A key finding in that
literature is that leverage buildups predict subsequent downturns in economic activity.1
For instance, Schularick and Taylor (2012), in a seminal paper, find that credit growth
is a powerful predictor of financial crises; Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2013) find that
more credit-intensive booms are followed by deeper (financial and normal) recessions; and
Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2016) find that both mortgage and non-mortgage credit
booms predict financial crises–but mortgage credit booms lead to deeper recessions and
slower recoveries. Gourinchas and Obstfeldt (2012) find that increases in the ratio of
credit to GDP predict future banking crises, while Baron and Xiong (2017) find that
increases in the credit-to-GDP ratio predict bank equity crashes. Finally, Mian, Sufi,
and Verner (2017) find that increases in the ratio of household debt to GDP generate
“boom-bust” cycles: GDP grows in the short run but declines in the medium run. By
contrast, increases in the ratio of firm debt to GDP do not generate “boom-bust” cycles,
and they have only weak predictive power for GDP growth in the medium run.
1Otherempiricalstudiesusecreditspreads–asopposedtocreditgrowth–topredictfutureeconomic
activity (e.g., Gilchrist and Zakrajšek 2012; López-Salido, Stein, and Zakrajšek 2017).
2

Why do increases in household credit predict future GDP declines but increases in
firm credit do not? One possibility is that firms and households both respond to credit
booms, which may eventually “go bust.” However, in the case of firms, credit growth may
additionally also respond to other factors, some of which may be positively associated
with future output growth. As a result, the overall relation between firm credit growth
and future output growth may be ambiguous. For example, firms may also respond to
future growth opportunities–by borrowing and making investments–implying a positive
association between firm credit growth and future output growth. Naturally, this raises
the question as to why households do not (also) borrow in response to future growth
opportunities. We can think of at least two possibilities. One is that households are
simplynotasgoodatforecastingfuturegrowthopportunities. Theotheristhatfirmsand
householdsarebothgoodatforecasting, buthouseholdsfacetightercollateralconstraints,
preventing them from borrowing against future growth opportunities.2
In this paper, we explore a U.S. regional setting in which regional variation in firm
leverage growth is plausibly uncorrelated with regional growth opportunities. As we will
see, when regional growth opportunities are accounted for, we obtain the same pattern
for firm leverage growth that prior (country-level) studies have obtained for household
leverage growth: buildups in firm leverage are associated with short-run increases but
medium-run declines in aggregate regional employment. Thus, buildups in firm leverage
generate “boom-bust” cycles. Indeed, we obtain the same qualitative pattern for both
firm leverage growth and household leverage growth, suggesting that the predictability of
downturns after leverage buildups is a fairly broad phenomenon.
To isolate regional variation in firm leverage growth that is plausibly uncorrelated
with regional growth opportunities, we exploit variation in regional exposure to leverage
buildups by large U.S. publicly listed firms, which are widely spread across U.S. regions.
We measure regional exposure to leverage buildups by U.S. publicly listed firms by com-
puting the weighted average leverage ratio of U.S. publicly listed firms operating in a
given region (“regional firm leverage”). Weights are based on firms’ shares of regional
2For example, households may only be able to borrow against realized home value appreciations but
not against (expected) future home value appreciations.
3