NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TESTING, STRESS, AND PERFORMANCE:
HOW STUDENTS RESPOND PHYSIOLOGICALLY TO HIGH-STAKES TESTING
Jennifer A. Heissel
Emma K. Adam
Jennifer L. Doleac
David N. Figlio
Jonathan Meer
Working Paper 25305
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25305
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018
We thank the anonymous school district and its staff for their invaluable cooperation, as well as
Kaho Arakawa, Chernjen Lee, Royette Tavernier, members of the COAST Lab at Northwestern
University, and seminar participants at AEFP, APPAM, Northwestern University, and the
Western Economic Association meetings. Laura Scaramella at the University of New Orleans
provided access to laboratory space. We are grateful for funding from the Spencer Foundation
(Grant No. 2015000117) and the Institute for Policy Research at Northwestern University. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Jennifer A. Heissel, Emma K. Adam, Jennifer L. Doleac, David N. Figlio, and
Jonathan Meer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Testing, Stress, and Performance: How Students Respond Physiologically to High-Stakes
Testing
Jennifer A. Heissel, Emma K. Adam, Jennifer L. Doleac, David N. Figlio, and Jonathan Meer
NBER Working Paper No. 25305
November 2018
JEL No. I21,I24
ABSTRACT
A potential contributor to socioeconomic disparities in academic performance is the difference in
the level of stress experienced by students outside of school. Chronic stress – due to
neighborhood violence, poverty, or family instability – can affect how individuals’ bodies
respond to stressors in general, including the stress of standardized testing. This, in turn, can
affect whether performance on standardized tests is a valid measure of students’ actual ability.
We collect data on students’ stress responses using cortisol samples provided by low-income
students in New Orleans. We measure how their cortisol patterns change during high-stakes
testing weeks relative to baseline weeks. We find that high-stakes testing does affect cortisol
responses, and those responses have consequences for test performance. Those who responded
most strongly – with either a large increase or large decrease in cortisol – scored 0.40 standard
deviations lower than expected on the on the high-stakes exam.
Jennifer A. Heissel David N. Figlio
Graduate School of Business and Institute for Policy Research
Naval Postgraduate School Northwestern University
555 Dyer Road 2040 Sheridan Road
Monterey, CA 93943 Evanston, IL 60208
jaheisse@nps.edu and NBER
figlio@northwestern.edu
Emma K. Adam
School of Education and Social Policy Jonathan Meer
Northwestern University Department of Economics
2120 Campus Drive Texas A&M University
Evanston, IL 60208 College Station, TX 77843
United States and NBER
ek-adam@northwestern.edu jmeer@econmail.tamu.edu
Jennifer L. Doleac
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
jdoleac@tamu.edu

1. Introduction
The results of high-stakes standardized tests determine course placement, gradua-
tion, and college admission for students, result in sanctions or rewards for schools, and
inform education policy. There is substantial resistance to testing regimes, often predicated
on the notion that students are “stressed” by tests.1 Yet, to our knowledge, no evidence
exists on test-induced physiological stress among K-12 students in a real-world setting.2
Understanding variation in test-induced stress responses and implications for performance
is important for determining whether scores on high-stakes tests are reliable measures of
ability and knowledge, or if they are biased by “stress disparities” between children (see
review in Heissel, Levy, & Adam, 2017).
This study makes clear the potential policy implications of high-stakes test-induced
stress. We document how high-stakes testing affects low-income children’s stress biology,
and we show how changes in children’s physiological responses to high-stakes tests affect
performance on standardized tests. Knowing the answers to these questions affects our un-
derstanding of how high-stakes test results should be used and interpreted.
We use saliva-based measures of cortisol – a primary stress hormone that indicates
how the biological stress system is functioning – among low-income students in New Orleans
to document how cortisol levels change (“cortisol reactivity”) in response to a high-stakes
standardized test administered to students in grades 3-8, relative to a regular baseline school
1 The Center for American Progress found that 49% of parents thought that there was too much testing in
schools (Lazarín, 2014), and the New York Association of School Psychologists provides an overview of
many reported parent concerns (Heiser et al., 2015). These concerns are not unfounded: grade 3-5 students
reported higher anxiety and stress symptoms following No Child Left Behind-required testing, relative to
lower-stakes classroom testing (Segool, Carlson, Goforth, Embse, & Barterian, 2013).
2 A variety of studies have examined cognitive tests in lab settings (Lupien et al., 2002; Stroud, Salovey, &
Epel, 2002) or with researcher-administered tests in schools that did not matter for student or school out-
comes (Blair, Granger, & Razza, 2005; Lindahl, Theorell, & Lindblad, 2005). These studies do not include
baseline, non-testing weeks in their analysis. Other studies have looked at adult responses in undergraduate
and medical students (Malarkey, Pearl, Demers, Kiecolt-Glaser, & Glaser, 1995; Weekes et al., 2006).

2
week. We then examine whether differences in cortisol reactivity are associated with perfor-
mance on the test. We find that students have 15% higher cortisol levels in the homeroom
period just before taking the high-stakes test, relative to that same timeframe during weeks
without testing. These differences are driven by boys, whose homeroom cortisol is 35%
higher during testing weeks than regular weeks.3 While our entire sample can be considered
economically disadvantaged, we also find suggestive evidence of differences by level of dis-
advantage, with the largest cortisol effects for those living in high-poverty and high-crime
neighborhoods. We also show that both large increases and large decreases in cortisol from
the baseline week to the high-stakes testing week are associated with much lower test scores
on the high-stakes test, relative to how we would expect students to perform based on other
in-school academic performance (e.g., grades). High-stakes testing appears to be inducing
large cortisol increases in some students, perhaps disrupting their ability to concentrate. For
other students, their response to the stressor appears to be disengagement with their envi-
ronment, as captured by large cortisol decreases and also resulting in worse test outcomes.
Descriptive studies show that children from low-SES and racial/ethnic minority
groups have lower average scores on standardized academic tests relative to high-SES and
white families (Bradbury, Corak, Waldfogel, & Washbrook, 2015; Reardon, 2011). Low-SES
and racial/ethnic minority individuals are also more likely to be exposed to stressful life
events relative to higher-income or white individuals (see review in Hatch & Dohrenwend,
2007). These patterns are correlated, but the physiological stress response may provide a
link between them.
In particular, students who experience chronic stress may respond differently to new
stressors, such as high-stakes tests. Persistent socioeconomic gaps in academic performance
3 This is consistent with previous evidence that males show larger cortisol responses to achievement-related
stressors (Stroud, Salovey, & Epel, 2002; Weekes et al., 2006).