NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SECURITIES LAWS, BANK MONITORING, AND THE CHOICE BETWEEN COV-LITE
LOANS AND BONDS FOR HIGHLY LEVERED
Robert Prilmeier
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 25467
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25467
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2019
We thank Mark Carey, Sergey Chernenko, Victoria Ivashina (EFA discussant), Justin Murfin,
Greg Nini (AFA discussant), Mike Schwert, Phil Strahan, participants at presentations at City
University of Hong Kong, Tulane University, the European Finance Association Meeting in
Lisbon, the American Finance Association meeting in San Diego, and the FDIC Annual Bank
Research Conference for helpful comments. We are grateful for excellent research assistance
from Andrei Gonçalves, Byungwook Kim, and Leandro Sanz. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25467.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2019 by Robert Prilmeier and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Securities Laws, Bank Monitoring, and the Choice Between Cov-lite Loans and Bonds for
Highly Levered
Robert Prilmeier and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 25467
January 2019, Revised June 2020
JEL No. D82,G18,G23,G32
ABSTRACT
In contrast to bonds, cov-lite loans do not require SEC registration and are not subject to
securities laws. We show that this distinction plays an important role in firms’ choice between
funding through cov-lite loans and bonds and helps understand why the market share of cov-lite
loans has been so high in recent normal times. Compared to cov-heavy loans, cov-lite loans are
closer substitutes for bonds in that they have similar covenants, have tighter bid-ask spreads, have
more trading, and are more likely to be used to refinance bonds than cov-heavy loans.
Robert Prilmeier
Tulane University
A.B. Freeman School of Business
7 McAlister Drive
New Orleans, LA 70118
rprilmei@tulane.edu
René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu

1. Introduction
There is a considerable literature that examines theoretically and empirically the choice of firms
between borrowing from public markets and from banks. In this literature, reviewed in the next section,
bank loans differ from bonds because banks monitor the borrower through covenants and have information
that capital market investors do not have. This literature cannot explain why the typical leveraged loan
outstanding is a cov-lite loan. Like bonds but unlike traditional bank loans, cov-lite loans do not have
maintenance covenants. The absence of maintenance covenants means that the lender cannot monitor the
loan at regular intervals, so that compared to a traditional bank loan, a cov-lite loan is an unmonitored loan.
Partly or mostly because of data availability, the literature has heavily focused on choices made by
public firms. We argue in this paper that the literature misses an important dimension of the choices made
by firms. A firm can only issue public bonds if it registers these bonds with the SEC and commits to regular
filings. Hence, borrowing from the public markets would change drastically the public reporting
requirements of a private firm. In contrast, borrowing in the form of a loan would have no impact on these
requirements. Further, because of the Trust Indenture Act, the firms that issue bonds publicly face severe
limitations in restructuring these bonds. Such legal limitations do not exist for bank loans (but they may be
included in loan contracts as discussed in Demiroglu and James (2015)). Lastly, bonds are securities but
loans are not, so that bonds issued by non-registrants, such as bonds issued pursuant to Rule 144a, are
subject to securities laws.
We investigate in this paper whether the different legal status of bonds and loans is an important factor
in firms’ decisions to borrow in the form of loans or through issuance of bonds and in how loans are
structured. If a firm borrows in the form of a loan but would prefer to raise funds through a bond issuance
if not for the legal status of bonds, we would expect that firm to structure the loan so that it would be as
similar to a bond as possible. We call the motivation to borrow in the form of loans because of their legal
status the legal status motivation for loan issuance. We find that the legal status motivation plays an
important role in firms’ use of banks to raise funds through cov-lite loans and helps understand the dramatic
1

growth of the cov-lite market following the global financial crisis (GFC). If firms value bond-like loans,
we would expect the design of these loans to evolve so that they become better substitutes for bonds. We
show that cov-lite loans have many features of bonds.
Though we show the importance of legal considerations in firms’ loan and bond issuance decisions, we
do not imply that other considerations raised in the literature are not relevant and provide further support
for the role of some of these considerations. In particular, our evidence that cov-heavy loans have higher
credit spreads than cov-lite loans for private firms is supportive of theories that covenants may have adverse
selection costs for investors (Parlour and Plantin (2008)), that covenants may be costly because of
coordination costs (Becker and Ivashina (2017)), and that monitoring may be better allocated to tranches
of loans that do not involve institutional investors (Berlin, Nini, and Yu (2020)).
There is now a large literature documenting the drop in IPOs in the 2000s and the decrease in the
willingness of firms to be publicly listed (see Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2013, 2017) and Gao, Ritter, and
Zhu (2013)). It is often argued that firms shy from the public markets in part because going public changes
their disclosure obligations and puts them under the regulatory umbrella of the SEC. If the change in
disclosure obligations leads firms to avoid going public, we would also expect private firms to refrain from
issuing bonds publicly and would expect public firms that might want to go private to do the same. The role
of SEC registration requirements in the decision of firms to borrow through loans instead of bonds is largely
obscured by the fact that firm-level data is available almost exclusively for SEC registered firms. Any
analysis of the decision to borrow through bonds or loans that uses a conventional database such as
Compustat is limited to SEC registered firms. Yet, though the typical issuer of a bond is an SEC registered
firm, the typical borrower through a highly levered loan is a private firm.
Historically, loans differed from bonds because loans were illiquid and held by banks that monitored
borrowers while bonds were liquid and there was no bank-like monitoring for bond issuers. These sharp
distinctions between loans and bonds started to disappear in the 1980s and the disappearance has
accelerated. Now, firms that do not qualify for an investment-grade rating can borrow through loans that
resemble bonds along many dimensions. Cov-lite loans enable firms to borrow in a way that is very similar
2