NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
VOLATILITY AND INFORMATIVENESS
Eduardo Dávila
Cecilia Parlatore
Working Paper 25433
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25433
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2019
We would like to thank Fernando Álvarez, Yakov Amihud, Marios Angeletos, Dirk Bergemann,
Bruno Biais, John Campbell, Jennifer Carpenter, Olivier Darmouni, Ian Dew-Becker, Maryam
Farboodi, Xavier Gabaix, Itay Goldstein, Piero Gottardi, Joel Hasbrouck, Zhiguo He, Ralph
Koijen, Hanno Lustig, Stephen Morris, Thomas Philippon, Tano Santos, Alexi Savov, Alp
Simsek, Aleh Tsyvinski, Felipe Varas, Laura Veldkamp, Xavier Vives, Brian Weller, Wei Xiong,
Liyan Yang, and Haoxiang Zhu for helpful comments and discussions. We would also like to
thank seminar participants at NYU Stern, Yale Finance Junior Conference, Columbia Finance
Junior Conference, MIT Sloan, Harvard, Northwestern Kellogg, and the NBER Asset Pricing
Meeting. Luke Min and Josh Mohanty provided exceptional research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Eduardo Dávila and Cecilia Parlatore. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Volatility and Informativeness
Eduardo Dávila and Cecilia Parlatore
NBER Working Paper No. 25433
January 2019
JEL No. D82,D83,G14
ABSTRACT
We explore the equilibrium relation between price volatility and price informativeness in
financial markets, with the ultimate goal of characterizing the type of inferences that can be
drawn about price informativeness by observing price volatility. We identify two different
channels (noise reduction and equilibrium learning) through which changes in price
informativeness are associated with changes in price volatility. We show that when
informativeness is sufficiently high (low) volatility and informativeness positively (negatively)
comove in equilibrium for any change in primitives. In the context of our leading application, we
provide conditions on primitives that guarantee that volatility and informativeness always
comove positively or negatively. We use data on U.S. stocks between 1963 and 2017 to recover
stock-specific primitives and find that most stocks lie in the region of the parameter space in
which informativeness and volatility comove negatively.
Eduardo Dávila
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
edavila@stern.nyu.edu
Cecilia Parlatore
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY, 10012
cparlato@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
There is a long tradition in economics, commonly traced back to Hayek (1945), which emphasizes
the role of financial markets aggregating dispersed information. Under this view, prices not only
convey scarcity but they also reveal the dispersed information held by investors about the underlying
fundamentals of the economy. Within this paradigm, a key object of interest is the level of
price informativeness. Price informativeness, formally defined as the precision of the signal about
fundamentals revealed by asset prices, is a natural measure of the ability of financial markets to
aggregate information. Unfortunately, price informativeness is a complex equilibrium object that is
hard to measure directly, in particular at high frequencies. An alternative equilibrium object that
is easily computable and that is the subject of continuous scrutiny is price volatility. In this paper,
we explore the relation between both variables, with the ultimate goal of characterizing the type of
1
inferences that can be drawn about price informativeness by observing price volatility.
By relating both variables, our results allow us to determine the conditions under which observed
fluctuations on asset prices can be interpreted as a reflection of informative asset markets or vice
versa. Because price volatility and price informativeness are jointly determined in equilibrium, this
paperadoptsasomewhatunconventionalmethodologicalapproach. Itinitiallyexplorestheequilibrium
relation between both endogenous variables as the first step to subsequently shed light on conventional
comparative static exercises conducted within fully specified models.
Our first main result shows that the equilibrium relation between price informativeness and price
volatility in financial markets for the class of models with linear asset demands and additive noise –
which we refer to as the fundamental relation – is uniquely characterized by i) the variance of the
innovation to the fundamental and ii) the signal-to-price demand sensitivity, which corresponds to
the ratio of investors’ demand sensitivities to private information and to asset prices. Exploiting this
relation, we identify two different channels through which changes in price informativeness that leave
2
the fundamental relation otherwise unchanged are associated with changes in price volatility. We
refer to the first channel as the noise reduction channel. Through this channel, an increase in price
informativeness is directly associated with a reduction in price volatility, since less noise is incorporated
intotheprice. Werefertothesecondchannelastheequilibriumlearning channel. Throughthischannel,
which is inactive when investors do not learn from asset prices, an increase in price informativeness
changes investors’ behavior by varying their equilibrium signal-to-price (demand) sensitivities. In
principle, the sign of the equilibrium learning channel can be positive or negative.
To further characterize the behavior of signal-to-price sensitivities, we specialize our analysis to
a general CARA-Gaussian environment. The additional structure allows us to show that the signal-
1Therelevantdefinitionofpricevolatilityforouranalysiscorrespondstotheconditionalidiosyncraticvolatilityofasset
prices given past public information, as it will become clear in Section 2.
2Sincepriceinformativenessisanendogenousobject,consideringchangesinpriceinformativenessthatdonototherwise
affectthefundamentalrelationisonlypossibleforasubsetofallthemodelparameters. Thistypeofchangesisnonetheless
useful for definitional purposes. We eventually consider changes in parameters that at the same time change price
informativeness and shift the fundamental relation.
2

to-price sensitivity is strictly increasing in the level of price informativeness, implying that the noise
reduction channel and the equilibrium learning channel operate in opposite directions. Intuitively, an
increase in price informativeness tilts investors’ demands toward putting more weight on the price as a
signalaboutthefundamental, increasingthesensitivityofpricestoaggregateshocksand, consequently,
price volatility. The additional structure also allows us to express the fundamental relation between
price informativeness and price volatility exclusively as a function of a subset of primitives. The
only primitives that explicitly enter into the fundamental relation are i) the prior volatility of the
fundamental, ii) the precision of investors’ private signals about the fundamental, and iii) the ratio of
precisions of the signal contained in the price for an investor relative to an external observer.
Oursecondmainresultshowsthat,underasimpleandplausibleparameterrestrictionthatlimitsthe
precision of the signal conveyed by the equilibrium price to be less than two times more informative for
aninvestorrelativetoanexternalobserver, thefundamentalrelationbetweenpriceinformativenessand
price volatility has a positive (negative) slope whenever price informativeness is sufficiently high (low).
This result implies that any change in the subset of parameters that do not enter the fundamental
relation directly must induce a positive comovement between price informativeness and volatility
when prices are sufficiently informative and a negative comovement when price informativeness is
sufficiently low. This result also implies that any change in the subset of parameters that at the
same time shifts the fundamental relation upwards and increases price informativeness must also
induce a positive comovement between equilibrium price informativeness and volatility when prices are
sufficiently informative. Alternatively, we show that a change in the subset of parameters that shifts
the fundamental relation upwards and increases price informativeness induces a negative comovement
between informativeness volatility when prices are barely informative. When interpreted through the
lensofourtwo-channeldecomposition,whenpricesaresufficientlyinformative,theequilibriumlearning
channel becomes overwhelmingly important and dominates the noise reduction channel. Alternatively,
when prices are sufficiently uninformative, the noise reduction channel dominates.
While the results derived in the general case provide interesting insights into the nature of the
relation between price volatility and informativeness, understanding the exact comovement between
both variables for any set of parameters and their independent behavior requires the study of fully
specified models. Therefore, we specialize our results to three applications that allow us to interpret
conventional comparative statics through the lens of the fundamental relation. First, we study a model
inwhichheterogeneityininvestors’priorsprovidesthesourceofaggregatenoiseintheeconomy. Second,
we study a model in which the breakdown of the Law of Large Numbers caused by the interaction of
a finite number of strategic investors is the source of aggregate noise. Finally, we study a model in
which uncertainty about the aggregate level of hedging needs is the source of aggregate noise. These
applicationsillustratethedifferentvaluesthattheratioofprecisionsofthesignalcontainedintheprice
for an investor relative to an external observer can take. For instance, in the first application, investors’
private trading motives are not useful to forecast the level of aggregate noise, which implies that price
informativeness is identical for investors in the model relative to an external observer. In the case of
strategic traders, price informativeness is higher for an external observer relative to investors in the
3