NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IS THERE A DEMAND FOR REVERSE MORTGAGES IN CHINA? EVIDENCE
FROM TWO ONLINE SURVEYS
Katja Hanewald
Hazel Bateman
Hanming Fang
Shang Wu
Working Paper 25491
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25491
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2019
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the ARC Centre of Excellence in Population
Ageing Research (CEPAR) - CE17010005. We thank Olivia S. Mitchell, John Piggott, Thomas
Post, Jennifer Alonso Garcia, and Ralph Stevens for valuable comments and suggestions. We also
thank conference participants at the 22nd International Congress on Insurance: Mathematics and
Economics in Sydney, at the International Conference on "Addressing Population Aging:
Institutional and Public Policy Innovation" held at the ShanghaiTech University, and at the 26th
Colloquium on Pensions and Retirement Research in Sydney. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Katja Hanewald, Hazel Bateman, Hanming Fang, and Shang Wu. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Is There a Demand for Reverse Mortgages in China? Evidence from Two Online Surveys
Katja Hanewald, Hazel Bateman, Hanming Fang, and Shang Wu
NBER Working Paper No. 25491
January 2019
JEL No. D14,G11,G21,G22
ABSTRACT
Reverse mortgages provide an alternative source of retirement funding by allowing older
homeowners to borrow against their home. However, a recent pilot program of reserve mortgage
products in several large Chinese cities saw almost no take up. To ascertain the demand for
reverse mortgages in China, we conduct and analyze two online surveys that focus respectively
on homeowners aged 45-65 as potential purchasers, and on adult children in the 20-49 age group
representing children of potential purchasers. We address the reported shortcomings of the pilot
reverse mortgage product by testing an improved product design presented in a clear and
comprehensive format. In stark contrast, we find that 89% of older Chinese homeowners would
be interested in this new reverse mortgage product, and 84% of adult children would recommend
such a product to their parents. Participants in both surveys reported that they would use the
reverse mortgage payments to fund a more comfortable retirement and to pay for better medical
treatments and aged care services. Respondents' interest in reverse mortgages was associated with
their familiarity and understanding of the product, and its perceived potential to address liquidity
constraints in retirement. Health status, aged care preferences and proxies for intergenerational
links were also important. Our results are contrary to the common perception of intergenerational
expectations of wealth transfer in China, and provide new evidence in support of the potential
development of China's reverse mortgage market.
Katja Hanewald Hanming Fang
ARC Centre of Excellence in Population Ageing Research Deparrtment of Economics
UNSW Sydney Ronald O. Perelman Center
Sydney, NSW, 2052, Australia for Political Science and Economics
k.hanewald@unsw.edu.au 133 South 36th Street
Suite 150
Hazel Bateman Philadelphia, PA 19104
School of Risk and Actuarial Studies and NBER
ARC Centre of Excellence in Population hanming.fang@econ.upenn.edu
Ageing Research (CEPAR)
UNSW Sydney, 2052 Australia Shang Wu
H.Bateman@unsw.edu.au First State Super and CEPAR,
University of New South Wales
shang_wu@firststatesuper.com.au

1 Introduction
China’s large population is aging rapidly. The median age is projected to climb from 37 years in 2015 to
48yearsin2050, andisexpectedtoexceedthemedianageofhigh-incomecountriesfrom 2035onwards
(UnitedNations,2017). In2015,215millionpeopleaged60andabove(or24%oftheworld’solderpopu-
lation)livedinChina. Thisnumberisexpectedtoincreaseto479millionby2050andwillthencomprise
23%oftheworld’selderlypopulation(UnitedNations,2017). China’selderlywillrequiresignificantand
increasing resources to finance their retirement income, health care and aged care costs – needs that will
place an enormous pressure on the financial viability of the social security systems in China (Fang and
Feng,2018).
To explore new ways to fund retirement, the Chinese government initiated a pilot program to facilitate
the take-up of reverse mortgage products in urban China. Reverse mortgages allow older homeowners
to borrow against the equity in their home. Payment options can include a lump sum, a regular income
stream,alineofcreditoracombinationoftheseoptions. Therearenorepaymentsofinterestorprincipal
whiletheborrowerlivesinhis/herhome. Instead,thepropertyissoldwhentheborrowerdiesorvacates
the home, and the sale proceeds are used to repay the loan including interest and fees (e.g., Mitchell
and Piggott, 2004; Nakajima and Telyukova, 2017). Reverse mortgage products are available in the U.S.,
Australia, Canada, some European countries, and New Zealand, and are emerging in a number of East
AsianeconomiessuchasJapan,Korea,HongKong,SingaporeandTaiwan(MertonandLai,2016;Phang,
2018).
TheChinesereversemortgagepilotprogramwasintroducedinmid-2014byHappyLifeInsuranceCom-
panyinfourcities(Beijing,Shanghai,GuangzhouandWuhan)andwasextendedtoothermajorcitiesin
2016andthennationwideinAugust2018.1 Thepilotprogramhasnotbeensuccessful: Onlyoneprovider
isofferingreversemortgageproductsandthedemandislow. BytheendofJune2018,only139contracts
(with 98 households) were underwritten. News reports list several factors explaining this low demand,
includingchildrendisapprovingoftheirparentsreversemortgagingtheirhomes,productcomplexity,le-
galandregulatoryconcerns,andhighinterestrateschargedbytheprovider(MertonandLai,2016;Asia
InsuranceReview,2017).
Inthispaper,weusesurveymethodstoinvestigatethestateddemand(orlackthereof)forreversemort-
gage products in China. In order to explore the role of the perceived intergenerational expectations of
wealth transfer (Merton and Lai, 2016), we test whether the acceptance of reverse mortgages differs be-
1See Notice No. 43 [2018] of the China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission on Expanding the Scope of the
ElderlyHousingReverseMortgageEndowmentInsurance,whichwasreleasedon8August2018(http://bxjg.circ.gov.cn/
web/site0/tab5168/info4115825.htm).
2

tweenolderhomeownersandtheiradultchildren. Wedesignedareversemortgageproductwiththeaim
ofaddressingsomeofthekeyproblemsidentifiedinthecurrentChinesemarket,andtherecentliterature
on reverse mortgages in general (Davidoff et al., 2017; Dillingh et al., 2017; Fornero et al., 2016; Jefferson
et al., 2017) and took special care to provide a clear product description. In two large online surveys, we
askedolderhomeownerswhethertheywouldbeinterestedinthereversemortgageproductwepresent,
andwealsoaskedtheworking-ageadultchildrenofolderhomeownerswhethertheywouldrecommend
the product to their parents. Both groups were then asked to identify how they would like to use the
reverse mortgage payments. Our total sample comprised 2,200 participants living in 64 large cities in
China.
Reversemortgagescanservemultiplepurposes. Retireescanusetheadditionalliquidwealth,forexam-
ple,toaffordamorecomfortablelifestyle,tocovermedicalcostsandtopayforformalagedcareservices.
Reversemortgagesalsoallowfamiliestobettertimetheirbequestsandreducetheuncertaintyaroundbe-
questtiming(Merton,2008;Dillinghetal.,2017). WetesthowtheinterestinreversemortgagesinChina
varies according to the way in which a reverse mortgage is described. In particular, we focus on four
differentframingsofhowthereversemortgagepaymentistobeused–toincreaseownconsumption,to
finance better medical treatments and/or aged care services, to support children or grandchildren, or to
have more financial flexibility in retirement, together with a group with no payment use framing – and
randomlyassignparticipantsintothesetreatmentgroups.
We find that the product design and presentation format we developed using focus group testing was
successful: Both older homeowner and adult children participants rated their product understanding as
high and scored well in a product knowledge quiz. Interest in the reverse mortgage was strong for both
groups. 89% of the older homeowners stated interest in the reverse mortgage product and 84% of the
adultchildrensaidtheywouldrecommendsuchaproducttotheirparents. Thisisinstarkcontrasttothe
common perception that strong expectations of intergenerational wealth transfer act as a barrier to the
development of reverse mortgage market in China , but consistent with an emerging literature (Zhong
and Li, 2017). For both samples, demand was similarly high under all product use framing treatments,
whichweattributetotheoverallhighproductunderstanding. Participantsstatedthattheywoulduse(or
recommend the use of) the reverse mortgage payments for a range of purposes, including to live more
comfortablyinretirement,topayforbettermedicaltreatmentsoragedcareservices,tosupportchildren
orgrandchildren,andtohavegreaterfinancialflexibilityinretirement.
Ourstudycontributestothegrowingliteratureonthedemandforreversemortgages. Theoreticalstudies
documentwelfaregainsofreversemortgagesinlife-cyclemodels(e.g.,Davidoff,2009;CoccoandLopes,
2014;Hanewaldetal.,2016),whilerecentstudiesattempttoexplainwhydemandislowinmanymarkets
3