NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK REGULATION, NETWORK TOPOLOGY, AND SYSTEMIC RISK:
EVIDENCE FROM THE GREAT DEPRESSION
Sanjiv R. Das
Kris James Mitchener
Angela Vossmeyer
Working Paper 25405
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25405
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2018, Revised November 2021
Previously circulated as “Systemic Risk and the Great Depression.” We are grateful to Charles
Calomiris, Mark Carlson, Co-Pierre Georg, Gary Gorton, Taylor Jaworski, Ivan Jeliazkov,
Christoffer Koch, Loriana Pelizzon, and conference and seminar participants at the NBER
Summer Institute, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Bank of
England, Federal Reserve Board, Mountain West Economic History Conference, Chicago
Financial Institutions Conference, and Western Finance Association Annual Conference for
helpful comments and suggestions. We thank Jack Brown, Kendall Greenberg, Angie Wang, and
Peter Welch of the Lowe Institute of Political Economy, and Bhavika Booragadda, Lorraine
Zhao, Tanisha Seth, Krystal Sung, Laira Aggarwal, and Hunter Olsen of the Financial Economics
Institute for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Sanjiv R. Das, Kris James Mitchener, and Angela Vossmeyer. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bank Regulation, Network Topology, and Systemic Risk: Evidence from the Great Depression
Sanjiv R. Das, Kris James Mitchener, and Angela Vossmeyer
NBER Working Paper No. 25405
December 2018, Revised November 2021
JEL No. E42,E44,G01,G18,G21,L1,N12,N22
ABSTRACT
We study how bank regulation interacts with network topology to influence systemic stability.
Employing unique hand-collected data on the correspondent network for all U.S. banks on the
eve of the Great Depression and a methodology that captures bank credit risk and network
position, we explore how the pyramid-shaped network topology was inherently fragile and
systemically risky. We measure its contribution to banking distress in the early 1930s, and show
that a bank's network position as well as the risk of its network neighbors are strong predictors of
bank survivorship. Institutional alternatives, such as branch banking, and alternative topologies
appear to deliver networks that are more stable than the network that existed in 1929.
Sanjiv R. Das Angela Vossmeyer
Dept. of Finance Robert Day School of Economics and Finance
Santa Clara University Claremont McKenna College
316M Lucas Hall, 500 El Camino Real 500 E. Ninth Street
Santa Clara, CA 95053 Claremont, CA 91711
srdas@scu.edu and NBER
Angela.Vossmeyer@cmc.edu
Kris James Mitchener
Department of Economics
Leavey School of Business
Santa Clara University
Santa Clara, CA 95053
and NBER
kmitchener@scu.edu

1 Introduction
TheGlobalFinancialCrisis(GFC)focusedattentionontheimportanceofunderstandingthe
connections between financial institutions, which have been seen as a mechanism for prop-
agating distress (Allen and Gale, 2000; Acharya et al., 2017; Elliott et al., 2014; Acemoglu
et al., 2015; Allen et al., 2010; Freixas et al., 2000; Dasgupta, 2004; Caballero and Simsek,
2013). Researchers and policymakers have sought a better understanding of the characteris-
tics that predispose financial systems to risk, but are often hindered by difficulties measuring
connections between financial institutions, which can be opaque. In this paper, we analyze
a banking system where the entire interbank network can be observed and precisely mapped
in order to examine the importance of network topology in predisposing financial systems to
risk.
The structure and shape of networks (hereafter “network topology”) are known to affect
the speed and scale of the transmission of payments, information, people, and goods, such
as commercial aviation travel routes or packets of information on the internet. For example,
in the context of banking, scale-free networks can be both a blessing and a curse: they
can permit efficient transmission of payments in good times, but can potentially propagate
risk in periods of distress. Researchers often model extant financial network topologies as
the outcome of responses of firms in the network. However, what is less well understood
is how financial regulation can alter the shape of financial networks and how that, in turn,
predisposes financial institutions to risk and influences their ability to weather financial
crises. Our research seeks to understand this question. Focusing on network topology also
allows us to examine the extent to which a financial institution’s ability to survive a crisis
is dependent, not only on its ex ante balance-sheet risk and network position, but on its
network-neighbors’ riskiness.
To shed light on these questions, we study the commercial bank correspondent network
in 1929 – just prior to the largest American financial crisis of the 20th century. Using bank-
leveldata,wedemonstratethatthepyramid-likestructureofthecommercialbankingsystem,
which was a legacy of 19th century regulations on bank reserves, had direct consequences
for systemwide risk. We do so by first constructing novel measures of systemic risk at
2

the individual bank level to examine how the correspondent network’s topology influenced
the geographical distribution and concentration of risk prior to the Great Depression, and
how “fragile” the 1929 network was relative to other possible topologies. Our systemic
risk measure accounts for risk arising from a bank’s balance sheet and its position in the
network, and allows us to quantify risk arising from linkages with “network neighbors” or
“peers.” Next, we use Bayesian model comparison techniques and data on surviving banks
in 1934 (after the severe banking crisis of the early 1930s had ended) to examine whether the
inclusion of our systemic risk measures in the prediction of bank survival is supported by the
data and, more broadly, to provide a validation test for policymakers interested in applying
these measures. Finally, we analyze the extent to which a bank’s predicted probability of
survival can be attributed to balance-sheet risk and network position as well as the risk
due to linkages to network neighbors and spatial neighbors. Our findings not only shed
light on how the correspondent-banking network predisposed banks to subsequent failure
but, more generally, allow us to examine the biases that arise from the omission of network
characteristics and peer effects when studying financial stability.
To do so, we hand collected data on every commercial bank in the U.S. in 1929 and each
bank’s correspondent relationship with every other bank. These data and our historical set-
ting prove crucial for studying the impact of network topology on systemic stability. First,
in contrast to approaches that estimate financial linkages from financial flow data or price
and return co-movements, our historical measure of connectedness uses stated, contractual
bank correspondent relationships based on bank records. Because network connections be-
tween commercial banks are observed in our data and are not inferred from correlations, we
are able to construct a full adjacency matrix of connections. The full matrix allows for a
deeper examination of peer effects, and affords the consideration of counterfactual adjacency
matrices that can be used to assess whether the observed 1929 network was riskier than al-
ternative topologies. Second, in this earlier era, regulations on branch banking varied across
state borders. This geographical variation in regulation allows us to consider how banking
policy interacts with financial networks to shape risk and to examine spatial dimensions of
systemic risk. Third, financial regulation affects the size of the financial system. Because of
restrictions on branch banking at the state and national level, small banks flourished (White,
3