NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAPITAL REQUIREMENTS IN A QUANTITATIVE MODEL OF BANKING INDUSTRY
DYNAMICS
Dean Corbae
Pablo D'Erasmo
Working Paper 25424
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25424
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2019
The authors wish to thank John Boyd, Gianni DeNicolo, Jean-Francois Houde, Victor Rios-Rull,
and Skander Van Den Heuvel, as well as seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Board,
European Central Bank, European Commission, and FDIC; Central Banks of Argentina, Canada,
Chile, Columbia, Mexico, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, and Uruguay;
the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Chicago, Cleveland, Kansas City, Minneapolis, New York,
and St. Louis; the Universities of British Columbia, UCLA, Carnegie Mellon/Pittsburgh, Chicago
Booth, Colorado - Boulder, Cologne, Columbia, Cornell, Drexel, European University Institute,
George Washington, Goethe, Indiana, London Business School, Maryland, McMaster, Michigan,
Minnesota, NYU, Notre Dame, Ohio State, Penn, Penn State, Princeton, Queens, Rice, Rochester,
Southern California, Tilburg, Toronto, Tsinghua; the Allied Social Science Association, CIREQ
Macroeconomics Conference, Econometric Society, Sciences Po Macro Finance Conference, and
Society for Economic Dynamics for helpful comments. The views expressed in this paper do not
necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Dean Corbae and Pablo D'Erasmo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Capital Requirements in a Quantitative Model of Banking Industry Dynamics
Dean Corbae and Pablo D'Erasmo
NBER Working Paper No. 25424
January 2019
JEL No. E44,G21,L11
ABSTRACT
We develop a model of banking industry dynamics to study the quantitative impact of capital
requirements on equilibrium bank risk taking, commercial bank failure, interest rates on loans,
and market structure. We propose a market structure where big banks with market power interact
with small, competitive fringe banks. Banks face idiosyncratic funding shocks in addition to
aggregate shocks to the fraction of performing loans in their portfolio. A nontrivial bank size
distribution arises out of endogenous entry and exit, as well as banks' buffer stock of net worth.
We show the model predictions are consistent with untargeted business cycle properties, the bank
lending channel, and empirical studies of the role of concentration on financial stability. We then
conduct a series of counterfactuals (including countercyclical and size contingent (e.g. SIFI)
capital requirements). We find that regulatory policies can have an important impact on market
structure in the banking industry which, along with selection effects, can generate changes in
allocative efficiency.
Dean Corbae
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin, Madison
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
corbae@ssc.wisc.edu
Pablo D'Erasmo
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Research Department
Ten Independence Mall, Philadelphia PA 19106
pabloderasmo@gmail.com

1 Introduction
The banking literature has focused on two main functions of bank capital. First, because
of limited liability and deposit insurance, banks have an incentive to engage in risk shifting.
Requiring banks to hold a minimum ratio of capital to assets constrains the banks’ ability to
take risk. Second, bank capital acts like a buffer that may offset losses and save its charter
value. In this paper, we develop a quantitative model of banking industry dynamics with
imperfect competition and an endogenous size distribution of banks to answer the following
question: How much does an increase in capital requirements affect failure rates, interest
rates, and market shares of large and small banks?
As Figure 1 makes clear, the number of commercial banks in the U.S. has fallen from over
11,000 in 1984 to under 5000 in 2016 while the asset market share of the top 10 banks has
grownfrom27.2%in1984to58.3%in2016. Risingmarketsharesofbigbanksmotivatesusto
consideramodelofthebankingindustrythatallowsforimperfectcompetition. Furthermore,
it allows us to understand how regulatory policy may affect market structure as well as
consider how market structure influences risk taking behavior that regulators are attempting
to mitigate.
Figure 1: Number of Banks and Bank Concentration
12000 70
11000 63.75
10000 57.5
9000 51.25
8000 45
7000 38.75
6000 32.5
5000 26.25
4000 20
1983 1987 1991 1995 1999 2003 2007 2011 2015
year
Note: Number of Banks refers to the number of bank holding companies. Top 10 Asset share
refers to the share of total assets in the hands of the top 10 banks in the asset distribution.
1

In an earlier paper (Corbae and D’Erasmo [23]), we endogenized market structure, but
limited the asset side of the bank balance sheet to loans and the liabilities side to deposits
and equity. While loans and deposits are clearly the largest components of each side of the
balance sheet of U.S. banks, this simplification does not admit ways for banks to insure
themselves at a cost through precautionary holdings of lower risk, highly liquid assets like
cash and securities such as T-bills.
In this paper, we still work with an endogenous market structure but extend the portfolio
of bank assets in the above direction. Further we assume that banks are randomly matched
with depositors and that these matches follow a Markov process that is independently dis-
tributed across banks. Thus, we add fluctuations in deposits and other sources of funds
(which we term “funding shocks”) to the model of the first paper.
We assume banks have limited liability. At the end of the period, banks may choose
to exit in the event of cash shortfalls if their charter value is not sufficiently valuable. If a
bank’s charter value is sufficiently valuable, banks can use their stock of net securities as a
buffer or issue seasoned equity. Thus, the extension allows us to consider banks undertaking
precautionarysavingsinthefaceofidiosyncraticshocksasinahouseholdincomefluctuations
problem, but with a strategic twist, since here, big banks have loan market power.
We “test” the model by showing its predictions are qualitatively consistent with untar-
geted data moments and empirical studies. First, in Subsection 6.2, we show the model’s
businesscyclepredictionsarequalitativelyconsistentwithuntargeteddatacorrelations. Sec-
ond, in Subsection 6.3 we show the model’s predictions for lending across banks of different
sizesinresponsetoariseinthecostofexternalfundingarequalititativelyconsistentwiththe
predictions from an important set of papers by Kashyap and Stein ([46],[47]). Kashyap and
SteinstudiedwhethertheimpactofFedpolicyonlendingbehavioris stronger forbankswith
less liquid balance sheets (where balance sheet strength is measured as the ratio of securities
plus federal funds sold to total assets). The mechanism they test relies on the idea that (see
[46] p. 410) “banks with large values of this ratio should be better able to buffer their lending
activity against shocks in the availability of external finance, by drawing on their stock of
liquid assets.” One of their measures of monetary policy is the federal funds rate. They find
strong evidence of an effect for small banks (those in the bottom 95% of the distribution).
In this section, we conduct an analogous exercise by running a similar regression on panel
data generated by our model and find that the results are qualitatively consistent with the
empirical evidence presented in Kashyap and Stein [46]. Third, in Subsection 6.4 we show
the model’s predictions are qualitatively consistent with the large empirical literature on the
competition-stability tradeoff along the lines of Beck, et. al. [11], Berger, et. al. [12], and
Jiang, et. al. [44]. Our model generates endogenous changes in market structure that are
correlated with cyclical changes in financial stability and intermediated output.
A benefit of our structural framework is that we can conduct policy counterfactuals. In
Subsection 7.1 we study a rise in level of capital requirements from 4% under Basel II to
8.5% (corresponding to the required minimum risk weighted capital requirement of 6% plus
a 2.5% capital conservation buffer) motivated by changes recommended by Basel III. FDIC
Rules and Regulations (Part 325) establishes the criteria and standards to calculate capital
requirements and adequacy (see DSC Risk Management Manual of Examination Policies,
2