NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ON THE DIRECT AND INDIRECT REAL EFFECTS OF CREDIT SUPPLY SHOCKS
Laura Alfaro
Manuel García-Santana
Enrique Moral-Benito
Working Paper 25458
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25458
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2019
We thank David Weinstein and Mary Amiti for kindly providing their codes and for comments
and suggestions, Stéphane Bonhomme, Gabriel Chodorow-Reich, Sergio Correia, Julian Di
Giovanni, Marco Di Maggio, Joseph G. Haubrich, Terry O'Malley, Victoria Ivashina, David
Martinez-Miera, Friederike Niepmann, Jose Luis Peydro, Andrew Powell, Sergio Vicente, and
participants in the First CEMFI - Banco de Espana Workshop, the MIT-Sloan seminar, the
Federal Reserve Board seminar, the University of Barcelona seminar, the IADB seminar, the
Kennedy School-LEP brown bag seminar, the UC3M seminar, the University of Groningen
seminar, the Workshop on Financial Intermediation and Risk at the Barcelona GSE Summer
Forum, the 1st Annual Workshop of the ESCB Research Cluster in Athens, the XX Workshop in
International Economics and Finance in Buenos Aires, the III Winter Macroeconomics Workshop
in Bellaterra, the Chicago Financial Institutions Conference, the Society for Economic Dynamics
in Mexico, CEBRA-Frankfurt, and the 26th Finance Forum in Santander. An earlier version of
this paper circulated under the title "Credit Supply Shocks, Network Effects and the Real
Economy". The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Laura Alfaro, Manuel García-Santana, and Enrique Moral-Benito. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

On the Direct and Indirect Real Effects of Credit Supply Shocks
Laura Alfaro, Manuel García-Santana, and Enrique Moral-Benito
NBER Working Paper No. 25458
January 2019
JEL No. E44,G21,L25
ABSTRACT
We consider the real effects of bank lending shocks and how they permeate the economy through
buyer-supplier linkages. We combine administrative data on all firms in Spain with a matched
bank-firm-loan dataset on the universe of corporate loans for 2003-2013 to identify bank-specific
shocks for each year using methods from the matched employer-employee literature. We
construct firm-specific exogenous credit supply shocks and estimate their direct and indirect
effects on real activity using firm-specific measures of upstream and downstream exposure.
Credit supply shocks have sizable direct and downstream propagation effects on investment and
output throughout the period, especially during the 2008-2009 global financial crisis. In terms of
mechanisms, trade credit extended by suppliers and price adjustments play a role in accounting
for downstream propagation of financial shocks.
Laura Alfaro Enrique Moral-Benito
Harvard Business School Bank of Spain
Morgan Hall 263 Calle de Alcalá, 48,
Soldiers Field 28014 Madrid, Spain
Boston, MA 02163 enrique.moral@gmail.com
and NBER
lalfaro@hbs.edu
Manuel García-Santana
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Departament d'Economia i Empresa
Ramon Trias-Fargas 25-27
Barcelona, 08005
and CEPR
manuel.santana@upf.edu

1 Introduction
In this paper we examine the real effects of the bank lending channel and how bank-lending shocks
permeate the economy through buyer-seller interactions. Propagation through the production chain
may substantially amplify the aggregate impact of bank lending shocks on real activity. We show
that bank credit supply shocks do affect, and indeed permeate the real economy through input and
output relations.
The Spanish economy witnessed an unprecedented boom-bust cycle over the 2003-2013 period,
both in terms of real activity and credit. The correlation between the growth rate of credit to
non-financial corporations and GDP throughout those different periods is 0.88, which points to
strong feedback effects between both variables.1 Interestingly, a simple look at the cross section of
industriesinSpainshowsthatemploymentandrealoutputfellthemostduringthecrisisinindustries
located downstream in the Spanish production network (see Figure 1). This implies that industries
more dependent on suppliers were hit relatively more by the global financial crisis. Downstream
propagation of the global financial shock rationalizes this negative association.
Figure 1: Downstreamness vs employment and output growth by industry
beta = −0.48
tstat = −2.24
htworg
tnemyolpmE
4.
2.
0
2.−
4.−
6.−
beta = -0.72
tstat = -2.37
.3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8
Downstreamness
htworg
tuptuO
5.
0
5.-
1-
.3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8
Downstreamness
Notes. Output/Employment growth refers to the change in real value added/employment by industry over the 2006-
2010period. Downstreamnessreferstothedownstreampositionofeachindustryintheproductionchain. Inparticular,
it is computed as the ratio of aggregate final direct use of industry’s output to aggregate use of industry’s output
as an input. Some examples of high downstream industries are Human Health Services (0.75) and Travel Agency,
Tour Operator (0.68). Some examples of low downstream industries are Electricity Services (0.38), Warehousing and
Support Services for Transportation (0.39), and Basic Metals (0.44). See discussion in Alfaro, Antr´as, Chor, and
Conconi (Forthcoming).
We analyze the direct and indirect effects of credit supply shocks on Spanish firms’ employment,
1See Section 2 for details on this correlation and Figure 3.
1

output, and investment over the 2003-2013 period. The exercise of quantifying the consequences of
financialshocksonrealvariablesandbuyer-supplier(input-output)relationsisverydemanding. Firm
firm-level data linking credit information to outcome variables (employment, investment, output,
etc.) is required as well as a plausibly exogenous source of variation in credit growth.2 To address
thischallenge, weidentifybank-year-specificcreditsupplyshocksthroughdifferencesincreditgrowth
betweenbankslendingtothesamefirmasinAmitiandWeinstein(2018).3 Importantly, weillustrate
that the estimated shocks remain very similar when also accounting for bank-firm specific factors as
shown by Amiti and Weinstein (2018).
We validate our bank-supply-shocks in several ways. First, we divide the sample into healthy
and weak banks ones, as in Bentolila, Jansen, and Jimenez (2018).4 We find that weak banks
experienced stronger supply shocks until 2006 and weaker afterwards. We interpret this evolution as
clear evidence favoring the plausibility of our estimated bank supply shocks. Second, if our identified
bank-specific credit shocks capture meaningful supply factors, a bank that experiences a greater
shock should grant more loans to a given firm, conditional on the firm applying for a loan. Using
loan application information, available in the credit registry dataset, we show this to be the case.
To estimate the real effects of banks’ credit supply shocks and their propagation through input-
output linkages, we combine the Spanish Input-Output structure and firm-specific measures of down-
stream and upstream exposure. Based on di Giovanni, Levchenko, and Mejean (2018), we measure
whether firms are indirectly affected by the fact that industries in which their suppliers operate are
hit by the shocks (downstream effects). Similarly, we also measure whether firms that sell goods
to industries whose firms are hit by the shocks are indirectly affected (upstream effects). Crucially,
our dataset, which combines administrative data for all firms in Spain with matched bank-firm-loan
information on the universe of corporate loans (Spanish Credit Registry, CIR), replicates to a nearly
complete picture the Spanish economy.
We find both the direct effects and propagation effects on real variables to be sizable. Our es-
2An important concern in the literature has been identifying plausible exogenous shocks to disentangle the bank
lending-channel (or bank-specific shock) from the firm borrowing-channel (i.e., a firm’s ability, or lack thereof, to
borrow from alternative sources). Firms may be able to undo a particular negative bank supply shock by resorting
to another bank or other sources of funds. Kashyap, Stein, and Wilcox (1993) and Adrian, Colla, and Shin (2012)
find that firms are able to substitute to other forms of credit in the presence of loan supply shocks. Klein, Peek, and
Rosengren (2002) stress the difficulties of substituting loans from one bank with loans from another. Midrigan and
Xu(2014)emphasizetheroleofself-financing; seeKhwajaandMian(2008), andJimenez, Mian, Peydro, andSaurina
(2014) for further discussion.
3To be more concrete, we use matched employer-employee techniques that enable us to recover multiple time-
varyingfirmandbankfixedeffects (seeAbowd, Kramarz, andMargolis(1999)). Thisapproachovercomeslimitations
faced by previous work that restricted analysis to smaller samples of firms or particular bank-specific supply shocks,
such as the 2007 liquidity drought in interbank markets.
4Bentolila,Jansen,andJimenez(2018)defineweakbanksasthosethatwerebailedoutbytheSpanishgovernment
as part of the restructuring process during the financial crisis.
2