NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO FIRMS RESPOND TO GENDER PAY GAP TRANSPARENCY?
Morten Bennedsen
Elena Simintzi
Margarita Tsoutsoura
Daniel Wolfenzon
Working Paper 25435
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25435
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2019
We thank our discussants Irem Demirci, Daniel Ferreira, Camille Hebert, David Matsa, Geoff Tate,
Karin Thorburn, and Rebecca Zarutskie. We are grateful for excellent comments from seminar participants
at UC San Diego, IESE Barcelona, Columbia Business School, Cornell University, Darden, INSEAD,
UIC, UCLA, ASU, and conference participants at LBS Summer Finance Symposium, Stanford SITE
conference, CEPR Incentives, Management and Organization 2018 conference, European Commission-Gender
equality Unit, Colorado Finance Summit, Swedish House of Finance and AFFECT conference, the
Corporate Finance Beyond Public Companies conference, 2019 SOLE conference, 2019 EFA meetings,
2019 WFA meetings, and 2020 AEA meetings. We thank Brian J. Lee and Jiacheng Yan for excellent
research assistance, He Zhang for data management, and help with data understanding from Mona
Larsen (VIVE), Helle Holt (VIVE) and Maria Boysen (Statistic Office Denmark). We are grateful
for financial support from the Danish National Research Foundation (Niels Bohr Professorship).The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2019 by Morten Bennedsen, Elena Simintzi, Margarita Tsoutsoura, and Daniel Wolfenzon. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Firms Respond to Gender Pay Gap Transparency?
Morten Bennedsen, Elena Simintzi, Margarita Tsoutsoura, and Daniel Wolfenzon
NBER Working Paper No. 25435
January 2019, Revised April 2020
JEL No. G18,G28,J16
ABSTRACT
We examine the effect of pay transparency on gender pay gap and firm outcomes. This paper exploits
a 2006 legislation change in Denmark that requires firms to provide gender disaggregated wage statistics.
Using detailed employee-employer administrative data and a difference-in-differences and difference-in-discontinuities
designs, we find the law reduces the gender pay gap, primarily by slowing the wage growth for male
employees. The gender pay gap declines by approximately two percentage points, or a 13% reduction
relative to the pre-legislation mean. Despite the reduction of the overall wage bill, the wage-transparency
mandate does not affect firm profitability, likely because of the offsetting effect of reduced firm productivity.
Morten Bennedsen Margarita Tsoutsoura
Department of Economics SC Johnson College of Business
INSEAD Cornell University
Fontainebleau Ithaca, NY 14853
France and NBER
Morten.BENNEDSEN@insead.edu tsoutsoura@cornell.edu
Elena Simintzi Daniel Wolfenzon
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Graduate School of Business
Kenan-Flagler Business School Columbia University
Chapel Hill, NC Uris Hall, Room 808
United States 3022 Broadway
Elena_Simintzi@kenan-flagler.unc.edu New York, NY 10027
and NBER
dw2382@columbia.edu

I Introduction
Gender pay disparities characterize labor markets in most developed countries
(Goldin, 2014; Blau and Kahn, 2017). When a man earns $100, a woman earns $77
in the US (Goldin, 2014), $78.5 in Germany, $79 in the UK, and $83.8, on average,
across EU countries (Eurostat, 2016). Recent proposals across many countries focus on
paytransparencytopromoteequalpay.1 However, evidenceontheeffectoftransparency
on gender pay disparities on employee and firm outcomes is limited. In this paper, we
draw insights from a regulation in Denmark that increased transparency by requiring
companies to inform employees of average wages by gender and occupation.
The debate about the consequences of disclosing gender wage gaps is ongoing. Gov-
ernments often propose transparency as a tool to encourage firms to reduce the wage
gap between men and women. Unions and employee groups representing women also
seem to believe secrecy about pay contributes significantly to unequal pay for women.2
Opponents of pay transparency argue disclosing gender pay comes as a challenge to firms
because it lacks practical utility, increases administrative burden, and violates employee
privacy.3
The effect of transparency on the gender pay gap and firm outcomes is ultimately
an empirical question. Whether transparency will provide sufficient incentives for firms
1In the UK, employers of firms with more than 250 employees have to publish gender-based wage
statisticsfromApril2018. InGermany,employeeshavetherighttoknowthemediansalaryforagroup
of comparable employees in firms with more than 200 employees. An executive order signed by the US
government in 2016 required large companies to report salary data broken down by gender starting in
2017, but the succeeding administration overturned the rule.
2AFL-CIO runs a petition campaign as a response to the halt of the equal pay initiative that
would have required large corporations to report pay data by gender to the Equal Employment Op-
portunity Commission. https://actionnetwork.org/petitions/tell-the-eeoc-we-need-the-equal-pay-data-
collection?source=website. The Institute for Women’s Policy Research in a survey documents 60% of
employees are discouraged or prohibited from sharing wage information, and concludes pay secrecy is
an important determinant of the gender gap in earnings (IWPR, 2014).
3See, for example, a letter representing employers against a bill in California that requires large
firms in the state to file reports detailing the gender pay gap for people working in the same position.
http://blob.capitoltrack.com/17blobs/e3526ab2-1360-4461-a1d3-b0580abe6172
– 2 –

to adjust their compensation policies is unclear. Moreover, these wage adjustments
might have unintended consequences for firm outcomes, such as firm productivity and,
eventually, profitability.
Studying this question empirically requires addressing two key challenges: finding
exogenous variation in wage transparency at the firm level and obtaining information on
wages and employment at the individual level. For the source of exogenous variation,
we exploit a 2006 legislation change in Denmark that requires firms with more than
35 employees to report salary data broken down by gender for employee groups large
enough for individual’s anonymity to be protected. Firms must inform their employees
of wage gaps between men and women and explain the design of the statistics and the
wage concept used. For data on wages and employment at the individual level, we use
administrative records from the Danish Statistics matched employee-employer dataset.
In our research design, we compare employees in firms above the 35-employee thresh-
old with employees in firms below. Because firm size can influence wage dynamics and
firm outcomes, our sample includes only employees in firms in a narrow band around 35
employees. Specifically, we estimate a difference-in-differences model (diff-in-diff) where
treated employees are those working in firms that employ 35-50 employees prior to the
introduction of the law and the control employees are those working in firms with 20-34
workers.
In our specifications, we control for a variety of time-varying firm and individual
characteristics (age, work experience, firm size), year fixed effects, interacted individual
and firm fixed effects, and interacted firm and year fixed effects. By including individual-
firm fixed effects, we control for time-invariant person characteristics, time-invariant firm
characteristics, and the match between firms and workers. In essence, these fixed effects
allow us to compare the same employee at the same firm before and after the regulation.
By including firm-year fixed effects, we absorb any time-varying shocks at the firm level
that may be correlated with wages.
Intermsoftheeffectoftransparencyonfirmcompensationpolicies, wefindthatafter
– 3 –