NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE CREATION AND EVOLUTION OF ENTREPRENEURIAL PUBLIC MARKETS
Shai Bernstein
Abhishek Dev
Josh Lerner
Working Paper 25414
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25414
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2018
We thank Harvard Business School’s Division of Research, the Private Capital Research
Institute, the Smith-Richardson Foundation, and the Toulouse Network on Information
Technology for financial support. Josh Lerner periodically receives compensation for advising
institutional investors, private equity firms, corporate venturing groups, and government agencies
on topics related to entrepreneurship, innovation, and private capital. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Shai Bernstein, Abhishek Dev, and Josh Lerner. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Creation and Evolution of Entrepreneurial Public Markets
Shai Bernstein, Abhishek Dev, and Josh Lerner
NBER Working Paper No. 25414
December 2018
JEL No. G24,G38,L26
ABSTRACT
This paper explores the creation and evolution of new stock exchanges around the world geared
towards entrepreneurial companies, known as second-tier exchanges. Using hand-collected novel
data, we document the proliferation of these new stock exchanges that were created in a large
number of countries, attracted a significant volume of global IPOs, were introduced fairly
cyclically, and had lower listing requirements when compared to first-tier stock exchanges. We
find that increases in demand for entrepreneurial capital—as proxied for by patenting, IPOs, and
stock market valuations—led to a higher likelihood of the introduction of second-tier exchanges.
We find no evidence that new second-tier exchanges diverted the existing flow of IPOs from
established stock exchanges. Shareholder protection strongly predicted exchange success, even in
countries with high levels of venture capital activity, patenting, and financial market
development. Second-tier exchanges in countries with better shareholder protection allowed
younger, less profitable, but faster-growing companies to raise more capital. These results
highlight the importance of institutions in enabling the provision of entrepreneurial capital to
young companies.
Shai Bernstein Josh Lerner
Stanford Graduate School of Business Harvard Business School
655 Knight Way Rock Center 214
Stanford, CA 94305 Soldiers Field
and NBER Boston, MA 02163
shaib@stanford.edu and NBER
jlerner@hbs.edu
Abhishek Dev
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field Road
Boston, MA 02163
adev@hbs.edu
An internet appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25414

1. Introduction
How does finance contribute to economic growth? Empirical evidence (see Levine, 2005
for a review) suggests that one important channel through which financial development enables
growth is through the funding of innovative and entrepreneurial projects, activities that have been
long recognized as particularly hard to finance with outside capital (Arrow, 1962). Well-developed
public equity markets have shown to be instrumental in filling this financing gap, allowing young
and fast-growing companies to fund R&D activities (Brown, Fazzari, and Petersen, 2009; Hall and
Lerner, 2010).
Recognizing the importance of entrepreneurial finance, a major focus of financial
policymakers around the world has been on the creation of new stock exchanges for young and
small-capitalization companies, often characterized by less restrictive listing requirements. Such
exchanges, termed second-tier exchanges, have been heralded in many places as a way to promote
the creation, financing, and retention of job-creating new ventures.2 Anecdotally, while there have
been some highly visible successes (such as NASDAQ in New York, London’s Alternative
Investment Market, and the Shenzhen-based ChiNext market), there have been many more failures
(such as EASDAQ). We describe two such cases in Section 3.
2 Recent examples from Saudi Arabia, Trinidad and Tobago, India, and China include “New Saudi SME stock market
surges on first day,” http://gulfbusiness.com/new-saudi-sme-stock-market-surges-first-day/, February 20, 2017; Leah
Soriasand, “CinemaONE first up on SME market,” https://www.trinidadexpress.com/business/local/cinemaone-first-
up-on-sme-market/article_dd89dca0-f29d-11e8-aa09-3f220ed53323.html, November 27, 2018; “BSE creates new
division for listing of startups,” November 28, 2018,
https://www.livemint.com/Companies/BEFgjhFC1Zupl2hIB5CrYK/BSE-creates-new-division-for-listing-of-
startups.html; and Zhang Yu, Liu Caiping, Qu Yunxu and Fran Wang, “Shanghai’s New High-Tech Board to Lower
Profitability Requirements, Draft Rules Say,” https://www.caixinglobal.com/2018-12-10/the-proposed-high-tech-
board-will-lower-the-requirements-on-candidate-companies-profitability-but-it-will-not-directly-accept-biotech-
firms-that-have-not-had-any-income-a-market-participant-close-to-the-shanghai-stock-exchange-told-caixin-
101357510.html, December 10, 2018.
2

Despite the energy devoted by securities regulators to these efforts, there has been very
few systematic explorations in the finance literature of the determinants of the creation and success
of new exchanges geared towards entrepreneurial firms. Among the few exceptions have been
Vismara, Paleari, and Ritter’s (2012) examination of the listing decision of firms in the four largest
European economies in the period from 1995 to 2009 and Aggarwal and Angel’s (1999) clinical
study of the Amex Emerging Company Marketplace during the 1990s. This neglect is particularly
striking in light of the interest in trends in global equity markets. Doidge, Karyoli, and Stultz
document that the number of listed companies in the U.S. has dropped by more than half in the
past two decades (2017), driven in large part by the declining share of American companies going
public (2009, 2013). This reduced propensity to undertake an initial public offering (IPO) appears
to be particularly concentrated among smaller firms in the U.S., as documented by Gao, Ritter,
and Zhu (2013).
In this paper, we seek to understand the drivers of the creation and success of new second-
tier markets, focusing specifically on the role of countries’ legal provisions for shareholder
protection. Second-tier markets typically allow small market-cap entrepreneurial firms to raise
capital by lowering their listing requirements, as we show below. However, lower listing
requirements increase adverse selection concerns and the risk that investors may be expropriated
by the entrepreneur. Following La Porta et al. (2002, henceforth LLSV), we hypothesize that when
minority shareholder rights are better protected by the law, investors should be more willing to
provide capital to firms on exchanges with low listing requirements, as the risk of expropriation
will be mitigated. Thus, stronger shareholder protection may increase the willingness of
shareholders to invest in new listings and the valuations that they assign to these firms. This greater
willingness will, in turn, attract more entrepreneurs to list their companies in the market. We
3