NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
GOOD CARRY, BAD CARRY
Geert Bekaert
George Panayotov
Working Paper 25420
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25420
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2019
We acknowledge many fruitful suggestions by Raymond Kan and discussions with Gurdip
Bakshi, Utpal Bhattacharya, Steve Riddiough, Giorgio Valente and Jialin Yu, who also helped us
obtain some of the data used in the paper. Participants at the 2016 Annual Conference in
International Finance at City University of Hong Kong, the Bank of England, Banca d’Italia and
ECB 6-thWorkshop on Financial Determinants of Foreign Exchange Rates, and seminars at
Nanyang Technology University, UNSW, SAIF and Xiamen University provided helpful
insights. Any remaining errors are our responsibility alone. Panayotov acknowledges support
from a Hong Kong RGC Research grant (No. 16505715). The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Geert Bekaert and George Panayotov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Good Carry, Bad Carry
Geert Bekaert and George Panayotov
NBER Working Paper No. 25420
January 2019
JEL No. C23,C53,G11
ABSTRACT
We distinguish between ”good” and ”bad” carry trades constructed from G-10 currencies. The
good trades exhibit higher Sharpe ratios and sometimes positive return skewness, in contrast to
the bad trades that have both substantially lower Sharpe ratios and highly negative return
skewness. Surprisingly, good trades do not involve the most typical carry currencies like the
Australian dollar and Japanese yen. The distinction between good and bad carry trades
significantly alters our understanding of currency carry trade returns, and invalidates, for
example, explanations invoking return skewness and crash risk.
Geert Bekaert
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, 411 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
gb241@columbia.edu
George Panayotov
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Business School - Dept. of Finance
Clear Water Bay
Kowloon, Hong
panayotov@ust.hk

I Introduction
Thecurrencycarrytrade,whichgoeslong(short)currencieswithhigh(low)yieldscontinuestoattract
much research attention, as it has been shown to earn high Sharpe ratios, while its returns are largely un-
correlated with standard systematic risks (e.g., Burnside, Eichenbaum, Kleshchelski, and Rebelo (2011),
Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011)). Prototypical carry currencies among the liquid G-10 curren-
cies are the Swiss franc (CHF) and Japanese yen (JPY), which almost always exhibit the lowest yields
andhenceatypicalG-10carrytradewouldshortthem,andtheNewZealanddollar(NZD)andAustralian
dollar (AUD), which typically have the highest yields and would be held long. These four currencies
featureprominentlyinextantexplanationsofthereturnsofthecarrytrade. Onesuchexplanationinvokes
crash risk (e.g. Brunnermeier, Nagel, and Pedersen (2009)) and thus relies implicitly on the fact that JPY
andAUDprovidethemost”skewed”returnperspectivesfromtheviewpointofaUSinvestor. Anotheris
basedonthedifferentialexposuretoglobalproductivityshocksofproducersoffinalgoods,suchasJapan
and Switzerland, versus commodity producers, such as Australia and New Zealand (Ready, Roussanov,
andWard(2017)).
While the prior literature takes for granted that the prototypical carry currencies1 drive carry trade
profitability, we document the existence of ”good” and ”bad” currency carry trades. We consider an
investorwhosequentiallytestswhetherreducingthesetofG-10currenciesimprovesthehistoricalSharpe
ratio, and then implements equally weighted carry trades with fewer currencies. We find that such trades
improve the return profile (in terms of both Sharpe ratio and skewness) relative to the carry trade which
employsallG-10currencies,anddenotethemas”good”carrytrades. Mostsurprisingly,thesegoodtrades
almost never include the AUD and JPY, or the NOK - another commodity currency. Next, we construct
1To clarify terminology, we note that a key component of the return of a carry trade is the interest rate (or forward) dif-
ferentialbetweentheinvestmentandfundingcurrenciesthatarelongandshortinthetrade, respectively. Thiscomponentis
often,evenifperhapsconfusingly,referredtoas”carry”,andwealsofollowthistradition,forbrevity. Forthesamereasonwe
alsosometimesreferto”carrycurrencies”,”carryprofitability”,”carryreturns”,etc.,insteadof”carrytradecurrencies”,”carry
tradeprofitability”and”carrytradereturns”. Thecontextisclearinallthesecases,andshouldallownoambiguity.
1

carry trades using fixed subsets of the G-10 currencies over the full sample, and find that trades involving
onlytheprototypicalcurrencieshavelowerSharperatiosandmorenegativelyskewedreturns. Wedenote
them as ”bad” carry trades. The trades using the remaining currencies preserve the desirable features of
”good”carrytrades.
Providing a first glimpse on the issue, Figure 1 contrasts the return properties of carry trades that in-
volvevarioussubsetsoftheG-10currencies. Inparticular,thefigureplots(withblackdots)theskewness
versus Sharpe ratio for all carry trades constructed from five currencies that use three of the prototypical
currencies (AUD, CHF and JPY), together with any possible pair from the remaining seven currencies.
The currencies enter each trade with equal weights, as is common in the literature and finance industry.
Strikingly,these21tradesshowworseSharperatios,andalsosubstantiallylowerskewnessthanthestrat-
egy that uses all G-10 currencies (denoted with the horizontal and vertical lines in the graph). Therefore,
trades constructed predominantly from the prototypical carry currencies appear to be ”bad” carry trades.
WesubsequentlyrefertothetradefromallG-10currenciesas”standardcarry”anddenoteitasSC.
Probing further, Figure 1 also displays (with unfilled circles) the skewness versus Sharpe ratio of the
complements of the previous 21 carry trades, which are constructed with the remaining five currencies in
eachcase,againwithequalweights. Itisnoteworthythat14outofthe21complementtradesfeaturehigher
Sharperatiosthanthatofthestandardcarry(SC)trade(inonecasealmostdoublethatratio),and16show
higher (less negative or positive) skewness. Furthermore, half of the complement trades improve both on
the skewness and Sharpe ratio of the SC trade, qualifying them as ”good” carry trades. These findings
cast doubt on efforts to explain carry trade returns by focusing on properties of the prototypical carry
currencies,andunderminethepracticeofassociatingthecarrytradepredominantlywithsuchcurrencies.
InSectionIVweinvestigatetheabilityofgoodcarrytradestofunctionasriskfactorsforcertaincross
sections of currency returns (see, e.g. Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011) and Menkhoff, Sarno,
2