NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO TRADE CREDITORS POSSESS PRIVATE INFORMATION?
STOCK RETURNS EVIDENCE
David Hirshleifer
Yifan Li
Ben Lourie
Thomas Ruchti
Working Paper 25553
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25553
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2019, Revised November 2023
The views expressed here are those of the authors and not necessarily the views of the Office of
Financial Research or the U.S. Department of the Treasury, or any federal agency and do not
establish supervisory policy, requirements, or expectations, nor do they necessarily represent
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank David Aboody, Judson Caskey,
Elizabeth Chuk, Henry Friedman, Dan Givoly, Steve Karolyi, Clive Lennox, Alex Nekrasov,
Devin Shanthikumar, Austin Sudbury, Brett Trueman and participants at the UCI-UCLA-USC-
UCSD joint accounting conference for their helpful comments and suggestions.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by David Hirshleifer, Yifan Li, Ben Lourie, and Thomas Ruchti. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Trade Creditors Possess Private Information? Stock Returns Evidence
David Hirshleifer, Yifan Li, Ben Lourie, and Thomas Ruchti
NBER Working Paper No. 25553
February 2019, Revised November 2023
JEL No. G3,G32
ABSTRACT
Payment timeliness in trade credit transactions is a key metric suppliers use to monitor their
buyers. However, firms are not required to disclose payment timeliness information. In theory,
late payments could be either a positive or negative indicator of future performance. We find that
late payment by buyers is negatively associated with future buyer financial performance and
positively associated with subsequent default risk. This suggests that late payments are an
indicator of inability to pay on time rather than an indicator that firms are delaying payments to
fund profitable investments. The predictive power of payment timeliness for fundamentals is
stronger for low liquidity and distressed firms. Finally, we find a significant association between
payment timeliness and future stock returns, suggesting that investors do not fully incorporate
payment timeliness information. Our evidence regarding the informativeness of payment
timeliness is relevant for the ongoing regulatory debate on whether firms should disclose payment
timeliness.
David Hirshleifer Ben Lourie
Marshall School of Business Merage School of Business
University of Southern California University of California, Irvine
3670 Trousdale Pkwy Irvine, CA 92697
Los Angeles, CA 90089 blourie@exchange.uci.edu
and NBER
hirshlei@marshall.usc.edu Thomas Ruchti
Carnegie Mellon University
Yifan Li Tepper School of Business
College of Business ruchti@andrew.cmu.edu
San Francisco State University
San Francisco, CA 94132
yifanli@sfsu.edu

1. INTRODUCTION
Trade credit is a major source of external financing for US firms. Roughly a quarter of
corporate debt is trade credit, which is about three times the size of bank loans (Rajan and Zingales
1995; Barrot 2016; Ivashina, Iverson, and Smith 2016). Due to its size, and its more immediate
implications for cash flows, buyers and suppliers devote substantial time and resources to
managing trade credit compared to other sources of external financing (Long, Malitz, and Ravid
1993).
The importance of trade credit suggests that the trade credit repayment track records of
buying firms may contain important information about firm value and future financial
performance. However, it is not obvious on theoretical grounds whether timely payment of trade
credit will be a positive or negative indicator about the firm’s prospects. On the one hand, timely
repayment may indicate that the borrower has little need for cash, i.e., few profitable investment
opportunities. On the other hand, timely repayment may instead indicate that the firm’s current
activities are generating high cash flow.
We test here between these possibilities. Buyers report scant information about payment
timeliness to suppliers, but the rise of alternative data providers has led to new types of disclosure
by suppliers that are available at high cost. Specifically, aggregators collect information on account
receivables from anonymous suppliers on web platforms for the purpose of monitoring buyers. We
use this new proprietary data source of disclosures by suppliers to measure the percentage of trade
credit payments that are past due and examine whether it is informative about future firm financial
performance.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3295808

Regulators around the world have recognized the importance of payment practices in trade
credit and are accordingly considering or have recently mandated more disclosure in this area. For
example, Section 3 of the Small Business, Enterprise and Employment Act 2015 which became
effective on April 6, 2017, requires large UK firms to self-report their payment practices including
the percentage of late payments to suppliers. This requirement is meant to increase transparency
of payment practices and it arose due to concerns that small- and medium-sized suppliers were
suffering from cash flow problems due to late payments by buyers.1 In the U.S. and abroad, the
Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB)2 and the International Accounting Standards
Board (IASB)3 have made proposals (discussed below) related to factoring transactions which
might require greater disclosure of information about payment timeliness.
A firm’s failure to pay on time could result in contractual penalties (Fabbri and Klapper
2016). The firm also risks losing access to trade credit from that supplier in the future and
potentially risks its ability to trade with that supplier at all (Smith 1987; Petersen and Rajan 1994,
1997). If late payments are a sign of a firm’s inability to make timely payments, then late payments
should be associated with poor subsequent performance and an increased default risk.
However, late payment by buyers could be a positive indicator of a firm’s prospects. A
common cash management policy involves strategically delaying payments to suppliers to free
up cash to be used in alternative short-term investments (Emery 1984).4 Similarly, customers
with greater bargaining power can often delay payments with impunity (Murfin and Njoroge
2012). Furthermore, firms may not wish to harm trade credit relationships given alternative
1 See the UK report on “Duty to report on payment practices and performance” for further discussion of the
justification for such policies
(https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/574312/duty-to-
report-on-payment-practices-and-performance-government-response.pdf).
2 https://www.fasb.org/page/getarticle?uid=fasb_Media_Advisory_12-20-21_Body_0228221200&isNewsPage=true.
3 https://www.ifrs.org/projects/completed-projects/2020/supply-chain-financing-arrangements-reverse-factoring/.
4 https://www.wsj.com/articles/delaying-payments-to-suppliers-help-companies-unlock-cash-1530178201.
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3295808