NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BANK OF JAPAN EQUITY PURCHASES:
THE (NON-)EFFECTS OF EXTREME QUANTITATIVE EASING
Ben Charoenwong
Randall Morck
Yupana Wiwattanakantang
Working Paper 25525
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25525
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2019
Previously circulated as “Asset Prices, Corporate Actions, and Bank of Japan Equity Purchases.”
We are grateful to Sumit Agarwal, Francesco Franzoni, Virginia Gianinazzi, Marcin Kacperczyk,
Gregor Matvos, Andrew Rose, Pietro Veronesi, Bernard Yeung, our discussants Andrea Barbon
and Joe Zhang, seminar participants at the 2020 American Economic Association Meeting, 2019
European Finance Association Meeting, JSPS Core-to-Core Program: Governance Reforms from
Comparative Perspectives Conference, Development Bank of Japan, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, National University of Singapore, University of New South Wales, the Singapore
Scholar Symposium, Bank of Thailand, the Puey Ungphakorn Institute for Economic Research,
Chulalongkorn University, and NIDA University for helpful suggestions. This work was
supported the NUS Start-up Grant [grant number R-315-000-119-133 to B.C.] and the Singapore
Ministry of Education Tier 1 Research Grant [grant number R-315-000-127-115 to B.C.]. This
paper has circulated as NBER Working Paper No. W25525. All remaining errors are ours. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Ben Charoenwong, Randall Morck, and Yupana Wiwattanakantang. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bank of Japan Equity Purchases: The (Non-)Effects of Extreme Quantitative Easing
Ben Charoenwong, Randall Morck, and Yupana Wiwattanakantang
NBER Working Paper No. 25525
February 2019
JEL No. E52,E58,G31,G32
ABSTRACT
From January 2011 through March 2018, the Bank of Japan purchased equity index ETFs worth
about 3.5% of GDP. Identification of the effect of central bank ETF purchases on stock
valuations and corporate responses is via differently-weighted and changing stock indices. BOJ
purchases lift valuations, increase share issuances, and increase total assets. On average, the latter
increase is due to cash and short-term securities rather than capital investment. However, firms
with worse corporate governance do increase capital investment. These findings suggest central
bank equity purchases are a problematic tool for stimulating economic growth through high
broad-based private-sector corporate investment.
Ben Charoenwong Yupana Wiwattanakantang
National University of Singapore National University of Singapore
15 Kent Ridge Dr #07-69 Business School
Singapore 119245 BIZ 1 2-7, 15 Kent Ridge Drive
Singapore Singapore 119245
bizbgc@nus.edu.sg bizyw@nus.edu.sg
Randall Morck
Faculty of Business
University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB T6G 2R6
CANADA
and NBER
randall.morck@ualberta.ca

1. Introduction
The Bank of Japan (BOJ) is pioneering a unique form of quantitative easing: the central bank
buying and holding large equity blocks in domestic corporations. From the policy’s advent in
December 2010 through March 2018, the BOJ accumulated equity index-backed exchange-traded
fund (ETF) holdings worth almost ¥19.3 trillion, some 2.9% of the market capitalization of the
Tokyo Stock Exchange, 3.5% of GDP, and over 75% of the total ETF market. In response to the
COVID-19 coronavirus crisis, in March of 2020, the BOJ announced a doubling of its equity
purchases with an annual budget of ¥12 trillion.1
Are massive equity purchases by central banks an effective alternative monetary policy
stimulus other central banks might use amid near zero or, as in Japan, negative interest rates when
debt market interventions grow ineffective? The possibility of share purchase as an additional
policy tool has been discussed in several economies, including the United States, Europe, Israel,
and China.2 However, so far, the BOJ is the only major central bank to have purchased domestic
equities on such a scale.3 Based on our empirical analyses, we conclude that these BOJ equity
purchases have scant expansionary impact on corporate actions but temper bankruptcy risk. We
argue that Japan’s institutions and recent economic history leave its experience relevant to policy-
makers elsewhere.
The BOJ’s policy reports explain ETF purchases as interventions to boost equity values to
reduce firms’ costs of capital and stimulate their investment. Consistent with the former, the BOJ
1 Bank of Japan ploughs deeper into stocks to ease coronavirus fears, Financial Times, by Leo Lewis and Kana
Inagaki, March 16, 2020.
2 Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen has advocated expanding the Fed’s mandate to buying corporate stocks – see
“Janet Yellen Sees Benefits to Central Bank Stock Purchases” by David Harrison, Wall Street Journal, Sept. 29
2016. Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren’s March 2020 comments on the central bank intervening in “a broader
range of securities or assets” were widely interpreted as referring to stock purchases – see e.g. “Could the Fed resort
to buying stocks?” by Stephen Alpher, SeekingAlpha.com, Mar. 6. Blackrock Chief Investment Officer Rick Rieder
urged the European Central Bank to buy equities – see “ECB can boost growth across Europe by buying stocks”
Financial Times, July 22 2019. See also “Businesses urge Bank of Israel to buy corporate bonds, stocks,” Jerusalem
Post, Mar. 18th 2020; “China's next stimulus step could be direct share purchases by its central bank,” Business
Insider Australia, by David Scutt, Jan. 8th 2019.
3 Equity constitutes about 20% of the Swiss National Bank’s (SNB) balance sheet. However, these are foreign stocks
such as Apple, Alphabet, Microsoft, and Amazon. The SNB’s foreign equities serve as a profit center and as an
additional channel for influencing the exchange rate. As another example, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority holds
up to 20% of its balance sheet in equities. It had used its Exchange Fund Ordinance to purchase US$15 billion worth
of stocks during the Asian Financial Crisis, but reduced its portfolio of Hong Kong equities to 5% of its reserves as
of 2003. In 2015, the People’s Bank of China countered a stock market drop by lending to China Securities Finance
Corporation, which then purchased stocks. Various governments purchase shares via sovereign wealth funds, public
sector pension plans, or to affect complete or partial nationalizations. However, central banks do not take part in
these policies and these purchases are not formally considered monetary policy interventions.
1

appears to time ETF purchases to occur on days when the market drops in the first trading session.
Success in the BOJ’s experiment would be evident (1) if its ETF purchases lifted share
prices relative to a market-weighted benchmark, (2) if higher share prices led firms to raise more
capital, and (3) if firms used this capital to undertake more investment. Empirical tests confirm
only the first two parts in this mechanism: Larger BOJ-backed ETF share purchases lift stock
prices and predict equity issuance. However, the third essential part of the mechanism appears
non-functional: Larger BOJ-backed ETF share purchases do not predict substantially increased
corporate investment, but rather predict increased holdings of cash and other current assets.
Since the policy shock is likely correlated with other factors that simultaneously affect
firms’ investment opportunity sets, our empirical analysis faces an important endogeneity concern.
Our identification strategy exploits a unique institutional feature of the program: the BOJ buys
stocks in proportions set by firms’ weights in a combination of three indexes: one price-weighted,
another free-float value-weighed TOPIX, and the third containing firms selected for “investor
appeal”. This introduces an exogenous firm-specific heterogeneity in BOJ demand for different
stocks that permits identification of the causal effects of central bank equity purchases on stock
returns and corporate responses.
Validating the first part of the mechanism, greater BOJ demand increases a stock’s price
significantly the same day. After a small partial reversal, the increase persists through the
subsequent week and month. The data associate total quarterly BOJ purchases worth 1% of a firm’s
total prior quarter assets with a 1% higher stock return that quarter.
Validating the second link, more BOJ purchases of a firm’s shares also correspond to
statistically and economically significant increases in that firm’s seasoned equity issuances.
However, despite a decrease in market leverage ratio due to increased market value of these firms,
there is no evidence of any increase in their debt issuance frequency/activity.
The third link— firms investing more after BOJ-backed ETF purchases increase their share
values and thereby reduce their costs of capital — is not economically significant. Instead, we
observe large increases in current assets, especially in cash and short-term investments. The BOJ
purchasing equity amounting to 1% of a firm’s lagged assets predicts a 2.28% increase in that
firm’s assets over the same quarter. However, our quarterly regressions associate only 8.5% of this
with increased capital investment. Instead, the increase in assets is overwhelmingly in short term
assets, with cash and short-term investments accounting for 53%. In annual regressions, the link
2