NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DECENTRALIZED MINING IN CENTRALIZED POOLS
Lin William Cong
Zhiguo He
Jiasun Li
Working Paper 25592
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25592
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2019, Revised January 2019
We thank Foteini Baldimtsi, Joseph Bonneau, Matthieu Bouvard, Bhagwan Chowdhry, Douglas
Diamond, Hanna Halaburda, Wei Jiang, Evgeny Lyandres, Ye Li, Richard Lowery, Maureen
O'Hara, George Panayotov, Fahad Saleh, Katrin Tinn, Liyan Yang, David Yermack, and Xin
Panayotov, Fahad Wang for helpful discussions, as well as Tianshu Lyu, Zhenping Wang, Xiao Yin, and Xiao
Zhang for excellent research assistance. We also thank seminar audiences at Ant Financial,
Chicago Booth, CKGSB, Cleveland Fed, Columbia GSB, Cornell, CUNY Baruch, Duke, George
Mason, HKU, University of Houston, University of Maryland, Michigan University, NYU,
Tsinghua PBC, Princeton, Rice University, Stanford, UNC (Microeconomic Theory), Yale, as
well as conference participants at Asian Development Bank Conference on FinTech, Becker
Friedman Institute Conference on Cryptocurrencies and Blockchains, CEPR Gerzensee ESSFM
Workshop, CIFFP, Credit and the Future of Banking Conference (Rigi Kaltbad), DataYes &
ACM KDD China FinTech AI Workshop, Econometric Society NA Meeting, Georgia State
FinTech Conference, Harvard CMSA Blockchain Conference, ISB Summer Conference,
Midwest Finance Association Meeting, Northern Finance Association Meeting, SAIF Summer
Institute, Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing at UC Berkeley, SFS Cavalcade Asia-
Pacific, and 2nd Toronto FinTech Conference for helpful comments and discussions. This
research was funded in part by the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation. The contents of this
publication are solely the responsibility of the authors. We are equally grateful for funding from
the Initiative on Global Markets, the Stigler Center, and the Center for Research in Security
Prices at the University of Chicago, and from the Multidisciplinary Research (MDR) Initiative in
Modeling, Simulation and Data Analytics at George Mason. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Lin William Cong, Zhiguo He, and Jiasun Li. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Decentralized Mining in Centralized Pools
Lin William Cong, Zhiguo He, and Jiasun Li
NBER Working Paper No. 25592
February 2019, Revised January 2019
JEL No. D43,G2,G22,L13,L44
ABSTRACT
The rise of centralized mining pools for risk sharing does not necessarily undermine the
decentralization required for permissionless blockchains: Each individual miner's cross-pool
diversification and endogenous fees charged by pools generally sustain decentralization, because
larger pools better internalize their externality on global hash rates, charge higher fees, attract
disproportionately fewer miners, and thus grow more slowly. Instead, mining pools as a financial
innovation escalate the arms race among competing miners and thus significantly increase the
energy consumption of proof-of-work-based consensus mechanisms. Empirical evidence from
Bitcoin mining supports our model predictions. The economic insights inform many other
blockchain protocols as well as the industrial organization of mainstream sectors with similar
characteristics but ambiguous prior findings.
Lin William Cong Jiasun Li
Cornell University George Mason University School of Business
Ithaca, NY 14853 4400 University Drive, MSN 5F5
will.cong@cornell.edu Fairfax, Virg 22030
United States
Zhiguo He jli29@gmu.edu
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
zhiguo.he@chicagobooth.edu

1 Introduction
Digitaltransactionstraditionallyrelyoncentralrecord-keepers,whoaretrustedtobehave
honestly and to be sophisticated enough to defend against cyber-vulnerabilities. Blockchains
instead can decentralize record-keeping, with the best-known application being the P2P
payment system Bitcoin (Nakamoto, 2008). The majority of (permissionless) blockchains
thus far rely on various forms proof-of-work (PoW) protocols, often known as “mining,” in
which independent computers (“miners”) dispersed all over the world spend resources and
compete repeatedly for the right to record new blocks of transactions, and the winner in each
round gets rewarded. Independent miners have incentives to honestly record transactions
because rewards are valid only if their records are endorsed by subsequent miners.
Compared to a centralized system, a blockchain has several advantages, including en-
hanced robustness to cyber-attacks or mechanical glitches from the removal of any “single
point of failure” (e.g., Equifax scandal, Economist, 2017). A blockchain is also presumably
less vulnerable to misbehaviors or censorships, as it shifts the trust on the stewardship of
a central book-keeper to the selfish economic incentives of a large number of competitive
miners. However, these advantages rely on adequate decentralization of the system, which is
thus far only a technological possibility rather than a guaranteed economic reality. Indeed,
while Nakamoto (2008) envisions perfect competition among independent computer nodes
dispersed across the world, many cryptocurrencies have over the years witnessed a rise of
“pooled mining” wherein miners partner together and share mining rewards, as opposed to
“solo mining” wherein individual miners bear all idiosyncratic risks. Furthermore, the bene-
fits of PoW blockchains come at high costs: practitioners and academics alike recognize well
how crypto-mining increasingly consumes energy and affects the climate and environment.1
Bitcoin mining provides an illustration: Mining pools grew from constituting only 5% of
globalhashrates(ameasureofcomputationpowerdevotedtomining)inJune2011toalmost
100% since late 2015, as shown in Figure 1. The rise of mining pools also coincides with
the explosive growth of global hash rates (plotted by the red line, in log scale). Meanwhile,
some pools gained significant shares from time to time, with the best-known example being
1AsofApril2018,aggregateelectricitydevotedtoBitcoinminingaloneexceeds60TWh,roughlythean-
nual energy consumed by Switzerland (Lee, 2018). The cryptocurrency forum Digiconomist provides similar
estimates, noting that mining a single block consumes enough energy to power more than 28 U.S. homes for
a full day (https://digiconomist.net/bitcoin-energy-consumption). Mora, Rollins, Taladay, Kantar, Chock,
Shimada, and Franklin (2018) project that if Bitcoin follows the adoption pattern of other technologies, it
could push global warming above 2 degrees Celsius within three decades. See also Rogers (2017).
1

Figure 1: The evolution of size percentages of Bitcoin mining pools
This graph plots (1) the growth of aggregate hash rates (right hand side vertical axis, in log scale) starting
from June 2011 to Dec 2018; and (2) the size evolution of all Bitcoin mining pools (left hand side vertical
axis) over this period, with pool size measured by each pool’s hash rates as a fraction of global hash rates.
Different colors indicate different pools, and white spaces indicate solo mining. Over time, Bitcoin mining
has been increasingly taken over by mining pools, but no pool ever seems to dominate the mining industry
for long. The pool hash rates data come from Bitcoinity and BTC.com, with details given in Section 5.
GHash.io that briefly reached over 51% of global hash rates in July 2014. Although such
cases call into question whether a blockchain system can stay decentralized, none of the large
pools emerged has snowballed into dominance for prolonged periods of time. Instead, Figure
1 reveals that pool sizes seem to exhibit a mean-reverting tendency, suggesting concurrent
economic forces suppressing over-centralization.
Motivated by these observations, we study the centralization and decentralization forces
in the evolution and industrial organization of mining pools, and relate them to the energy
consumption of mining as well as classic economic theories. Specifically, we model miners’
decision-making in acquiring and allocating hash rates into mining pools, together with the
competition among pool managers who charge fees for providing risk-sharing services. We
highlight two features of cryptocurrency mining that are key to understanding our results:
(i) It is easy for profit-driven miners to participate in multiple mining pools, an interesting
feature that contrasts with the traditional literature on labor and human capital in which
each individual typically only holds one job; (ii) As will be explained shortly, the dynamic
adjustment of mining difficulty required for ensuring a stable block production rate leads to
an arms race, creating a negative externality in which each individual’s acquisition of hash
2