NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE HIDDEN COSTS OF SECURING INNOVATION:
THE MANIFOLD IMPACTS OF COMPULSORY INVENTION SECRECY
Daniel P. Gross
Working Paper 25545
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25545
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2019, Revised April 2022
I thank Ashish Arora, Pierre Azoulay, Wes Cohen, Alberto Galasso, Shane Greenstein, Deepak
Hegde, Je Kuhn, Hong Luo, Fabian Waldinger, Martin Watzinger, numerous seminar and
conference audiences, three very thoughtful referees, the Associate Editor, and Editor Toby Stuart
for helpful comments. I am grateful to Alessandro Iaria, Carlo Schwarz, and Fabian Waldinger
for sharing code and to Je Kuhn for discussing the mechanics of semantic analysis. I also thank
Hayley Pallan, Greg Saldutte, and Senan Hogan-Hennessy for outstanding research assistance,
and Harvard Business School and the NBER Innovation Policy grant (2016) for nancial support.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Daniel P. Gross. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Hidden Costs of Securing Innovation: The Manifold Impacts of Compulsory Invention
Secrecy
Daniel P. Gross
NBER Working Paper No. 25545
February 2019, Revised April 2022
JEL No. N42,N72,O31,O32,O34,O38
ABSTRACT
One of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office’s (USPTO) most commanding powers is to compel
inventions into secrecy, withholding patent rights and prohibiting disclosure, to prevent
technology from leaking to foreign competitors. This paper studies the impacts of compulsory
secrecy on firm invention and the wider innovation system. In World War II, USPTO issued
secrecy orders to >11,000 patent applications, which it rescinded en masse at the end of the war.
Compulsory secrecy caused implicated firms to shift their patenting away from treated classes,
with effects persisting through at least 1960. It also restricted commercialization and impeded
follow-on innovation. Yet it appears it was effective at keeping sensitive technology out of public
view. The results provide insight into the effectiveness of compulsory secrecy as a regulatory
strategy and into the roles, and impacts, of formal intellectual property in the innovation system.
Daniel P. Gross
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
daniel.gross@duke.edu

Compulsory secrecy is one of the most imposing discretionary powers the U.S. Patent and Trade-
mark Office (USPTO) and other patent offices have today. Since World War II, USPTO has had
the legal authority to order firms and inventors to keep secret inventions in, and suspend examina-
tion of, patent applications whose disclosure it deems may pose risks to national security—not only
withholding intellectual property (IP) rights, but effectively impounding new invention. The pur-
pose of the policy is to protect domestic invention from (mis)appropriation by foreign competitors.
Compulsory secrecy is ordinarily invoked with careful discretion, but in a crisis the prospects for
its use grow, and increasing pressures of foreign technological competition have prompted recent
considerations of expanding its use to protect economic security.
Little is known about how compulsory secrecy affects innovation. Broad invocation is not unprece-
dented: in World War II, USPTO ordered over 11,000 patent applications into secrecy, covering
inventions as diverse as radar, cryptography, and synthetic materials. The vast majority of these
secrecyorderswererescindedwhenthewarended. Thescopeandscaleofthepolicy, anditsabrupt
conclusion, present a rare opportunity to study the effects of compulsory secrecy on innovation and
diffusion. Doing so can also offer insight on the value of patents and the ways in which holding up
formal IP can interfere with ordinary inventive and commercial activity.
In this paper, I study how this program affected individual firms and the wider innovation system.
I show that firms which received secrecy orders at high rates during the war shifted their patenting
away from technology areas in which they were affected, and some temporarily stopped patenting
altogether. This was particularly true for firms which were not involved in the wartime research
effort. The patents of these firms which were secret for long periods were also less likely to be cited
by future patents, and a deeper dive suggests this is the result of a missing generation of follow-on
invention. Evidence from a case study of one firm (Du Pont) suggests that secret inventions were
temporarily precluded from being commercialized. Collectively, these results point to a number of
potential costs of compulsory secrecy, distorting the direction of invention and undermining firm
investments in innovation. Yet the policy appears to have worked as intended: new terms in titles
of secret patents saw limited mention in patent text and the wider literature until after the war
ended, such that these repercussions should be evaluated against the seeming effectiveness of the
policy in keeping sensitive technological content out of public view.
Tounderstandtheseresults,itisusefultotakeastepbackandconsidertherolespatentsplayinthe
innovationecosystem,andhowcompulsorysecrecymightinterferewithitsregularfunctioning. The
patent system is designed to provide incentives for innovation by granting a temporary monopoly
1

on invention, which is predicated on patents granting, in exchange for disclosure. Exclusivity with
commercialopportunityallowfirmstoearnreturnsontheirresearchinvestment. Informationabout
new invention, conveyed in patent publications or otherwise, can clarify competitive positions and
delineate property rights, helps inventors build on prior art, and enables others to produce and sell
the invention when IP rights expire. Compulsory secrecy in the United States directly defies these
goals by holding up patent rights and forbidding disclosure.
The results of this paper illustrate what can happen when these functions are suppressed. Firms
caught in the crossfire might lose access to inventive inputs and opportunities to profit from their
investment, and reduce or reallocate research and development (R&D) investments accordingly.
Restrictionsondisclosureaffectfollow-oninnovation,whichcaninturnlimitcompetition(asecond,
indirect channel through which incentives for innovation might be suppressed). Though World War
II was an extraordinary time, unlike in Europe the domestic U.S. economy was still functioning.
The evidence is thus suggestive of the impacts a similar intervention may have in other crises or
even in regular times. It is not hard to imagine, for example, secrecy orders being used to protect
COVID-19 vaccine development, as they once were in wartime.
The evidence points to the private value of the rights to, and commercial opportunities for, inven-
tionswhichsecrecyordersessentiallyimpounded. Withoutexclusivity, letalonecommercialization,
the returns to R&D are often eradicated. In comparison to compulsory licensing, compulsory se-
crecy can be even more costly to firms, as it can foreclose the possibility of market entry for as
long as restrictions are in place—leaving firms in the interim with only internal applications as
opportunities to profit from their invention. Firms might even choose to avoid applying for patent
protection to preclude the risk of being compelled into secrecy. That said, the incidence is unlikely
to be uniform. Incumbent firms and firms that already rely on secrecy may stand to benefit from
compulsory secrecy if it protects them from competing innovation or harms rivals. Consistent with
this possibility, I show that large firms were relatively less affected.
This paper also speaks to the role of information in the functioning of the wider innovation system.
Agrowingliteratureexplorestheroleofpatentsinthisdomain, includingthroughincreasingaccess
to patent documents (Furman et al. 2021) and policy changes which accelerated patent publication
(Hegde et al. 2019), and even uses modern invention secrecy to argue for patent disclosure (de
Rassenfosse et al. 2020). Although these papers detect positive effects on local patenting, patent
citations, and licensing, these results are in tension with skepticism from legal scholars (e.g., Roin
2005,Fromer2009,Devlin2010), whopointoutthatmuchoftheinformationinpatentsisavailable
2