NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT AND PRODUCTIVE EFFICIENCY:
EVIDENCE FROM THE BIDDING AND RENEGOTIATION OF POWER CONTRACTS IN INDIA
Nicholas Ryan
Working Paper 25547
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25547
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2019
Thank you to Rahul Banerjee for sparking my interest in this topic. Thanks to Sushanta
Chatterjee for rich discussions and assistance in data collection. Thanks to Kevin Rowe, Hideto
John Mori and Ryo Tamaki for excellent Research Assistance. Thanks to Phil Haile for detailed
comments. All views and errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Nicholas Ryan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Contract Enforcement and Productive Efficiency: Evidence from the Bidding and Renegotiation
of Power Contracts in India
Nicholas Ryan
NBER Working Paper No. 25547
February 2019
JEL No. D44,K12,L94,O14,Q41
ABSTRACT
Weak contract enforcement may reduce the efficiency of investment in developing countries. I
study how contract enforcement affects efficiency in procurement auctions for the largest power
projects in India. I gather data on bidding and ex post contract renegotiation and find that the
renegotiation of contracts in response to cost shocks is widespread, despite that bidders are
allowed to index their bids to future costs like the price of coal. Connected firms choose to index
less of the value of their bids to coal prices and, through this strategy, expose themselves to cost
shocks to induce renegotiation. I use a structural model of bidding in a scoring auction to
characterize equilibrium bidding when bidders are heterogeneous both in cost and in the
payments they expect after renegotiation. The model estimates show that bidders offer power
below cost due to the expected value of later renegotiation. The model is used to simulate bidding
and efficiency with strict contract enforcement. Contract enforcement is found to be pro-
competitive. With no renegotiation, equilibrium bids would rise to cover cost, but markups
relative to total contract value fall sharply. Production costs decline, due to projects being
allocated to lower-cost bidders over those who expect larger payments in renegotiation.
Nicholas Ryan
Department of Economics
Yale University
P. O. Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
nicholas.ryan@yale.edu

Contract Enforcement and Productive Efficiency: Evidence
from the Bidding and Renegotiation of Power Contracts in India∗
Nicholas Ryan†
February 5, 2019
Abstract
Weak contract enforcement may reduce the efficiency of investment in developing coun-
tries. I study how contract enforcement affects efficiency in procurement auctions for the
largest power projects in India. I gather data on bidding and ex post contract renegotia-
tion and find that the renegotiation of contracts in response to cost shocks is widespread,
despite that bidders are allowed to index their bids to future costs like the price of coal.
Connected firms choose to index less of the value of their bids to coal prices and, through
this strategy, expose themselves to cost shocks to induce renegotiation. I use a structural
model of bidding in a scoring auction to characterize equilibrium bidding when bidders
are heterogeneous both in cost and in the payments they expect after renegotiation. The
modelestimatesshowthatbiddersofferpowerbelow costduetotheexpectedvalueoflater
renegotiation. The model is used to simulate bidding and efficiency with strict contract
enforcement. Contract enforcement is found to be pro-competitive. With no renegoti-
ation, equilibrium bids would rise to cover cost, but markups relative to total contract
value fall sharply. Production costs decline, due to projects being allocated to lower-cost
bidders over those who expect larger payments in renegotiation.
1 Introduction
There are many investments firms will make only if they can sign a contract to protect
their returns (Klein, Crawford and Alchian, 1978; Hart and Moore, 1990). Countries that
enforce contracts strictly therefore invest and produce more in industries that rely on such
relationship-specific investments (Acemoglu, Johnson and Mitton, 2009; Nunn, 2007).
Countries that enforce contracts imperfectly, to the contrary, may bear economics costs.
Thesizeandevenexistenceofthesecostsarenotobvious,though,sinceitishardtoknowhow
firms’ investment decisions respond to weak contracts. Suppose, for example, that some firms
areconnectedtothegovernmentandcanholdupthegovernmentorothercounterparties, and
∗Thank you to Rahul Banerjee for sparking my interest in this topic. Thanks to Sushanta Chatterjee for
rich discussions and assistance in data collection. Thanks to Kevin Rowe, Hideto John Mori and Ryo Tamaki
for excellent Research Assistance. Thanks to Phil Haile for detailed comments. All views and errors are my
own.
†Department of Economics, Yale University, Box 208269, New Haven, CT 06520-8269 (e-mail:
nicholas.ryan@yale.edu.)
1

thatthisholduppowerallowsthemtoinvestatalowerprice. Weakcontractenforcementwill
reduce competition and transfer rents to these connected firms. It may also have an economic
cost, if connected firms displace other firms that would—under strong contracts that leveled
the competitive field—be able to invest or produce more efficiently. Connected firms profit
from their connections (Fisman, 2001; Faccio, 2006). The mere fact that connected firms
profit, however, is not enough to establish an efficiency cost of weak contracts. It may be that
connected firms are just as efficient at investing and producing as other firms and their rents
are transfers.
This paper studies the efficiency costs of weak contract enforcement in the Indian power
sector. Power generation requires large and specific investments that in India were tradition-
ally made under complete public ownership and vertical integration. Structural reforms in
the 2000s moved the power generation segment from integration toward private investment
(Kumar and Chatterjee, 2012). As part of this reform, the government set up power procure-
ment auctions for state utilities to buy power from private companies that would invest in
building and running new plants.
Several features of these auctions make them a good setting to study how contract en-
forcement affects equilibrium rents and productive efficiency. First, because the regulatory
institutions in the power sector are new, the enforcement of power procurement contracts
is imperfect. Second, power remains a regulated sector, which means the renegotiation of
contracts set at auction must be recorded and is therefore observable. Third, the bids used
for these auctions are rich, and include not only a total price but also the separate parts that
make up each bid. With these bid parts, I show that it is possible from bidding strategies to
infer how much bidders anticipated contract renegotiation.
The auctions studied are also important in their own right. This mechanism, as the
main way states bought power from new plants after the structural reforms, contributed to
the rapid growth of private investment in the Indian power sector (Figure 1). The average
investment in these power projects is USD 553 million per plant and the largest projects of
this generation, so-called Ultra-Mega Power Plants, demand USD 2.5 billion of capital. I
calculate the total capacity procured through the auction mechanism studied to be 45% of
the generation capacity in India when the auction rules were put in place.
I gather a new data set on bidding, contracting, investment and contract renegotiation in
2