NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE TOTAL RISK PREMIUM PUZZLE
Òscar Jordà
Moritz Schularick
Alan M. Taylor
Working Paper 25653
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25653
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2019
This work is part of a larger project kindly supported by research grants from the European
Research Council (ERC) and the Institute for New Economic Thinking, and we are grateful for
this support. We are particularly thankful to Johannes Matschke and Sarah Quincy for
outstanding research assistance. We received helpful comments from Thomas Mertens. All errors
are our own. The views expressed herein are solely the responsibility of the authors and should
not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25653.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Òscar Jordà, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Total Risk Premium Puzzle
Òscar Jordà, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 25653
March 2019
JEL No. E44,G12,G15,N20
ABSTRACT
The risk premium puzzle is worse than you think. Using a new database for the U.S. and 15 other
advanced economies from 1870 to the present that includes housing as well as equity returns (to
capture the full risky capital portfolio of the representative agent), standard calculations using
returns to total wealth and consumption show that: housing returns in the long run are comparable
to those of equities, and yet housing returns have lower volatility and lower covariance with
consumption growth than equities. The same applies to a weighted total-wealth portfolio, and
over a range of horizons. As a result, the implied risk aversion parameters for housing wealth and
total wealth are even larger than those for equities, often by a factor of 2 or more. We find that
more exotic models cannot resolve these even bigger puzzles, and we see little role for limited
participation, idiosyncratic housing risk, transaction costs, or liquidity premiums.
Òscar Jordà Alan M. Taylor
Economic Research, MS 1130 Department of Economics and
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Graduate School of Management
San Francisco, CA 94105 University of California
and University of California, Davis One Shields Ave
oscar.jorda@sf.frb.org Davis, CA 95616-8578
and CEPR
Moritz Schularick and also NBER
University of Bonn amtaylor@ucdavis.edu
Department of Economics
Adenauerallee 24-42
53113 Bonn
Germany
and CEPR
moritz.schularick@uni-bonn.de

1 ntroduction
. I
If economics is galvanized by the raw conflict between pure theories and brute facts, then the battle
over the equity premium puzzle has arguably energized as much intellectual warfare as almost
any other empirical anomaly. Over four decades it has stood as a rebuke to many macro-financial
1
theories, and consumption-based asset pricing in particular, triggering an avalanche of research.
Thus far, the near-universal reaction has been to come up with more elaborate theories taking
themagnitudeofthepuzzleasgiven. Thispaperisdifferent. Webringnewevidencefromhistorical
data to this research agenda along three dimensions. First, international evidence from a wider
spectrum of advanced economies. Second, a longer time span that includes wars, financial and
currency crises, and other rare but dramatic events that greatly influence how one should think
about consumption risk. Finally, we bring in returns to housing, a large category of investable assets
for the representative consumer, getting us closer to a more accurate measure of the investor’s total
wealth portfolio returns and its relation to consumption growth. We focus on measurement and
how alternative theories fare against this new evidence.
Methodologically, the paper follows a long lineage. According to textbook theory, a risky asset
shouldearnariskpremium,anexcessreturnrelativetoasafeasset,whichdependsonthestatistical
properties of the risky return and the investor’s discount factor—more specifically the covariance of
1982
the two, as we recap below. As Shiller ( ) demonstrated, by deriving volatility bounds, if the
stochastic discount factor is derived from a standard power utility function, then the high excess
return on equities combined with a plausible risk aversion parameter would imply a discount factor
that was inadmissible as it was many times more volatile than could be generated by actual U.S.
2 1985
post-WW time-seriesdataonconsumption. MehraandPrescott( )workedinatwo-statemodel,
and reached a formulation which cast the result in a different light: given a plausible risk aversion
parameter and the measured consumption data, the excess return was inexplicably large, and they
2
attached to this conundrum its enduring name, the equity premium puzzle.
A huge literature has tried a variety of approaches to “solve” the puzzle. One major approach
has been to alter the consumption and return data fed into the model. For example, some narrow
the excess return or increase the covariance by various means such as choosing longer-duration safe
2
assets (U.S. bonds rather than bills), or considering longer spans of pre-WW U.S. economic history
1930
where negative skew from “rare disasters” (e.g., the s) change key statistical moments; some
introduce non-U.S. time series data to further address the arguably quite serious small-sample and
survivorship bias derived from studying only the equity market of the global capitalist hegemon
in its heyday. The other major approach has been to alter the model itself, specifically by adding
1 Articlestoonumeroustolistaddressthepoint. FormajorsurveysseeBreedenetal. (2015ab),Campbell
(1999;2005;2017),Cochrane(2008),CochraneandHansen(1992),andMehra(2008).
2 On the history of thought, Cochrane (2008, 261–266) notes that many papers from that era found
unrealisticallyhighriskaversionwasneededtofitconsumption-basedmodelstothedata,e.g.,Grossmanand
Shiller(1981),Shiller(1982),HansenandSingleton(1983),aswellasMehraandPrescott(1985). Cochrane
alsooffersaninterestingdiscussionofwhythelatterpapergotmuchmorecreditthantheothers.
1

“exotic”preferenceassumptionstoderivethestochasticdiscountfactor,andtoamplifythenecessary
moments to achieve a better fit with a plausible level of risk aversion. For example, some impose
habitsinconsumption, sothatchangesare penalizedmoreheavilyandunderlying marginal utilities
become more volatile; some impose recursive preferences and long-run risks to growth.
The central contribution of this paper is to bring insights from the workhorse models to bear
again once we re-measure returns to the hypothetical representative investor’s total portfolio
including both equities and housing. Note that to keep all else equal, our benchmark is the standard
representative agent model. In that model, the equilibrium for the agent is, ipso facto, a buy-and-
hold, no-trade equilibrium. We take no stand on whether this is the right model of the world, which
is a different discussion. Of course, in reality key assumptions fail: assets trade, transactions costs
intrude, etc. But this is true for equities as well as housing, and we shall take some time to ponder
these issues even if they must be left to a different paper. Rather, our aim is to ask how well this
widely-used canonical model works once returns to wealth are properly measured to include a
proxy for total wealth that includes the hitherto ignored role of housing.
We make that critical but arduous correction and arrive at a striking conclusion. We rely on a
15 1870
new database for the U.S. and other advanced economies, from to the present, including
total returns on housing as well as equities (Jorda`, Knoll, Kuvshinov, Schularick, and Taylor,
forthcoming). We do standard calculations on returns and consumption and show that housing
returnsarecomparabletothoseofequities,andyethousingreturnshaveevenlowercovariancewith
consumptiongrowththanequities. Thesamealsoholdsforatotalwealthportfolio,andoverarange
of horizons. In other words, the total risk premium puzzle is even bigger: The implied risk aversion
parameters for housing wealth and total wealth are considerably larger than those for equities alone,
2
often by a factor of or more. The total risk premium puzzle is even more pronounced than the
equity risk premium puzzle, given the implausibly large degree of risk aversion implied by the data.
2
The outline of the paper is as follows. Section presents summary data to fix facts and set the
3
scene. Section reviews the key literature on equity risk premiums, while bringing in studies of
4
housing risk premiums that use the standard asset pricing framework. Section reviews our new
5
data on housing and equity returns. Section presents our key results: asset pricing moments for
equities, housing, and the total portfolio are computed, and implied risk aversion parameters are
6
derived. Section shows that several well-known “exotic” variants of the benchmark consumption-
based asset pricing model, which partly resolve the equity premium puzzle, struggle to explain
the housing and total risk premium puzzles uncovered here. This section also discusses potential
deviations from the canonical representative agent model such as limited participation, transaction
costs, idiosyncratic risk, and liquidity, how these factors might not much mitigate the puzzles we
7
uncover. Section concludes, and poses a question for future research: if asset pricing research has
struggled for decades with equity-return implied risk aversion parameters too large for comfort,
how can we proceed now, confronted with housing-return and total-return implied risk aversion
2 3
parameters that are or times larger still?
Our paper opens a new front in the risk premium conflict, with challenging findings for asset
2