Risk Management in Financial Institutions
Adriano A. Rampini, S. Viswanathan, and Guillaume Vuillemey
NBER Working Paper No. 25698
March 2019, Retracted
JEL No. D92,E44,G21,G32
ABSTRACT
The authors have retracted this paper and the subsequent version that was published in the April
2020 issue of The Journal of Finance (JF). A replication study that will be, or has, been published
in the JF finds that the replication code provided in the supplementary information section of the
article does not reproduce some of the central findings reported in the article. Upon
reexamination of the work, the authors confirmed that the replication code does not fully
reproduce the published results and were unable to provide revised code that does. Therefore, the
authors conclude that the published results are not reliable and that the responsible course of
action is to retract the article. Further information may be found at https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/jofi.13064. The authors deeply regret the damage this
caused to the scholarly community. The specific contributions of the authors to the article were as
follows: the first and second author provided the theoretical hypothesis; all three authors jointly
designed the empirical approach and identification strategy; the third author constructed and
handled the data, implemented the empirical analysis, and provided the empirical results as well
as the replication data and code. The third author states that the original data and code that
produced the published results were lost. The first and second author were not notified of the loss
of the original data and code at the time it occurred and had no prior knowledge of the issues with
the replication data and code provided to the journal.
Adriano A. Rampini Guillaume Vuillemey
Duke University HEC Paris
Fuqua School of Business Finance Department 1
100 Fuqua Drive rue de la Libération
Durham, NC 27708 78 351 Jouy-en-Josas
and NBER France
rampini@duke.edu vuillemey@hec.fr
S. Viswanathan
Duke University
Fuqua School of Business
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
viswanat@duke.edu