NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
HOW MONETARY POLICY SHAPED THE HOUSING BOOM
Itamar Drechsler
Alexi Savov
Philipp Schnabl
Working Paper 25649
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25649
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2019
We thank Pauline Liang for excellent research assistance and seminar participants at Chicago
Booth and Harvard Business School. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Itamar Drechsler, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Monetary Policy Shaped the Housing Boom
Itamar Drechsler, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl
NBER Working Paper No. 25649
March 2019
JEL No. E43,E52,G21,G23
ABSTRACT
Between 2003 and 2006, the Federal Reserve raised rates by 4.25%. Yet it was precisely during
this period that the housing boom accelerated, fueled by rapid growth in mortgage lending. There
is deep disagreement about how, or even if, monetary policy impacted the boom. Using
heterogeneity in banks' exposures to the deposits channel of monetary policy, we show that Fed
tightening induced a large reduction in banks' deposit funding, leading them to contract new on-
balance-sheet lending for home purchases by 26%. However, an unprecedented expansion in
privately-securitized loans, led by nonbanks, largely offset this contraction. Since privately-
securitized loans are neither GSE-insured nor deposit-funded, they are run-prone, which made the
mortgage market fragile. Consistent with our theory, the re-emergence of privately-securitized
mortgages has closely tracked the recent increase in rates.
Itamar Drechsler Philipp Schnabl
Wharton School Stern School of Business
University of Pennsylvania New York University
3620 Locust Walk 44 West Fourth Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104 New York, NY 10012
and NBER and NBER
idrechsl@wharton.upenn.edu schnabl@stern.nyu.edu
Alexi Savov
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-80
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
asavov@stern.nyu.edu

I Introduction
Ten years after the financial crisis, an unresolved question remains: what role, if any, did
monetary policy play in the housing boom that precipitated the crisis? This question has
been the subject of an intense debate. On one side, Taylor (2007, 2010) argues that the Fed
kept rates “too low for too long” during the housing boom, and that this led to excessive
investment in housing. On the other side, Bernanke (2010a,b) argues that monetary policy
was not too loose during this period, and that the real culprit was a decline in mortgage
lending standards that accompanied the shift from traditional bank lending to securitized
lending. He emphasizes in particular the role of private-label securitization (PLS), which
did not conform to the stricter lending standards of the government-sponsored enterprises
(GSEs).
Underlying this debate is an empirical ambiguity: even if rates were too low in the
early years of the housing boom, the peak of the boom coincided with a period of Fed
tightening. Between 2003 and 2006 the Fed raised rates by 4.25%, a substantial hike on
par with previous cycles. Yet surprisingly, PLS lending accelerated sharply just as the Fed
shifted to a tightening stance in mid 2003. Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2017)
call this turning point “the mortgage rate conundrum.” Figure 1 reproduces one of their
main figures (also found in Mian and Sufi 2018), and overlays it with a measure of the
stance of monetary policy. Specifically, the figure plots the PLS share of securitized issuance
against the one-year Treasury rate from 1996 to 2018. It is clear from the figure that the
acceleration of the PLS market from its previous low level coincided with the shift to Fed
tightening after 2003. From then on, the two series track each other closely even if we ignore
their synchronous collapse in 2008. In particular, we highlight that the PLS market has
recently reemerged just as the Fed has been raising rates.
These observations raise the possibility that Fed tightening between 2003 and 2006 con-
tributed to the shift to PLS lending. In fact, this is a prediction of the “deposits channel
of monetary policy” of Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl (2017b) (hereafter, DSS). Under the
deposits channel, Fed tightening allows banks to increase the profits they earn on deposits by
charging higher deposit spreads (i.e., by keeping their deposit rates low). This induces some
1

deposits to be withdrawn. And since deposits are by far the largest source of bank funding,
and are valued for their unique safety and stability, the contraction in deposits leads banks
to contract their loan portfolios. Long-term loans such as mortgage loans are particularly af-
fected as it depends heavily on stable deposit funding (Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl 2017a).
Since bank-held loans serve mostly the non-conforming segment of the mortgage market, i.e.,
the loans that cannot be bought and guaranteed by the GSEs, their only alternative source
of credit is the market for PLS. This could explain why the mortgage market shifted to
PLS lending as the Fed tightened. Moreover, if the demand for PLS was strong during this
period, then this shift could explain why Fed tightening did not significantly curb mortgage
lending during the housing boom.
In this paper, we use the lens of the deposits channel to examine whether Fed tightening
impacted mortgage lending during the housing boom. We find that it did. First, banks
reacted to Fed tightening by sharply increasing deposit spreads, and this led to a 12.4%
reduction in the stock of deposits.1 Second, banks partly absorbed this reduction by con-
tracting their yearly flow of new portfolio mortgage lending by 25.9%. Third, PLS lending
largely offset this contraction, led by growth among nonbank mortgage originators (here-
after, nonbanks).2 We estimate that Fed tightening induced a 10.2 percentage point increase
in the PLS share of all non-GSE mortgage lending (inclusive of banks’ portfolio lending).
This is roughly the entire increase in the PLS share over this period. And fourth, with PLS
lending offsetting the contraction in bank portfolio lending, total non-GSE mortgage lending
declined by just 4.4%. Thus, Fed tightening had only a modest impact on total lending, even
as it induced large shifts in how mortgages were originated and funded. In particular, the
shift from stable deposit funding to run-prone capital markets funding exposed the housing
sector to a credit freeze like the one that arrived in 2007.
Our results thus suggest a high degree of substitutability between bank portfolio lending
1ThisisconsistentwiththefindingsofDSSoveralongersample. Sinceourfocusisonthehousingboom,
we zoom in on the period from 2003 to 2006 and examine the impact on the mortgage market.
2Nonbank lenders, also referred to as “shadow banks,” are non-depository institutions outside the scope
of traditional banking regulation (Buchak, Matvos, Piskorski, and Seru 2018a,b). Lacking a large balance
sheet, nonbanks securitized all of their mortgage loans, selling them off to asset-backed commercial paper
conduits, collateralized debt obligations, and structured investment vehicles. These in turn were funded by
a range of institutions including money market mutual funds, pension funds, and insurance companies. See
Adrian and Ashcraft (2016) for further discussion.
2