NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
TRADING COSTS AND INFORMATIONAL EFFICIENCY
Eduardo Dávila
Cecilia Parlatore
Working Paper 25662
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25662
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2019
We would like to thank comments from Fernando Álvarez, Snehal Banerjee, Gadi Barlevy,
Bruno Biais, Philip Bond, Markus Brunnermeier, Eric Budish, James Dow, Emmanuel Farhi,
Simon Gervais, Piero Gottardi, Joel Hasbrouck, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Stephen Morris, Thomas
Philippon, Adriano Rampini, Tom Sargent, Alp Simsek, Laura Veldkamp, Venky
Venkateswaran, Xavier Vives, Brian Weller, Wei Xiong, and Jeff Zwiebel, as well as our
discussants Kerry Back, Bradyn Breon-Drish, Liyan Yang, and Haoxiang Zhu. We would also
like to thank seminar participants at NYU, 2016 London FTG Summer Conference, SED, MIT,
UCSB LAEF Conference, 2017 AFA, Duke, ASU-Sonoran Winter Conference, Princeton,
Stanford, Macro-Finance Society, and FIRS. Yangjue Han, Luke Min, Josh Mohanty, and
Ryungha Oh provided excellent research assistance. Financial support from the CGEB at NYU
Stern is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Eduardo Dávila and Cecilia Parlatore. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Trading Costs and Informational Efficiency
Eduardo Dávila and Cecilia Parlatore
NBER Working Paper No. 25662
March 2019
JEL No. D82,D83,G14
ABSTRACT
We study the effect of trading costs on information aggregation and acquisition in financial
markets. For a given precision of investors' private information, an irrelevance result emerges
when investors are ex-ante identical: price informativeness is independent of the level of trading
costs. When investors are ex-ante heterogeneous, anything goes, and a change in trading costs can
increase or decrease price informativeness, depending on the source of heterogeneity. Our results
are valid under quadratic, linear, and fixed costs. Through a reduction in information acquisition,
trading costs reduce price informativeness. We discuss how our results inform the policy debate
on financial transaction taxes/Tobin taxes.
Eduardo Dávila
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
edavila@stern.nyu.edu
Cecilia Parlatore
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY, 10012
cparlato@stern.nyu.edu

1 Introduction
There are costs associated with trading in financial markets, and the magnitude of these costs varies
over time and across space. For instance, technological advances have dramatically reduced the cost of
trading in many financial markets over the last decades. On the flip side, taxes on financial transactions
that would increase the cost of trading at the margin along the lines of Tobin’s proposal (Tobin,
1978) are periodically the subject of heated debates and sometimes implemented in practice.1 Given
that financial markets play an essential role in generating and aggregating dispersed information, it is
natural to study whether changes in the level of trading costs make financial markets better or worse
at aggregating information. It is also important to explore whether the ability to trade more or less
cheaply encourages or discourages information acquisition in financial markets. In this paper, we seek
to provide a systematic answer to these questions by formally studying the implications of trading costs
for information aggregation and information acquisition in financial markets.
In our model, investors trade for two reasons. First, investors trade on private information, after
receivingaprivatesignalaboutassetpayoffs. Thesetradescontributetomakingpricesinformativeabout
asset payoffs. Second, investors also trade on the realization of a privately known prior, which is random
across the population of investors and uncertain in the aggregate. The combination of trading based on
private information with a non-payoff related source of aggregate uncertainty makes prices only partially
informative about asset payoffs. The fact that prices are partially informative about asset payoffs forces
anyone interested in recovering the information aggregated by asset prices to solve a filtering problem.2
A key determinant of this filtering problem is price informativeness, formally defined as the precision of
the unbiased signal about asset payoffs revealed by asset prices. In this paper, we formally characterize
how price informativeness, which captures how good asset prices are at aggregating information, varies
with the level of trading costs.
Twomainresultsemergefromourinitialanalysiswheninvestors’precisionchoicesarepredetermined
and trading costs are quadratic. Our first main result is an irrelevance theorem that applies when
investors are ex-ante homogeneous. We show that, for a given precision of investors’ private signals,
price informativeness is independent of the level of trading costs. The logic behind our main result is
elementary and intuitive. The effect of trading costs on how prices aggregate information is a function
of how the relevant signal-to-noise ratio contained in asset prices is affected. For example, an increase in
trading costs necessarily reduces the amount of information based trading, reducing the informational
content of prices. However, this increase in trading costs also reduces the amount of non-payoff relevant
trading (due to investors’ priors in our case), reducing the noise component of asset prices. When
investors are ex-ante identical, the ratio of these two trading motives remains constant as trading costs
change, leaving the aggregate signal-to-noise ratio unchanged, yielding the irrelevance result.3
1SeeColliardandHoffmann(2017)andJinghanCai,JibaoHe,WenxiJiangandWeiXiong(2017),whoprovideevidence
on the consequences of introducing transaction taxes during the recent experiences of France and China, respectively.
2The exact nature of the non-payoff related source of aggregate uncertainty (“noise”) is not essential for our results. In
theOnlineAppendix,wederiveourmainresultsinamodelinwhichwesubstituteinvestors’priorsforhedgingneedsthat
areuncertainintheaggregateasthesecondsourceoftrading. Formultiplereasonsthatwehighlightthroughoutthetext,
our leading formulation is the most workable.
3Like other irrelevance results, e.g., Modigliani and Miller (1958), our irrelevance result is pedagogical in nature. Part
2

Our second main result is a characterization of how trading costs affect price informativeness when
investorsareex-anteheterogeneous. Weshowthatanything-goesoutsideofthehomogeneitybenchmark,
since the sign of the relation between changing trading costs and price informativeness is ambiguous. We
identify the cross-sectional covariance of relative demand sensitivities to information and noise with the
overall demand sensitivity to trading costs as the key endogenous object that determines how trading
costsaffectpriceinformativeness. Anincreaseintradingcostsdecreases(increases)priceinformativeness
when the investors who trade relatively more (less) aggressively on their private information also have
an overall demand that is more sensitive to trading costs.
While our characterization in term of endogenous objects is valid in general, we explicitly study
how price informativeness reacts to changes in trading costs when investors differ along a single
dimension. First, we show that when investors differ in the precision of the private signals about the
fundamental, price informativeness decreases with trading costs. Intuitively, better informed investors
aredisproportionatelymoreresponsivetoprivateinformationbutalsomoreresponsiveoveralltotrading
costs, due to their overall lower perceived risk. Therefore, an increase in trading costs disproportionately
reduces the informed trades, reducing price informativeness. Second, we show that when investors differ
in the precision of their prior, price informativeness increases with trading costs. Intuitively, investors
with tighter priors are more responsive to the realization of the non-payoff relevant component of prices
and also more responsive overall to trading costs, due to their overall lower perceived risk. Therefore,
an increase in trading costs disproportionately reduces the non-payoff relevant trades, increasing price
informativeness. Finally, we show that trading costs do not modify price informativeness when investors
are heterogeneous in their risk aversion. Intuitively, in our framework, the cross-sectional distribution of
relative demand sensitivities to information and noise is not affected by investors’ risk aversion, leaving
price informativeness unchanged.
Folkwisdom oftenassociates hightrading costswith low price informativeness. Our two mainresults
overturn this logic in two different ways. First, we show that under ex-ante homogeneity, changes in
trading costs will not affect the ability of financial markets to aggregate information at all. Our result
emphasizes that not only informed trades will be reduced when trading costs are higher, but that also
tradesthatcontributetomakingthepricenoisywillbereducedtoo. Second, weshowthatheterogeneity
among investors is necessary to make trading costs affect price informativeness. In particular, we show
that it is possible to generate an ambiguous relation between the level of trading costs and price
informativeness merely by considering one-dimensional heterogeneity. Our results highlight that the
form in which investors are heterogeneous is also essential to understand the relation between trading
costs and price informativeness.
Next, we illustrate how trading costs affect price informativeness in the context of four different
applications. These results play a dual role. First, the specific applications allow us to model several
scenarios of practical relevance. We consider environments meant to capture institutional and retail
investors, informed and uninformed investors, elastic noise traders, and classic noise traders. Second,
we use the applications to illustrate how the relation between trading costs and informativeness is
of our contribution lies on identifying the set of assumptions (investor homogeneity and exogenous information precision)
that must be violated for trading costs to affect price informativeness.
3