NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
STRESS TESTING NETWORKS:
THE CASE OF CENTRAL COUNTERPARTIES
Richard B. Berner
Stephen G. Cecchetti
Kermit L. Schoenholtz
Working Paper 25686
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25686
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2019
Berner is Executive in Residence and Adjunct Professor, NYU Stern School of Business, and former
Director of the Office of Financial Research; Cecchetti is Rosen Family Chair in International Finance,
Brandeis International Business School, Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research,
and Research Fellow, Centre for Economic Policy Research; Schoenholtz is Henry Kaufman Professor
of the History of Financial Institutions and Markets, NYU Stern School of Business, and Director
of the Stern Center for Global Economy and Business. We would like to thank Robert Engle, Richard
Haynes, Til Schuermann, and Bruce Tuckman for helpful discussions; and the NYU Stern Volatility
Lab for providing firm-level SRISK data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25686.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2019 by Richard B. Berner, Stephen G. Cecchetti, and Kermit L. Schoenholtz. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Stress Testing Networks: The Case of Central Counterparties
Richard B. Berner, Stephen G. Cecchetti, and Kermit L. Schoenholtz
NBER Working Paper No. 25686
March 2019
JEL No. G18,G23,G28,G32
ABSTRACT
Stress tests applied to individual institutions are an important tool for evaluating financial resilience.
However, financial systems are typically complex, heterogeneous and rapidly changing, raising questions
about the adequacy of conventional tests. In this paper, we interpret the current stress test practice
from a network perspective, highlighting central counterparties (CCPs) as an example of a critical
network hub. Networks that include CCPs involve deep and broad interconnections, making stress
testing a challenging task. We analyze supplementing both private and supervisory CCP stress tests
with a high-frequency indicator constructed from a market-based estimate of the conditional capital
shortfall (SRISK) of the CCP’s clearing members. Applying our measure to two large CCPs, we analyze
how they can transmit and amplify shocks across borders, conditional on the exhaustion of prefunded
resources. Our results highlight how the network created by central clearing can act as an important
transmission mechanism for shocks emanating from Europe.
Richard B. Berner Kermit L. Schoenholtz
NYU Stern School of Business NYU Stern School of Business
44 West 4th St Department of Economics
New York, NY 10021 44 West 4th Street
rberner@stern.nyu.edu Suite 7-89
New York, NY 10012
Stephen G. Cecchetti kschoenh@stern.nyu.edu
Brandeis University
International Business School
415 South Street
Waltham MA 02453
and NBER
cecchetti@brandeis.edu

Berner, Cecchetti & Schoenholtz Stress Testing Networks March 2019
I. Introduction
Complex and diverse links among financial market participants across financial activities and borders are
a defining characteristic of the modern financial system. Indeed, they are what make it a system, rather
than merely a collection of individual firms and markets. Connections can be direct, indirect, or both. For
example, firms are directly connected through mutual counterparty exposures and indirectly connected
to other firms who are counterparties of their counterparties. Similarly, firms have indirect linkages
through holdings of correlated portfolios of assets and through common funding and resolution
mechanisms.
Interconnectedness creates both economic benefits and financial vulnerabilities. The process of financial
intermediation can be simple, but to satisfy client needs, firms may innovate, creating new products, or
connecting to specialized firms to obtain them. The rapid growth of securitization and derivatives
markets before the crisis was a good example. The resulting elaborate division of labor among suppliers
reduced the costs of intermediation and helped to diversify or share risks. Similarly, other services
provide the processing required for completing financial transactions.
The diversity created by interconnections can add to financial system resilience. As then-Fed Chair Janet
Yellen noted in 2013, the more complete is the network of interconnections, the more resilient it may
be: “The principle behind this result is familiar and basic to economics: Diversification reduces risk and
improves stability.”
However, interconnections can also act as channels for transmitting and amplifying shocks. Liquidity or
credit shocks in one part of the financial system may spread to other parts, resulting in runs and fire
sales. In addition to being more complex, interconnected systems or networks tend to be more opaque.
The combination can blind market participants to the nature and extent of exposures and can trigger
individually rational but collectively destabilizing behavior, amplifying the effects of an initial shock.
More concentrated, highly interconnected systems with a few key players can be particularly vulnerable
to shocks unless these institutions are highly resilient. Even where direct linkages are sparse, common
exposures can generate herding, amplifying shocks.
Two aspects of interconnectedness illustrate these benefits and costs. First, linkages in networks for
payments, clearing, and settlement offer clear benefits for efficiency and risk management. Second,
heterogeneous networks that operate across jurisdictions with different laws and regulatory
frameworks can distort competition among market participants.
Analyzing and monitoring interconnectedness, and the benefits and vulnerabilities it creates, requires a
systemwide, granular approach. Researchers suggest two broad methodologies for addressing this
challenge. One relies on estimation of models from market price data and perhaps some details on
quantities. Such a non-network approach relies on the validity of the model and its applicability to stress
events. Examples include the development of so-called cross-sectional measures like CoVaR, the default
insurance premium (DIP), marginal expected shortfall, and SRISK. The other approach starts with
mapping the network and then uses various graph-theoretic tools to assess the strength of transmission
mechanisms through both direct and indirect exposures.1
1 See Kara, Tian and Yellen (2015) for a taxonomy of these two approaches.
1/29

Berner, Cecchetti & Schoenholtz Stress Testing Networks March 2019
Analysis of interconnectedness is critical for policy judgments. Equally important, researchers and
policymakers need detailed, consistent, timely data on counterparty exposures (including derivatives
transactions) to assess and monitor interconnectedness. Challenges remain in collecting granular data,
in assuring the confidentiality and security of those data, and in developing methodologies to
reconstruct the full network from partial information, when full data are unavailable. In addition,
analysts necessarily customize network analysis to the special characteristics of each financial network,
including its topology, the heterogeneity of its participants, and the speed with which it can become
vulnerable.
Central counterparties (CCPs) are arguably the most interconnected of all financial institutions. Indeed,
they have a host of counterparties, some of which also are very large and interconnected, and some of
which are highly leveraged. It is relatively straightforward to map these connections, making them a
natural object for applying network analysis. CCPs also conduct an enormous volume of transactions and
may provide critical services for which there are no short-run substitutes. Hence, the study of these
financial market utilities is essential for assessing and securing financial stability: What makes CCPs a
source of systemic vulnerability? How might we determine the potential for these network hubs to
transmit and amplify shocks? How can we mitigate the vulnerability?
Following this introduction, we start with a description of stress testing, including a discussion of why it
is such a valuable tool for determining financial system resilience. We then move to a discussion of the
topology of networks and the challenge of testing their fragility. Finally, we turn to CCPs, critical nodes in
numerous, highly interconnected financial networks. After discussing the characteristics of CCPs, we
suggest a metric for assessing the extent to which they would likely transmit and amplify shocks. Unlike
most studies of CCP resilience that focus on the adequacy of pre-funded resources, we consider the
impact on the financial system in the event that these resources run out.
Our customized CCP network risk measure starts with SRISK—an estimate of the capital shortfall
following a large decline in the global equity market—of a CCP’s clearing members (CMs). We analyze an
index based on a weighted sum of each CM’s SRISK as a measure of the degree to which the CCP adds to
the fragility of the system. Not surprisingly, that contribution depends on the level of capital in the
system. Applying a version of this index each to the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) and to the
London Clearing House (LCH) allows us to draw two conclusions. First, we confirm that they would likely
come under stress simultaneously, as many of the CMs of the CME and LCH are the same. Second, our
results reveal that the U.S.-domiciled CME currently has substantial exposure to European banks. As a
result, an important source of fragility in these well-defined networks emanates from the relatively low
capitalization (relative to the likely losses following a significant global shock) of European banks.
2/29