NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECTS OF INCOME TRANSPARENCY ON WELL-BEING:
EVIDENCE FROM A NATURAL EXPERIMENT
Ricardo Perez-Truglia
Working Paper 25622
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25622
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2019, Revised September 2019
Thanks to Ipsos MMI for providing access to the survey data. Thanks to Ottar Hellevik for all his
help with this study. Thanks to Erzo F.P. Luttmer and Johanna Mollerstrom for providing
excellent discussions. Thanks to the editor and reviewers for their invaluable input. I also
benefited from the feedback from several colleagues as well as seminar discussants at Harvard,
Princeton, Yale, Universidad de San Andres, LMU Munich, ITAM, CIDE, Universidad Catolica
de Chile, Universidad de la Republica, RAND, the BESH Research Symposium, the AEA Annual
Meetings, the USC Happiness Conference and the NBER Summer Institute. Diego Marino Fages
provided outstanding research assistance. The first draft of this paper circulated in August 2015
under the title “Measuring the Value of Self- and Social-Image.” The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Ricardo Perez-Truglia. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Effects of Income Transparency on Well-Being: Evidence from a Natural Experiment
Ricardo Perez-Truglia
NBER Working Paper No. 25622
February 2019, Revised September 2019
JEL No. D03,D31,D60,D83,I31,Z10
ABSTRACT
In 2001, Norwegian tax records became easily accessible online, allowing everyone in the
country to observe the incomes of everyone else. According to the income comparisons model,
this change in transparency can widen the gap in well-being between richer and poorer
individuals. We test this hypothesis using survey data from 1985–2013. Using multiple
identification strategies, we show that the higher transparency increased the gap in happiness
between richer and poorer individuals by 29%, and it increased the life satisfaction gap by 21%.
We provide suggestive evidence that some, although probably not all, of this effect relates to
changes in self-perceptions of relative income. We provide back-of-the-envelope estimates of the
importance of income comparisons, and discuss implications for the ongoing debate on
transparency policies.
Ricardo Perez-Truglia
Anderson School of Management
University of California, Los Angeles
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
ricardo.truglia@anderson.ucla.edu

1 Introduction
The income comparisons model proposes that individual well-being largely depends on how that
individual’s income compares to the incomes of others (Luttmer, 2005). This is a fundamen-
tal aspect of individual preferences, yet no consensus exists about the importance of income
comparisons.1 In this study, we offer novel evidence based on a unique natural experiment: in
2001, Norwegian tax records became easily accessible online, allowing everyone in the country
to observe the incomes of everyone else quickly and easily. We test the hypothesis that, consis-
tent with the model of income comparisons, increased income transparency widens the gap in
well-being between richer and poorer individuals.
Tax records have been public in Norway since the nineteenth century, but they have not
always been easily accessible. Before 2001, one had to make a formal request in person at the
tax agency to see someone else’s income. In the fall of 2001, the Norwegian media digitized tax
records and created websites that allowed any individual with Internet access to search anyone’s
tax records. Every Norwegian was one click away from finding out the incomes of everyone else
in the country.
We use various data sources to show the massive popularity of these online tax lists. During
the busiest week of the year, these websites were more popular than YouTube. We also show
that, rather than using the tax lists for legitimate goals (e.g., uncovering corruption or tax
evasion), mostusedthewebsitestosnooponfriends, relatives, andsocialcontacts. Forexample,
users could create leaderboards showing the highest and lowest earners among their Facebook
friends or maps showing the incomes of everyone living around a specific location. This behavior
became so pervasive that the Norwegian media dubbed it “tax porn.”
Because income transparency facilitates income comparisons, it can widen the gap in well-
being between richer and poorer individuals. Poorer individuals often lose this game of income
comparisons. For example, if they learn that they are poorer than they thought (Cruces, Perez-
Truglia, and Tetaz, 2013), it can lower their self-esteem. If their social contacts learn how poor
they are, it can reduce their social-esteem. In contrast, richer individuals often benefit from
this game. Learning that they are richer than they thought can boost their self-esteem. And
being looked up by their social contacts can boost their social-esteem.2
To test this hypothesis, we measure the effect of the increase in transparency on the gra-
dient between subjective well-being and individual income rank (hereinafter referred to as the
1This question is important to understand preferences more deeply, and also due to its implications for
income taxation and other policies. For example, income comparisons can create positional externalities that
reduce social welfare and could be corrected with taxes (e.g., Boskin and Sheshinski, 1978; Frank, 1985).
2Different individuals may react differently to the increased transparency. For example, while some rich
individuals may feel happy that their neighbors caught a glimpse of their income, others may feel uneasy about
the same situation (e.g., if they do not feel deserving of their high income). In this study, we can only measure
which of these different mechanisms dominates on average.
2

happiness-income gradient). We use survey data from Norway from 1985–2013 that includes
the two most widely used measures of subjective well-being: happiness and life satisfaction. De-
spite some limitations of these subjective measures, evidence suggests that they contain useful
information about well-being. For example, life satisfaction and happiness have been shown to
be significantly correlated with objective measures of well-being and with decision utility (Di
Tella, MacCulloch, and Oswald, 2003; Benjamin, Heffetz, Kimball, and Rees-Jones, 2012).
Consistent with the hypothesis of income comparisons, we show that the 2001 income trans-
parency change led to a 29% increase in the happiness-income gradient (p-value=0.005) and a
21% increase in the life satisfaction-income gradient (p-value=0.026).
We use multiple strategies to identify the causal effect of the transparency change of 2001.
First, we conduct an event-study analysis and find that the happiness-income gradient stayed
constant in the years before the change, increased in 2001, and persisted at the higher level
during the subsequent twelve years of higher transparency.
Second, weidentifyindividualswhoweremostlikelytobeexposedtotheeffectsofonlinetax
lists, based on observable characteristics that predict Internet access. We show that, between
1985 and 2000, the happiness-income gradient remained stable for individuals with low and high
Internet access. After 2001, the happiness-income gradient remained at the pre-2001 level for
individuals with lower Internet access but increased substantially and persisted at the higher
level for individuals with higher Internet access.
Our third identification strategy reproduces the analysis using similar survey data from Ger-
many, a country that was not affected by the Norwegian change in income transparency. Similar
results for Germany would indicate that another factor, such as the dot-com bubble, caused
the change in the happiness-income gradient in Norway. In sharp contrast to the Norwegian
findings, however, the life satisfaction-income gradient did not change around 2001 in Germany.
The event-study analysis shows that this gradient remained stable in Germany from 1985 to
2013, both in the population at large and in the sub-populations of individuals with higher and
lower Internet access.
Anecdotal evidence supports our finding that higher income transparency increased the
well-being gap between richer and poorer households. For example, the media reported that the
onlinetaxlistsledtobullyingofkidsfrompoorerhouseholdsandthatadultsfrompoorerhouse-
holds felt that they disappointed themselves and others (Aftenposten, 2008; New York Times,
2009). Our findings also align with survey data indicating that, relative to richer households,
poorer households were more likely to oppose the income transparency policy (Aftenposten,
2011).
The effects of income transparency may operate through multiple mechanisms. We provide
suggestive evidence for one specific mechanism: self-perceptions. According to this channel,
richer individuals may be happier because they learn that they are richer than they thought,
3