NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
LIQUIDITY RISK AFTER 20 YEARS
Lubos Pastor
Robert F. Stambaugh
Working Paper 25774
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25774
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2019
The views in this paper are the responsibility of the authors, not the institutions with which they
are affiliated, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research. For helpful comments, we thank
Doug Diamond, Ralph Koijen, Stefan Nagel, Robert Novy-Marx, Jeff Pontiff, Jeff Russell, Rob
Vishny, and the seminar audience at the University of Chicago. We are also grateful to the Fama-
Miller Center for Research in Finance and the Center for Research in Security Prices, both at
Chicago Booth, for research support.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Lubos Pastor and Robert F. Stambaugh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Liquidity Risk After 20 Years
Lubos Pastor and Robert F. Stambaugh
NBER Working Paper No. 25774
April 2019
JEL No. G12
ABSTRACT
The Critical Finance Review commissioned Li, Novy-Marx, and Velikov (2017) and Pontiff and
Singla (2019) to replicate the results in Pástor and Stambaugh (2003). Both studies successfully
replicate our market-wide liquidity measure and find similar estimates of the liquidity risk
premium. In the sample period after our study, the liquidity risk premium estimates are even
larger, and the liquidity measure displays sharp drops during the 2008 financial crisis. We
respond to both replication studies and offer some related thoughts, such as when to use our
traded versus non-traded liquidity factors and how to improve the precision of liquidity beta
estimates.
Lubos Pastor
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
lubos.pastor@chicagobooth.edu
Robert F. Stambaugh
Finance Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
stambaugh@wharton.upenn.edu

1. Introduction
We began our work on liquidity risk 20 years ago, shortly after the 1998 collapse of the
Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) hedge fund. LTCM held multiple large trading
positions that were exposed to the risk that market liquidity might deteriorate. One famous
examplewastheirlong-shortpositioninoff-the-runversuson-the-runTreasurybonds. These
positions performed well in normal times, but they suffered when liquidity dried up in the
summer of 1998. The LTCM episode highlighted the facts that market liquidity fluctuates
over time and that asset prices respond to these fluctuations.
Twenty years ago, the role of liquidity in asset pricing was viewed largely in static terms,
based on differences in liquidity across assets. As in Amihud and Mendelson (1986), less
liquid assets were understood to offer higher expected returns to compensate for their lower
liquidity. Inspired by the LTCM episode, we took a dynamic view, focusing on time variation
in liquidity. Our idea was that the price of an asset can depend not only on the asset’s
liquidity but also on the sensitivity of the asset’s return to pervasive liquidity shocks.
Our published study, Pa´stor and Stambaugh (2003), makes three primary contributions.
First, it advances the hypothesis that aggregate liquidity is a state variable relevant for
asset pricing. Motivated by the evidence of commonality in liquidity (Chordia, Roll, and
Subrahmanyam, 2000), we hypothesize that liquidity risk is systematic, or non-diversifiable,
and thus potentially priced. Second, to test the above hypothesis, we construct a measure
of aggregate stock market liquidity. From that measure, we derive a liquidity factor that
capturesinnovationsinaggregateliquidity. Finally, wefindthattheliquidityfactorispriced,
in that stocks with higher sensitivities to this factor—i.e., higher liquidity betas—have higher
average returns. Liquidity betas are defined as slope coefficients βL from the regression
i
r = β0 +βLL +βMMKT +βSSMB +βHHML +(cid:15) , (1)
i,t i i t i t i t i t i,t
where r denotes asset i’s excess return, L is the liquidity factor, and MKT, SMB, and
i,t t
HML are the three factors of Fama and French (1993).
While our study focuses on equities, subsequent studies find liquidity risk to be priced
in other asset classes, such as hedge funds (e.g., Sadka, 2010), private equity (e.g., Franzoni,
Nowak, and Phalippou, 2012), emerging markets (e.g., Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad,
2007), and corporate bonds (e.g., Bongaerts, de Jong, and Driessen, 2017). Important theo-
reticalinsightsintoliquidityriskareprovidedbyAcharyaandPedersen(2005),Brunnermeier
and Pedersen (2009), and others. The literature on liquidity risk has grown tremendously,
and we do not attempt to review it here.
1

A decade after LTCM, academic interest in liquidity risk was further stimulated by the
2008 financial crisis, during which markets experienced dramatic reductions in liquidity. The
crisis highlighted the effects of liquidity shocks on not only asset prices but also real activity.
When liquidity dries up in the market, other bad things tend to happen. Liquidity shocks
can destroy value, for example, by creating runs on financial institutions or by impeding
the financing of viable investment projects. The crisis clearly showed why investors may be
willing to pay more for assets whose values better withstand market-wide liquidity shocks.
Ourliquidityfactorpicksupthekeyeventsofthecrisis, asweshowinSection2.2. Becauseit
happened five years after the publication of our paper, the crisis provides some out-of-sample
validation for the methodology behind our liquidity factor.
WearegratefultotheeditoroftheCritical Finance Review, IvoWelch, forcommissioning
two studies to assess the extent to which our empirical results can be replicated. We are
especially grateful to the authors of those studies, namely Hongtao Li, Robert Novy-Marx,
Mihail Velikov, Jeffrey Pontiff, and Rohit Singla, for undertaking this task and executing it
with the utmost competence and professionalism. We have learned a lot from their work.
In the rest of this paper, we first review key results of the replicators and respond to
some of their claims. We then present a few thoughts on our liquidity factor, such as when
to use its traded versus non-traded version, why we pay more attention to historical rather
than predicted liquidity betas, and why our liquidity measure is more useful at the aggregate
rather than the individual-stock level. Finally, we discuss the implications of the asymmetric
nature of liquidity shocks. For example, we explain why liquidity betas are relatively hard
to estimate and what can be done to improve their precision.
2. Replication Results
Both Li, Novy-Marx, and Velikov (2017) and Pontiff and Singla (2019) successfully replicate
the construction of our liquidity factor over the time period used in our study (1962 through
1999). Li, Novy-Marx, and Velikov report a correlation of 98.9% between their liquidity
series and ours. Pontiff and Singla report a correlation of one, up to five significant digits.
The above correlations pertain to our main liquidity factor, L from equation (1). Both
t
studies also replicate the traded version of our factor, which we discuss in more detail in
Section 3.1. Li, Novy-Marx, and Velikov (2017) report a 95% correlation between their
traded liquidity factor and ours in 1968 through 1999. Both their factor and ours produce
very similar alphas (see their Table 2). For example, both factors produce in-sample four-
2