NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO DISTRESSED BANKS REALLY GAMBLE FOR RESURRECTION?
Itzhak Ben-David
Ajay A. Palvia
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 25794
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25794
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2019
Ben-David and Stulz are at The Ohio State University and NBER, and Palvia is at the Office of
the Comptroller of the Currency. We thank seminar participants at Norges Bank for their
comments. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not reflect those of
the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the U.S. Treasury Department, or the national
Bureau of Economic Research. Ben-David has an ownership stake in a firm that trades securities.
Palvia is an employee of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, which supervises banks.
Stulz serves on the board of a bank and consults and provides expert testimony services for
financial institutions. He also belongs to the board of trustees of the Global Association of Risk
Professionals.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Itzhak Ben-David, Ajay A. Palvia, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Distressed Banks Really Gamble for Resurrection?
Itzhak Ben-David, Ajay A. Palvia, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 25794
May 2019
JEL No. G11,G21,G33
ABSTRACT
We explore the actions of financially distressed banks in two distinct periods that include
financial crises (1985-1994, 2005-2014) and differ in bank regulations, especially concerning
capital requirements and enforcement. In contrast to the widespread belief that distressed banks
gamble for resurrection, we document that distressed banks take actions to reduce leverage and
risk, such as reducing asset and loan growth, issuing equity, decreasing dividends, and lowering
deposit rates. Despite large differences in regulation between periods, the extent of deleveraging
is similar, suggesting that economic forces beyond formal regulations incentivize bank managers
to deleverage when their banks are in distress.
Itzhak Ben-David René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business Fisher College of Business
606A Fisher Hall 806A Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210-1144 Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER and NBER
ben-david.1@osu.edu stulz@cob.osu.edu
Ajay A. Palvia
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
400 7th St SW
Washington, DC 20024
Ajay.Palvia@occ.treas.gov

1. Introduction
Many financial economists take the view that distressed banks have strong incentives to
gamble for resurrection by taking risks they would not otherwise take and to refrain from
deleveraging. For instance, Freixas, Rochet, and Parigi (2004) write that “We take into account
two well-acknowledged facts of the banking industry: first, that it is difficult to disentangle
liquidity shocks from solvency shocks, second, that moral hazard and gambling for resurrection
are typical behaviors of banks experiencing financial distress.” With this view, the shareholders
gain if the risks pay off and if the risks fail the bill is paid by the bondholders and the taxpayers.
A related view is that deleveraging by banks benefits the liability holders and hurts the
shareholders, so that shareholders try to avoid it (Admati (2014)). An alternative view is that there
are many forces that push shareholders of distressed banks to lower their risk and leverage to
reduce distress costs. These forces include, for instance, managerial reputation, managerial risk-
aversion, threat of runs, bond covenants, preservation of franchise value, and regulatory
interventions.
In this study, we focus on two turbulent periods in the U.S. banking system, the late 1980s and
late 2000s, in which hundreds of banks faced financial distress, and explore in a systematic fashion
whether the behavior of distressed banks is consistent with gambling for resurrection or
deleveraging. Surprisingly, there is little existing evidence on the issues we address despite their
importance. The studies that exist do not reach a consensus regarding gambling for resurrection.
Our main finding is that despite regulatory differences between the two periods, banks took actions
to reduce their asset risk and leverage, rather than gamble for resurrection, in both periods.
Banks do not make the choice to gamble for resurrection or deleverage in the abstract.
Regulations limit their room to manoeuver. For the first period we consider, banks did not have
2

formal capital requirements of the type we are now familiar with, as the Basel Accord was
concluded in 1989 and implemented in the 1990s in the U.S. Further, as a result of concerns about
moral hazard following the savings and loans crisis, the U.S. tightened regulations substantially.
FDICIA, adopted in 1991, introduced prompt corrective action (PCA) which was designed to
resolve banks before they could engage in actions detrimental to the deposit insurance fund (DIF).
These substantial differences in regulation arose partly because of the intent to reduce risk taking
by banks that could hurt the financial system or the DIF. It is therefore interesting that we find
little evidence of changes in the behavior of distressed banks.
Our study has four parts. First, we propose two empirical indicators for bank distress and test
their usefulness in forecasting bank failure. These indicators are a low equity capital ratio and a
low Z-score. Banks with low equity capital ratio are those in the bottom decile of the equity-to-
assets distribution. Banks with low Z-scores are those who are in the bottom decile of a distance-
to-default measure (based on banks’ earnings). We show that these variables are good predictors
of future bank failure, and that their intersection is even a better predictor. A bank that is in the
lowest decile of the distribution of equity capital ratio and in the lowest decile of Z-score is about
17.8% and 19.3% more likely to fail within three years during both periods, respectively (relative
to an unconditional base rate of 2.0% and 1.7%, respectively).1 The probability of failure is even
stronger when distress happens during a crisis (19.4% and 22.7%, respectively). For the rest of the
analysis, we use the joint observation of a low equity capital ratio and a low Z-score as the main
indicator for bank distress.
1 This is based on estimated likelihood of failure within 3 years for each of the two periods, all else equal. The base
rate represents the mean failure rate for each of the two panels.
3