NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE DEMOCRACY EFFECT:
A WEIGHTS-BASED IDENTIFICATION STRATEGY
Pedro Dal Bó
Andrew Foster
Kenju Kamei
Working Paper 25724
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25724
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2019
We thank Alessandra Casella, Ray Duch, Adam McCloskey, Debraj Ray and seminar participants
at Bocconi, Columbia, LSE and Zurich for useful comments. We thank Catalina Ravizza for
excellent research assistance and Sven Fischer for his help in z-Tree programming. We thank
John Hey for his hospitality when the authors conducted experiments at the University of York.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Pedro Dal Bó, Andrew Foster, and Kenju Kamei. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Democracy Effect: a Weights-Based Identification Strategy
Pedro Dal Bó, Andrew Foster, and Kenju Kamei
NBER Working Paper No. 25724
April 2019
JEL No. C9,D02,D7
ABSTRACT
Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010) show experimentally that the effect of a policy may be
greater when it is democratically selected than when it is exogenously imposed. In this paper we
propose a new and simpler identification strategy to measure this democracy effect. We derive
the distribution of the statistic of the democracy effect, and apply the new strategy to the data
from Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010) and data from a new real-effort experiment in which
subjects’ payoffs do not depend on the effort of others. The new identification strategy is based
on calculating the average behavior under democracy by weighting the behavior of each type of
voter by its prevalence in the whole population (and not conditional on the vote outcome). We
show that use of these weights eliminates selection effects under certain conditions. Application
of this method to the data in Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010) confirms the presence of the
democracy effect in that experiment, but no such effect is found for the real-effort experiment.
Pedro Dal Bó Kenju Kamei
Department of Economics Durham University Business School
Brown University Mill Hill Lane, Room 176
64 Waterman Street DH1 3LB, Durham
Providence, RI 02912 United Kingdom
and NBER kenju.kamei@durham.ac.uk
pdalbo@brown.edu
Andrew Foster
Department of Economics and Community Health
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
afoster@brown.edu

I. Introduction
Previous research has suggested that democratic institutions may affect the
response to policies. For example, in experimental settings, Tyran and Feld (2006), Ertan,
Page, and Putterman (2010), Sutter, Haigner, and Kocher (2010), and Markussen,
Putterman and Tyran (2014) among others find that punishments and rewards have
greater impact on contributions to a public good when they are allowed democratically.2
However, as pointed out by Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010), it is difficult to
interpret this difference in behavior as a clear evidence that democratic institutions affect
behavior directly. The reason is that democracy allows for selection into policies. For
example, the availability of punishments after a public good game may have a greater
effect when that availability was chosen democratically than when it is chosen randomly
simply because subjects who are predisposed to employ punishments may be more likely
to vote for such punishments if given the opportunity.
Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010) provided two identification strategies to get
around the selection problem and showed that democratic choice, net of selection,
increases the effect on cooperation of a fine on unilateral defection in a prisoners’
dilemma game. Their identification strategies were based on having all subjects vote and
then randomly overriding votes in some groups. Having information on votes of all
subjects allowed them to compare behavior controlling for each person’s vote (therefore
controlling for selection) and show that there is a significant direct effect of democracy
when the fine is in place.
A shortcoming of their identification strategy is that one must know how subjects
voted even when their votes are overridden. Outside of the laboratory one may not be
able to override votes. The researcher may, for example, only have access to vote data
from democratic groups or societies, not from otherwise comparable groups in which
2 More generally, other papers have compared behavior between democratically chosen environments and
those imposed both in the lab and in the field. See, for example, Frey (1998), Bardhan (2000), Potters,
Sefton and Vesterlund (2005), Olken (2010), Baldassarri and Grossman (2011), Hamman, Weber and
Woon (2011), Corazzini et al (2014), Markussen, Reuben and Tyran (2014), Mellizo, Carpenter and
Matthews (2014), and Engl, Riedl and Weber (2018). Note that not all of these papers focus on the
democracy effect that we study. Democracy can also affect behavior through the implementation of
different policies and allowing for sorting into policies. Here we study the direct effect of democracy (for
simplicity the “democracy effect”) which consists of the impact of democracy on behavior after controlling
for the chosen policies and sorting.
2

rules are imposed exogenously. Moreover, within the laboratory it may be that the
process of voting and having one’s vote overridden has a different effect than just having
the rule imposed without having previously voted.3 It thus would be useful to be able to
test for a direct democracy effect even without information on how each subject in a non-
democratic group or society would have voted.
In this paper we devise a method that does just that. Our alternative identification
strategy consists of comparing behavior under non-democracy with behavior under
democracy but weighting the behavior of voters according to their proportions in the
population and not conditional on the election outcome. The basic insight is that the
source of the selectivity bias is that “yes” voters are overrepresented, relative to the
population, in groups that choose a particular policy. Similarly, “no” voters are
overrepresented in groups that reject the policy. If voting decisions are independent
across members of a society, a “yes” voter in a majority “yes” group is comparable to a
“yes” voter in a majority “no” group. Thus reweighting the behaviors under each policy
according to the proportion of yes and no voters in the population will yield an unbiased
estimate of the effects of the policy controlling for democratic selection.
We then apply this method to two different settings. First, we employ the data
from Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010), which considered a policy that transformed a
prisoners’ dilemma game into a coordination game. Consistent with the results presented
by Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010) we find a significant democracy effect using the
new methodology. The second experiment consisted of choosing a payment scheme for a
task. The task involves adding sets of five randomly generated two-digit numbers. In the
first part of the experiment subjects were paid a fixed amount regardless of the number of
correct answers. In the second part, subjects could be paid as in the first part or by a piece
rate (their payment was determined by their own performance only, independent of the
performance of the other subjects). The payment formula was chosen by the computer for
some groups, but for other groups the formula was chosen by simple majority. The
question is whether the effect of introducing piece rate payments on performance is larger
3 These may be the reasons why, despite the wide recognition of the importance of measuring the direct
effect of democracy, the identification strategy proposed in Dal Bó, Foster and Putterman (2010) has only
been used in a couple of experiments (e.g. Kamei 2016, Chen 2015, Marcin, Robalo and Tausch 2016, and
Schories 2017).
3