NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAPACITY CONSTRAINTS AND THE PROVISION OF PUBLIC SERVICES:
THE CASE OF WORKERS IN PUBLIC HEALTH CLINICS
Matthew C. Harris
Yinan Liu
Ian McCarthy
Working Paper 25706
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25706
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2019
We are grateful to the Knox County Health Department, particularly Dr. Kelly Cooper, Natalie
Alverson, and Caley Webster for their partnership and use of their data. We are also grateful for
comments from Bill Neilson, Sara Markowitz, Scott Barkowski, David Bradford, Don Bruce,
Georg Schaur, Don Clark, and participants at iHEA 2017 and the 2017 Southeastern Health
Economics Association Meetings. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Matthew C. Harris, Yinan Liu, and Ian McCarthy. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Capacity Constraints and the Provision of Public Services: The Case of Workers in Public
Health Clinics
Matthew C. Harris, Yinan Liu, and Ian McCarthy
NBER Working Paper No. 25706
March 2019
JEL No. D24,I18,J22
ABSTRACT
Unlike in the production of most goods, changes in capacity for labor-intensive services only
affect outcomes of interest insofar as service providers change the way they allocate their time in
response to those capacity changes. In this paper, we examine how public sector service
providers respond to unexpected capacity constraints in the specific context of public health
clinics. We exploit an exogenous reduction in public health clinic capacity to quantify nurses'
trade-off between patients treated and time spent with each patient, which we treat as a proxy for
a quality v. quantity decision. We provide evidence that these small and generally insignificant
effects on nurse time favor public sector employees prioritizing quality of each interaction over
clearing the patient queue.
Matthew C. Harris Ian McCarthy
University of Tennessee Department of Economics
Haslam College of Business Emory University
722A Stokely Management Center Rich Memorial Building, Room 319
916 Volunteer Boulevard Atlanta, GA 30322
Knoxville, TN 37996 and NBER
mharris@utk.edu immccar@emory.edu
Yinan Liu
1640 Cumberland Ave.
Howard H.. Baker Jr. Center for Public Policy
University of Tennessee
Knoxville, TN 37996
yliu110@vols.utk.edu

1 Introduction
The public labor force is a large component of the economies of most developed countries. Over
15 percent of the labor force is employed in the public sector in the U.S., and payroll expenses
account for approximately half of all state government expenditures (OECD, 2017; Gordon and
Iselin, 2017). Many of these workers are engaged in the production of labor-intensive services. For
example, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, six of the ten most common occupations
for government workers include: clerks, postal service workers, repair workers, highway workers,
corrections officers, and (most importantly for this paper) registered nurses.
Most service providers, in both the public and private sector, face inherently stochastic demand
but cannot store inventory. Suppliers therefore tend to carry excess capacity on a median day (De-
Vany, 1976); however, the presence of excess capacity is heavily influenced not only by stochastic
fluctuations in demand but also variations funding. Such variation in capacity constraints due to
funding is a particularly salient issue for public services, where debates over funding levels and
threats of budget cuts are regular occurrences with important consequences. For example, DeAn-
gelo and Hansen (2014) show that when budget cuts forced layoffs of State Troopers in Oregon,
traffic fatalities increased. Other work examining law enforcement show that capacity constraints
do affect the provision of public services, providing evidence that greater funding for law enforce-
ment decreases crime (Evans and Owens, 2007; Chalfin and McCrary, 2018; Mello, 2019).
Given that capacity constraints affect outcomes related the provision of public services, how do
employees respond when capacity constraints bind and prices cannot adjust?1 Understanding how
providers of public services reallocate their time when demand exceeds capacity (or vice versa) is
critical for understanding how changes in funding for the provision of public services will affect
outcomes of interest. In a for-profit setting, we expect that employees will respond in some way
consistentwiththeprofitmaximizationofthefirm, orrespondtotheincentivesinplacetoalleviate
principal agent problems. However, there is a large body of work showing that employees in non-
1Prior work has examined the effects of congestion (i.e., capacity constraints) under different levels of demand
in the transportation industry, and when prices are efficient allocation mechanisms (Carlin and Park, 1970; Daniel,
1995; Brueckner, 2002; Mayer and Sinai, 2003).
2

profit and public settings fundamentally differ from workers who select into for-profit employment,
making the response of public sector employees ex ante less clear (Preston, 1989; Leete, 2001;
Benz, 2005; Mas, 2006; Prendergast, 2007; Delfgaauw and Dur, 2008; Buurman et al., 2012).
In this paper, we provide evidence on how service workers in the public sector respond to
capacity constraints, focusing specifically in the context of public health clinics. We examine how
nurses in public health clinics respond to unexpectedly tight time constraints created by exogenous
temporary reductions in staff. When demand spikes and capacity is constrained, how much time
with the average patient are providers willing to trade-off to see as many patients as possible?
While the specific answer within this context can inform about the amount of median excess
capacity built into the provision of public clinical services, more broadly this paper examines how
providers of public services make quality v. quantity tradeoffs under binding time constraints. For
example, if providers are reluctant to reduce the time spent with patients, and leaving patients
untreated has a high social cost, then ensuring median day excess capacity in the public provision
of clinical services can yield significant welfare gains (Hughes and McGuire, 2003). While leaving
patients untreated creates obvious negative externalities, particularly if they are in the clinic for
communicable illness, a reduction in time spent with each patient may also negatively affect the
quality of care.2
We identify the causal effects of reductions in capacity through a series of repeated, but not
periodic, exogenous temporary reductions in the number of nurses working in a given clinic on a
given day. Our data were provided by the Knox County Health Department (KCHD) in Tennessee
and are comprised of time records for each patient visit in five public health clinics over sixteen
months. Inadditiontoprovidingcertaintypesofhealthcareintheclinic, KCHDisalsoresponsible
for administering FluMist vaccines in public schools. On days when KCHD is administering
FluMist, two nurses would be removed from typical clinical duties and sent to the particular
school for the morning, leaving clinics short-staffed with reduced operating capacity for the first
half of the day.
2See, for example, Whittington and McLaughlin (2000), Tai-Seale et al. (2007), Munyisia et al. (2011), and
McCloskey et al. (2014), among others.
3