NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A THEORY OF STOCK EXCHANGE COMPETITION AND INNOVATION:
WILL THE MARKET FIX THE MARKET?
Eric Budish
Robin S. Lee
John J. Shim
Working Paper 25855
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25855
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02134
May 2019, Revised November 2022
An early version of this research was presented in the 2017 AEA/AFA joint luncheon address.
We are extremely grateful to the colleagues, policymakers, and industry participants with whom
we have discussed this research over the last several years. Special thanks to Larry Glosten, Terry
Hendershott and Jakub Kastl for providing valuable feedback as conference discussants, and to
the editor and three anonymous referees for comments that significantly improved the paper. We
are also grateful to Jason Abaluck, Nikhil Agarwal, Susan Athey, John Campbell, Dennis
Carlton, Judy Chevalier, John Cochrane, Christopher Conlon, Shane Corwin, Peter Cramton,
Doug Diamond, David Easley, Alex Frankel, Joel Hasbrouck, Kate Ho, Anil Kashyap, Pete Kyle,
Donald Mackenzie, Neale Mahoney, Paul Milgrom, Joshua Mollner, Ariel Pakes, Al Roth, Fiona
Scott Morton, Sophie Shive, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, Mike Whinston, Heidi Williams and
Luigi Zingales for valuable discussions, and to seminar audiences at Chicago, Yale,
Northwestern, NYU, Berkeley, Harvard, MIT, NBER Market Design, UPenn, Columbia,
HKUST, KER, the Economics of Platforms Workshop, NBER IO, SEC DERA, and the AFAs.
Paul Kim, Cameron Taylor, Matthew O’Keefe, Natalia Drozdoff, and Ethan Che provided
excellent research assistance. Budish acknowledges financial support from the Fama-Miller
Center, the Stigler Center, and the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. Disclosure:
the authors declare that they have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in this paper. John Shim worked at Jump Trading, a high-frequency trading
firm, from 2006-2011. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Eric Budish, Robin S. Lee, and John J. Shim. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Theory of Stock Exchange Competition and Innovation: Will the Market Fix the Market?
Eric Budish, Robin S. Lee, and John J. Shim
NBER Working Paper No. 25855
May 2019, Revised November 2022
JEL No. D02,D44,D47,D53,D82,G1,G2,G23,L1,L13,L5,L89
ABSTRACT
Will stock exchanges innovate to address latency arbitrage and the arms race for speed? This
paper models how exchanges compete in the modern electronic era and how this shapes
incentives for market design innovation. In the status quo, exchange trading fees are competitive
while exchanges earn economic rents from selling speed. These rents create a wedge between
private and social incentives to innovate, and support the persistence of an inefficient market
design in equilibrium of a market design adoption game. We discuss implications for policy and
insights for the literatures on market design, innovation, and platforms.
Eric Budish John J. Shim
Booth School of Business Booth School of Business
University of Chicago University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue 5807 S Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637 Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER jshim2@nd.edu
eric.budish@chicagobooth.edu
Robin S. Lee
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 120
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
robinlee@fas.harvard.edu
A Data Appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25855

1 Introduction
Market design research usually focuses on designing the best possible market mechanism for a given
problem.1 Thispaperconcernsadifferent,complementary,question. Supposeresearchershavealready
designed an attractive mechanism—will it actually get adopted?
The context of the study is market design for financial exchanges. Financial exchanges are clearly
important—they serve vital roles in the global economy generating price signals, helping companies
and governments raise capital, and sharing risk. Stock exchanges alone execute over $200 trillion
of transaction volume per year. Recent research has shown that the predominant financial exchange
designusedaroundtheworld,calledthecontinuouslimitorderbook,hasanimportantdesignflaw. By
treating time continuously, the market design gives rise to a phenomenon called “latency arbitrage,”
or arbitrage rents from symmetrically disseminated public information—rents that in principle are not
supposed to exist in an efficient market, as opposed to the rents from asymmetric private information
that are at the heart of classic models of market microstructure (Kyle, 1985; Glosten and Milgrom,
1985). These latency arbitrage rents, in turn, cause a socially wasteful arms race for speed and harm
market liquidity. Latency arbitrage races are currently measured in millionths and even billionths of
seconds, andhavebeenestimatedasgeneratingabout20%ofalltradingvolumeandharmingliquidity
byfromabout17%to33%dependingonthemeasureused. Asimple(intheory)marketdesignreform,
that puts time into small discrete increments and batch processes trade requests that arrive at the
“same time,” would solve the problem.2
To date, while there has been a fair amount of innovative activity that is in some way related to
latency arbitrage, it is fair to say that large incumbent financial exchanges have not embraced the new
market design reform.3 This paper tries to understand how financial exchanges compete and how this
shapes their incentives to innovate—and ultimately whether exchanges’ private incentives for market
design innovation align with what is socially efficient. Will the market fix the market?
As is well known in the fields of industrial organization and innovation economics, there is no
one answer to whether private and social innovation incentives align. The usual case, of course, is
that if there is a large inefficiency in a market, and a private-sector innovation could address the
inefficiency, then the private sector will innovate in a way that aligns with social welfare (Griliches,
1957). But there are many cases where private and social innovation incentives might diverge (Arrow,
1962; Nordhaus, 1969; Hirshleifer, 1971; Mankiw and Whinston, 1986). We will ultimately find that
private and social incentives to innovate diverge here as well, for a mix of classical and novel reasons.
To analyze our questions, we build a model that is closely tailored to the institutional details of
modern electronic financial exchanges. Some aspects of the model are tailored specifically to regula-
1Forrecentsurveysofthemarketdesignliterature,seeRoth(2018),Milgrom(2021)andAgarwalandBudish(2021).
2SeeBudish,CramtonandShim(2015)forthedefinitionoflatencyarbitrageandthemarket-designreformoffrequent
batchauctions. Anothermarket-designreformthatcansolvethelatencyarbitrageproblemisanasymmetricspeedbump;
seeBaldaufandMollner(2020). SeeAquilina, BudishandO’Neill(2022)forempiricalmagnitudesoflatencyarbitrage.
See Indriawan, Pascual and Shkilko (2022) for an empirical comparison of continuous- and discrete-time trading.
3See discussion of innovation activity to date in Section 4.1 and Appendix H.
1

tions for the U.S stock market, which is both a canonical financial market and has been at the heart
of the controversy around latency arbitrage. The players in our model are exchanges and three kinds
of market participants: trading firms, informed investors and uninformed investors. Exchanges make
a market design decision and set prices—prices for trading per se and prices for what we call speed
technology. The trading firms decide whether to pay for speed technology and the market participants
play a trading game. Two important details of the trading game are that stocks are fungible across
exchanges (due to regulation called Unlisted Trading Privileges), and market participants are able to
engage in frictionless search across exchanges (due to regulations such as Regulation National Mar-
ket System in the U.S.). As will become clear, these details make stock exchange competition very
different from other familiar forms of platform competition.
Westartbystudyingequilibriuminthesubgamewhereallexchangeschoosethestatusquomarket
design(“Continuous”). Wefindthattradingfeesareperfectlycompetitivebutthatexchangesareable
toextractrentsfromspeedtechnology. Thereasonwhytradingfeesarecompetitiveisthatfrictionless
searchleadstoBertrand-likecompetitionoverthenetpriceofatrade, andhenceontradingfees. This
stands in contrast to many other platform markets, which have network effects and supra-competitive
transaction fees. The intuition for why speed technology fees are not competitive is that, if there is a
speed-sensitive trading opportunity on a particular exchange, only that exchange’s speed technology
is useful for the opportunity. For example, Nasdaq speed technology is not useful for latency-arbitrage
opportunities on the New York Stock Exchange, and vice versa. This creates market power. These
outcomes of our theory model align with empirical facts that we document about trading fees and
speed-technology revenues. The average trading fee in the U.S. stock market is just $0.0001 per-share
per-side, or just 0.0001% of a $100 share of stock.4 Further, speed technology revenues are several
times larger than trading fee revenues and have been growing rapidly in the modern electronic era.
We then study equilibria in subgames where one or more exchanges use a market design that
addresses latency arbitrage (“Discrete”). We obtain two sets of results. If there is a single exchange
that adopts Discrete, then this exchange would win share and be able to charge supra-competitive
trading fees, in any equilibrium. The same frictionless search that caused trading fees to be brutally
competitive under the status quo enables an exchange with a better market design to get off the
ground in any equilibrium. This too is in sharp contrast to many other platform settings, where
there are chicken-and-egg equilibria in which the new market design can stay stuck with zero share,
even if in principle it is better designed. Moreover, the exchange can charge a supra-competitive
fee commensurate with the latency-arbitrage savings it creates. Intuitively, the innovator is getting
compensated for solving the problem, as in the classic case where private and social incentives align.
However, if multiple exchanges use the new market design—as would be the case if there were a
regulatory mandate or if the initial innovator is imitated—then trading fees become perfectly compet-
4Thisissignificantlydifferentfromotherplatformmarketswithevenmodestsearchfrictions. Forexample,internet-
enabledplatformmarketsforitemssuchastickets,ride-sharing,fooddelivery,andvacationrentalscommonlyhavefees
ofabout10-30%,orabout100,000timeshigheronapercentagebasis. Whiletherearemanyreasonswhythiscomparison
is not apples-to-apples (e.g., fraud costs), the contrast is nonetheless striking.
2