NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CAN FINANCIAL PARTICIPANTS IMPROVE PRICE DISCOVERY AND EFFICIENCY IN
MULTI-SETTLEMENT MARKETS WITH TRADING COSTS?
Akshaya Jha
Frank A. Wolak
Working Paper 25851
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25851
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2019
We would like to thank Severin Borenstein, Jim Bushnell, Lucas Davis, Meredith Fowlie, Bill
Hogan, Ali Hortacsu, Paul Joskow, Lynne Kiesling, Erin Mansur, Ignacia Mercadal, Steve Puller,
Mar Reguant, Peter Reiss, and Ali Yurukoglu for helpful comments on previous drafts. We would
also like to thank Andres Santos and Han Hong for helpful discussions of their hypothesis testing
procedures. No external financial support was provided to Akshaya Jha or Frank A. Wolak to
complete this research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Akshaya Jha and Frank A. Wolak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Can Financial Participants Improve Price Discovery and Efficiency in Multi-Settlement Markets
with Trading Costs?
Akshaya Jha and Frank A. Wolak
NBER Working Paper No. 25851
May 2019
JEL No. G13,G14,Q02,Q4
ABSTRACT
The introduction of purely financial participants into commodity markets is thought to yield
forward prices that better reflect future spot prices, and ultimately, more efficient future
production and consumption decisions. However, there are sizable transaction costs associated
with trading in most commodity markets. This paper develops a statistical test of the null
hypothesis that expected forward/spot price spreads cannot be arbitraged even after accounting
for these transactions costs. We apply this test to hourly, location-specific day-ahead and real-
time prices from California's wholesale electricity market. The implied trading cost required to
reject the null hypothesis of no profitable arbitrage opportunities falls significantly after
California allowed purely financial participation. Moreover, variable input costs per MWh of
electricity produced fell by 3.6% in high demand hours after the introduction of purely financial
participants. Combined, our evidence supports the hypothesis that the introduction of purely
financial participants into the California wholesale electricity market decreased the average
difference and the volatility of the difference between day-ahead and real-time prices, which
ultimately lowered the total variable cost of serving demand
Akshaya Jha
Carnegie Mellon University
Hamburg Hall Office 2218
4800 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15232
Website: http://www.akshayajha.com
akshayaj@andrew.cmu.edu
Frank A. Wolak
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
wolak@zia.stanford.edu

1 Introduction
In multi-settlement markets, participants buy or sell delivery of a commodity at a pre-
specified future date in a forward market with the opportunity to close out that position
in a subsequent forward market or in the spot market. Each time the market for this
commodity and delivery date combination clears, settlement occurs, meaning that pur-
chases and sales of this product are made at a price that reflects the information available
to market participants at that time. Many commodities have multiple forward market
settlements before delivery ultimately takes place. For example, an airline might pur-
chase jet fuel for delivery on a pre-specified date in the future. It could close out this
position by selling it in any subsequent forward market before the delivery date or by
taking delivery of the jet fuel and selling it in the spot market.
Forward markets provide both producers and consumers of a product with future
price certainty. This increased future spot price certainty can improve the efficiency of
the spot market for a commodity. Specifically, forward prices that are accurate estimates
of future spot prices provide valuable information to investors in productive capacity to
supplythiscommodityorinvestorsinproductivecapacitythatconsumesthiscommodity.
For example, a potential investor in an oil refinery can use forward prices for gasoline
and oil to obtain a more accurate estimate of whether an investment in a facility that
comes on line in two years and produces for 20 years would be profitable.
Liquid forward markets for a commodity thus have the potential to improve both
future spot price transparency and overall market efficiency. However, many commodity
markets have a small number of physical participants. Consequently, purely financial
market participants that neither produce nor consume the commodity, but simply take
financial positions in forward markets, can increase market liquidity. This logic im-
plies that allowing purely financial participants to trade in multi-settlement commodity
markets has the potential to improve both future spot price transparency and real-time
market performance.
This paper uses the introduction of purely financial participants into California’s
wholesale electricity market to examine the validity of this logic. Electricity markets
are an ideal setting for this investigation. First, wholesale electricity markets are multi-
settlement: exactly the same product—electrical energy delivered to a specific location at
1

a specific hour of the day—is bought and sold using the same market-clearing mechanism
in both the day-ahead and real-time markets. Second, participants are required to post
significant collateral with the market operator and pay non-trivial transaction costs in
order to trade in these markets. This can limit the number of market participants and
baseline level of liquidity in the forward market. Moreover, it is extremely costly to
store electrical energy and the time lag between buying/selling electricity in the day-
ahead market and subsequent sale/purchase in the real-time market is less than one day.
Relative to other commodities, this greatly limits the extent to which day-ahead/real-
time electricity price differences are due to either a hedging motive or inter-temporal
discounting.
Finally, the market efficiency benefits from a more liquid forward market for grain,
gold, oil, jet fuel or other commodities are likely to be realized in a multi-year time frame.
Incontrast,introducingpurelyfinancialparticipantsinmulti-settlement(day-ahead/real-
time) electricity markets has the potential to quickly reduce the cost of serving real-time
demand. This is because market/system operators are required to take the offers sub-
mitted by generation unit owners and dispatch of hundreds of electricity generation units
to meet real-time demand at thousands of locations in a transmission network. In doing
this, system operators are faced with a multitude of different operating constraints such
as transmission network capacity constraints as well as generation unit start-up, ramp-
ing, and minimum runtime constraints. Computing the market-clearing configuration of
generation unit output levels given the offers submitted by market participants requires
solving an extremely complex mixed-integer programming problem. Allowing purely fi-
nancial participants to supply or demand virtual energy in the day-ahead market could
help system operators find better solutions to this optimization problem and thereby
reduce the total cost of serving demand, particularly during high demand hours when
transmission, generation unit-level, and other system operating constraints are likely to
be most relevant.
This paper has two parts. First, we develop a statistical test of arbitrage between
forward and spot markets and apply this test to data from California’s wholesale elec-
tricity market. The canonical principle of no arbitrage implies that the forward price of
a commodity at time t for delivery at time t+k (Pf ) is equal to the expected value
t,t+k
of the spot price for the same commodity at time t+k (Ps ) conditional on the infor-
t+k
2