NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DEBT-MATURITY MANAGEMENT WITH LIQUIDITY COSTS
Saki Bigio
Galo Nuño
Juan Passadore
Working Paper 25808
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25808
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2019, Revised May 2021
This paper supersedes “A Framework for Debt-Maturity Management”. The views expressed in
this manuscript are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the Bank of
Spain, the Eurosystem, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank Elena Fernandez
for excellent research assistance. The paper was influenced by conversations with Anmol
Bhandari, Manuel Amador, Andy Atkeson, Adrien Auclert, David Andolfatto, Luigi Bocola, Jim
Costain, Alessandro Dovis, Raquel Fernandez, Hugo Hopenhayn, Francesco Lippi, Matteo
Maggiori, Rody Manuelli, Ken Miyahara, Nathan Nadramija, Dejanir Silva, Dominik Thaler,
Aleh Tsyvinski, Pierre-Olivier Weill, Pierre Yared, Dimitri Vayanos, Anna Zabai and Bill Zame.
We thank Davide Debortoli, Thomas Winberry, and Wilco Bolt for discussing this paper. We are
specially thankful to Daragh Clancy, Aitor Erce and Kimi Jiang (ESM) and to Pablo de Ramón-
Laca (Spanish Treasury) for providing us with the Spanish micro data, and to Jens Christensen
for the estimates of the yield curve in Spain and France. We thank participants in multiple
seminars and conferences for their comments.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Saki Bigio, Galo Nuño, and Juan Passadore. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Debt-Maturity Management with Liquidity Costs
Saki Bigio, Galo Nuño, and Juan Passadore
NBER Working Paper No. 25808
May 2019, Revised May 2021
JEL No. F34,F41,G11
ABSTRACT
We characterize the optimal debt-maturity management problem in the presence of liquidity
costs. A government issues an arbitrary number of finite-maturity bonds and faces income and
interest-rate risk, which can tempt it to default. Optimal issuances are spread out across maturities
and are given by the ratio of a value gap over a liquidity coefficient that measures the price
impact. The value gap is the proportional difference between the bond prices obtained by
discounting with the international interest rates and with the domestic discount factor. This
characterization allows us to quantify the contribution of different economic forces—impatience,
yield-curve riding, expenditure smoothing, self-insurance, credit risk, and default incentives—in
shaping the optimal debt maturity distribution. In an application, we estimate the liquidity
coefficients using Spanish debt auction data and exploit the framework to evaluate Spanish debt
management practices.
Saki Bigio Juan Passadore
Department of Economics Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance (EIEF)
University of California at Los Angeles Via Sallustiana 62
8283 Bunche Hall Rome, 00187
Box 951477 Italy
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477 juan.passadore@eief.it
and NBER
sbigio@econ.ucla.edu
Galo Nuño
Banco de España
Alcalá 48,
28014 Madrid
Spain
galo.nuno@bde.es
Appendices are available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25808

1 Introduction
Any government faces a large-stakes problem: to design a strategy for the quantity and maturity of its
debt. Thispaperpresentsanewframeworktothinkaboutandevaluatethatdesign. Westudytheoptimal
debt-maturity management problem of a government subject to income and interest-rate risk, risks that
canleadtoadefault. Theframeworkmakestwoinnovations. First,itputsforthliquiditycostsasacentral
consideration,thenotionthatthegreaterabondauctionis,thelowertheauctionprice.Second,wedevelop
anapproachtocharacterizetheoptimaldebtprogramallowingforanarbitrarynumberoffinite-lifebonds.
With this approach, we can analytically and quantitatively decompose the different economic forces that
influenceanoptimaldebt-managementstrategy.
Liquidity costs are a common concern to practitioners, but to a large extent, their role has been absent
innormativeanalysis. Here, weembracetheviewthatliquiditycostsarecentraltothedebtmanagement
problem. WebuildonDuffie,GarleanuandPedersen(2005)andfeatureagovernmentthatauctionsbonds
to primary dealers who take time to resell bonds to their ultimate holders, investors. The greater the is-
suance, the longer the resell time. As in Vayanos and Vila (2021), we feature bond markets segmented by
maturityanddealerswhofacehighercapitalcoststhaninvestors. Asaresult,thetimetoredeploybondsis
costlyandproducesamarkupbetweentheissuergovernment’sauctionpriceandsecondary-bondmarket
prices.Sincethereselltimeincreaseswiththeauctionsize,theauctionpricefallswiththeauctionsize.The
sensitivitiesofauctionpricestotheauctionedamountsatgivenmaturitiesareliquiditycoefficientsthatwe
canmeasurewithauctiondata.
Beforestudyingtheoptimaldebtmanagementproblem,weestimatetheliquiditycoefficientsinamedium-
sized economy, Spain. Over the last 20 years, Spain has issued recurrently in only ten maturities. We
estimatetheliquidity coefficientsateachofthosematuritieswithdatacoveringmorethan2000bondauc-
tions. Dependingonthematurityweconsider,aoneppincreaseinmonthlyissuances(overannualGDP)
isassociatedwithareductioninauctionpricesbetween8and56bps.
Wethenstudytheoptimaldebtmanagementproblemofagovernmentthatinternalizesliquiditycosts. In
the presence of liquidity costs, the number and types of bonds that the government can issue are not in-
nocuous. For that reason, we allow the government to issue an arbitrary number of finite-life bonds, an
exercisehithertonotcarriedout. Duetothecurseofdimensionality,qualitativeanalysisisoftenrelegated
tohighlystylizedmodels,andquantitativemodelsonlyallowforasmallnumberofdecayingperpetuities
(asinLelandandToft,1996).1 Inpractice,governmentssimultaneouslyissueinmanymaturities,andper-
petuitiesareararity.Theapproachheremakesrestrictiveassumptionsonshocks,butallowsforananalytic
characterizationandaquantitativeevaluationofoptimaldebtmanagementwitharealisticdebtstructure,
thuscomplementingearlierwork.
1This limitation is easily understood. If we want to construct a yearly model where the government only issues 30-year
bonds,weneedatleast30statevariablesbecausea30-yearbondbecomesa29-yearbondthefollowingyear,a28-yearbondthe
yearafter,andsoon.Bycontrast,abondthatmaturesby5-percenteveryyearisstillabondthatmaturesby5-percenttheyear
afteritsissuance.
1

Ouranalysisuncoversageneralprinciple. Thegovernment’sproblemcanbestudiedasifmultipleartificial
traderswereinchargeofissuingdebtofacorrespondingmaturity. Eachtradermustapplyasimplerule:
issuanceatmaturityτ 1
= ×valuegapatmaturityτ .
GDP liquiditycoefficientatmaturityτ
Thisrulefollowsfromaconditionthatequatesmarginalauctionrevenuestoaninternaldebtvaluation.The
rule states that optimal issuances of a bond of maturity τ equal the ratio of a value gap over the liquidity
coefficient of that maturity. The value gap is the proportional difference between the secondary-market
price and a domestic valuation. With liquidity costs, the government’s discount rate does not equal the
internationalshort-termrate. Thus,thedomesticvaluationisacounterfactualbondprice,computedusing
the government’s discount rate instead of the short-term rate. A positive value gap indicates the desire
to arbitrage the difference between market prices and domestic valuations by the artificial traders. The
liquidity coefficient modulates the willingness to arbitrage in a given maturity. As a result of this limited
arbitrage, it is optimal to issue in all maturities at all times, as commonly done by Treasuries. Since the
domestic discount factor rate must be internally consistent at an optimum, a single equilibrium variable
summarizesaproblemwithinfinitecontrolvariables.2
The simple issuance rule holds, regardless of whether the government faces income or interest-rate risk,
or has the option to default. These factors impact the bond valuations and prices through their effects on
the interest rate and the domestic discount rates. This representation is convenient because it makes it
possible to dissect the forces that shape the optimal debt-maturity profile through their impact on these
rates. We characterize how these forces affect the level and weighted average maturity (WAM) of debt
issuance through the elasticities of domestic valuations and bond prices with respect to the parameters
associatedwitheachforce.
To flesh out how different forces contribute to the optimal maturity choice, we study the government’s
problem in steps. In the first step, we abstract from risk. In this case, the domestic rate only depends on
the government’s impatience relative to international investors, which implies an analytic expression for
the optimal steady-state debt profile. We show that, when liquidity costs are homogeneous, the govern-
mentshouldissueinallmaturitiesatthesteadystate,butwithapatternthatincreaseswithmaturity.3 The
government’s greater impatience compared to the market is key to deliver this result. Extending the ma-
turitybyoneperioddelaystheprincipalbyoneperiod. Ifthegovernmentwereaspatientasinternational
investors, this delay would not bring any benefit. However, since the government is more impatient, the
delay brings it a benefit. Thus, the government always prefers to issue at long maturities but spreads out
itsissuancestomitigateliquiditycosts. Weintroduceaproof,basedontheanalysisofelasticities,showing
2Thedomesticdiscountrateisthesolutionofafixed-pointproblem: Aconjecturedexpenditurepathmapstoadomestic
discountrate.Thisdiscountrategeneratesanissuancepathviatheoptimalrule.Ultimately,theissuancepathmustbeconsistent
withtheexpenditurepath’sdebtservices. Theconjecturedexpenditurepathmustcoincidewiththeactualexpenditurepath
obtainedapplyingtheissuanceruleattheoptimum.
3Althoughissuancesincreasewithmaturity,theoutstandingdebtstockdecreaseswithmaturity,asinthedata.Thisdecreas-
ingmaturityprofileisanartifactofbondshavingafinitelife.
2