NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INDUSTRIALIZATION WITHOUT INNOVATION
Paula Bustos
Juan Manuel Castro-Vincenzi
Joan Monras
Jacopo Ponticelli
Working Paper 25871
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25871
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2019, Revised March 2022
We received valuable comments from Thibault Fally, Manuel García-Santana, Donald Davis,
Gene Grossman, Michael Peters, Diego Puga, Sergio Rebelo, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, Chris
Tonetti, Chris Udry, Jose P. Vasquez, and seminar participants at CEMFI, CREI, Lugano,
Columbia, Northwestern, BdE, the NBER Economic Consequences of Trade, McGill, Princeton
Growth Conference, GEP/CEPR Summer Trade Workshop, and the Workshop on Structural
Transformation and Macroeconomic Dynamics. This project has received funding from the
European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and
innovation program (grant agreement no. 716388). We are also grateful to acknowledge financial
support from the UK Department for International Development (DFID) and the Centre for
Economic Policy Research (CEPR) (PEDL Scale-Up ERG no. 3787). Monras acknowledges
financial support from the Spanish Agencia Estatal de Investigación (AEI), through the Severo
Ochoa Programme for Centres of Excellence in R&D (Barcelona School of Economics
CEX2019-000915-S). Mark He and Erick Molina provided excellent research assistance. An
earlier version of this paper circulated under the title “Structural Transformation, Industrial
Specialization, and Endogenous Growth”. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Paula Bustos, Juan Manuel Castro-Vincenzi, Joan Monras, and Jacopo Ponticelli. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Industrialization without Innovation
Paula Bustos, Juan Manuel Castro-Vincenzi, Joan Monras, and Jacopo Ponticelli
NBER Working Paper No. 25871
May 2019, Revised March 2022
JEL No. F1,F16,F43,O1,O13,O4
ABSTRACT
The introduction of labor-saving technologies in agriculture can foster structural transformation
by releasing workers who find occupation in other sectors. The traditional view is that the
reallocation of labor towards manufacturing generates innovation and productivity growth. We
conduct an empirical investigation of this structural transformation process in the context of a
large and exogenous increase in agricultural productivity in Brazil. We find that workers leaving
agriculture were mostly unskilled. Thus, they found employment in the least skill-intensive
manufacturing industries. Next, we investigate the effect of this change in comparative advantage
within the manufacturing sector on innovation. We use social security data to develop a new
measure of the labor input in innovation that is representative at any level of spatial aggregation.
We find that regions with faster agricultural productivity growth experienced a reallocation of
unskilled workers away from agriculture into the least R&D-intensive manufacturing industries.
The expansion of low-R&D industries attracted workers away from innovative occupations in
high-R&D industries, slowing down local aggregate manufacturing productivity growth.
Paula Bustos Joan Monras
Centro de Estudios Monetarios y Financieros Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Casado del Alisal 5, 28014 Madrid Ramon Trias Fargas, 25
Spain 08005 Barcelona
paula.bustos@cemfi.es Spain
jmonras@princeton.edu
Juan Manuel Castro-Vincenzi
Department of Economics Jacopo Ponticelli
Princeton University Kellogg School of Management
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building Northwestern University
20 Washington Rd 2211 Campus Drive
Princeton, NJ 08544 Evanston, IL 60208
castro.vincenzi@princeton.edu and NBER
jacopo.ponticelli@kellogg.northwestern.edu

1 Introduction
Early development economists argued that the reallocation of workers from agricul-
ture to manufacturing was fundamental to sustain long run growth (Lewis 1954, Kuznets
1973). This structural transformation process can lead to higher output because labor
productivity is lower in agriculture than in the rest of the economy (Caselli 2005, Restuc-
cia, Yang, and Zhu 2008, Lagakos and Waugh 2013). In addition, the manufacturing
sector is characterized by economies of scale and knowledge spillovers. As a result, indus-
trialization can lead to higher long run growth (Krugman 1987, Lucas 1988, Matsuyama
1992a). In this paper, we qualify these views by noting that manufacturing productivity
growth depends not only on the size of the industrial sector but also on its composition
(GrossmanandHelpman1991). Thus, ifworkersleavingtheagriculturalsectoraremostly
unskilled, the structural transformation process can reinforce comparative advantage in
non-innovating industries, reducing long run growth.
We provide direct evidence on this structural transformation process in the context
of a large increase in agricultural productivity due to the adoption of genetically engi-
neered (GE) soy in Brazil. To identify the causal effects of this new technology on indus-
trial development, we exploit its heterogeneous effects on potential yields across regions
with different weather and soil characteristics. We think of these regions as small open
economies that were differently exposed to the new technology, which permits to estimate
the effects of local agricultural technical change on local labor reallocation, industrial spe-
cialization and productivity growth.1 To trace the effects of technical change in soy from
the agricultural to the manufacturing sector, we rely on detailed individual information
from the Brazilian Population Census and social security data (RAIS) which allows to
follow workers across sectors at fine levels of spatial aggregation. In turn, to focus on the
manufacturing sector we use firm-level data from the Brazilian Annual Industrial Survey
(PIA) and the Technological Innovation Survey (PINTEC).
We start by studying the effects of the new agricultural technology on labor allocation
across sectors. We build on earlier work showing that GE soy technology is strongly
labor-saving. Thus, its adoption increased the comparative advantage in agriculture but
releasedagriculturalworkerswhofoundemploymentinthelocalindustrialsector(Bustos,
Caprettini, and Ponticelli, 2016). In the current study, we take a step further and analyze
the skill composition of workers leaving agriculture. We trace the flow of workers with
different education levels across sectors using detailed individual information from the
decadal Brazilian Population Census. We find that the new agricultural technology led to
a reallocation of mostly unskilled workers away from agriculture towards manufacturing
with little reallocation towards services. Our estimates indicate that microregions with a
1OurgeographicalunitsofobservationareBrazilianmicroregions,whichattempttoapproximatelocal
labormarkets. TheBrazilianInstituteofGeographyandStatistics(IBGE)definesthesemicroregionsby
combiningeconomicallyintegratedmunicipalitieswithsimilarproductionandgeographiccharacteristics.
2

onestandarddeviationhigherincreaseinpotentialsoyyieldsexperienceda2.4percentage
points larger decrease in the share of unskilled workers employed in agriculture, and
a corresponding 2.1 percentage points larger increase in the share of unskilled workers
employed in manufacturing. We confirm these findings using yearly information on formal
workers from social security data, which shows that the timing of this labor reallocation
process corresponds to the timing of adoption of GE seeds.
Next, westudytheconsequencesofthisreallocationofunskilledlaborfromagriculture
to manufacturing for industrial specialization. From the point of view of the manufactur-
ing sector, the reallocation of former agricultural workers amounts to an increase in the
relative supply of unskilled labor. According to the classic Heckscher-Ohlin trade model,
this increase in the relative supply of unskilled labor generates a comparative advantage
in unskilled-labor intensive industries, which should expand by absorbing the inflow of
unskilled workers and also attract other complementary factors such as capital (Rybczyn-
ski, 1955). Indeed, we find that this inflow of unskilled workers was completely absorbed
by an expansion of the least skill-intensive manufacturing industries. As expected, the
labor inflow was followed by an increase in capital investment. Finally, we document that
the expanding industries are the least innovation-intensive as measured by expenditure in
research and development (R&D) as a share of sales. The theoretical literature discussed
above proposes several mechanisms through which changes in the size and composition
of the industrial sector can shape manufacturing productivity growth, which we explore
next.
We trace the effects of agricultural technical change on manufacturing productivity
using data from the yearly manufacturing survey (PIA). We find that microregions facing
faster agricultural technical change experienced a slowdown in manufacturing productiv-
ity growth. Our estimates imply that microregions with a one standard deviation larger
increaseinpotentialsoyyieldsexperienceda7percentincrease inthesizeofthemanufac-
turing sector and a corresponding 1.5 percent lower yearly growth rate of manufacturing
productivity, a result that challenges the traditional view in the literature.
The inflow of low-skill agricultural workers can reduce manufacturing productivity
growth through two channels. First, a reallocation of economic activity towards the
industrywithlowerskillandinnovationintensitycandecreasemanufacturingproductivity
duetoacompositioneffect. Second,anincreaseintherelativesizeofthelow-skillindustry
can reduce incentives to innovate within the high-skill industry, as predicted by models of
directedtechnicalchangebasedonmarketsizeeffectsa`laRomer(1990)suchasAcemoglu
(2002). We attempt to quantify each of these mechanisms. For this purpose, we split the
manufacturing sector by the median level of R&D, into H and L industries. Then, we
decompose the manufacturing productivity slowdown into between- and within-industry
components. We obtain that the between effect, which reflects the impact of factor
reallocation towards low productivity industries, can explain at most 8 percent of the
3