NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
WHO PROVIDES LIQUIDITY, AND WHEN?
Sida Li
Xin Wang
Mao Ye
Working Paper 25972
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25972
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2019
We thank Hengjie Ai, Shmuel Baruch, Malcolm Baker, Dan Bernhardt, Hank Bessembinder, Eric
Budish, Tarun Chordia, Thierry Foucault, Katya Malinova, Maureen O’Hara, Monika Piazzesi,
Veronika Pool, Neil Pearson, Barbara Rindi, Shri Santosh, Andriy Shkilko, Brian Weller, Chen
Yao, Bart Yueshen, and Marius Zoican for helpful comments. We are also grateful for input from
participants in conferences at the University of Rochester, UCLA, Texas A&M University, the
University of Florida, and Washington University at St. Louis, as well as at the Carlson Junior
Conference at the University of Minnesota, the NYU Stern Market Microstructure Conference,
the 2nd SAFE Market Microstructure Conference, the Colorado Front Range Finance Seminar,
the Bank of Canada-Laurier Market Structure conference, the Telfer Annual Conference on
Accounting and Finance, the Wabash River Conference at Indiana University, and the Smokey
Mountain Conference at the University of Tennessee for their helpful suggestions. This research
is supported by National Science Foundation grant 1352936 (jointly with the Office of Financial
Research at U.S. Department of the Treasury) and National Science Foundation grant 1838183.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Sida Li, Xin Wang, and Mao Ye. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Who Provides Liquidity, and When?
Sida Li, Xin Wang, and Mao Ye
NBER Working Paper No. 25972
June 2019
JEL No. G1,G12
ABSTRACT
We model competition for liquidity provision between high-frequency traders (HFTs) and slower
execution algorithms designed to minimize transaction costs for buy-side institutions (B-Algos).
Under continuous pricing, B-Algos dominate liquidity provision by using aggressive limit orders
to stimulate HFTs’ market orders. Under discrete pricing, HFTs dominate liquidity provision if
the bid–ask spread is binding at one tick. If the tick size is not binding, B-Algos choose between
stimulating HFTs and providing liquidity to other non-HFTs. Flash crashes arise under certain
parameter values. Transaction costs can be negatively correlated with the bid–ask spread when all
traders can provide liquidity.
Sida Li Mao Ye
Department of Finance, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
Gies School of Business 343K Wohlers Hall
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 1206 South Sixth Street
1206 South Sixth Street Champaign, IL 61820
Champaign, IL 61820 and NBER
sidali3@illinois.edu maoye@illinois.edu
Xin Wang
Nanyang Technological University
S3-B1B-60
50 Nanyang Ave
Singapore 639798
xin.wang@ntu.edu.sg
A SSRN Link is available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2902984

1. Introduction
To minimize their transaction costs, buy-side institutions, such as mutual funds and pension funds,
use computer algorithms extensively to execute their trades (Frazzini, Israel, and Moskowitz 2014;
O’Hara 2015). These buy-side algorithmic traders (B-Algos) differ from high-frequency traders
(HFTs) in two fundamental ways (Hasbrouck and Saar 2013; Jones 2013; O’Hara 2015). First, B-
Algos may use limit orders to provide liquidity, but their goal is to minimize transaction costs
rather than to profit from the bid–ask spread. Second, B-Algos are faster than humans but slower
than HFTs (O’Hara 2015). Although buy-side institutions are major players in financial markets,
their trading algorithms have no independent identity in existing models. From one point of view,
financial markets include HFTs and everyone else, where the latter includes both sophisticated
institutions and unsophisticated retail traders (see the survey by O’Hara [2015]). From the other
point of view, algorithmic traders and HFTs are interchangeable (see the survey by Biais and
Foucault [2014]). In this paper, we offer the first theoretical study of B-Algos by examining how
they interact with HFTs and humans.
In an environment populated by HFTs, B-Algos, and humans, who provides liquidity? Who
demands liquidity, and when? Answering these questions is important because traditional liquidity
providers, such as New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) specialists and NASDAQ dealers, almost
disappear in modern electronic markets (Clark-Joseph, Ye, and Zi 2017). Everyone can provide
liquidity, but no one is obligated to provide liquidity. We examine how this new environment of
voluntary liquidity provision and demand reaches equilibrium.
In our model, HFTs and two types of non-HFTs (B-Algos and humans) trade a security in
a dynamic limit-order book (LOB). All traders are risk-neutral. A liquidity provider in the LOB
submits limit orders (offers to buy or sell a stock at a specified price and quantity), and a liquidity
2

demander accepts a limit order using a market order. HFTs have no private value to trade, as they
simply provide or demand liquidity to maximize their expected profits from trading. Non-HFTs
arrive at the market following a Poisson process, bringing inelastic demand to buy or sell one unit
of a security. Some of the non-HFTs are B-Algos, and they can choose between limit and market
orders to minimize transaction costs; the remaining traders are humans, who use only market
orders.
Our model includes one security whose fundamental value is public information. However,
liquidity providers are subject to sniping risks (Budish, Cramton, and Shim 2015; BCS hereafter),
because they may fail to cancel stale quotes during value jumps. B-Algos are always sniped during
1
value jumps, and HFTs can reduce the probability of being sniped by , where 𝑁 is the number of
𝑁
equally fast HFTs. HFTs in our model, like those in BCS, quote a positive bid–ask spread because
of the sniping risk. Surprisingly, we find that B-Algos always quote better prices than HFTs as
long as the price in a given trade is continuous enough, even though B-Algos face greater exposure
to sniping risks.
Opportunity cost explains why B-Algos can afford more aggressive limit orders than HFTs.
In our model, B-Algos have an inelastic need to trade. If they do not use limit orders to provide
liquidity, they must use market orders and pay the bid–ask spread. Therefore, B-Algos incur a
negative opportunity cost for providing liquidity, and they choose limit orders as long as their
expected costs are lower in value than their market orders. HFTs, on the other hand, do not have
to trade, and their speed advantage leads to a positive opportunity cost for providing liquidity. An
HFT who posts a limit order surrenders the profit from sniping the share once it becomes stale.
Interestingly, although higher speed reduces HFTs’ sniping costs, it increases their opportunity
costs by the same amount. Adding the sniping and opportunity costs together, B-Algos incur lower
3