NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND CITY WELFARE
Jack Favilukis
Pierre Mabille
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Working Paper 25906
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25906
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2019, Revised June 2021
We thank Hae-Kang Lee for superb research assistance. We thank John Humphries, Timothy
McQuade, Adam Guren, Charles Nathanson (discussants), and Morris Davis for valuable
comments. We have benefited from participants at the 2018 Society for Economic Dynamics
conference in Mexico City, the Urban Economics Association conference at Columbia
University, the 2019 American Economic Association in Atlanta, the Macro Finance Society
meeting at Kellogg, the Conference on Low-Income Housing Supply and Housing Affordability
in Madrid, and seminar participants at the University of Miami, Columbia GSB, Atlanta Fed and
Emory University, NYU Stern, University of Connecticut, University of Luxembourg, John’s
Hopkins University, PUC in Santiago, Boston College, London Business School, and the San
Francisco Federal Reserve Bank. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Jack Favilukis, Pierre Mabille, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Affordable Housing and City Welfare
Jack Favilukis, Pierre Mabille, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
NBER Working Paper No. 25906
May 2019, Revised June 2021
JEL No. E21,E6,G11,G12,G18,H2,H76,R1,R13,R21,R28,R3,R31,R41,R51
ABSTRACT
Housing affordability is the main policy challenge for most large cities in the world. Zoning
changes, rent control, housing vouchers, and tax credits are the main levers employed by policy
makers. How effective are they at combatting the affordability crisis? We build a dynamic
stochastic spatial equilibrium model to evaluate the effect of these policies on the well-being of
its citizens. The model endogenizes house prices, rents, construction, labor supply, output,
income and wealth inequality, the location decisions of households within the city as well as
inter-city migration. Its main novel features are risk, risk aversion, and incomplete risk-sharing.
We calibrate the model to the New York MSA. Housing affordability policies carry substantial
insurance value but affect aggregate housing and labor supply and cause misallocation in labor
and housing markets. Housing affordability policies that enhance access to this insurance
especially for the neediest households create substantial net welfare gains.
Jack Favilukis Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Sauder School of Business Columbia University
University of British Columbia Graduate School of Business
Henry Angus Building 2053 Main Mall Uris Hall, office 809
Office 867 3022 Broadway
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z2 New York, NY 10027
Canada and NBER
jack.favilukis@sauder.ubc.ca svnieuwe@gsb.columbia.edu
Pierre Mabille
INSEAD
Boulevard de Constance
77300 Fontainebleau
France
pierre.mabille@insead.edu

1 Introduction
The increasing appeal of major urban centers has brought on an unprecedented housing
affordabilitycrisis. Evermoreurbanhouseholdsareburdenedbyrentsormortgagepay-
mentsthattakeupalargefractionoftheirpaycheckand/orbylongcommutes. Theshare
of cost-burdened renters in the United States has doubled from 24% in the 1960s to 48%
in 2016. Over this period, median home value rose 112%, far outpacing the 50% increase
in the median owner income (Joint Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University,
2018). Hsieh and Moretti (2019) argue that our most productive cities are smaller than
they should be because of lack of affordable housing options, underscoring the impor-
tance of the issue. The Covid-19 pandemic lent new urgency to the affordability crisis
with 10 million American renters behind on $60 billion in rent as of February 2021, and
withabove-10%housepriceappreciationin2020.
Policymakersthroughouttheworldareunderincreasingpressuretoimproveafford-
ability.1 They employ policy tools ranging from rent regulation, upzoning, inclusionary
zoning, housing vouchers, to developer tax credits. While there is much work, both em-
pirical and theoretical, on housing affordability, what is missing is a general equilibrium
modelthatquantifiestheaggregateanddistributionalimpactofsuchpoliciesonindivid-
ual and city-wide welfare. This paper provides such a model. It endogenizes prices and
quantities of owned and rented housing, the spatial distribution of housing and house-
holds,commutingpatterns,incentivestowork,incomeandwealthinequalitywithinand
acrossneighborhoods,output,andin-andout-migrationtoothermetropolitanareas. We
calibrate the model and use it as a laboratory to conduct various housing policy experi-
ments, allowing us to study the various policy instruments and compare their effective-
ness. Thisnewframeworkiswellsuitedforstudyingtheimpactofplace-basedpolicies.
We find that the expansion of a range of housing affordability policies improves wel-
fare. In an incomplete markets model with risk and risk aversion, affordability policies
play a quantitatively important role as an insurance device. The housing stability they
provide disproportionately benefits low-income households. These insurance benefits
trade off against the aggregate and spatial distortions in housing and labor markets that
accompanysuchpolicies. Ourresultshighlighttheimportanceofgeneralequilibriumef-
1Fifteen cities in California have rent regulation. A November 2018 California state ballot initiative
proposedtooverturnthe1995Costa-HawkinsAct,clearingthewayformorerentcontrol.Oregonimposed
statewiderentcontrolin2019. NewYorkStatepassedthemostsweepingexpansionofrentregulationlaws
inagenerationinJune2019. SodidtheDistrictofColumbia. BilldeBlasio, themayorofNewYorkCity,
was elected on a platform to preserve or add 200,000 affordable housing units. Many local policymakers
aretryingtooverturnpreemptionlaws, onthebooksinin36U.S.States, thatpreventlocalgovernments
fromadoptingrentregulationlaws.
1

fects, which often reverse partial equilibrium logic, and of how the affordability policies
arefinanced.
Our model consists of two metropolitan areas. The first metro is the one we focus on
and whose housing policies we study. We think of this metro as a “gateway” city with a
housing affordability problem. This metro consists of two zones, the urban core (zone 1)
andthesuburbs(zone2). Working-agehouseholdswholiveinzone2commutetozone1
forwork. Commutingentailsbothanopportunitycostoftimeandafinancialcost. Zones
have different sizes, captured by limits on the housing stock, provide different amenity
benefits, and households who live in the urban core enjoy higher productivity, captur-
ing agglomeration benefits. The second metro serves as an alternative, naturally more
affordable, location for residents of the first metro. We study migration between the two
metros, which is subject to moving costs. The spatial aspects of the model are important
since affordable housing policies affect the spatial allocation of labor and housing, both
withinandacrossmetros.
Theeconomyispopulatedbyoverlappinggenerationsofriskaversehouseholdswho
face idiosyncratic labor productivity and mortality risk. They make dynamic decisions
on location, non-housing and housing consumption, labor supply, tenure status (own
or rent), savings in bonds, primary housing, investment property, and mortgage debt.
Since households cannot perfectly hedge labor income and longevity risk, markets are
incomplete. Progressive tax-and-transfer and social security systems capture important
insurance mechanisms beside affordable housing policies. The model generates a rich
cross-sectional distribution over age, labor income, tenure status, housing wealth, and
financial wealth. This richness is paramount to understanding both the distributional
andtheaggregateimplicationsofhousingaffordabilitypolicies.
On the firm side, each metro produces tradable goods and residential housing, sub-
ject to decreasing returns to scale. As an area approaches its housing limit, construction
becomes increasingly expensive, and the housing supply elasticity falls. Wages, house
prices,andmarketrentsineachmetroaredeterminedinequilibrium.
We calibrate the first metro to the New York metropolitan statistical area (NY MSA),
designating Manhattan as zone 1 and the remaining 24 counties of the NY MSA as zone
2. Our calibration targets key features of the data, including the relative housing stock
and population of zone 1 and zone 2, the income distribution in the New York MSA, ob-
served commuting times and costs, the housing supply elasticity, current zoning laws,
the current size and scope of the rent stabilization system, and the current federal, state,
andlocaltax-and-transfersystem. Thebaselinemodelgeneratesrealisticincome,wealth,
andhomeownershippatternsoverthelife-cycleforvariouspercentilesoftheincomedis-
2