NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MEASURING INTANGIBLE CAPITAL WITH MARKET PRICES
Michael Ewens
Ryan H. Peters
Sean Wang
Working Paper 25960
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25960
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2019, Revised October 2023
The paper previously circulated under the title “Acquisition Prices and the Measurement of
Intangible Capital.” Special thanks to Dimitris Papanikolaou and Luke Taylor. We thank Gordon
Phillips for providing data for the SDCCompustat merge and Shiyu Zhang for research
assistance. Jan Bena (discussant), Nagpurnanand Prabhala (discussant), Hila Fogel-Yaari, Arthur
Korteweg, Pierre Liang, Song Ma, Tom Ruchti and seminar participants at Columbia University,
Cornell University (accounting and finance), University of Rochester, Michigan State University,
University of Michigan, UT-Dallas, Southern Methodist University, Singapore Management
University, National University of Singapore, HKUST, University of Hong Kong, CityU Hong
Kong, University of Utah, Tulane University, Caltech, American Finance Association, Paris
Financial Management conference, Washington University Conference on Corporate Finance,
Midwest Finance Association, the Cass Mergers and Acquisitions Conference, and the Finance,
Organizations and Market Conference (2018) provided helpful feedback. Code and data to
incorporate the intangible capital measures can be found at: http://bit.ly/intan_cap. First version:
September 2018. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Michael Ewens, Ryan H. Peters, and Sean Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Measuring Intangible Capital with Market Prices
Michael Ewens, Ryan H. Peters, and Sean Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 25960
June 2019, Revised October 2023
JEL No. G30,G32,G34,O3,O34
ABSTRACT
Accounting standards prohibit internally created knowledge and organizational capital from being
disclosed on firm balance sheets. As a result, balance sheets exhibit downward biases that have become
exacerbated by increasing levels of intangible investments. To offset these biases, researchers must
estimate the value of these off-balance sheet intangibles by capitalizing prior flows of R&D and SG&A.
In doing so, a set of capitalization parameters must be assumed, i.e., the R&D depreciation rate and
the fraction of SG&A that represents a long-lived asset. We estimate these parameters using market
prices from firm exits and use them to capitalize intangibles for a comprehensive panel of firms from
1978-2017. We then use a series of validation tests to examine the performance of our intangible capital
stocks versus those developed from commonly used parameters. On average, our estimates of intangible
capital are 15% smaller than estimates from status-quo parameters while exhibiting larger variation
across industry. Intangible capital stocks derived from exit price parameters outperform existing measures
when explaining market enterprise values and identifying human capital risk. Adjusting book values
with exit-based intangible capital stocks markedly attenuates well-documented biases in market-to-book
and return on equity ratios while increasing the precision of the HML asset pricing factor. We conclude
that our capitalization parameters create intangible stocks that perform equal to or better than status-quo
measures in various applications.
Michael Ewens Sean Wang
Columbia Business School Southern Methodist University
665 W 130th St 6425 Boaz Lane
Henry Kravis Hall, 732 Dallas, TX 75205
New York, NY 10027 seanwang@mail.smu.edu
and NBER
me2731@columbia.edu
Ryan H. Peters
Tulane University
7 McAlister Dr Suite 365
New Orleans, LA 70118
rpeters4@tulane.edu
A appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25960

Corporateinvestmenthastransformedoverthelastfewdecades,withU.S.firmsspendinglesson
tangible assets and more on intangibles related to knowledge and organizational capital (Figure 1).
This reduction in physical capital investments, along with the weaker connection between physical
capital investments and firm valuation, is described as a “broader investment puzzle” by Guti´errez
and Philippon (2017) and Crouzet and Eberly (2019). A shared conclusion of both papers is that
standard investment measures on firms’ balance sheets fail to capture the growing importance of
intangible assets, resulting in a downward bias in the recorded book values of invested capital.1
This bias has grown over time, as evidenced by the dramatic upward trend in market-to-book
ratios.
Reliable measures of intangible capital are becoming increasingly important for capital markets
and financial managers. For instance, numerous studies have provided evidence of mispriced equity
forfirmswithhigherlevelsofintangiblecapital,whichcouldleadtosuboptimalresourceallocation.2
Indebtmarkets,banksarelesswillingtolendtofirmswithhigherinformationasymmetryandmore
uncertaintyabouttheirliquidationvalues,twoprimarycharacteristicsofintangible-intensivefirms.3
In corporate finance, financial managers making capital budgeting decisions must estimate book
values of intangible capital to calculate returns to intangible capital (Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen,
2010). To adjust for the downward bias in invested capital, researchers estimate the off-balance
sheet intangible capital with accumulated flows of R&D4, SG&A5, or both.6 Such adjustments
require assumptions about the capital accumulation process, such as intangible depreciation rates
and the fraction of SG&A to be capitalized. Unfortunately, as Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2009)
1Accounting rules for intangibles originated in 1974 when intangibles were a small proportion of the economy,
andtheyhavenotchanged,despiteafundamentalchangetowardsintangiblesaseconomicvaluedrivers. Specifically,
internal Research and Development (R&D) costs and Selling, General, and Administrative (SG&A) activities are
expensed, and thus intangible values do not appear on the balance sheet. Such expensing has been shown to reduce
the overall usefulness of accounting statements (Lev and Zarowin, 1999).
2A partial list of these studies includes Daniel and Titman (2006); Eberhart, Maxwell, and Siddique (2004);
Aksoy, Cooil, Groening, Keiningham, and Yalc¸ın (2008); Edmans (2011); Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013).
3Williamson (1988); Shleifer and Vishny (1992); Loumioti (2012); Mann (2018)
4Bernstein and Nadiri (1988); Chan, Lakonishok, and Sougiannis (2001); Hirshleifer, Hsu, and Li (2013)
5Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013, 2014); Belo, Lin, and Vitorino (2014)
6Falato, Kadyrzhanova, Sim, and Steri (2022); Peters and Taylor (2017)
1

highlight, “relatively little is known about depreciation rates for intangibles” (pp 674). While there
is no clear consensus on parameter values, the most recently updated rates for knowledge capital
depreciation use Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) data based on multiple data sets, including
NSF surveys, where depreciation rates are based on the Li and Hall (2020) forward-looking profit
model. Hulten and Hao (2008) provide the main parameter for organizational capital (hereafter,
we refer to the combination of these parameters as “BEA-HH”). These capitalization parameters,
however, are limited by gaps in industry coverage.7
We propose a capitalization model that uses the market values of intangible assets to estimate
a new set of intangible capitalization parameters (hereafter referred to as “Exits” or “exit-based”
parameters) from a firm’s prior flows of intangible investments. Specifically, we obtain market
values of intangible assets from firm exits that include acquisitions, liquidations, and bankruptcies.
We identify the market prices of identifiable intangible assets and goodwill from these firms and
match these prices to the firm’s past spending on R&D and SG&A to estimate parameters that
capture(1)thedepreciationrateofpriorR&Dinvestmentinknowledgecapitaland(2)thefraction
of SG&A that represents an investment into organizational capital.
The results of our parameter estimation imply an average 33% annual depreciation rate for
R&D versus 23% for BEA R&D depreciation rates where industry coverage is available.8 Across
industries, we find a significantly higher depreciation rate for the two industries with the highest
R&D intensity: healthcare (33% vs 17%) and high-tech (42% vs 28%). For organizational capital,
we find that our 28% estimate of the fraction of SG&A representing invested capital is similar
to that used in earlier work (30%). However, while prior studies have assumed this ratio to be
constant across industries, this ratio varies dramatically across industries, from 20% (consumer) to
51% (healthcare).
7Approximately46%of4-digitSICcodesforpublicfirmshavedepreciationratesforknowledgecapitalusingBEA
parametersfoundhere: https://apps.bea.gov/national/FA2004/Details/xls/DetailNonres_rate.xlsx. Organi-
zational capital parameters have only been estimated in the pharmaceutical industry.
8Some53%of4-digitSICcodesaremissingdepreciationratesforR&D,andadepreciationrateof15%isgenerally
assumed by prior papers when a depreciation rate is unavailable for the given industry.
2