NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IS THERE A RISK-RETURN TRADEOFF IN THE CORPORATE BOND MARKET?
TIME-SERIES AND CROSS-SECTIONAL EVIDENCE
Jennie Bai
Turan G. Bali
Quan Wen
Working Paper 25995
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25995
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2019
We thank Andreas Barth, Marc Crummenerl, Kris Jacobs, Yigitcan Karabulut, Francesco
Sangiorgi, Christian Schlag, Grigory Vilkov, and seminar participants at Bloomberg, Frankfurt
School of Finance and Management, Goethe University, University of Houston, and 2019 Q-
group annual conference for their helpful comments and suggestions. We also thank Kenneth
French, Lubos Pastor, and Robert Stambaugh for making a large amount of historical data
publicly available. All errors remain our responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Jennie Bai, Turan G. Bali, and Quan Wen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Is There a Risk-Return Tradeoff in the Corporate Bond Market? Time-Series and Cross-Sectional
Evidence
Jennie Bai, Turan G. Bali, and Quan Wen
NBER Working Paper No. 25995
June 2019, Revised May 2020
JEL No. C13,G10,G11,G12
ABSTRACT
We provide time-series and cross-sectional evidence on the significance of a risk-return tradeoff
in the corporate bond market. We find a significantly positive intertemporal relation between
expected return and risk in the bond market and the time-series predictability is driven by
aggregate systematic risk instead of aggregate idiosyncratic risk. We also propose a new measure
of systematic risk for corporate bonds and find a positive link between systematic risk and the
cross-section of future bond returns. We provide an explanation for the significance of systematic
(idiosyncratic) risk based on different investor preferences and informational frictions in the bond
(equity) market.
Jennie Bai Quan Wen
McDonough School of Business Georgetown University
Georgetown University Washington, DC 20057
3700 O Street, NW quan.wen@georgetown.edu
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
jennie.bai@georgetown.edu
Turan G. Bali
McDonough School of Business
Georgetown University
Between 37th and O Streets
Washington, D.C. 20057
turan.bali@georgetown.edu

1 Introduction
Mostassetpricingtheoriespostulateapositiveintertemporalrelationbetweenexpectedreturn
and risk of market portfolios (Merton, 1973). Empirically, this relation has been studied
primarily in the equity market. The literature, however, has not yet reached to an agreement
on the existence of a positive risk-return tradeoff for stock market indices; indeed, many
studies cannot even identify a robust and significant time-series relation.1
While earlier studies focus on equities, debt financing forms a significant portion in the
capital structure of U.S. corporations (Graham, Leary, and Roberts, 2015), underscoring the
needtostudytherisk-returntradeoffinthecorporatebondmarket. SincetheGreatRecession
of 2007−2009, the corporate bond market has increased substantially with respect to trading
volume and the market size.2 Institutional investors in particular make an extensive use of
bonds in constructing their portfolios, which elevates the role of bonds in investors’ portfolios
more than any time in the past. Motivated by these observations, this paper studies the
risk-return tradeoff in the corporate bond market.
Does the risk-return relation for equities or its lack thereof extend to corporate bonds?
This is an open question given the significant difference in institutional and informational
frictionsacrossequitiesandbonds. Usingabigdatasetof1.3millionbondreturnobservations
from January 1995 to June 2019, we provide the first comprehensive study on the risk-return
1French, Schwert, and Stambaugh (1987) find that the risk-return coefficient is not significantly different
from zero when they use past daily returns to estimate the monthly conditional variance. Follow-up studies
by Campbell and Hentchel (1992), Glosten, Jagannathan, and Runkle (1993), Harrison and Zhang (1999),
and Bollerslev and Zhou (2006) rely on the GARCH-in-mean and realized volatility models that provide no
evidence of a robust, significant link between risk and return on the equity market portfolio. Several studies
even find that the intertemporal relation between risk and return is negative (e.g., Campbell, 1987; Nelson,
1991; Glosten et al., 1993; Whitelaw, 1994; Harvey, 2001; and Brandt and Kang, 2004). Some studies do
provide evidence supporting a positive and significant link between expected return and risk in the equity
market (e.g., Bollerslev, Engle, and Wooldridge, 1988; Ghysels, Santa-Clara, and Valkanov, 2005; Guo and
Whitelaw, 2006; Bali, 2008; and Bali and Engle, 2010).
2Corporate bonds constitute one of the largest components of the U.S. bond market, which is considered
the largest security market in the world. According to the Federal Reserve database, the total market value
of outstanding corporate bonds in the United States was about $1.74 trillion in 1990 and it increased mono-
tonically to $14.02 trillion by the end of 2019. This implies an annual growth rate of 7.6% from 1990 to 2019.
The corporate bond market is active as well. Over the past 16 years, daily trading volume has been in the
range of $12.6 and $24.5 billion, with an average of $17.6 billion (source: www.sifma.org).
1

tradeoff in the corporate bond market, both in time series and in the cross section. Overall,
weascertainarobust, significant, andpositiveintertemporalrelationbetweenexpectedreturn
andriskinaggregatebondmarketportfolios, andalsoaconsistentpositiverisk-returnrelation
in the cross section of individual bonds. Our findings in the bond market are in line with
asset pricing theories, but are foiled against the evidence in the equity market. We delineate
reconciling explanations later in this section and more details in Section 5. The basic idea is
that the investor clientele plays an important role in the contrasting risk-return relations in
the bond versus equity markets.
We start the analysis with the intertemporal relation between the conditional mean and
the conditional variance of aggregate bond market returns. We find that the bond market risk
proxiedbyitslagged(orconditional)variancepredictsfuturebondmarketreturns. Moreover,
weshowthatthetime-seriespredictabilityisdrivensolelybyaggregatesystematicriskinstead
of aggregate idiosyncratic risk. The results are robust under three different weighting schemes
in aggregating the bond-level risk measures, namely, the equal-weighted, value-weighted, and
rating-weighted average. The results are also robust to controlling for a number of variables
proxying for business cycle fluctuations.
To appraise the economic significance of the time-series predictability, we simulate the
returns of a trading strategy based on the out-of-sample one-month-ahead forecasts of the
bond market using its realized variance.3 In this market-timing strategy, we obtain both
a higher mean return and a lower standard deviation compared to the strategy using the
forecasts from existing corporate bond market factors. We find that a risk-averse investor is
willing to pay an annualized fee of 3.6∼5.0% to invest in the strategy that forecasts the bond
market return based on the market variance.
After thoroughly investigating the time-series risk-return relation at the market level,
we propose new measures of bond-level systematic and idiosyncratic risk and examine the
3For each month t, the strategy invests 100% in the bond market index if the predicted excess return of
bonds over the risk-free rate is greater than zero; otherwise it invests 100% in Treasury bills. At time t+1,
the return of the portfolio is realized, a new regression is estimated, a return forecast computed, and new
portfolio weights determined. In this way, we obtain a monthly time series of returns to the trading strategy.
2